THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF MINES
“THE MINES AND MINERALS
(DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) BILL, 2011”
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.05.2013
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 07.05.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)


CC&S No. 75
Price : Rs. 538.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-12) .......................................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
CHAPTER I Introductory ............................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Preliminary ............................................................... 9
CHAPTER III General Restrictions on Mineral Concessions ..... 16
CHAPTER IV Non-Exclusive Reconnaissance Licence ............ 77
CHAPTER V High Technology Reconnaissance-cum-
Exploration Licence ............................................... 81
CHAPTER VI Mining Lease ........................................................... 88
CHAPTER VII Reservation ............................................................... 98
CHAPTER VIII Royalties, Compensation and Cess ................... 101
CHAPTER IX Power to Issue Directions ................................... 124
CHAPTER X National, State Mineral Fund and District
Mineral Foundation ............................................... 129
CHAPTER XI National  and  State Mining Regulatory
Authority .................................................................. 134
CHAPTER XII Coordination Committee & National
Repositories .............................................................. 150
CHAPTER XIII Offences and Penalties .......................................... 154
CHAPTER XIV Miscellaneous .......................................................... 159
APPENDICES
I. List of Central Ministries/Organizations/
Institutions/Individuals which appeared before
the Committee for evidence and State Governments
with whom the Committee had discussions ........... 167
II. List of various stakeholders who submitted their
views/suggestions on the Bill ..................................... 169

PAGE
III. Minutes of the sitting held on 30.01.2012 ............... 172
IV . Minutes of the sitting held on 13.02.2012 ............... 174
V. Minutes of the sitting held on 15.03.2012 ............... 176
VI. Minutes of the sitting held on 20.03.2012 ............... 179
VII. Minutes of the sitting held on 27.03.2012 ............... 181
VIII. Minutes of the sitting held on 25.04.2012 ............... 183
IX. Minutes of the sitting held on 11.05.2012................ 185
X. Minutes of the sitting held on 01.06.2012 ............... 187
XI. Minutes of the sitting held on 25.06.2012 ............... 191
XII. Minutes of the sitting held on 02.07.2012 ............... 195
XIII. Minutes of the sitting held on 16.07.2012 ............... 198
XIV . Minutes of the sitting held on 23.07.2012 ............... 200
XV . Minutes of the sitting held on 03.08.2012 ............... 204
XVI. Minutes of the sitting held on 30.10.2012 ............... 207
XVII. Minutes of the sitting held on 16.11.2012................ 209
XVIII. Minutes of the sitting held on 06.05.2013 ............... 211
XIX. Copy of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011” ............... 213
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2011-12)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3.  Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi
5.  Shri Udyanraje Bhonsle
6.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury
7.  Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhury
8.  Smt. Jyoti Durve
9.  Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
10.  Shri Ismail Hussain
11. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13.  Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
14.  Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
15.  Shri Kalyan Singh
16.  Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
17.  Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
18.  Shri K. Sugumar
19.  Shri Manohar Tirkey
20.  Dr. G. Vivekanand
21.  Shri Pakauri Lal@
@ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari $
23. Shri Jugul Kishore
24. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty^
25. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao
$
26. Ms. Mabel Rebello $
27. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
28. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
29. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
30. Shri R.C. Singh
$
31. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani*
# Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012.
$ Retired w.e.f. 02.04.2012.
^ Retired w.e.f. 03.04.2012.
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17.09.2011.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2012-13)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Sabbam Hari
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
8. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
9. Shri Pakauri Lal
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Rajaram Pal
13. Kumari Saroj Pandey
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
15. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
16. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
21.  Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary*
* Nominated  w.e.f. 13.12.2012
(v)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Sanjay Raut
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
30. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Balsekhar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
(vi)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "The Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011" relating to the
Ministry of Mines.
2. “The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Bill, 2011”
as introduced in Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2011 was referred by
the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331(E) (i) (b) of the Rules
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 5th January,
2012 to the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel for examination
and report.
3. Considering the wide ramifications of the Bill, the Committee
(2011-12) at their sitting held on 30th January, 2012, inter alia , decided
to obtain suggestions from the general public, views of the State
Governments/UTs, Central Ministries concerned and also to take
evidence of various stakeholders, experts, selected State Governments
and Central Ministries and the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Mines
on various provisions of the Bill.
4. In pursuance of the Committee's decision, besides seeking
comments of State Governments and selected Central Ministries, a press
release was issued through print and electronic media on 23rd January,
2012 for soliciting the comments from general public, stakeholders and
others by 7th February, 2012. Apart from individuals, organizations
memoranda, the Committee received comments/suggestions from
different State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and
Central Ministries. Based on the response from various stakeholders,
the Committee (2011-12) and (2012-13) took evidence of the selected
stakeholders, State Governments, Central Ministries including the Nodal
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Mines as indicated in Appendix-I.
5. The Committee also wish to express their sincere thanks to their
predecessor Committees for the significant contribution made by them
in the examination of the Bill. The Committee at their sitting held on
06.05.2013 considered and adopted the draft Report. The Committee
were immensely benefited by the suggestions/contribution made by
the Members of the Committee for which I express my sincere thanks
to them.

6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Mines who tendered their evidence before the
Committee and attended all the sittings of the Committee when the
representatives of Central Ministries, State Governments and other
stakeholders appeared before the Committee and gave their considered
views. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of various Central Ministries/State Governments and
other organizations/individuals who furnished written information/
views as well as those who appeared before the Committee and made
available necessary information for consideration of the Committee,
which was of great help to the Committee in arriving at conclusions.
7. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation of the invaluable assistance rendered to them by
the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
06 May, 2013 Chairman,
16 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.
(viii)

REPORT
CHAPTER I
 INTRODUCTORY
A. Background
India is endowed with large mineral resources, especially of iron
ore, bauxite, limestone, base metals, noble metals and diamonds, but
due to lack of adequate survey and exploration activities, full potential
of these deposits are not known. Further some of the factors affecting
the growth of mineral sector (non-fuel) in India could be attributed to
the methodology of grant of concessions, since decision making process
involved in the grant of concessions is perceived as non-transparent,
inefficient and subject to huge delays at all levels, resulting in poor
investments in the sector, discontent in host populations for mining
projects and illegal mining which is causing loss of revenues to
State Governments. In a mid-term appraisal of the Tenth Five-Year
Plan, it was observed that the main factors responsible for lack of
adequate investments into the mineral sector (non-fuel) were procedural
delays in processing of applications for mineral concessions and absence
of adequate infrastructure in the mining areas. The mid-term appraisal
recommended constitution of a Committee to suggest way and means
for stepping up of investment and other matters confronting mineral
sector.
B. High Level Committee
1.2 A High Level Committee (HLC) was constituted by the
Government of India, Planning Commission under the Chairmanship
of Shri Anwarul Hoda, Member, Planning Commission with the
following terms of reference:—
(i) To review the National Mineral Policy, 1993 and the Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Act,
1957 and suggest the changes needed for encouraging
investment in public and private sector in exploration and
exploitation of minerals;
(ii) To review the existing procedures for granting
Reconnaissance Permits (RPs), Prospecting Licenses (PLs),
and Mining Leases (MLs) and suggest ways for their
streamlining and simplification;

2
(iii) To review the procedures for according clearance to mineral
exploration and mining projects under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 and Environment (Protection) Act,
1986, and suggest ways for speeding them up;
(iv) To prioritise the critical infrastructure needs of the Indian
mining sector and make recommendations on ways to
facilitate investment to meet these needs;
(v) To examine the implications of the policy of mineral-rich
states to make value addition within the state a condition
for grant of mineral concession and make appropriate
recommendations in this regard;
(vi) To examine ways of augmenting State revenues from the
mineral sector; and
(vii) To examine any other issue relevant for stimulating
investment flows and inducting state-of-the-art technology
into the sector.
1.3 The Committee invited all stakeholders to submit
representations and/or make presentations detailing their perceptions
in respect of the various terms of reference of the Committee. The
Committee held extensive consultations with various interest groups
and stakeholders.. The Committee studied the various reports prepared
and submitted by study groups and in-house committees set up by
various ministries from time to time on the issues before the
Committee.
1.4 The Committee submitted its report to the Government on the
20th July 2006 in which it observed that out of 1.82 million sq. km.
of hard rock area (excluding the Deccan Trap), geological mapping
on a scale of 1:50,000 has been largely completed on estimated
347,040 sq. km., geophysical mapping of only 56,000 sq. km. and
geochemical mapping of only 73,000 sq. km. has been completed. It
further observed that in India, investment has been lacking in high-
risk exploration ventures and the work done by Geological Survey of
India (GSI) continued to be the main basis for investment in mining,
and there was a felt need to attract high risk investment in the interest
of discovering commercially exploitable deposits.
1.5 The Committee also submitted its recommendations which
included suggestions for evolving a mining code adapted to the best
international practices, streamlining and simplifying procedures for grant
of mineral concessions to reduce delays, strengthening the infrastructure
for mining activities and recommendations on other issues for
improving the environment for investment in the mining sector. Based

3
on the recommendations of the HLC, the Government has enunciated
National Mineral Policy, 2008 (NMP). A copy of the Policy document
was laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16.04.2008.
C. Approach to the New Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Bill, 2011
1.6 The National Mineral Policy (NMP), while ushering in greater
liberalization and private sector involvement, has simultaneously sought
to widen the scope of the regulatory framework of the Government in
the mining sector by shifting the focus from conventional areas of
managing the mineral concession systems to new areas of regulating
the mineral sector holistically through addressing issues of
simplification, transparency and sectoral best practices in order to attract
capital and technology in the sector from new sources.
1.7 NMP has also deepened the scope of the developmental
framework by mandating better management of resources and
improving the Research and Development and Human Resources in
the sector to ensure that the interests of host populations and other
vulnerable sections are fully protected and stakeholder interests are
developed, and the benefit of the economic activity in the mining sector
flows equitably to the stakeholders.
1.8 A large proportion of the mineral wealth is situated in areas
under forest cover, inhabited by tribal or under-privileged communities,
and of late, socio-economic issues of tribal and remote communities
which inter-alia include perceptions about displacement, control of area
by outsiders, economic isolation, environmental degradation and loss
of livelihood and habitat, have come into focus, articulated through
various means as constituting alienation and loss of identity. There is
a felt need to incorporate provisions in the mining legislation enabling
creation, activation and empowerment of institutional mechanisms for
involvement of the local people, especially the tribal and under
privileged communities, in the development of mineral resources
through creation of stakeholder rights.
1.9 Considering that the existing law had already been amended
several times, and further amendments may not clearly reflect the
objects and reasons emanating from the new mineral policy and that
a new legislation would be preferable in order to clarify the legislative
intent, the Ministry of Mines framed a new Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011, to replace the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.

4
1.10 As per the provisions of Article 246, the Seventh Schedule of
the Constitution of India in Entry 54 of List I (Union List) provides for
“Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which
such regulation and development under the control of Union is declared
by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest”. Similarly,
Entry 23 of the List II (State List) provides for “Regulation of mines
and mineral development subject to the provision of List-I w.r.t.
regulation and development under the control of Union”.
1.11 Though the Constitution provides that the State Governments,
as the owners of the minerals regulate and grant the mineral
concessions for exploration and mining of minerals. In exercise of the
powers vested by the Constitution of India, the Parliament, after
declaring it to be in expedient in the public interest, has enacted the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR
Act). The MMDR Act enables all the States to exercise their powers
within a uniform national framework, and the primary powers of the
State Governments stand denuded to that extent so far as the
Parliament has legislated on any such subject.
D. Objective of New Bill
1.12 Statement of Objects and Reasons is given below:—
1. The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act,
1957 was enacted so as to provide for the regulation of mines and
development of minerals under the control of the Union. The aforesaid
Act was amended in the years 1958, 1972, 1986, 1987, 1994 and 1999.
2. The first National Mineral Policy was enunciated by the Central
Government in 1993 for liberalization of the mining sector. With the
passage of time and the economic development of the country, which
requires a vibrant energy, metal and commodities sector to meet the
infrastructure, manufacturing and other sectoral demands, the nature
and requirements of the mineral sector has changed. Based on the
recommendations of a High Level Committee set up in the
Planning Commission, Government of India, in consultation with
State Governments, had replaced the National Mineral Policy, 1993
with a National Mineral Policy on the 13th March, 2008. The new
National Mineral Policy provides for a change in the role of the Central
Government and the State Governments particularly in relation to
incentivizing private sector investment in exploration and mining and
ensuring level playing field and transparency in the grant of concessions
and promotion of scientific mining within a sustainable development
framework so as to protect the interest of local population in mining
areas. This necessitated a new legislation for harmonization with the
new National Mineral Policy.

5
3. The salient features of the Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Bill, 2011, inter alia , are as follows:—
(a) It provides for a simple and transparent mechanism for grant
of mining lease or prospecting licence through competitive
bidding in areas of known mineralization, and on the basis
of first-in-time in areas where mineralization is not known;
(b) It enables the mining holders to adopt the advanced and
sophisticated technologies for exploration of deep-seated and
concealed mineral deposits, especially of metals in short
supply through a new mineral concession;
(c) It enables the Central Government to promote scientific
mineral development, through Mining Plans and Mine
Closure Plans enforced by a central technical agency namely
the Indian Bureau of Mines, as well as the Regulatory
Authorities and Tribunals;
(d) It empowers the State Governments to cancel the existing
concessions or debar a person from obtaining concession in
future for preventing the illegal and irregular mining;
(e) It empowers the Central Government and State Governments
to levy and collect cess;
(f) Establishment of the Mineral Funds at National and State
level for funding the activities pertaining to capacity building
of regulatory bodies like Indian Bureau of Mines and for
research and development issues in the mining areas;
(g) It provides for reservation of an area for the purpose of
conservation of minerals;
(h) It enables the registered co-operatives for obtaining mineral
concessions on small deposits in order to encourage tribals
and small miners to enter into mining activities;
(i) It empowers the Central Government to institutionalise a
statutory mechanism for ensuring sustainable mining with
adequate concerns for environment and socio-economic
issues in the mining areas, through a National Sustainable
Development Framework;
(j) It provides for establishment of the National Mining
Regulatory Authority which consists of a Chairperson and
not more than nine members to advise the Government on
rates of royalty, dead rent, benefit sharing with District
Mineral Foundation, quality standards, and also conduct
investigation and launch prosecution in cases of large scale
illegal mining;

6
(k) It provides for establishment of the State Mining Regulatory
Authority consisting of such persons as may be prescribed
by the State Government to exercise the powers and
functions in respect of minor minerals;
(l) It provides for establishment of a National Mining Tribunal
and State Mining Tribunals to exercise jurisdiction, powers
and authority conferred on it under the proposed legislation;
(m) It empowers the State Governments to constitute Special
Courts for the purpose of providing speedy trial of the
offences relating to illegal mining;
(n) It empowers the Central Government to intervene in
the cases of illegal mining where the concerned
State Government fails to take action against illegal mining;
(o) It provides for stringent punishments for contravention of
certain provisions of the proposed legislation; and
(p) To repeal the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957.
4. A notable feature of the Bill is to provide a simple mechanism
which ensures that revenues from mining are shared with local
communities at individual as well as community level so as to empower
them, provide them with choices, enable them to create and maintain
local infrastructure and better utilise infrastructure and other services
provided for their benefit.
5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of
the proposed Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
E. Consultations with the Stakeholders
1.13 The new legislation has been extensively consulted with all
the stakeholders. This included an intensive exercise of consultation
with all the stakeholders including representatives of civil society
concerned with environmental/societal impact. After obtaining the
views of the stakeholders, the new draft legislation was circulated to
the Ministries of Commerce, Finance, Environment and Forests, Steel,
Shipping and Surface Transport and Rural Development, the
Departments of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Legal Affairs, Atomic
Energy and Tribal Affairs and Planning Commission, etc. The successive
versions of the draft legislation was also circulated /uploaded on the
website of the Ministry for the benefit of the stakeholders on 5.8.2009,
17.9.2009, 17.11.2009, 8.1.2010, 31.3.2010 and 3.6.2010.

7
F. Deliberations of the Group of Ministers
1.14 The Government then set up a Group of Ministers (GoM)
vide letter No 381/3/2/2010-Cab dated 14.6.2010 to look into the
proposed new draft Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Bill, 2011.
1.15 Some of the specific concerns of the stakeholders which were
not in consonance with the perspective of the Ministry of Mines were
placed before the GoM, and considered in detailed discussions held on
22nd July 2010, 30th July 2010, 17th September 2010, 3rd December
2010 and 7th July 2011. The Chairman of GoM, as desired by the
GoM, also held meetings with the Chief Ministers of the
State Government of Chhattisgarh and Odisha.
1.16 The Government also set up a Committee for allocation of
Natural Resources vide Cabinet Secretariat’s order No. 483/1/1/2011-
Cab dated 31st January 2011. The Committee submitted its Report on
the 3rd June 2011 and made ten recommendations in respect of the
mineral sector. These were duly examined and placed before the GoM
in its meeting on the 7th July 2011, which approved changes in several
provisions in the draft Act under consideration.
G. Cabinet Approval
1.17 The GoM recommended the draft MMDR Bill, 2011, to be
placed before the Cabinet on 7th July 2011. After taking into account
the recommendation of the GoM, the Cabinet approved the draft
MMDR Bill, 2011, on 30.9.2011, subject to any further changes, if any,
arising out of any comments received from the State Government of
West Bengal within 15 days. The Ministry of Mines, in terms of the
decision of the Cabinet, requested comments of the State Government
of West Bengal, and after waiting for 15 days initiated the process to
introduce the draft Bill in Lok Sabha. After obtaining recommendation
of the Hon'ble President of India on 11th November 2011, the draft
MMDR Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 12th December
2011.
1.18 The Committee note that the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 was enacted for regulation
and development of mineral under the control of Union Government.
The Act was subsequently amended in the years 1958, 1972, 1986,
1994 and 1999 to cater to the needs of the sector. Pursuant to the
National Mineral Policy, 2008, the reformulated legislative proposal
in the form of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)

8
Bill, 2011 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 11.12.2011 and referred to
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on 05.01.2012 for
examination and report under Rule 331E (1)(b) of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Committee
held a series of meetings in connection with the examination of the
Bill. The observations/recommendations of the Committee on various
provisions/clauses of the Bill are given in the succeeding Chapters.

9
(CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION)
CHAPTER II
PRELIMINARY
Clause 1 of the Bill reads as under:—
1(1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Act, 2011.
1(2) It extends to the whole of India.
1(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
“Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision.”
Suggestions received by the Committee and
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
2.2 On being enquired to give their comments as to whether
constitutional safeguards have been taken to ensure applicability of
the bill to whole country including J&K, the Ministry of Mines informed
the Committee in a written reply as under:—
“Article 370 of the Constitution of India allows the Parliament to
make laws for State of J&K in the matters in Union list and
Concurrent list which are declared by the President to correspond
to matters specified in the Instrument of Accession, or any other
matter in the two referred lists as the President may specify.”
2.3 In terms of the Appendix-XI in the comments to the
Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, is applicable in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. Similar to the MMDR Act of 1957, the draft
MMDR Bill, 2011 extends to the whole of India. No separate status
has been accorded to the State of Jammu and Kashmir in the draft
Bill. After the draft MMDR Bill is approved by the Parliament, the
State Government of Jammu and Kashmir shall be requested to

10
appropriately move an amendment Bill to this effect to replace the
relevant entry in the Appendix-XI in the comments to the Constitution
of Jammu and Kashmir.
Recommendation of the Committee
2.4 In view of the comments of the Ministry of Mines, the
Committee expect that after approval of MMDR Bill, 2011 by the
Parliament, the Government should ensure that the State Government
of Jammu & Kashmir is requested to appropriately replace the entry
in the Appendix-XI to the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir so
that the Bill be made applicable to the whole country including
Jammu and Kashmir.
Definitions
(i) Atomic Mineral Directorate
2.5 Clause 3(b) of the Bill reads as under:—
“Atomic Minerals Directorate” means the Atomic Minerals
Directorate for Exploration and Research, Hyderabad, under the
control of the Department of Atomic Energy, Central Government.”
Suggestions received by the Committee and
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
2.6 On being enquired to make the definition of AMD more explicit
and comprehensive, the Ministry of Mines have informed the
Committee that AMD was set up in July, 1949 as a Research and
Development unit in the Department of Atomic Energy, Government
of India. The task of survey of Atomic minerals is at present entrusted
only to the AMD. The draft Bill provides for notifying any other
Government agency for the purpose of promotional exploration [clause
4(2)]. For this reason, there may not be a requirement for change in
the definition of AMD.
Recommendation of the Committee
2.7 The Committee find that the definition assigned to Atomic
Mineral Directorate in the Bill is limiting and restrictive in nature
and not broad based, ignoring eventualities that may arise in future.
For instance, in the event of change in the nomenclature of the
Directorate, shifting of office from Hyderabad, Department of Atomic
Energy being converted into a Ministry, the definition would require

11
to be revisited. In order to make definition more explicit and
comprehensive, the Committee recommend that the definition of
Atomic Mineral Directorate be as under:—
“Atomic Mineral Directorates” means the Atomic Mineral
Directorate for Exploration and Research, Hyderabad or any other
Government agency notified by the Central Government.”
(ii) Coal Controller
2.8 Clause 3(e) of the Bill reads as under:—
“Coal Controller” means the person appointed as such by the
Central Government under the Coal Controller Organisation (Group
‘A’ Posts) Recruitment Rules, 1986 for the time being in force.”
Recommendation of the Committee
2.9 In the event of change in the recruitment rules, or change in
the nomenclature, the definition would need to be redefined. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the above sub-Clause be
modified as under:—
“Coal Controller” means the person appointed as such by the
Central Government under the Coal Controller Organisation
(Group A posts) recruitment rules 1986 or any other Rules for
the time being in force.
(iii) Detail Exploration/General Exploration/Mineral Concession
Prospecting
2.10 Clause 3(g) of the Bill reads as under:—
“Detailed exploration” means a detailed three-dimensional
delineation of a known deposit achieved through close spaced
sampling, pitting, trenching and drilling in a grid, and includes an
analysis of outcrops, trenches, boreholes, shafts and tunnels, so
that the size, shape, structure, grade of the deposit are established
with high degree of accuracy, in order to conduct a feasibility
study.”
2.11 Clause 3(j) of the Bill reads as under:—
“general exploration” means the process of initial delineation of
an identified deposit in an area using surface mapping, wide spaced
sampling, trenching and drilling for preliminary evaluation of

12
mineral quantity and quality, including mineralogical tests on
laboratory scale, and any indirect method of mineral investigation,
in order to conduct a pre-feasibility study and further detailed
exploration.
2.12 Clause 3(n) of the Bill reads as under:—
“Mineral concession” means a reconnaissance licence, a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, a prospecting
licence, or a mining lease in respect of major minerals and minor
minerals and includes quarrying permits and any other mineral
concessions permitting the mining of minor minerals in accordance
with such rules as may be made by the State Government in this
behalf.”
2.13 Clause 3(v) of the Bill reads as under:—
“prospecting” means the systematic process of searching for a
mineral deposit by narrowing down an area of promising enhanced
mineral potential through outcrop identification, geological mapping,
geophysical and geochemical studies, trenching, drilling, sampling,
etc., in order to facilitate general and detailed exploration.
Recommendation of the Committee
2.14 In detail exploration, 3(g), general exploration (j) and Mineral
Concession (n) and prospecting (v) various techniques used have been
indicated as part of the definition. In the event of discovery of new
and novel technique/technology in the process of detailed exploration/
general exploration and prospecting, the Committee feel that
definitions would undergo change. As the present definition is limited
to the extent of present techniques/discoveries made in the mining
process, the Committee recommend that the following words may be
suitably added in the above sub-Clauses:—
“or any other proven scientific technique (s)/technology(s) as may
be notified by the Central Government.”
(iv) Major Minerals and Minor Minerals
2.15 Clause 3(m) of the Bill reads as under:—
Major minerals means the minerals specified in First Schedule.
2.16 Clause 3(p) of the Bill reads as under:—
Minor minerals means the minerals other then major minerals
specified in the First Schedule.

13
Suggestions received by the Committee
2.17 The Committee received the following suggestions from
various stakeholders:—
(i) “The draft bill has missed out on certain important aspects
i.e. addressing the need for re-classification of ornamental
dimensional granite as a major mineral as well as long term
mining lease etc., which are pertinent to granite industry.
With the elapse of more than 50 years since the time of last
classification, the ornamental granite industry has come a
long way to emerge as one of the most important minerals
of India in terms of economic and industrial value,
employment, investment, mechanization, application of
technology, skill sets, export revenues etc. The Committee
have been further informed that the growth of granite
industry is adversely affected by the neglect, discouragement
as well as short term and policies of the State Governments,
having jurisdictional control over the minor minerals. The
granite sector employs 2.0 million skilled personnel and
generates about Rs. 6,000 crores of exports every year.
(ii) In the event of ornamental granite is classified as major
mineral allowing uniform, long term and transparent policies
of regulation and taxation, the sector will witness a high
growth in the coming years and decades resulting in much
higher employment, investment, exports and other benefits
to the economy. The employment will jump beyond
3.00 million jobs and will attract Rs. 50,000 crores in capital
investment and exports will exceed Rs. 10,000 crores per
annum.”
2.18 The Committee have further been apprised of the case of
Deepak Kumar, etc. vs. State of Haryana and others Hon’ble Supreme
Court in their judgment dated 27.02.2012 have also recommended that
the Ministry of Mines along with Indian Bureau of Mines, in
consultation with the State Governments may re-examine the
classification of minerals into major and minor categories so that the
regulatory aspects and environment mitigation measures are
appropriately integrated for ensuring sustainable and scientific mining
with least impacts on environment.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
2.19 Regarding reclassification of ornamental/industrial granite
from minor mineral to major mineral, the Ministry of Mines have
replied that as per Clause 3(m) the major minerals are the minerals

14
specified in the first schedule which is to be done by the Central
Government. Any reclassification will be done as per the
recommendation of the National Mining Regulatory Authority.
2.20 The Secretary, Ministry of Mines further informed the
Committee during evidence as under:—
“The situation is that the Supreme Court has asked the Ministry
of Mines to frame model rules and give them to the States to
adopt them. That is what is happening. That is the current
thing.…………..,. The Supreme Court has asked the Centre to make
model rules.”
Recommendation of the Committee
2.21 The Committee recommend that ‘granite’ should be brought
under the schedule of Major Minerals.
(v) Consultation
Suggestions received by the Committee
2.22 Ministry of Panchayati Raj has desired that definition of
‘Consultation’ should be defined to ensure that Gram Sabha is given
full information and its views are respected in Schedule V areas where
under Section 4(d) of the legislation extending the Panchayats Act to
Scheduled areas—the PESA Act, 1996, the Gram Sabha is made the
competent authority to preserve its traditions, customary rights and
community resources, consultation has to be defined as consent. Unless
this is done, this legislation will create contradiction with PESA Act,
1996.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
2.23 In this regard, a representative of Ministry of Panchayati Raj
informed the Committee during evidence as under:—
“When the Constitution 73rd Amendment was passed, initially it
was not applied to Scheduled 5 areas but subsequently PESA was
enacted in 1996. Under PESA, extensive powers had been given
not only to Gram Panchayat but also to Gram Sabha. One of the
powers given to Gram Sabha is that prior recommendation of the
Gram Sabha is mandatory when a prospecting licence or licence
for mine and mineral as well as concession for mine and mineral
are given. So, that is according to the provisions of PESA. Our
Ministry’s mandate is to ensure the implementation of PESA. All
our comments are basically in tune with PESA and we would like
that this MMDR Bill is in compliance with the provisions of PESA.”

15
2.24 The witness further added that the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj have put up a Cabinet Note for amending the PESA Act itself to
make the recommendation of the Gram Sabha as a mandatory.
2.25 In this regard, the Ministry of Mines, have informed the
Committee that consultation as may be defined in the PESA Act, 1996
would be acceptable to the Ministry.
Recommendation of the Committee
2.26 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj
have desired that the Gram Sabha be made the competent authority
to preserve its traditions, customary rights and community resources
and to ensure this, consultation has to be defined as ‘consent’. While
observing that under Panchayat Extension to Schedule Areas (PESA),
Act, 1996, one of the powers given to Gram Sabha is that prior
recommendation of the Gram Sabha is required when a prospecting
licence or licence for mine and mineral as well as concession for
mine and mineral are given, the Committee have been given to
understand that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have put up a Cabinet
Note for amending the PESA Act itself to make the recommendation
of the Gram Sabha as mandatory. Although, the Ministry of Mines
have admitted that ‘consultation’ as defined in the PESA, Act, 1996
would be acceptable to them, the Committee desire that the term
‘consultation’ should be read as an effective consultation. The
Committee desire that views of Gram Sabha should not be lightly
ignored into. The Committee observe that strong valid reason should
be given in case of ignoring the views of Gram Sabha and necessary
amendment should be brought into the Act.

16
CHAPTER III
GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON MINERAL CONCESSIONS
License for Reconnaissance, Prospecting and Mining Operations
(Clause 4)
Clause 4(2)of the Bill reads as under:—
No licence shall be necessary in respect of reconnaissance or
prospecting operations undertaken by the Geological Survey of India,
the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the Mineral Exploration Corporation
Limited, the Singareni Collieries Limited, the Neyveli Lignite
Corporation Limited and the Central Mine Planning and Design
Institute Limited being Government companies within the meaning of
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 or the Directorate of Mining
and Geology (by whatever name called) of any State Government and
such other Government agencies as may be notified by the Central
Government from time to time in respect of any land where rights on
minerals vest in the State Government:
“Provided that all such operations shall be notified by the State
Government and may be undertaken for a period not exceeding
three years in respect of reconnaissance and six years in respect of
prospecting, as may be specified in such notification:
Provided further that no such reconnaissance or prospecting shall
be undertaken in an area for which a licence or mining lease has
been granted or for which application for a grant of licence or
mining lease is pending.”
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.2 The Committee have inter-alia received the following
suggestions:—
(i) As regards, notification by the State Government in first
proviso clause 4(2), the Department of Atomic Energy has
suggested that instead of a notification by the State
Government on the exploration activities by Government
agencies in Clause 4(2), mere intimation should be sufficient
or a deemed notification should be provided in the draft
Bill, [Clause 4(2)].

17
(ii) Regarding exploration and discovery of atomic minerals, the
Committee were apprised by the Secretary, Department of
Atomic Energy during evidence that "according to Section 9
of the Atomic Energy Act it is exclusively in the domain of
Atomic Energy Department and the section imply that this
power is to carry forward the discovery or exploration in
any part of the country notwithstanding the status of the
particular land.
The witness further added:
“In any case, atomic minerals will not be of interest to any other
party who can be granted licence to carry forward the exploration
in any part of the country. To this extent, section 9 of the Atomic
Energy Act is very clear.”
3.3 The Department of Atomic Energy has, therefore, suggested
that the following be inserted in the second proviso of Clause 4:—
“except in areas where section 9 of Atomic Energy Act, 1952 is
applicable”.
3.4 The Committee had desired to know the justification for
inclusion of certain agencies like GSI, Atomic Mineral Department etc.
referred to in the definition and exclusion of NALCO, HCL, SAIL,
MOIL, etc.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.5 The Ministry of Mines have not accepted the first suggestion
of the Department of Atomic Energy and have informed the Committee
that notification is necessary since it would allow clarity in the filling
of applications and awareness on the areas under promotional
exploration.
3.6 As regards the second issue raised by Department of Atomic
Energy, the Secretary, Ministry of Mines drew attention of the
Committee to the Clause 48(1) which is omnibus in nature and
empowers the Central Government to authorize Geological Survey of
India and Indian Bureau of Mines, Atomic Minerals Directorate etc., to
investigate and report for purpose of conservation of strategic mineral
resources or for the scientific management, exploration and exploitation
of mineral resources it is expedient to conduct a technical or a scientific
investigation with regard to any mineral or any land including lands
in relation to which mineral concessions may have been granted.

18
3.7 The objective of clause 4(2) is to allow promotional exploration
activities by Government agencies in the interest of mineral
development, without the necessity to obtain a licence or lease under
the draft MMDR Bill. NALCO, SAIL, MOIL, HCL etc. are into
commercial exploration and mining. However, if any promotional
exploration is mandated and budget is provided for by Government
to these PSU's in future, clause 4(2) of the draft Bill allows these
companies (which are within the meaning of Section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1952) to operate.
3.8 The details of exploration carried out by various agencies
during 2008-09 to 2010-11 (reply to Lok Sabha USQ No. 3260,
31.08.2012) indicate that NALCO have carried out detailed exploration
for 230 million tonnes minerable estimated results of bauxite and about
73.16 million tonnes of Fe resources were explored by SAIL in
Chhattisgarh (Rajahara, Dalli, Jharandalli iron ore mines).
Recommendation of the Committee
3.9 The Committee do not concur with the views of the
Department of Atomic Energy merely intimating would be as good
as deemed notification while emphasizing the need for notification
under first Proviso Clause 4(2) by the State Government to ensure
that no agencies other than Atomic Minerals Directorate be allowed/
allocated areas where deposits of Atomic minerals have been
identified as such no change is warranted. The Committee are,
however, not in agreement with the contention of the Ministry of
Mines that clause 48(1) of the proposed Bill would ensure
management and conservation of strategic minerals. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Mines should make
necessary amendments in the Second Proviso to Clause 4(2) by
inserting the words “except in areas where section 9 of Atomic Energy
Act, 1952 is applicable” as suggested by Department of Atomic
Energy.
3.10 The Committee note that agencies/companies such as MECL,
Neyveli Lignite Corporation, Singareni Collieries Limited, etc. are
exempted for obtaining licence under Clause 4(2). Taking into
consideration that HCL, NALCO, SAIL and MOIL are also engaged
in reconnaissance and prospecting operation, the Committee are not
convinced with the reply of the Government that whenever budget
is provided for exploration works by these PSUs, the Government
may notify them from time to time. The Committee, thus, feel that
these organizations too be granted exemptions within the meaning
of clause 4(2) of the Bill and mentioned therein.

19
3.11 The Committee note that State Governments have been
armed to notify the completion of reconnaissance and prospecting
operations within a span of three and six years respectively by the
agencies enumerated in clause 4(2). The Committee though in the
agreement with the present dispensation, desire that some flexibility
in the period for such operations ought to be given to the State
Governments as they are the owners of minerals. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the State Government concerned may be
empowered to alter, modify the periods for the reasons recorded in
writing. Accordingly, clause 4(2) be suitably amended to the above
extent.
Second Proviso to Clause 4(2)
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.12 As regards, the second proviso to clause 4 (2), the State
Government of Chhattisgarh and Odisha have desired that instead of
restricting promotional exploration on areas where application for a
grant of license or mining lease is pending, such restriction should be
limited only to such areas where application for grant of license or
mining lease of a previous licence holder is pending.
3.13 In a note furnished to the Committee, the State Government
of Jharkhand have desired that second proviso to sub clause 2 of clause
4 also requires re-drafting as the current draft bars/prohibits
reconnaissance or prospecting in areas where licenses and mining leases
have been granted or for which application/applications are pending.
Had these provisions been for a group of associated minerals, it would
have been reasonable. But the draft in its present form could prohibit
reconnaissance or prospecting for even unassociated minerals. For
instance, base metals and diamonds are unassociated group of minerals.
But with the provisions in the current draft, reconnaissance or
prospecting for one group of associated mineral is not possible if the
license or leases for the other has been granted or pending.
3.14 During evidence, a representative of State Government of
Jharkhand further elaborated as under:—
“If already lease has been granted then it is all right. Even if the
application is pending then further reconnaissance or prospecting
shall not be undertaken in an area. There may be several minerals
available in the same area even unassociated minerals may be there
which are different minerals. So, this will prohibit the exploration
of the mineral potential of that area.”

20
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.15 While responding to the suggestions of Governments of
Chhattisgarh and Odisha, the Ministry of Mines have commented that
in the context of National Mineral Policy, 2008, the primary focus of
the draft Bill is to fast-track exploration of resources in the country,
which could be either through promotional State led exploration using
public money or through entrepreneurial venture of private companies
specialising in exploration at their own cost. The Mineral Policy allows
both types of exploration to co-exist, but also lays down that in case
private sector is interested in any area, then public funds should be
prioritised in other areas. The draft Bill is therefore in line with the
policy. However, sufficient protection is allowed to the State to block
out an area for private investment under clause 37 in the interest of
conservation of minerals.
3.16 As regards, the issue raised by the State Government of
Jharkhand, the Secretary of Ministry of Mines submitted before the
Committee during the evidence on 16.07.2012 in his oral submission
that this point is worth consideration and the Ministry will consider it.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.17 Taking note of the suggestion of State Government of
Jharkhand to amend Second Proviso to the Clause 4(2) of the Bill
under which reconnaissance or prospecting for one group of associated
mineral is not possible if the license or leases for other minerals has
been granted or pending and its acceptance by Ministry of Mines,
the Committee recommend the Government to make suitable changes
in the bill to ensure that the Clause 4(2) should not prohibit
reconnaissance or prospecting licence or mining lease for unassociated
minerals where applications are pending and if such application is
not disposed of within a period of 6 months from the date of coming
into force of the Act.
Level playing field for power companies—Clause 4(2) read with
Clause 8(6)
3.18 Clause 8(6) regarding Grant and extension of mineral
concession is as under:—
A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance cum exploration licence, prospecting licence or mining
lease for coal minerals shall be granted by the State Government to a
company approved by the Central Government on such terms and

21
conditions as may be prescribed by it and such licence or lease be
granted through competitive bidding and auction in such manner as
may be prescribed by it.
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not be
applicable for grant of mineral concession—
(a) to a Government company or corporation for mining or
such other specified end use;
(b) to a company or corporation which has been awarded a
power project (including Ultra Mega Power Project) on the
basis of competitive bids for tariff.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.19 The Committee have received following suggestions in this
regard:—
(i) While observing provisions of clause 8(6) and 13(9) together
one of the stakeholders has suggested that a proper mix of
both financial and technical requirements for selection criteria
will allow participation of serious and competent players
who will be able to develop these blocks in time as intended
by Government unlike the current situation where most of
the allocated mines have not been operational mostly owing
to poor financial and technical strength/capability of the
allottees.
The framework and criteria should be spelt out as already
given for other minerals in the act to facilitate timely start
of production from underground mines and to ensure safe
and environment friendly stowing, allocation of sand leases
along with the coal block.
(ii) While the Bill requires all private entities to obtain a license
for Reconnaissance and Prospecting, Clause 4(2) exempts
government Companies from obtaining such a license.
Similarly, while private entities are required to participate
in competitive bidding and auctioning for grant of mineral
concessions, including mining lease, Clause 8(6) proviso (a)
exempts Government Companies from the same. It may be
noted that the exemption available to a power company
from participating in competitive bidding and auctioning
(Clause 8(6) proviso (b) applies only when such a company
has already been awarded a power project on the basis of
competitive bids for power tariff.

22
As per Electricity Act, 2003 and National Tariff Policy, electricity
distribution companies (Discoms) can procure power only through
competitive bidding route. From 5.1.2011, even the Government
owned generation companies, such as NTPC, have to participate
in competitive bidding process of the Discoms to sell their power
to Discoms.
If Clause 4(2) and 8(6) proviso (a) are given effect to under the
Act, Government Companies, such as NTPC, Nevyeli Lignite will
be able to procure mining leases at prices/rates which are below
market rates discovered through competitive bidding process.
It has, therefore, been submitted before the Committee that any
advantage given to Government companies in grant of mineral
concessions, particularly mining leases, will give unfair competitive
advantage to such Government companies in the Discom's tender
process for procurement of power as their cost of coal will be less
than the market price, while Independent Power Producers will
only be able to offer at a higher tariff on account of procurement
of coal though competitive bidding and auctions.
The stakeholder has thus claimed that this will jeopardize equal
opportunity for all the Case-I competitive bidding as prescribed in
Competitive Bidding Guidelines (CBG) framework notified by
Government of India, Ministry of Power in 2006. Besides the above,
allocating coal mines without following the auction route to
Government companies (other than academic, statistical, geological
or geophysical, R&D government authorities) would defeat the basic
intent of the Act as enumerated in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons to the Bill — “…incentivizing private sector investment in
exploration and mining and ensuring level playing field and
transparency in the grant of concessions and promotion of scientific
mining within a sustainable development framework…”
It has, therefore, been suggested to the Committee that exemption
provided to Government Companies from obtaining various mineral
concessions without participating in the auction process as provided
in these two clauses may be revised to exclude those Government
Companies whose business objective under their Articles of
Association is power generation. Even in case of other Government
companies the option to grant such license without following
auction route may be provided by respective Central or State
Government on exceptional basis.”

23
(iii) Reservation of areas for undertaking promotional exploration
by Government organizations needs to be removed as it is
against the intention of reforms introduced.[Clause 4(2)]
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.20 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestion as
under:—
(i) The suggestion is not acceptable to the Ministry . The fear is
unfounded. The objective of this clause is to allow
promotional exploration by the Government. After this
promotional work, the Government would publish all the
exploration data on public domain and notify for allocation
of prospecting licence or Mining lease on competitive
bidding. This provides sufficiently fair level of equal
opportunities for serious players.
(ii) Setting aside of the areas for promotional exploration for
Government organizations will not affect the interest of
private investors as the draft Bill provides sufficient
protection that such promotional reconnaissance or
prospecting shall not be undertaken by any Government
organizations in an area for which a license or mining lease
has been granted or for which application for a grant of
license or mining lease is pending.
(iii) The exception has been suggested by Ministry of Coal,
considering National interests, especially power sector
requirements.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.21 The Committee observe that though licence is not required
by the Government companies like GSI, Atomic Minerals Directorate,
MECL, SCCL, NLC and CMPDIL, etc., under Clause 4(2) for carrying
out reconnaissance or prospecting licence which are meant for
promotional exploration, proviso to Clause 8(6) give advantage to
Government companies in grant of mineral concessions particularly
mining leases giving unfair competitive bidding advantage to these
Government companies in the Discom's tender process for
procurement of power as their cost of coal will be less then the
market price while independent power producers will only be able
to offer at a high tariff on account of procurement of coal through
competitive bidding and auction. Thus the Committee feel that the
fear of the industry that granting of mining lease to Government

24
organisation is against the intention of reforms introduced by the
Government is not well founded. Although, the Ministry of Mines
have informed that the exception granted to Government Companies/
UMPPs has been suggested by the Ministry of Coal considering
national interests, especially power sector requirement, the Committee
observe that the proviso to Clause 8(6) applicable not only to
Government companies but also the private sector companies who
have been awarded power projects including UMPPs on the basis of
competitive bidding for tariff.
3.22 Clause 4(4) of the Bill reads as under:—
In respect of land on which prospecting operations are conducted
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), before the expiry
of the period specified in the notification issued by the
State Government, the Central Government in case of coal minerals,
and the State Government in case of all other minerals, may by
notification, invite competitive offers for grant of concession under
section 13 or may set aside the entire land or any portion of the land
for a period not exceeding three years for grant of mineral concession
under section 13 and no application for grant of any mineral concession
shall lie during this period or on the expiry thereof, except in
accordance with a notification issued under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (4) of section 13 of this Act, as the case may be.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.23 No r estrictions on grant of Non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence (NERL)/prospecting licence (PL)/mining lease (ML) in areas
set aside for promotional exploration by State, if there is no conflict of
interest. Government agencies to work only where private agencies do
not have interests or for gathering broader geoscientific data.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.24 In clause 4(2) it is proposed that no reconnaissance or
prospecting shall be undertaken by any government organizations in
an area for which a license or mining lease has been granted or for
which application for a grant of license or mining lease is pending.
However, in order to identify areas for competitive bidding,
promotional exploration is necessary by the State. Government agencies
are already working in area where private companies have not shown
any interest, but it may not be in the national interest to state that
promotional exploration should be carried out only in such areas, since
there are several deposits where mineralization is known but detailed
exploration is lacking.

25
Recommendation of the Committee
3.25 The Committee observe that for nation's interest reply of
the Ministry of Mines is accepted and no change is required of
Clause 4(4) of the Bill.
Application for Grant of Prospecting Licenses and Mining Leases
[Clause 4(5) and 4(6)].
3.26 Clause 4(5) and 4(6) of the Bill are reproduced below:-
Clause 4(5): Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), no mineral
concession shall be granted except on an application made to the State
Government after the commencement of this Act and in accordance
with the provisions thereof along with the application fee and earnest
money, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that
applicants who made the applications before the commencement
of this Act shall be required to make fresh applications under this
Act, and no right [except as otherwise provided under sub-section
(6)] shall accrue to such applicants under this Act by virtue of
having made an application before such commencement.
Clause 4(6): The provisions of sub-section (5) shall not be applicable
in case of applications made in accordance with any law for the time
being in force, before the commencement of this Act—
(a) for grant of prospecting licence or a mining lease after
completing exploration under a reconnaissance permit or a
prospecting licence, as the case may be; or
(b) for which prior approval of the Central Government for
grant of mineral concessions, has been given; or
(c) where a letter of intent (by whatever name called) has been
issued by the State Government to grant reconnaissance
permit or prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case
may be, and was pending grant of the concession under
this Act for fulfilment of the conditions of the letter of intent,
and the application for grant of the mineral concessions is
pending with the State Government at the time of
commencement of this Act.

26
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.27 The Committee have received various suggestions from the
Stakeholders proposing amendments to clause 4(5) and 4(6). Some of
these are as under:—
(i) According to State Governments of Odisha and Chhattisgarh,
Clause 4(5) should be amended to protect applications of
Prospecting licence and Mining Lease for coal minerals filed
by shortlisted coal block allottees under the MMDR, 1957,
and are pending for disposal at various levels before the
commencement of the draft Bill.
(ii) Sub-clause (5) & (6) of clause 4 of draft Bill requiring
pending applicants for mineral concession to apply afresh
should be amended to allow State Governments to dispose
off all pending applications within 180 days of
commencement of draft Bill. It does not save those
applications, which are recommended by the State
Government and are pending approval or are sub-judice or
are pending clarification or cases where exploration is not
complete but investments have been made.
(iii) Need to add a proviso to ensure that the applications
pending in any Court of law or for any other reason are to
be protected in the interest of mining entrepreneur.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.28 The Ministry of Mines replied as under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines have agreed to protect applications
of prospecting licenses and mining lease in case of coal
Minerals only as suggested by State Governments of Odisha
and Chhattisgarh.
(ii) As regards allowing State Governments to dispose off all
pending applications, the Ministry of Mines are of the view
that the State Government should normally have disposed
all pending applications in a timely manner. Since there are
lot of applications for grant of mineral concessions pending
in the State Governments, and considering the fact that the
State would be required to allot concessions on competitive
bidding, all pending applications, excepting those where
Central Government has given its prior approval or where
State Governments has given Letter of Intent, or where

27
application has been filed for next stage concession, have to
be treated as null and void. Such a measure is necessary for
undertaking the grant of concessions through the process of
bidding, which otherwise will be defeated. The Ministry of
Mines have further informed the Committee that this
suggestion is not acceptable to the Ministry. Separate
provisions not provided since in grant cases which are in
litigation or adjudication in the Courts, the Government has
to comply with orders of the Court. Further, under the new
bill, provisions for treating the existing applications are made
under section 4(6). The applications fulfilling the conditions
of seamless transition will be entertained. This provision
has been introduced for undertaking the grant of concessions
through the process of bidding/auction which otherwise will
be defeated.
(iii) Separate provisions have not been provided in the draft
Bill to protect such applications under litigation. Where a
Court has given directions in mineral concession cases under
litigation or adjudication, court directions are complied with
by the Government. However, a saving clause to this effect
could be added to the draft Bill in consultation with
Ministry of Law and Justice.
3.29 According to the Ministry of Mines, there are total of 47933
applications for grant of Mineral Concessions pending with the State
Governments. Details of 229 proposals pending with Ministry of Mines
Government of India are given below:—
•F rom 0-12 months - 94
•F rom 12-24 months - 64
• More than 24 months - 71
The Central Government have set up a Central Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee to facilitate Coordination between various
departments for streamlining the clearance process. (USQ 1251 dated
30.11.12)
Recommendation of the Committee
3.30 The Committee are not in agreement with the reply of the
Ministry of Mines in regard to grant of prospecting licence and
mining lease under Clause 4(5) and 4(6). Taking note of the fact that
there are 47933 applications for grant of Mineral Concessions pending
with the State Governments and 229 proposals pending with Ministry
of Mines, the Committee find merits in the contention of the
stakeholders that application pending for want of approvals or are

28
seeking clarification or where exploration is not complete but sizeable
investment has been made, may be accorded protection. The
Committee, therefore, desire that a suitable provision be made in the
Bill whereby the Government(s) are under an obligation to complete
the process/activities, within a span of one year, from the date of
commencement of the Act or outcome of litigation, as the case may
be, to protect the interest of mining entrepreneurs. Accordingly, a
saving clause to this be added in the draft Bill in consultation with
Ministry of Law and Justice.
Transport and Storing of Minor Minerals
3.31 Clause 4(8) read as under:—
No person shall transport or store, or cause to be transported or
stored, any minerals otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
Suggestion received by the Committee
3.32 Necessary proviso may be added in Section 4(8) to bring this
in conformity with Section 4(m)(vii) of PESA Act and to ensure that
people living in the schedule V areas are allowed to transport and
store minor minerals, upto certain limit for personal use like
construction of houses, ponds, panchayat building and boundaries etc.
In this respect rules may be made by the State Government on
recommendation of Gram Sabha.
3.33 During evidence, a representative of the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj submitted that a proviso should be added to Clause 4(8) so that
the people living in the scheduled area be allowed to transport and
store mines and minerals, upto a limit, which can be prescribed for
personal use like construction of houses, ponds, panchayat building,
etc.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.34 The Ministry of Mines have stated that the State Governments
would be advised at the time of framing of sub-legislation for minor
minerals.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.35 The Committee desire that to protect the interest of tribals
living in scheduled areas, be allowed to transport and store minerals
for personal use but not for any commercial use as prescribed and
notified, for the purpose, by the State Government. This clause may
be amended suitably.

29
Report on Reconnaissance
3.36 Clause 4(10) of the Bill reads as under:—
In any reconnaissance or prospecting operations undertaken by
the Geological Survey of India, the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the
Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries
Limited, the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited, the Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute Limited and such other Government
agencies, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), such
agency conducting the reconnaissance or prospecting operations shall
publish, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, a report of the reconnaissance or prospecting operations
and intimate the publication to the State Government in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government to enable the State
Government to set aside the area under sub-section (4) or notify the
area under section 13 for prospecting or mining, as the case may be:—
“Provided that where the State Governments fails to take a decision
to set aside the area or notify the area under section 13, it shall
publish such data in its official website, that would be available to
the general public in such manner as may be prescribed by the
State Government.”
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.37 In order to disseminate the information widely, a provision
has to be added so as to publish data in local/vernacular press for
mass circulation.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.38 This is a matter of procedures, which shall be provided for in
the sub-legislations, as provided under the Rule making powers in
clause 131.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.39 The Committee also desire that the data for prospecting or
mining need not be published in official website only. In order to
disseminate the information widely, the Committee recommend that
besides being publishing in official website, it may also be published
in local/Vernacular Print Media of mass circulation.
C. Eligibility for Grant of Mineral Concession
3.40 Clause 5(1) and 5(2) of the Bill read as under:—
Clause 5(1): No person shall be eligible for grant of a mineral
concession unless such person is a citizen of India or a company as
defined in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, or
a firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 and has

30
registered himself with the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate or any other agency authorised by a notification issued by
the Central Government, in such manner, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government:
Provided that for the purposes of mineral concessions for small
deposits in any area referred to in sub-section (6) of section 6, a
co-operative society registered with the State Government under
the law made by it and registered in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (2) shall be eligible for grant of such mineral
concession:
Provided further that in respect of any concession or an application
for grant or renewal of a mineral concession pending with the
State Governments at the commencement of this Act in terms of
sub-section (6) of section 4, the applicant of such application shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to register with the Indian
Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate, as the case may be, within
such time as may be notified and such application shall not be
rejected solely on the ground of non-registration with the Indian
Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the firm or
association or co-operative shall be eligible where all the members
of such firm or association or cooperative are citizens of India.
Clause 5(2): Subject to any notification issued under sub-section
(1), the registration process in respect of mineral concessions,—
(a) for major minerals shall be administered by the Indian
Bureau of Mines;
(b) for minor minerals shall be administered by the State
Directorate; and
(c) for Coal minerals shall be administered by the Central
Government.
3.41 Clause 5(2) of the Bill reads as under:—
No person shall be entitled to operate a mineral concession if he
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder, which renders him ineligible for grant of a mineral
concession:
Provided that a person who is holding a mineral concession prior
to the commencement of this Act shall not be deemed to be
contravening the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder merely on account of the fact that the area of such
concession is less than the mining area specified under section 6.

31
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.42 The Committee have received the following suggestions:—
(i) One of the stakeholders has stated that Limited Liability
Partnership, a new form of business entity should be
included in Clause 5 as eligible for grant of mineral
concessions.
(ii) “Limited liability partnership” with all the members being
Indian citizens to be made eligible for grant of mineral
concessions.
(iii) As regards, the registration of applications with IBM or State
Directorates or any other agencies notified by the Central
Government, the Committee have received following
suggestions:
A. This system existed in the Mines & Mineral
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1948 when it was
known as “Certificate of Approval”. This system of pre-
ascertainment of eligibility was subjected to this gross
abuse. Therefore, such a provision was removed from
the current version of the Mines & Mineral
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. The current
bill seeks to revive the same old system (State
Government of Jharkhand).
B. No useful purpose will be served by introducing the
system of registration. It is in a way reverting to the
earlier Concession of Certificate of Approval which has
been dispensed with years ago.
C. It is an unnecessary restriction on the freedom of trade
and business and puts unwarranted restriction and
brings to the fore inspector raj which the Government
of India is trying to dismantle since 1991. It also violates
Article 19 of the Constitution which allows the citizens
the right to “practice any profession, or to carry on any
occupation, trade or business. It may be pertinent to
point out that before the MMDR Act, 1957 was amended
on 22nd August, 1986; there were some such restrictions
on the grant of prospection license and mining leases”.
Section 5(1) of pre-MMDR Act, 1986 amendment read
as under:—

32
No prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted by
a State Government to any person unless he—
(a) Holds a certificate of approval in the prescribed form
from the State Government;
(b) Produces from the Income-tax Officer concerned an
income-tax clearance certificate in the prescribed form;
and
(c) Satisfies such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(d) Since these provisions were coming in the way of
development of mineral resources, these clauses were
dropped after 1986 amendments. Going back to the same
and more rigorous and laborious provision will make
entrepreneurs shy to invest in mineral industry.
(iv) To the First Proviso of Clause 5 (1), the Committee have
received the following suggestion:—
Following the Samta Judgment Mining activities in
Scheduled Areas should be in accordance with the scheme
of Schedule V & VI of the constitution and Judgment of
the Supreme Court in Samta Vs State of Andhra Pradesh
[197 (8) SCC 191]. Mining leases especially in case of mining
minerals can only be granted to cooperative societies
comprising of local tribal gram sabhas who are directly or
indirectly affected by the proposed mining operation. The
said cooperative societies shall operate without any direct
or indirect transfer/sub-leasing to any private entity. The
State Agencies shall act as a trustee and should assist these
cooperatives through technical, human and financial support
to the tribal cooperatives.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.43 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions as
under:—
(i) The above suggestion at (i) is not acceptable to the Ministry
since a mineral concession can be granted only to a citizen
of India while an Limited Liability Partnership allows non-
citizen also to form a partnership with resident Indians, thus
making Limited Liability Partnership ineligible. However, a
Limited Liability Partnership may be allowed to obtain
concessions, provided all its partners are Indian citizens.

33
(ii) An LLP (Limited Liability Partnership) may be allowed to
obtain concessions, provided all its partners are Indian
citizens. However, legal opinion in the matter would be
necessary from the Ministry of Law and Justice.
(iii) The above suggestion at (iii) is not acceptable and
registration is essential to identify the bonafide investors
and as a deterrent to curb the illegal mining.
(iv) To the suggestion at (iii) regarding grant of mining leases
to cooperative societies, the Ministry of Mines in a written
note have stated that First Proviso of clause 5(1) of the
draft Bill provides that a cooperative may also obtain
mineral concessions in area outside Fifth and Sixth Schedule
for small areas.
Recommendations of the Committee
3.44 The Committee find that a person, company or firm
registered under Indian Partnership Act, 1932 and registered with
IBM or State Directorate been permitted for grant of mineral
concession Clause 5(1). As per note submitted by the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs, 'limited liability partnership' is another legal entity
where under all or major partners may or may not be Indian citizens.
The Committee desire that besides firm or company, ‘limited liability
partnership’ with all the members being Indian citizens be made
eligible after taking necessary legal opinion from the Ministry of
Law and Justice for grant of mineral concession.
3.45 As regards to registration, the Committee are in agreement
with the views of the Ministry that the registration is essential to
identify the bonafide investors and as a deterrent to curb the illegal
mining. The Committee, however, like the Ministry to simplify the
procedure for registration. The Ministry while making rules for
implementation of the Act, should specifically prescribe minimum
period when the registration of the potential applicants should be
completed failing which such registration shall be deemed to have
been taken place.
3.46 The Committee find that in accordance with Supreme Court
ruling in Samta case, whereunder mining lease especially in case of
mining minerals can only be granted to Cooperative Societies
comprising of local tribal Gram Sabha, who are directly or indirectly

34
affected by the proposed mining operation. The Committee would
like the Ministry of Mines to take the legal opinion of the
Department of Legal Affairs in view of constitutional provision
involved in Samta Judgment and consider the same for tribal and
displaced/affected persons in regards to enabling the cooperative
society to obtain leases not only for small deposits but also for larger
areas, especially in case of minor minerals. However, the Government
should ensure that such cooperative societies ought to operate without
any direct or indirect transfer/sub-leasing to any private entity. At
the same time, State Government should be urged upon to assist
such cooperatives through technical, human and financial support, so
as to improve the viability of such cooperatives.
Maximum and Minimum Area of Mineral Concession
3.47 Clause 6(1), (2) and (3) of the Bill reads as under:—
Clause 6(1): The maximum area which can be held under mineral
concession at any time by a person in respect of any mineral or
prescribed group of associated minerals in a State shall be,—
(a) ten thousand square kilometres in respect of non-exclusive
reconnaissance licences;
 (b) five thousand square kilometres in respect of high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licences;
(c) five hundred square kilometres in respect of prospecting
licences; and
(d) one hundred square kilometres in respect of mining leases:
Provided that a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence shall be granted for such group of associated minerals (other
than iron ore, bauxite, limestone, coal minerals or other bulk
minerals) as may be prescribed by the Central Government, and
subject to such general conditions regarding use of advanced
technologies and methodologies as may be notified from time to
time by the Central Government:
Provided further that in case of coal minerals, if the Central
Government is of the opinion that in the interest of development
of coal minerals, it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, permit any person to acquire one or more
prospecting licence or mining lease covering an area in excess of
the maximum area specified in sub-section (1).

35
Clause 6(2): In respect of major minerals, the minimum area for
grant of,—
(a) A high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence
shall be one hundred square kilometres;
 (b) a prospecting licence shall be one square kilometre; and
(c) a mining lease shall be ten hectares.
Clause 6(3):  In respect of minor minerals the minimum area for
grant of,—
(a) A non-exclusive reconnaissance or a prospecting licence shall
be ten hectares; and
(b) a mining lease shall be five hectares:
Provided that the State Government in consultation with the
Ministry of Environment and Forest in the Central Government for
reasons to be recorded in writing may, in respect of any area and
any minor mineral, notify a minimum area other than the area
specified in this sub-section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the
area held by a person as a member of a co-operative society,
company or other corporation and a Hindu undivided family and
a partner of a firm or as an individual shall be jointly computed.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.48 In memoranda submitted by various organisations, the
Committee have been urged to amend the provisions of allocating
maximum and minimum area for grant of major and minor mineral
concessions. The suggestions received by the Committee are as under:—
(i) While the maximum area is 100 sq. kms. in respect of
Mining Leases, the minimum area shall be ten hectares
[25.0 acres] The provision U/s 6 of the new MMDR Bill,
stipulates that in respect of small deposits, not suitable for
scientific mining in isolated patches, a mining lease may be
granted for a cluster of such deposits within a defined area
not less than 10 hectares [25.0 acres].
It was requested that area restrictions of minimum 5 hectares
for the grant of minor mineral concessions vide Section 6(3)
of the draft Act be not incorporated and rather States be
left at liberty to notify the area of the quarries because as

36
a matter of fact the 40% of the quarries of State comprising
an area of less than 5 hectares.
(ii) The existing provision for a minimum area of 4 hectare for
major mineral and 1 hectare for minor mineral may be
continued as land is not available for mining purpose and
this too is in the interest of mineral conservation.
(iii) T oday’s growth is more due to the active and bold
entrepreneurship of the Private sector with less intervention.
Hence the Central Government should not treat the Beach
Mineral sands deposits [Placers] on a par with other “Major
Minerals” whose nature of formation [origin] and mining
methods are entirely different.
(iv) the minimum area for grant of major mineral under Clause
6(2), beach mineral is opposed as beach minerals are
deposited at any particular place and will not be available
in all the areas, that area will be less than one hectare, two
hectares or three hectares. It has, therefore, been suggested
that the minimum area be brought down to two hectares
which is a viable proposition for extracting Beach Minerals
as more than this area will become waste.
3.49 Further, the State Government of Rajasthan and Himachal
Pradesh have given the following justifications for amending the Clause
6(1) (2) and (3) in view of the peculiar conditions of the availability of
minerals in the State:—
Rajasthan
(i) Clause 6(1):  There should be a limit on number of leases
held by a single person/company and the maximum area
for grant be decreased to discourage the practice of holding
of large areas for a long time without actually working on
them. Either the number of leases or maximum area
whichever is higher may be made applicable.
(ii) Clause 6(2):  Minimum area proposed in amendment bill is
very high. If minimum size is reduced more entrepreneurs
will come forward and small patches of deposits will also
be exploited. Few minerals like ball clay, china clay, fire
clay, feldspar, quartz, jespar, silica sand, laterite, ochre,
soapstone and talc, pyrophylite are available in small patches
and free hold land is also available in small patches. Hence,
these minerals should be categorized separately and for these
minerals minimum area of mining lease may be 4 hectares.
For the remaining minerals minimum size may be 10
hectares as proposed in the Bill.

37
(iii) Clause 6(3): In Rajasthan about 12100 leases of minor
minerals are in working and most of them are of 1 hectare.
If minimum size is kept to be 5 hectare then it will become
very difficult to grant new leases due to unavailability of
large areas. In the category of minor minerals in Rajasthan
mostly the leases of masonry stone, sand stone, granite and
marble are granted. For these minerals, area is available in
small patches only and large number of people are
dependent on mining of these minor minerals for their daily
livelihood. Thus the minimum size of plot should be kept
1.00 hectare.
Himachal Pradesh
(i) It is recommended to reduce the minimum area for grant
of mining lease for major minerals in hill states up to 4
hectares taking into considerations the topography, small
size of land holding, cost of Net Present Value in forest
land, employment factor to local people near and the issue
of illegal mining. [Clause 6(2)(c)].
(ii) A mining lease for minor minerals shall be:
a. In hill regions, for minor minerals like sand stone, building
stone, slates, slabs etc (0.5 hectares)
b. In hilly regions, for minor minerals required for mineral
based industry like stone crusher (1.0 hectares)
c. In river beds for free sale of minor minerals like sand, stone
and bajri etc. (2.0 hectares)
d. In river beds for stone crusher and bajri. (5.0 hectares)
[Clause 6(3)(b)]
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.50 The Ministry of Mines have replied to the above concerns
negatively and submitted as under:—
(i) The minimum area of 10 hectares for major minerals has
been proposed taking into account the environmental
concerns of overburden and waste management in mining,
and keeping in view the recommendations of the MoEF.
However, in case of minor minerals, provisions allows for
State Government to relax the minimum area limits in
consultation with the Ministry of Environment and Forests
(MoEF).

38
(ii) In case of minor minerals, though the limit is 5 hectares,
the State Governments can allow further relaxation only in
consultation with Ministry of Environment and Forests. This
is also in line with the recent Supreme court judgment dated
27.2.2012 [SLP(C) No 19628-19629 of 2009].
Recommendation of the Committee
3.51 The Committee observe that various stakeholders have
suggested to amend provisions of Clause 6 regarding allocation of
maximum and minimum area for grant of major and minor mineral
concessions. As regards minimum area for grant of major mineral
under Clause 6(2), the Committee have been given to understand
that beach mineral gets deposited at any particular place and will
not be available in all the areas. Similarly, few minerals like ball
clay, china clay, fire clay, feldspar, quartz, jespar, silica sand, laterite,
ochre, soapstone and talc, pyrophylite are reported to be available in
small patches. While considering the reply of the Ministry of Mines
to the above suggestions that the minimum area of 10 hectares for
major minerals has been proposed taking into account the
environmental concerns of overburden and waste management in
mining, and keeping in view the recommendations of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests (MoEF), the Committee desire that the
Government should notify some of the major minerals (including
beach minerals) in 'B' category and maximum area for major mineral
for grant of mineral concessions be accordingly decreased to 'B'
category to 5 hectares.
3.52 As regards the minor minerals, the Committee have received
suggestion that the minimum area of 5 hectares for grant of mining
lease be done away with and it should be brought down to 1 hectare
as sand stone and granite, marble etc. are available in small patches
and the existing leases of these minor minerals granted in various
States are of 1 hectare only. The Committee took note of difficulties
of various stakeholders specially Rajasthan. In that view of the matter,
the Committee recommend that in case of minor minerals excepting
sand stone, granite, marble, etc. it should be 2 hectares and in case
of sand stone and granite, marble etc. it should be 1 hectare. The
Committee take note that large number of small stakeholders depends
upon their livelihood on mineral material.
Procedure for surrender area held for mineral concession [Clause 6(5)
and 6(6)]
3.53 The Clause 6 (5) and 6(6) of the proposed Bill are as under:—
Clause 6(5):  The holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence,
high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, and prospecting

39
licence shall surrender area out of such licence annually, as may be
specified in the licence, in the manner prescribed by the Central
Government so that at the end of the last year after the commencement
of operations of the non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, the area held
does not exceed the maximum eligibility of the licence holder for a
prospecting licence and at the end of the last year of the high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting
licence, the area held does not exceed the maximum eligibility of the
licence holder for a mining lease in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (1).
Clause 6(6):  No mining lease shall be granted in respect of any
area which is not compact and contiguous or otherwise not suitable to
scientific development:
Provided that in respect of small deposits not suitable to scientific
mining in isolated patches, a mining lease may be granted for a
cluster of such deposits within a defined area of not less than the
area specified in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may
be, in accordance with such procedure and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Suggestion received by the Committee
3.54 The Committee have inter-alia received following reservations
from the different stakeholders for the procedure and manner in which
the land allocated for mineral concession be surrendered:—
(i) High technology reconnaissance cum exploration licence/
Prospecting licence — 6(5) According to the draft MMDR
Bill 2011, the licence holder is stipulated to surrender area
of licence annually. It is not possible to surrender area in
the first year due to initial mobilization time, first-pass
reconnaissance/exploration of the entire licence area, time
for getting analytical results and review of entire data for
proper identification of area to be surrendered. Similarly, it
will not be possible to surrender equal areas every year by
virtue of the nature of the investigation. This also reduces
the opportunity of the licensee to surrender the area, as
detailed investigation need to be carried out at length. It
should not be mandatory to surrender any area for
reconnaissance licence and high-technology reconnaissance
cum exploration licence for the first two years.

40
(ii) The surrender shall start not before 2 years after the award
of the licence of EL and PL and 18 month for Non-Exclusive
RL wherever period is for at least 2 years. Initial
mobilization etc. takes a long time and it will be difficult to
start surrendering area from first year.
3.55 During evidence, a representative of State Government of
Odisha submitted that under Section 6(6), small deposits have been
mentioned but there has to be little more clarity on the small deposits
and on the definition of small deposits because actually it is not suitable
for scientific exploration.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.56 The Ministry of Mines have not accepted the above
suggestions. Gradual relinquishment of area under any exploration
licence is linked with the maximum tenure and the maximum area
that can be held under such licence. The basic objective is that at the
end of the exploration period the total area held by a person should
be gradually reduced to the maximum permissible area allowed under
the next concession.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.57 The Committee accept the view of the Ministry of Mines.
3.58 The Committee note that in accordance with Clause 6(6), no
mining lease shall be granted in respect of any area, which is not
compact and contiguous or otherwise not suitable in scientific
development. The Proviso further provides that in respect of small
deposits, not suitable to scientific mining in isolated pockets, a
mining lease may be granted for a cluster of such deposits with a
defined area of not less than the area specified in Sub Clause (2) or
(3). The Committee are of the view that words “small deposits”
needs to be defined, so as to impart clarity, since it is not suitable
for scientific exploration. The Committee desire that follow-up action
be taken in the matter.
3.59 Clause 6(7) of the Bill reads as under:—
6(7) In case of the Scheduled area specified in the Fifth Schedule
to the Constitution and the tribal area specified in the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution, the State Government may, by notification, give
preference as may be specified in the notification in grant of mineral
concessions on an area referred to in sub-section (6) to a Co-operative
of the Scheduled Tribes.

41
Suggestions received by the Committee and Reply of
the Ministry of Mines
3.60 When asked about barring Schedule Tribe Cooperatives with
non-Scheduled Tribes be barred from obtaining mineral concessions,
the Ministry of Mines have informed the Committee that the
Cooperatives, seeking to obtain mineral concessions in an area defined
in the Fifth or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, should consist of
purely ST persons.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.61 As regards the preference in grant of mineral concession on
an area referred to in Clause 6(6) to a Cooperative of the Scheduled
Tribes, the Committee desire that the provision of Clause 6(7) be
suitably amended and the words, ‘consisting of purely ST persons and
no indirect control of non-schedule tribe persons’ be added in the end
of the Clause after the words, ‘Cooperative of the Scheduled Tribes’.
D. Period of Grant and Extension of Licence and Deposit of Security
3.62 Clause 7 of the Bill reads as under:—
Clause 7(1): A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence shall be granted
for a period of not less than one year and not more than three years.
Clause 7(2):  A high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence shall be granted for a period of not less than three years and
not more than six years:
Provided that the period may be extended, on an application made
by the licensee for a further period not exceeding two years in
respect of such part of the area as may be specified in the licence.
Clause 7(3):  A prospecting licence shall be granted for a period of
not less than two years and not more than three years:
Provided that the period may be extended on an application made
by the licensee for a further period not exceeding two years in
respect of such part of area as may be specified in the licence.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.63 The Committee have received following suggestions on the
above provisions of the Bill:—
(i) As regards high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence under Clause 7(2), the State Government of Rajasthan
have suggested that the licence be granted for a period not
less than 2 years and not more than 3 years and there should

42
not be any further extension. In support of their argument,
the Rajasthan Government have stressed that if time limit
for this licence is reduced entrepreneurs will complete
prospecting work in time, otherwise the area will be held
for long time with no compulsion on the licensee to
complete the prospecting work early.
(ii) Similarly, for prospecting license under Clause 7(3) the State
Government of Rajasthan have desired that no extension
should be granted as if PL is held for as long as 5 years
than the final grant for exploitation of mineral would get
delayed.
(iii) As r egards extension of time for prospecting licence, a
representative of the State Government of Rajasthan during
evidence has submitted that failure on the part of licensee
is only on two grounds, i.e. either the licensee has not
worked seriously or is unable to get mineral deposits.
Therefore, the State Government have suggested that in both
the cases extension should not be allowed.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.64 As regards the suggestion of State Government of Rajasthan,
the Ministry of Mines have not accepted the same. According to the
Ministry of Mines, HREL is a new licence introduced which means a
licence granted under this bill for reconnaissance and prospecting,
including general and detailed exploration. This licence has been
introduced to encourage investors to invest for exploration for non-
bulk minerals (scarce and deficient minerals) in surface and at greater
depth using state of art exploration techniques. To the suggestion of
State Government of Rajasthan on Clause 7(3), the Ministry of Mines
have stated that prospecting licence is granted either under
Clause 13(1) through auction route or under Clause 22 for licensee
after completion of reconnaissance licence under secure tenure and
seamless transition and is also granted on basis of first come first
served basis. Thus for the completion of PL activities this provision
has been kept.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.65 The Committee accept the view of the Ministry of Mines.
Period of Lease Minerals
3.66 Clause 7(5) is about the period of lease for minor minerals,
it states as under:

43
A mining lease for a minor mineral shall be granted for a period
not less than five years and may be extended for such period as may
be notified by the State Government:
Provided that different periods may be specified for different
minerals having regard to the nature and manner of occurrence of
mineral deposits:
Provided further that in respect of any minor mineral, where a
minimum area is notified in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (3) or sub-section (6) of section 6, the State Government
may notify a minimum period of less than five years in consultation
with the Central Government.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.67 The Committee have inter alia received the following
suggestions:—
(i) Clause 7(5) of the proposed Act deals with the period of
grant of lease. The minimum period of lease for minor
minerals is 5 years whereas it is minimum 20 years for
major minerals. A distinction may be made within the minor
minerals for ornamental stones such as granite, marble and
limestone for considering a minimum lease period of 20
years. The Government of India has provided for minimum
lease period of 20 years for granite in GCDR 1999.
(ii) It has been requested that the period of contract for the
minor mineral quarries not less than 5 years be also not
imposed vide Clause 7(5) of the new Bill and rather the
States be allowed to notify the period of contract depending
upon the availability of minor mineral in the quarries as
many a times the process of replenishability happened to
be slow due to scrawny rains.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.68 The Ministry of Mines have clarified the position to remove
the apprehension of State Governments by submitting before the
Committee that while the minimum tenure is provided as 5 years,
proviso to clause 7(5) allows State Government to notify a lesser tenure
for small size leases.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.69 The Committee observe that natural ornamental stone
varieties such as, Granite, Marble, Limestone need detailed mine
planning, mine development, mechanization, use of technology,

44
skilled manpower and involves large capital investment. As submitted
by the stakeholders, such investment will not be justified unless the
minimum period of lease is 10 years for this category of minor
minerals and thereafter may be extended for such period as may be
notified by State Governments. Further, the suggestions regarding
notification for less than 5 years for exploration of minor minerals,
the State Governments have to consult the Central Government as
required under second proviso to Clause 7(5), the Committee feel
that the same may be dispensed with to allow State Governments to
act freely for framing rules for minor minerals.
Period of Grant and Extension of Concession
3.70 Clause 7(6) of the Bill reads as under:—
A mining lease for a major mineral may be extended, on an
application made by the lessee, in respect of such part of the area as
may be specified and for such period not exceeding twenty years at
a time, as may be required to ensure full exploitation of the run-of-
the-mine in a scientific manner:
Provided that no such extension shall be granted, except after
approval in the prescribed manner, of a fresh mining plan for the
area for which the lease is sought to be extended.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.71 The Committee feel that a proviso may be added to ensure
that the Government on a representation made to it may extend the
period of grant and extension of concession as specified under
sub-section (1) to (6) of Clause 7, for the reasons recorded in writing.
Special provisions in respect of Atomic Minerals
3.72 Clause 10(2) & (4) of the Bill reads as under:—
Clause 10(2):  The licensee or lessee, as the case may be, referred
to in sub-section (1) shall, within a period of sixty days from the date
of discovery of atomic mineral, apply to the Secretary, Department of
Atomic Energy, Mumbai, along with the recommendations of the State
Government, for grant of a licence or lease to handle the said atomic
minerals in accordance with the provisions of the Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 made under the Atomic Energy Act,
1962, and on grant of such licence or grant of lease to handle, the

45
licensee or lessee, as the case may be, may apply for inclusion of such
atomic minerals in his licence or lease, as the case may be:
Provided that if in the opinion of the Department of Atomic Energy,
the atomic mineral recovered incidental to such prospecting or
mining operations is not of an economically exploitable grade or
the quantity found is insignificant, the licensee or lessee need not
apply for inclusion of such atomic mineral in his licence or lease,
as the case may be.
Clause 10(4):  For obtaining a separate licence or lease for atomic
minerals, the licensee or lessee, as the case may be, shall, within a
period of sixty days from the date of discovery of atomic mineral,
apply to the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai, along
with the recommendations of the State Government, for grant of licence
to handle the said atomic mineral in terms of the Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 made under the Atomic Energy
Act,1962 and no licence or lease be granted except in accordance with
the conditions of such licence granted under the provisions of the
Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.73 The Department of Atomic Energy has desired that the
following amendments be made in line 5 & 20 of the Clause 10 (2)
and (4):—
For “Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection Rule, 2004 made under
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962)”.
Insert “Atomic Energy Act 1962 and the rules framed thereunder”.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.74 The Ministry of Mines have accepted the above suggestion of
the Department of Atomic Energy.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.75 The Committee recommend that the suggestion of the
Department of Atomic Energy may suitably be incorporated in the
Clauses referred to above.
Mineral Concession to be void, if in contravention of Act
3.76 Clause 11 of the Bill reads as under:—
11(1) Any mineral concession granted, extended, held or acquired
in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules or orders
made thereunder, shall be void and of no effect, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2).

46
11(2) Where a person has acquired more than one non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, and
the aggregate area covered by such licences or leases in respect of a
mineral in a State, as the case may be, exceeds the maximum area
permissible under section 6, only that non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence or mining lease the acquisition of which has resulted
in such maximum area being exceeded, shall be deemed to be void.
11(3) In every case where a mineral concession is void under sub-
section (1), the earnest money or security deposit as the case may be
deposited in respect of that application shall stand forfeited, and the
mineral concession shall be granted to the next eligible applicant or
notified for grant of mineral concession, as the case may be, in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Suggestions received by the Committee and
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.77 Asked about the justification/rationale behind grant of mineral
concession to next eligible person when a concession was held void
and earnest money/deposit forfeited, the Ministry of Mines have
informed the Committee that this Clause is applicable in all such cases
where multiple applications have been received against an area, and
the shortlisted applicant is unable to obtain the concession because of
ineligibility for contravention of rules. In such cases, rather than
undergoing the entire process of notification and calling for application,
which may be time taking, the next best eligible applicant is proposed
be considered for grant.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.78 The Committee do not agree with the contention of the
Ministry of Mines that in the event where a mineral concession
granted is held void and the earnest money of the applicant has
been forfeited, the next eligible applicant may be granted the mineral
concession as undergoing the entire process of notification and calling
for application afresh may be time taking. The Committee feel that
where a mineral concession granted, extended, held or acquired is
declared void, after efflux of reasonable period of time, grant of such
concession to next eligible applicant defies logic and is against the
principle of natural justice. Changes in the terms of condition between
the period when the numeral concession granted and those held void
etc. cannot be ruled out. The Committee, therefore, desire that the

47
whole exercise may be undertaken afresh in the interest of natural
justice. This will also provide a fair and equitable opportunities to
all the players. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
provision of Clause 11(3) may accordingly be amended.
Cancellation of a mineral concession or disqualification
3.79 Clause 12(1) and (1)(d) of the Bill read as under:—
In respect of any land in which minerals vest in the Government:—
(a) where any person fails to conduct reconnaissance or high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration or prospecting or mining
operations in accordance with a reconnaissance, or exploration plan
or a prospecting or mining plan, as the case may be, prepared in
the manner provided in this section, the State Government may
after issuing a notice to show cause and giving him an opportunity
of being heard, by an order, forfeit all or any part of the security
deposit and may suspend, curtail or revoke the licence or lease
having regard to the circumstances of the case.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section the
framework of mining operations in respect of minor minerals
not requiring a mining plan shall be deemed to be the
mining plan;
Clause 12(1)(d): Where at the expiry of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence, the licensee fails to comply with the
conditions of the licence, the State Government may, within a period
of six months from the date of expiry of the licence, or the time given
for fulfilment of the conditions, whichever is later, issue a notice asking
him to show cause, and after giving him an opportunity of being
heard, by an order, forfeit all or any part of the security deposit and
may declare him to be ineligible for consideration for any mineral
concession in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of
section 20 or sub-section (3) of section 22, as the case may be, for such
period, as it may specify, not exceeding five years, having regard to
the circumstances.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.80 The Committee have received the following suggestions from
various stakeholders:—
(i) The Bengal Chamber of Commerce has suggested that the
extreme punishment of suspension, curtailment or revocation
of licence should be considered only in rare cases when

48
lessee’s performance is highly disappointing. In case of
minor deviation or lack of sufficient progress in project
execution, a provision of penalty should be clearly defined.
(ii) Revocation/Cancellation of Licence/Lease can be totally
subjective and would lead to unnecessary litigation, so to
be removed.
(iii) The Bengal Chamber of Commerce has observed that making
ineligible for five years for a concession for not adhering to
conditions is too harsh a punishment and the same can also
be misused.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.81 The Ministry of Mines did not agree with the objections and
has submitted before the Committee that in order to encourage scientific
exploration and mining as per the conditions of the licence and lease,
suspension, forfeiture, declaring a person ineligible is necessary to
ensure compliance. However, these actions are subject to review in the
National Mining Tribunal.
Recommendation of the Committee
3.82 The Committee observe that a proviso to be inserted to the
extent where minor deviation has been made, any other mode of
punishment may be imposed keeping in mind the doctrine of
proportionality.
Notification of certain areas for grant of mineral concessions
3.83 Clause 13 of the Bill reads as under:—
13(1) In respect of any land where the minerals vest in the
Government, the State Government shall, by notification, invite
applications in the form of competitive offers for any mineral except
coal minerals for grant of a prospecting licence over any area where
reconnaissance has been conducted and sufficient evidence of enhanced
mineralisation of the specified minerals has been established:—
Provided that no application for a high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence is pending relating to such area:
Provided further that no such notification shall be issued, in respect
of an area in which reconnaissance or exploration or prospecting
operations were completed under a licence, till the lapse of the period
of six months from the date of the expiry of the licence, unless the
area has been relinquished:

49
Provided also that in case where no application is received on an
area notified under this sub-section, the State Government shall within
a period of three months from the date of the said notification either
re-notify the area or notify it as being available for grant of mineral
concession under section 22.
13(2) Where an application or applications for grant of prospecting
licence has been filed on an area and the State Government has not
issued any notification, the State Government may notify such area or
areas within a period of one month from the date of receipt of the
first application by amalgamating or expanding all or any of the applied
areas, if required, in the interest of scientific mining, and the State
Government may invite applications in the form of competitive offers
for any mineral, except coal and atomic minerals for grant of a
prospecting licence:
Provided that the area so notified shall not include any area for
which there has been or is an application pending for more than one
month prior on the date of the notification:
Provided further that where the State Government has notified an
area, it shall provide an opportunity to an applicant who filed an
application prior to such notification within a period of one month
from the date of the provisional determination of the best offer for the
purposes of sub-section (4) and to submit a competitive offer in terms
of the said notification after being informed of the details of the best
offer received by the State Government subsequent to the said
notification of the area, and the State Government shall consider the
applications in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) and
grant the licence to the best overall offer:
Provided also that only those applicants who had applied suo motu
without any notification of such area by the State Government shall
be afforded an opportunity to submit a competitive offer under the
second proviso, and any such offer shall be limited in respect of only
the area notified irrespective of the areas for which such applicant
had applied earlier:
Provided also that where the State Government fails to notify the
area within the specified period under this sub-section, the applications
for grant of prospecting licence shall be considered in accordance with
the provisions of section 22.
13(3) A notification issued under sub-sections (1) and (2) may
specify that any application received shall be considered with reference

50
to such criteria including all or any one of the following as per
weightages assigned, as may be specified in the notification, namely:—
(a) specific knowledge and experience of prospecting possessed
or accessed by the applicant;
(b) nature and quality of technical resources proposed to be
employed;
(c) value addition such as mineral processing and beneficiation;
(d) end use including industries based on the mineral;
(e) provision of ore-linkage through long-term agreements with
domestic industry;
(f) in the case of prospecting for iron ore, bauxite and limestone,
having finished products production capacity at the time of
commencement of this Act and captive ore resources which
are likely to be exhausted in the near future; and
(g) a financial bid quoted either as a lump sum recoverable in
instalments at the time of mining or a percentage of royalty
or a profit sharing of mineral production.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) the financial bid shall offer the State Government to recover
a value,—
(A) for its efforts in managing information relating to survey
or regional exploration work including computer
databases and samples for minerals; and
(B) for the mineral on the basis of market consideration to
be based on a floor price set by the State Government
on the available reconnaissance data;
(ii) the weightage shall be numerical in character and enable a
composite ranking based on numerical marks assigned for
each of the criteria listed in the notification in order to
determine the best offer.
13(4) The applications received in accordance with the conditions
specified in the notification issued under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)
shall be considered in accordance with such criteria and weightage as
specified in the notification, and the eligible applicant obtaining the
best marks as per weightages, be granted the prospecting licence in
accordance with the rules made under this Act:
Provided that the licence may include special conditions under
which a mining lease shall be granted on an application made under

51
sub-section (3) of section 25, including restrictions arising from
requirements of value-addition or ore-linkage or restrictions on sale of
ore in the case of captive resources.
13(5) In such areas where prospecting has been conducted and
sufficient evidence of enhanced mineralisation has been established
through a prospecting report and feasibility study, and where no
application for a mining lease is pending, the State Government shall
by notification invite applications in the form of competitive bids for
any minerals excepting coal minerals, for grant of mining lease, to the
bidder who in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (6) quotes
the best financial bid including the bid for the prospecting report and
feasibility study for the area so notified:
Provided that no such notification shall be issued, in respect of an
area in which prospecting operations were completed under a licence,
until the lapse of the period of six months from the date of expiry of
the licence unless the area has been relinquished:
Provided further that before issuing the notification under this
sub-section in respect of any forest or wildlife area, the State
Government shall obtain,—
(i) all forest clearances under the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980 and wildlife clearance under the Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972, or any other law for the time being in force, so
as to enable the commencement of operations; and
(ii) all necessary permissions from the owners of the land and
those having occupation rights.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) the financial bid shall offer the State Government either as
a lump sum, recoverable in instilments or a percentage of
royalty or a profit sharing, as may be specified in the
notification, and the purpose of the financial bid for the
prospecting report and feasibility study is to allow the State
Governments to recover a value,—
(A) for its efforts in acquiring and managing information
through detailed survey, exploration, feasibility studies,
including computer databases, and cores and samples,
computer databases and samples for minerals; and
(B) for the mineral on the basis of market consideration to
be based on a floor price set by the State Government
on the available prospecting data;

52
(ii) the expression “forest clearance” shall comprise conditional
clearance on the basis of the recommendations of the
committee constituted for the purpose.
13(6) A notification issued under sub-section (5) may specify that
bids received shall be considered with reference to such criteria
including all or any one or more of the following, as per weightages
assigned, as may be specified in such notification, namely:—
(a) special knowledge and appropriate experience in scientific
mining and mineral beneficiation;
(b) bringing new and advanced technologies;
(c) investments in value addition such as mineral processing
and beneficiation;
(d) having industrial capacity based on the mineral or having
set up industry based on the mineral, and achieved financial
closure for such project;
(e) providing ore-linkage through long-term agreements with
domestic industry;
(f) constructing transportation networks (road and rail) and
other infrastructure facilities in the mineral bearing area;
(g) in the case of iron ore, bauxite and limestone, having
finished products production capacity at the time of
commencement of this Act and captive ore resources which
are likely to be exhausted in the near future; and
(h) financial bid including the bid for the prospecting report
and feasibility study for the area so notified.
Explanation.—For the purposes of determination of best bid, the
weightage shall be numerical in character and enable a composite
ranking based on bid price and numerical marks assigned for each of
criteria specified in the notification.
13(7) The bids received under sub-section (5) shall be evaluated in
the prescribed manner and the best eligible bid shall be issued the
letter of intent for awarding the mining lease after obtaining all
necessary statutory approvals and clearances, on such conditions as
may be specified having regard to the criteria stated in the notification
issued under sub-section (6) and the response thereto.

53
13(8) In respect of atomic minerals and beach sand minerals,
notification inviting applications and grant of the mineral concession
shall be made with the prior approval of the Central Government.
13(9) In respect of coal minerals, notification for inviting and grant
of mineral concessions shall be made by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed by it.
13(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,
notification of an area for inviting applications in respect of public
lands in areas covered by the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth Schedule to
the Constitution, shall be issued after consultation with the
Gram Sabhas or District Councils, as the case may be, and in respect
of non-Scheduled areas, after consultation with the District Panchayat.
13(11) The State Government shall invite and entertain applications
for grant of prospecting licence in an area relinquished by a holder of
a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence only after such area is notified by the
State Government for inviting applications for grant of prospecting
licence under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 13 or notified
as being available for grant of concessions for the purpose of
section 22:
Provided that if the State Government fails to notify such
relinquished area within three months of such relinquishment, any
person interested may apply to the State Government and in case it
fails to notify the area within a further period of three months, the
applicant may apply to the National Mining Tribunal in case of major
minerals and State Mining Tribunal in case of minor minerals for
notification of that area and the concerned Tribunal may direct the
State Government to notify the area within such period as it may
specify.
13(12) The procedure for notifying an area for inviting applications
for major minerals and grant of mineral concessions shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
13(13) In respect of minor minerals, notwithstanding anything in
this section, the procedure for notification and grant of mineral
concessions shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that before granting mineral concession for minor minerals
in an area covered by the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution, the Gram Sabha or the District Council, as the case may
be, shall be consulted.

54
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.84 The Committee have received the following suggestions:—
A. Notification of Areas for Grant of Mineral Concession [Clause
13(1)]
(i) On the provision of Clause 13(1) and (2), the State Government
of Chhattisgarh has observed as under:-
“Although sub-clause(1) of the Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the
State Governments to notify an area for grant of prospecting licence
through competitive bidding, its scope has been highly restricted
in as much as:—
(a) such notification can be issued only in respect of such areas
where reconnaissance operations have been conducted and
sufficient evidence of enhanced mineralization has been
established. If the said provision is legislated in its present
form, States will not be able to notify areas for competitive
bidding where mineralization is known otherwise than by
formal reconnaissance operations. It is worthwhile to
mention that existence of bulk minerals like iron ore,
dolomite, limestone, stones etc. that are found on the earth
crest, is well known by local knowledge/random sampling
also.
(b) similarly, although sub-clause (2) of clause 13 of the Bill
empowers the State Governments to issue notification for
inviting competitive offers for grant of prospecting licence,
however, the time period permitted to do so is just one
month and if the State fails to issue notification in one
month's time period, then licence shall be granted only to
the “first applicant” who can, thereafter, transfer it for a
consideration as per the section 17.
Allowing only a month's time to the State Government for
issuance of notification for competitive bidding is grossly
impractical and lacks objectivity and may lead to trading in
mineral licence.”
Chhattisgarh Government has accordingly suggested that the
clauses of the Bill pertaining to grant of mineral concessions should
be modified as follows:—
(a) In clause 13(1) of the Bill for the words “where
reconnaissance has been conducted and sufficient evidence

55
of mineralization of the specified mineral has been
established” the words “where existence of specified
minerals is known by reconnaissance operations or
otherwise” should be substituted.
(b) The first proviso to clause 13(1) should be omitted.
(c) In clause 13(2) of the Bill for the words “prospecting
licence”, the words “prospecting licence or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence” should be
substituted.
(d)  In clause 13(2) of the Bill for the words “one month”, the
words “four months” should be substituted.
(ii) One of the observation made by various stakeholder before
the Committee is that Clause 13 in the Bill for auctioning of
mineral bearing lands already explored and relinquished by
govt. survey organisations - GSI, MECL & DGMs etc. under
Section 4(2) and private agencies and PSUs under Sections
19 to 22. There was no need of introducing auctioning for
grant of Prospecting Licence. The existing system of grant
of PL is working very well except for the enormous delay
in disposing the applications. No stakeholder has complained
against the present system of grant of PL save for the
lengthy procedures. With the exception of a few captive
mineral-based industries no other stakeholder has favoured
introduction of auctioning for grant of PLs.
B. Competitive Bidding for PL and HTREL [Clause 13(2)]
(i) The State Government of Chhattisgarh have also advised to
delete first proviso to Clause 13(1) which restricts notification
of an area for competitive bidding in case of an application
for HTREL is filed.
(ii) On the similar lines while observing Clause 13(2)—
Government of Chhattisgarh has suggested the Committee
that In clause 13(2) of the Bill for the words “prospecting
licence”, the words “prospecting licence or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence” should be
substituted to allow the State Government to call for
competitive bids on an area applied for PL and HTREL.
C. Weightage assigned for bidding criteria [Clause 13(3) & (6)]
As regards provisions in Clause 13(3) & (6) which specifies the
bidding criteria for which weightages may be assigned uses the

56
phrase “all or any…”, the Committee received the following
suggestions:—
(i) This gives huge discretion to any government to use or
drop any of these criteria as per their wish. This would also
ensure that there would be no universality in approach in
different parts of India and would deter transparency.
It was, therefore, suggested to the Committee for redrafting
of the Clause as below:—
“shall be considered with reference to the following criteria
as per weightages assigned, as may be specified in the
notification namely…”
(ii) Regarding issue (Criteria) it observed the criteria in 13(3)(d)
includes “end use including industries based on the
mineral”—this does not specify the magnitude of investment
since that is critical to the nature of the end use. Also there
is no criteria for financial viability and health of the bidder.
Accordingly it suggested redrafting of the following Clauses
as below:
“13(3)(d) end use (nature and extent of investment for it)
including industries based on the mineral.
13(3)(h) financial capability including net worth”.
(iii) A proviso be added whereby no extra or any weightage
assigned. In case the State in which the lease has been
granted insist that he shall establish industry based on the
minerals in the State itself.
(iv) It is not possible to have competitive bidding for Prospecting
Licence since the reserves are not known.
The Provision should not result in Competitive bidding
weighing in favour of large corporate and corner vital
mineral resources based on speculative scenarios.
Government may not be able to enforce the distribution of
available resources to the domestic industries which are
linked to the priority of the country's needs.
The criteria to be adopted by the State Governments while
granting Prospecting License or Mining Lease should give
higher weightage to specific expertise, value addition like
beneficiation, palletisation, sintering, etc. apart from financial
capabilities.

57
(a) Comparative merits viz. , Captive End Use plant,
Availability of technical Manpower and Quantum of
investment in the End use plants should be given higher
weightage while determining the best offer.
(b) To ensure fair and transparent allocation of Mineral
Concessions, the weightage for each non-financial
criterion can be assigned in the MMDR Bill itself so that
each State uses same criteria in determining the best
offer.
(v) Lack of level playing field — there is an exception carved
out from competitive bidding in respect of coal for
Government Companies.
(vi) (a) Regarding competitive bidding for explored blocks: The
competitive bidding may be exempted for captive users.
(b) Regarding eligibility criteria for selecting the successful
bidder — Weightages for individual criterion to be fixed
in the Act itself so that it gives transparency and
uniformity across all the States.
(vii) The criteria to be adopted by the State Governments while
Granting Prospecting License or Mining Lease should be
given to integrated Manufacturing facilities which are already
in existence as on date and have been deprived of captive
mines, should be given preferential allotment of mineral
resources to meet the captive requirement of the plant life.
It has also demanded that due weightage to be given to the
size and the quantum of investment already made while
considering allocation of a specific ore body. Also the process
of preferential allotment of Mineral concession has to be
completed mandatorily before allotment through tender/
auction process.
It has also suggested that for all future investments in
Integrated Manufacturing facilities tender/auction process
to be introduced with due weightage to value addition
within the country.
(viii) As regards reservation of mining areas for Government
companies, the Ministry of Steel in a note have suggested
the following:—
Reservation of mining areas for Government Companies:—
(a) Section 17A(1A) of the existing MMDR Act, 1957
provides for the reservation for government companies
in the grant of mineral concessions for prospecting or

58
mining operations. However, this provision has been
done away with in the MMDR Bill, 2011. Section 37 of
MMDR Bill, 2011 provides only for reservation for
mineral conservation (and not for prospecting or mining
operations by government companies).
(b) The PSUs of Government of India as well as of the
State Government are playing an important role in the
social and economic development of the country and
therefore, there is a need for continued support to these
PSUs, in order to help them in contributing to equitable
growth of various areas of the country and also in larger
public interest.
(ix) The Ministry of Steel has argued a strong case for preference
to end-use industry in allocation of mineral concessions and
assured allocation of captive iron ore mines to the existing
steel capacities. The Ministry has categorically submitted that
“it should also be specified in the Act that there shall be
preference for end-use industries while allocating mineral
concessions and this preference will be ‘irrespective of
geographical boundary/location of end-use industry’ (i.e.,
irrespective of the State where end use industry is located).
(x) The representatives of the Government of Odisha has during
the course of evidence submitted before the Committee that
minerals like Chromites, mineral sand and manganese ore
may be added in Clause 13(6)(g).
D. Forest and Wildlife Clearances [Clause 13(5)]
(i) In a written memorandum furnished to the Committee, one
of the stakeholders has stated that the provision mandates
that in case of bidding, the Government will ensure that
they get the forest clearances and wildlife clearances first.
Considering that getting such clearances takes on an average
4-5 years, the moratorium which the Government has
proposed under the Act for prospecting licences [Section
137(5)] shall be effectively then be 7 years.
(ii) In clause 13(5), it has been further suggested to the
Committee that adequate time limit need to be given for
extension/renewal case as prescribed for grant. If not done,
it should be considered deemed clearance/extension. It has
further been contended that the term “Reasonable” used in
the section is unclear in its connotation and hence three
months time is suggested. This will ensure accountability at
all level.

59
(iii) The second proviso to Clause 13(5) that warrants obtaining
of all forest clearances under the F.A. Act, 1980 before issuing
the notification is restrictive in nature. This may be deleted.
In case the State has been able to obtain such a clearance
this advantage will get factored into the offers that will be
received automatically and the State would stand to benefit
from higher bid compared to an area where no such
clearance has been received. Hence, it is suggested that this
restrictive provision may be deleted retaining only the other
condition, namely, obtaining of all necessary permissions
from the owners of the land and those having occupation
rights.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.85 Para-wise replies of the Ministry of Mines on the above
suggestions are as under:—
A. Notification of Areas for Grant of Mineral Concession [Clause 13(1)]
The Ministry of Mines did not subscribe to the above suggestion
and in a written note submitted as below:—
“Establishing sufficient evidence of mineralization through
reconnaissance is a scientific process, and clause 4 (2) can always
be invoked by the State Government to complete reconnaissance
activities before notifying an area.”
B. Competitive Bidding for PL and HTREL [Clause 13(2)]
(i) The Ministry of Mines however, did not agree with the
suggestion and submitted that HTREL needs to be prioritised
since it is for deep-seated non-bulk minerals [proviso to
clause 6(1) restricts grant of HTREL for bulk minerals].
Further, it is provided in the draft Bill that in case an HTREL
holder finds a bulk mineral deposit in his licence area, the
HTREL holder would have no mining claim on it [clause
21(1)(i)]. This restriction adequately addresses the concerns
of the State Government.
(ii) The Ministry of Mines have further submitted that HTREL
cannot be granted through competitive bidding. HTREL is
specifically designed for areas where mineralisation is not
known to the Government and requires primary regional
exploration. In such areas, calling for competitive bidding
would be highly discretionary and administratively

60
impossible since mineral occurrence, in case of metallic
minerals is heterogeneous and not homogenous as in the
case of fuel minerals. For this reason HTREL cannot be put
out for competitive bidding.
(iii) During evidence, one of the stakeholder has submitted
before the committee that in case of mineral resources,
bidder will always be apprehensive about the exact size of
the deposit, the nature of the deposit, the grade of the
minerals, the depth of the minerals, the size, chemical and
physical composition and this may give rise to a lot of
speculative bidding.
C. Weightage assigned for bidding criteria [Clause 13(3) & (6)]
(i) Clause 131(i) & (K) specifies the manner of evaluation of
bids under sub section (6) section 13 for which the Central
Government has to make rules. In the rules the complete
manner for evaluation will be laid down; which eliminate
any subjective discretion by the State Government.
(ii) Ministry of Mines in a written submission to the Committee
has not accepted the contention and submitted that, the
competitive bidding criteria for grant of prospecting licence
and for grant of mining lease allow flexibility to the State
to give due weightage to expertise and value addition in
grant of concession, as per their priority in a transparent
manner through notification. Section 131(K) specifies the
manner of evaluation of bids under sub section (6) section
13 for which the Central Government has to make rules. In
these rules the complete manner for bid evaluation will be
laid down; which will eliminate any subjective discretion to
any Government. Section 13(3) and 13(6) clearly specifies
the criteria which will be given due weightages during the
course of bidding.
(iii) Different State Governments have various priorities to
address while granting mineral concessions. Rather than
restrict grant of additional weightage by the State
Governments, it could be provided that criteria/weightage
assigned in the notifications for grant of concessions for short
listing criteria should be approved by the Central
Government in case a new criteria or a new weightage, other
than those already provided in clause 13 is added by the
State Government. Value-addition unit with-in the State is
being insisted by various State Governments on the ground

61
of development of the State. However, India is a single
economic space. Therefore, in national interest, the
Committee's final recommendations in line with the concept
of the nation as a single entity would be acceptable.
(iv) The Ministry of Mines have not accepted the suggestion of
Ministry of Steel and inter-alia submitted before the
Committee as below:
“………The Ministry of Mines is of the opinion that categorizing
iron ore as a strategic mineral in this context may not be
appropriate, considering that the ion ore resources in the country
stand at 28.5 billion tonnes and are likely to increase further in
future due lowering of cut-off grade from 55% Fe grade to 45% Fe
grade, and detailed explorations. However, the Ministry of Mines
recognizes the need to ensure adequate raw material supplies to
the existing steel plants in the country. However, at the same time
the Ministry is of the opinion that grant of exclusive captive mines
is not an optimum solution since captive mining generally leads to
sub-optimal utilization of the entire grade of iron ore, especially
iron ore fines, for which at present negligible domestic utilization
capacities exist. ………….. There is a broad agreement between the
Mines and Steel Ministries that since captive mining had inherent
limitations which did not incentivize complete utilization of run-
of-mine and the fact that assured quality ore linkage is critical for
functioning of large steel projects, the Government should focus
not only on encouraging ultra mega steel projects, but also to
develop ultra mega mining projects in the country, similar to
NMDC, which would ensure zero waste mining and complete
utilization of ore produced. Ore linkage rather than captive mining
should be the paradigm for ensuing raw material security. At the
same time, there is an increasing trend in the State Government to
insist on value addition as criteria for grant of mineral concession,
even if it is not economical to set up an industry locally. ………..
If it is possible to get both industry and mine with in a State
without sacrificing the economic viability of the latter there is no
reason why the applicant should not be offered inter-se preference.
Considering the above, the draft Bill allows the State Government
to give weightage to such applicants for grant of mining lease for
iron ore, bauxite and limestone, who are having finished products
production capacity at the time of commencement of the Bill and
have captive ore resources which are likely to be exhausted in the
near future.”

62
D. Forest and wildlife clearances
(i) Ministry of Mines have clarified this apprehension by
submitting that obtaining first stage clearances would enable
smoother commencement of the mining operations, especially
after bidding is complete. Further it would also enable
assessment of the cost of NPV for forest areas, for structuring
into the bidding price. These First-stage clearances would
remove the apprehensions of the investors in obtaining
clearances for mining projects.
(ii) The Ministry of Mines in their written submission to the
Committee on these suggestions has informed that in order
to facilitate streamlining of the process, while it has been
made mandatory for the State Governments to obtain first
stage clearance for forest or wildlife areas proposed to be
notified for competitive bidding for grant of mining lease,
the draft Bill also proposes to set up a Central Coordination-
cum-Empowered Committee and State Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee for expediting clearances. The
Ministry further stated that the suggestion of adequate time
limit for extension/renewal case as prescribed for grant can
be considered at the time of framing the rules. Regarding
the use of the term ‘Reasonable’, that period is to be
specified by the National Mining Tribunal.
Recommendations of the Committee
3.86 While considering Chhattisgarh Government’s suggestion
that if the said provision is legislated in its present form, States
will not be able to notify areas for competitive bidding where
mineralization is known otherwise than by formal reconnaissance
operations, the Committee are of the view that the possibility of
getting knowledge about availability of minerals should not be
restricted to only formal reconnaissance as existence of bulk minerals
like iron ore, dolomite, limestone, stones etc. found on the earth
crest, may be well known by local knowledge/random sampling also.
The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to consider the
suggestion made by State Government of Chhattisgarh and suitably
amend the Clause 13(1).
3.87 The Committee have considered the suggestion of the
Chhattisgarh Government that one month time period provided in
the Bill to the State Government for issuance of notification under
Clause 13(2) for competitive bidding is grossly inadequate and non-

63
adherence to the said time limit may lead to trading in mineral
licenses. The Committee note that in the event of non-adherence to
the one month time schedule as prescribed, the licence shall be
granted only to the ‘first applicant’ eligible under the Act and other
applicants be deemed to have been refused to this extent of the area
granted to the first applicant under Clause 22(4). The Committee feel
that the concern of the Chhattisgarh Government is genuine as the
licence to the ‘first applicant’ will be automatically granted in case
of failure of the State Government to issue notification within one
month period and will defeat the very purpose of competitive
bidding. The Committee would like the Ministry to consider this
suggestion and amend Clause 13(2) accordingly.
3.88 The Committee are of the view that supply of raw minerals
to the integrated plants must be smooth so as to ensure that the
concerned industry flourish to boost overall economy of the country.
But, according to the Ministry of Mines, the allocation of captive
mines to existing plants, is however not advisable as it would amount
to an anti-competitive market practice and has inherent limitations
which do not incentivize complete utilization of run-of-mine. The
Committee, however, recommend that the Government should make
necessary amendments in the Clause to make it mandatory that proper
and sufficient weightage be given to the end-user plants while
evaluating competitive bids. The Committee would also like the
Ministry to consider the issue of existing captive mines being allotted
to some integrated plants. Though, the running tenure of the licence
should be allowed to complete being contractual obligation of State,
but to ensure fair competition in the market, the Committee
recommend the Government to make a mandatory provision that on
completion of running licence-period, the existing captive mines must
be put to open auction, however, specific investments by existing
licensee may be given suitable weightage.
3.89 The Committee has taken note of flexibility granted to
States, in assigning weightage to different parameters for grant of
mineral concessions [Clause 13(3)]. The Committee feel that to
overcome regional disparities and promote development per se across
regions/States in setting up of mineral based industries, a proviso
be added whereby no extra or any weightage is assigned by the
concerned States for setting up of industries in that State only.
3.90 Taking note of the suggestions that list of minerals in Clause
13(3)(f) and 13(6)(g) should be expanded and chromites, mineral sand,
manganese ore be included, the Committee recommend the
Government to consider the same.

64
3.91 The Committee observe that competitive bidding process,
undertaken in accordance with Clause 13(5) may at times leads to
speculation. The Committee, therefore, desire that adequate preventive
action may be taken to prevent speculative bidding.
3.92 Under second proviso to Clause 13(5), the Committee find
that before issuing the notification in respect of any forest or wild
life area, the State Government should obtain all forest clearances
under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972 or any other Act for the time being in force so as to
enable the commencement of operation. Some State Government,
particularly the Government of Odisha have reservation on this issue
and wanted to delete this proviso. The Committee strongly believe
that in view of the State Governments virtually sitting over the
lease applications without taking any time bound action, it is
absolutely necessary that forest clearance is obtained by them before
the notifications and issue for mining operation. The Committee,
therefore, favour this Clause to be part of the bill. The Committee,
however, would suggest specific time frame for the State
Governments for obtaining forest clearance.
3.93 The Committee note that a duty has been cast on the State
Government to obtain all necessary permission from the owners of
land and those having occupancy rights [Clause13(5)(ii)]. A
representative of Government of Jharkhand brought to the notice of
the Committee that in the event of conclusion of competitive bidding
process, the owners and those having occupational rights may tend
to artificially jack up the price of land which may derail the process
of grant of mining lease. The Committee desire that the Government
should ensure that rates arrived at the conclusion of bidding process
should be irrevocable to the extent possible.
Time limit for disposal of applications for grant of mineral
concessions
3.94 Clause 14 of the Bill reads as under:—
14(1) In respect of any lands where the minerals vest in the
Government, the State Government shall dispose off the applications
for grant of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting licence within
the following period reckoned from the date of receipt of applications,
namely:—
(a) within a period of three months in respect of non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence;
(b) within a period of four months in respect of high technology
reconnaissance exploration licence and prospecting licence.

65
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, where applications
for prospecting licence are received in response to a notification under
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 4) of section 13, the
time period for disposal shall be reckoned from the last date notified
for receipt of applications.
14(2) The State Government shall dispose of the applications for
grant of mining lease in the following manner and within the time
limit specified hereunder, namely:—
(a) a letter of intent or recommendation to the Central
Government for giving prior approval if required, shall be
issued within a period of four months,—
(i) from the opening of bids in respect of applications
received under section 13; or
(ii) from the date of application in respect of application
received under section 25; and
(b) the mining lease shall be executed within three months of
intimation by means of a written communication by the
applicant holding the letter of intent of his having obtained
all clearances and approvals specified in the letter of intent.
14(3) In any matter requiring the prior approval of the Central
Government, the matter shall be disposed off by the Central
Government, within a period of three months from the date of receipt
of proposal from the State Government, and the State Government
shall issue a letter of intent within a period of one month from the
date of such approval by the Central Government.
14(4) Where any application or written communication is deficient
in information or documentation, the State Government shall, by notice
issued within sixty days of receipt thereof, require the applicant to
supply the omission within such period as may be specified having
regard to the nature of the document or information, but not being a
period of less than fifteen days and not more than sixty days, and
such period is excluded from the time limits specified in sub-sections
(1) and ( 2).
14(5) Where an applicant for mineral concession fails to furnish
documents and information as required under sub-section ( 4) for
processing the application or written communication, the State
Government after issuing a notice to show cause and giving him an
opportunity of being heard, may by order forfeit the earnest money
and reject his application for grant of mineral concession.

66
14(6) Where an application is not disposed off within the limit
specified in sub-section ( 1), ( 2) or ( 3) subject to the provisions of sub-
section ( 4), the applicant may apply to the National Mining Tribunal
in the case of major minerals and the State Mining Tribunal in case of
minor minerals, for a direction to the Central Government or State
Government, as the case may be, to dispose of the application within
such reasonable period as may be specified by the National Mining
Tribunal or the State Mining Tribunal, as the case may be.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.95 The Committee have received following suggestions on this
clause of the Bill:—
(i) Regarding time limit for Disposal of Concession applications-
The time limits for disposing mineral concession applications
have been defined in the Draft MMDR Act, 2011. In case of
non-adherence to the timelines, Revision Authority/Central
Govt. may be empowered to dispose the applications on
merit within a grace period of 30 days from the end of the
time period. Revision cases to be made more time bound,
say within 90 days.
(ii) Adequate time limit need to be given for extension/renewal
case as prescribed for grant. If not done, it should be
considered deemed clearance/extension. Reasonable is an
unclear term and hence three months time is suggested. This
will ensure accountability at all level.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.96 The Ministry of Mines have responded to the above
suggestions as under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines has not accepted this suggestion and
submitted to the Committee that no timelines can be fixed
for the National or State Mining Tribunals as they are quasi
judicial. However, six months time is provided in the draft
Bill for disposal of case.
(ii) On this suggestion, the Ministry of Mines have informed
the Committee that the suggestions of adequate time limit
for extension/renewal case as prescribed for grant can be
considered at the time of framing the rules. Wherever
‘Reasonable’ period is to be specified by the National Mining
Tribunal.

67
Recommendation of the Committee
3.97 Clause 14 clearly specifies the time frame within which the
Central and State Governments are required to dispose of applications
for grant of mineral concessions. However, where an application is
not disposed of within the time frame, the aggrieved applicant can
move National Mining Tribunal in the case of major minerals and
the State Mining Tribunal in case of minor minerals under Clause
14(6) seeking directions to the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be to dispose of applications with such
reasonable period as may be specified by the respective tribunals.
Since such tribunal will specify the time for disposal, no other words
are required to be added.
Rights of a holder of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting
licence or mining lease
3.98 Clause 15 of the Bill reads as under:—
“On issue of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence or
mining lease under this Act, it shall be lawful for the holder of
such licence or lease, his agents or his servants or workmen to
enter the lands over which such licence or lease had been granted
at all times during its currency and carry out all such
reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations as permitted:
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon an
enclosed court or garden attached to a dwelling-house (except with
the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such
occupier at least seven days notice in writing of his intention to do
so.”
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.99 The committee have received following suggestions regarding
clause 15:—
(i) Right of entry has been given to the licensee after giving
seven days notice to the occupier. There should be provisions
to ensure law and order. The holder of the licence or lease
shall have the right to request for and receive the assistance
of the State Government, its agencies or the police for
ensuring that law and order is maintained during the
exercise of such rights.

68
(ii) Clause 15 should be reworded to say that a licensee can
enter upon any private land only with the consent of the
land owner and that in the case of mining lease,
commencement of mining shall be undertaken with the
consent of the owner or by paying to the owner full
compensation determined under the Land Acquisition Act.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.100 Para-wise replies of the Ministry of Mines are as under:—
(i)&(ii). The Ministry of Mines has clarified these objections by
submitting that clause 15 is to be read with section 13(5)(ii)
wherein it is stated that ‘all necessary permissions from the
owners of the land and those having occupation rights’ are
to be obtained by the state government before issue of any
notification. Thus the entry rights will be obtained in
advance by the concerned state government.
(iii). Compensation for acquisition of land shall be governed by
the State R&R Policy or the Land Acquisition, Resettlement
and Rehabilitation Bill, 2011, as and when the Bill is
approved by the Parliament. However, where no acquisition
of land is involved, as per the draft Bill in case of grant of
a direct mining lease through competitive bidding the
concerned State Government shall be required to obtain
consent from the owners of the land and those having
occupation rights, as defined under clause 13(5)(ii). In case
of a person progressing from the exploration stage to the
mining stage, the compensation required to be paid is given
in clause 43 of the draft Bill, and under the National
Sustainable Development Framework, engagement with local
population including the land rights owner would be
mandatory.
Recommendations of the Committee
3.101 The Committee concur with the stand of the Ministry of
Mines that compensation for acquisition of land will be governed by
the State or National R&R Policy or any other Act in force including
the Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Bill, 2011 as
and when the Bill is approved by the Parliament. At the same time,
the Committee caution that where no acquisition of land is involved
for grant of a direct mining lease through competitive bidding, the
concerned State Government ought to require consent from the owners

69
of the land and those having occupation rights, as defined under
clause 13(5)(ii). The Committee are also of the view that compensation
rights of the land owner are well protected in clause 43 of the draft
Bill, and under the National Sustainable Development Framework,
engagement of local population including the land rights owner be
made mandatory. The Committee, however, desire that Clause 15
should be reworded, “that a licensee can enter upon any private
land only with the consent of the land owner and that in the case
of mining lease, commencement of mining shall be undertaken with
the consent of the owner or by paying to the owner full compensation
determined under the Land Acquisition Act.”
Transfer of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and prospecting licence.
3.102 Clause 17 of the Bill stipulated as under:—
17(1) A holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting licence
may, except in the case of coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach
sand minerals, after the expiry of a notice of not less than ninety days
to the State Government concerned, transfer his licence to any person
eligible to hold such licence in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder:
Provided that the holder of a prospecting licence, granted prior to
the commencement of this Act and valid under the provisions of
this Act, may after giving a notice of not less than ninety days to
the State Government concerned, transfer his prospecting licence
only to a person holding a prospecting licence or mining lease in
the adjoining area, and any transfer in contravention of this proviso
shall be void:
Provided further that the original licensee shall intimate to the
State Government the consideration payable or paid by the
successor-in-interest for the transfer, including the consideration in
respect of the reconnaissance or prospecting operations already
undertaken and the reports and data generated during the
operations:
Provided also that no such transfer shall take place if the State
Government, within the period specified in the notice for reasons
to be communicated in writing, disapproves the transfer on the
grounds that the transferee is not eligible as per the provisions of
the Act.

70
17(2) A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting licence in respect
of coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals shall be
transferred only with the prior approval of the Central Government.
17(3) On transfer of the licence, all rights and liabilities of, and
under, the licence shall be transferred to the successor-in-interest.
17(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the holder of a
licence may transfer his rights and liabilities within a period of six
months after the expiry of the mineral concession period to a person
eligible under this Act to hold a licence.
17(5) On transfer of rights and liabilities, the successor-in-interest
shall be entitled to consideration in terms of section 22 or section 25,
as the case may be, as if he was the original holder of the mineral
concession.
17(6) The State Government may charge such fees for transfer of
the mineral concession as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
17(7) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to enable
a holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting licence, in
respect of land where the minerals vest in a private person, to transfer
such licence other than in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the mineral concession agreement.
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.103 The Committee have received the following suggestions
regarding clause 17:—
(i) If a person is eligible to hold such a licence under the Act,
the transfer can be made. This opens up huge possibilities
for unregulated transfers and therefore cartelization and anti-
competitive practices. Also acquisition of licences through
these transfer provisions than a primary grant. Addition of
provisions which require approval of the Government for
transfer after ascertaining “whether such transfer is
bona fide , not anti-competitive and that the transfer would
not be detrimental to mineral development in any manner”.
(ii) Clause 17(1) and 18 refers to the transferability of PL/ML.
However, Clause 17(1), first proviso states that the transfer
of a PL only to a person holding PL or ML in the adjoining
area. Even though this is done with a good intention of

71
consolidation of mining area, but this might lead to
unhealthy practices. Therefore, the transfer should be
allowed to all eligible transferees (Government of Karnataka).
(iii) Sub-clause (4) of clause 22 of the Bill provides that State
Government shall grant high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence only to first applicant and to none else.
section 17 of the Bill provides that a licence can be
transferred for consideration.
The aforesaid provision is undesirable as the same:—
(a) prefers ”licence to the first in line” principle over the
“competition bidding” route;
(b) geological data in the country not being in public
domain completely, the provision may be misused by
those having access to the geological data in the
technical officers of the Central and the State
Government; and
(c) shall result into “trading in mineral licences”.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.104 The Ministry of Mines have responded to the above
suggestions as under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines has responded that the philosophy
of ‘Transfer of Concessions’ has been framed in light of the
recommendations of Hoda Committee. The basic objective
is to enable specialists in exploration to undertake risky
explorations and then pass on the mining rights to those
interested in mining.
(ii)&(iii) The Ministry of Mines did not find favour with these
suggestions/objections and informed the Committee that
HTREL is specifically designed for areas where
mineralisation is not known to the Government. In such
areas, calling for competitive bidding would be
administratively impossible since mineral occurrence, in case
of metallic minerals is heterogeneous and not homogenous
as in case of fuel minerals. Further HTREL is designed to
attract high technology and high investments in exploration
for deep-seated deposits, which is severely lacking in the
country. In all such cases where the investor has discovered
the minerals through his efforts, the Ministry is of the
opinion that he should be allowed the benefit from his
entrepreneurial activities either by obtaining a mining lease

72
or through transferring to another eligible mining company.
However, the HTREL holder would be tightly regulated
through stringent data reporting requirements, which would
eventually lead to addition to the geoscience data bank of
the country.
Recommendations of the Committee
3.105 The Committee find the apprehensions of industry that
the proposed provision of Clause 17(1) that a holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence may, except in the case of
coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals, after the
expiry of a notice of not less than ninety days to the State
Government concerned, transfer his licence to any person eligible to
hold such licence in accordance with the provisions of this Act and
the rules made thereunder are well founded as it may open up
possibilities for unregulated transfers and therefore cartelization and
anti-competitive practices. At the same time, the Committee find the
Clause as ‘noble’ in view of Ministry of Mines' reply the philosophy
of ‘Transfer of Concessions’ has been framed with the basic objective
of enabling specialists in exploration to undertake risky explorations
and then pass on the mining rights to those interested in mining as
recommended by Hoda Committee.
3.106 As regards the objections regarding transferability of HTREL,
the Ministry of Mines have submitted that HTREL is designed to
attract high technology and high investments in exploration for deep-
seated deposits, which is severely lacking in the country. In all such
cases where the investor has discovered the minerals through his
efforts, the Ministry is reported to be of the opinion that he should
be allowed the benefit from his entrepreneurial activities either by
obtaining a mining lease or through transferring to another eligible
mining company are well founded. The Committee while taking note
of recent cases of corruption involving similar circumstances of re-
sale of licences, recommend that due amendments/safeguards
including approval of transfer of licences by Government agencies
like IBM, etc. be incorporated in Clause 17 so as to ensure technical
expertise and adequate monitoring mechanism is put in place.
Transfer of a mining lease (Clause 18)
3.107 Clause 18 of the Bill reads as under:—
18(1) The holder of a mining lease shall not, without the previous
approval in writing of the State Government, and in the case of

73
coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals, the
previous approval in writing of the Central Government,—
(a) assign, sublet, mortgage, or in any other manner, transfer
the mining lease, or any right, title or interest therein; or
(b) enter into or make any arrangement, contract, or
understanding whereby the lessee may be directly or
indirectly financed to a substantial extent by, or under which
the lessee’s operations or undertakings may be substantially
controlled by any person or body of persons other than the
lessee:
Provided that where the mortgagee is an institution or a bank or
a corporation notified for the purpose by the Central Government
under this Act, it shall not be necessary for the lessee to obtain
any such approval of the State Government.
18(2) Where a holder of a mining lease has filed an application to
the State Government for approval of transfer of a mining lease
and the State Government, having regard to the prospecting report
if any, and approved Mining Plan and mining schemes and other
related documents filed by the mining lease holder, is of the opinion
that the amount of consideration between the transferor and the
transferee is not adequate, it may issue a notification in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, inviting
competitive financial bids, within one month of filing of the
application for transfer, giving a last date, which shall not be more
than thirty days from the date of notification, from the interested
persons eligible under this Act, to submit their financial bids for
the mining lease sought to be transferred.
18(3) In all cases where the notification has been issued by the
State Government under sub-section ( 2), it shall complete the
evaluation of bids within a period of one month from the last
date specified in the notification and,—
(a) permit the holder of mining lease to transfer the lease to
the transferee at the amount of consideration stated in the
application if the bid amount of the highest eligible bidder
is not greater by twenty per cent. than the amount of such
consideration stated in application; or
(b) direct the holder of mining lease to transfer the lease to the
highest eligible bidder if the bid is higher than the
consideration by more than twenty per cent., and the highest
eligible bidder shall pay to such holder of mining lease, a
sum equal to the amount of consideration stated in the

74
application for transfer along with an additional amount
equal to twenty per cent. thereof, and the remaining amount
of bid shall be paid to the State Government in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that in all cases of applications for transfer of a mining
lease granted by the State Government prior to the commencement
of this Act under the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section 11 of
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
as it stood before its repeal, the State Government may collect an
additional fee, as may be prescribed by the Central Government,
for such transfer:
Provided further that in case the State Government fails to complete
the process of inviting competitive offers referred to in sub-section
(2) within the period specified therein without any sufficient and
adequate reasons for such failure, the holder of the mining lease
may apply to the National Mining Tribunal for appropriate
directions in this regard.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the highest
eligible bidder shall be a person who gave the highest bid and is
eligible to be granted the mining lease on the day of the determination
of the bids.
18(4) The State Government or the Central Government, as the
case may be, shall not give its approval to transfer of a mining
lease unless the transferee has accepted all the conditions and
liabilities under any law for the time being in force to which the
transferor was subject to in respect of such mining lease.
18(5) No transfer of a mining lease shall be made to a person not
eligible under this Act to hold the lease and no transfer be made
by a person in contravention of the condition of, and subject to
which the lease was granted.
18(6) An application for transfer of mining lease shall,—
(a) state the reason for the transfer;
(b) state the consideration for the transfer;
(c) have attached to it, an agreement between the holder of
mining lease who has applied for transfer of mining lease
and the transferee setting out the terms and conditions of

75
the offer and acceptance, with a validity period of at least
a period of six months from the date of application;
(d) state whether the mining lease had been granted prior to
the commencement of this Act under the provisions of sub-
section ( 5) of section 11 of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, as it stood before
its repeal; and
(e)g ive such other particulars as may prescribed by the Central
Government.
18(7) No transfer of a mining lease shall be permitted, if,—
(a) it leads to fragmentation or unscientific mining;
(b) it is not in the interest of mineral development; and
(c) it is against the national interest.
18(8) Where the mining lease is in respect of land where the
minerals vest in a private person, no transfer shall be permitted
except in accordance with the terms and conditions of the mineral
concession agreement in regard to the consent of such person.
18(9) The State Government may charge fees for the transfer of
the mining lease in case of a major mineral as may be prescribed
by the Central Government and in case of minor minerals, as may
be prescribed by the State Government.
18(10) The Central Government and the State Government shall
take into account the consideration payable by the transferee to
the transferor while prescribing the fee under sub-section (9).
Suggestions received by the Committee
3.108 The committee have received the stakeholder's view on clause
18 as below:—
(i) Regarding transfer of mining lease clause 18(1) allows
notified banks to be mortgagees without approval. This open
up opportunities for misuse, since persons would attempt
to purchase leases as NPAs through such banks.
(ii) The provisions of the clause 18(1)(b) read with clause 18(3)(b)
does not address cases when transfer is within subsidiaries
of the same company. As an example, one company of the
same group may have financial resources and another

76
company within the group may have the lease and want to
transfer the same within the group in such cases, provision
for transfer to be effected within the same group without
bidding may be incorporated.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
3.109 The reply of the Ministry of Mines are as under:—
(i) The Ministry are not in agreement with such apprehension
and clarified that such transfers are change in ownership of
the leases and need previous approvals by the State
Governments under clause 18.
(ii) The Ministry have accepted the suggestion in its written
submission as well as during the sittings of the Committee
held on June 25, 2012.
Recommendations of the Committee
3.110  The Committee concur with the opinion of Ministry of
Mines on the issue of bank mortgages. Although the Ministry of
Mines have clarified the transfer of mining lease under Clause 18(1)
by stating that such transfers are change in ownership of the leases
and need previous approvals by the State Governments under clause
18, the Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as
the proviso to 18(1) clearly state that where the mortgagee is an
institution or a bank or a corporation notified for the purpose by the
Central Government under this Act, it shall not be necessary for the
lessee to obtain any such approval of the State Government. The
Committee, therefore recommend that Ministry of Mines should re-
look at the suggestions regarding transfer of mining lease under
Clause 18(1) which allow notified institutions or a bank or a
corporation to transfer lease mortgaged with them without obtaining
approval of the State Government.
3.111 As the Ministry of Mines have accepted the suggestion of
transfers within subsidiary companies, the Committee expect that
Ministry of Mines will carry out suitable amendment in Clause 18.

77
CHAPTER IV
NON EXCLUSIVE RECONNAISSANCE LICENCE
Conditions of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence
Clause 19 of the Bill reads as under:—
19(1) In respect of every non- exclusive reconnaissance licence
granted for major and minor minerals under this Act and the
rules made thereunder, the licence holder shall,—
(a)p rogressively relinquish the area granted under the licence
as shall be specified in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder;
(b) file a reconnaissance plan in case of major minerals other
than coal minerals with the Geological Survey of India, the
Indian Bureau of Mines, and the State Directorate, and in
case of coal minerals with the Central Government, and in
case of minor minerals with the State Directorate concerned
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, which shall include,—
(i) the particulars of the area such as aerial extent, in terms
of latitude and longitude;
(ii) the scale of the plan and the area of geological mapping;
(iii) the particulars of the machines and instruments to be
used, and the nature of the data proposed to be
collected;
(iv)a  quarterly plan of operations; and
(v) the quarterly detailed projection of expenditure on the
operations:
Provided that in respect of minerals other than coal minerals,
atomic minerals and beach sand minerals, with the prior approval
of the State Directorate and in case of coal minerals, atomic
minerals, beach sand minerals with the prior approval of the
Central Government, the licence holder may modify the plan of
operations or the State Directorate or the Central Government, as
the case may be, may direct the licensee to modify his plan of
operations, if it appears that ground operations proposed may be
in conflict with the ground operations of another licensee who has
already filed his plan.

78
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the quarterly plan of
operations shall be prepared so as to exclude overlapping of ground
operation of the non-exclusive reconnaissance licence holders who
have already filed the plan of operations for the area;
(c) make available all data including all the aerial, photo-
geological, geophysical, geochemical and such other data
collected by him to the Geological Survey of India, the State
Directorate and in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals,
beach sand minerals to the Central Government, in such
manner and within such intervals as may be prescribed by
the Central Government;
(d) in case radiometric instruments are used, make available all
radiometric data available to the Atomic Minerals
Directorate;
(e) maintain detailed and accurate accounts of all the expenses
incurred by him on the non-exclusive reconnaissance
operations;
(f) submit reports to the Geological Survey of India, the Indian
Bureau of Mines, the State Directorate and in case of coal
minerals, atomic minerals, beach sand minerals to the
Central Government, in such manner and within such
intervals as may be prescribed by it and while submitting
reports, the licence holder may specify that the whole or
any part of the report or data submitted by him shall be
kept confidential; and the Geological Survey of India, the
Indian Bureau of Mines, the State Directorate, and in case
of coal minerals, the Central Government, thereupon shall,
keep the specified portions as confidential for a period of
six months from the expiry of the licence, or abandonment
of operations or termination of the licence, whichever is
earlier;
(g) allow every officer authorised by the Central Government
or the State Government as the case may be, in case of
major minerals and the State Governments in case of minor
minerals, to examine the accounts maintained;
(h) furnish to the Geological Survey of India, the Indian Bureau
of Mines, and the State Directorate in case of major minerals,
in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals, beach sand
minerals to the Central Government, and in case of minor
minerals to the State Directorate concerned, such information
and returns as may be required in relation to the
reconnaissance operations;

79
(i) allow any officer authorised by the Geological Survey of
India or the State Directorate in case of major minerals and
the officers of State Directorate in the case of minor minerals
to inspect any reconnaissance operations carried on by the
licence holder;
(j) pay to the State Government in respect of land in which
minerals vest in the Government, and to the person in
whom the minerals vests in other cases, a licence fee as
may be notified by the Central Government, being an
amount of not less than fifty rupees per square kilometre
per year and not more than five hundred rupees per square
kilometre per year or part thereof:
Provided that the Central Government may, by a notification,
specify different rates for each successive years;
(k) obtain clearance from the Ministry of Defence in the Central
Government, in case any Defence establishments lies in the
area proposed for exploration;
(l) comply with such other conditions as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
19(2) The non-exclusive reconnaissance licence may contain such
other general conditions as may be prescribed in the interest of
public safety or national security by the Central Government which,
inter alia , may include the condition that a representative of the
Directorate General, the Civil Aviation or the Ministry of Defence
shall be present during the aerial surveys.
19(3) The Central Government, in case of coal minerals, and the
Indian Bureau of Mines in case of other major minerals, may issue
direction to a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence holder to ensure
compliance with the conditions of the licence and the licence holder
shall be bound to comply with such directions.
19(4) The licence holder shall before starting operations, deposit as
security an amount equal to the licence fee levied for the first
year and in case of breach of any condition imposed on a holder
of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence by or under this Act, the
State Government may by order in writing, suspend, curtail or
revoke the licence, and may forfeit in whole or in part, the amount
deposited by the licence holder as security:
Provided that no such order shall be made without issuing a notice
to the licence holder to show cause and giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard:

80
Provided also that in case of land in which the minerals vest in
a person other than the Government, the State Government shall
give such person an opportunity of being heard and may issue
directions to him to suspend, curtail or revoke the mineral
concession or forfeit the security in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the mineral concession agreement.
19(5) In every case where a part or all of the security deposit has
been forfeited, the licensee, shall furnish security deposit to make
up the deficiency before recommencing operations under the licence.
19(6) Any amount deposited as security deposit in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall unless forfeited, be returned
to the licensee at the end of the six month period following the
expiry or termination of the licence:
Provided that in case the return of the security or such part thereof
as may be payable takes place more than thirty days after the
expiry of the six months period, a simple interest at the rate of six
per cent per annum shall be payable for the period beyond thirty
days.
Suggestions received by the Committee
4.2 In this regard Department of Atomic Energy have suggested
that the name of Atomic Minerals Directorate to be included after Indian
Bureau of Mines in clause 19(1)(b).
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
4.3 The Ministry of Mines has given acceptance to this suggestion.
Recommendation of the Committee
4.4 The Committee accordingly recommend that suitable
amendment be incorporated in the Clause 19(1)(b) as suggested by
Department of Atomic Energy.

81
CHAPTER V
HIGH TECHNOLOGY RECONNAISSANCE-CUM-
EXPLORATION LICENCE
Conditions of a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence and prospecting licence
Clause 21 of the Bill reads as under:—
21(1)(b) the licence holder shall,….. ( b) prepare and file an
exploration plan in respect of a high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence or a prospecting plan in case of a
prospecting licence with the Geological Survey of India, the Indian
Bureau of Mines and the State Directorate in respect of major
minerals (other than coal minerals) and in case of coal minerals
with the Central Government, and the State Directorate in the case
of minor minerals including such particulars and, in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, which shall
include,—
(i) the particulars of the area being prospected;
(ii) the scale of the plan and the area of geological mapping;
(iii)a  six monthly plan of operations including—
(a) the number of pits, trenches, and bore holes which he
proposes to put in the area;
(b) the number of samples proposed to be drawn and
analysed;
(c) the particulars of the machines to be used;
(d) the details of exploratory mining if any, proposed to be
undertaken;
(e) the beneficiation studies proposed to be undertaken.
(iv) appropriate baseline information of prevailing environmental
conditions before the beginning of reconnaissance or
prospecting operations;
(v) steps proposed to be taken for protection of environment
which shall include prevention and control of air and water
pollution, progressive reclamation and rehabilitation of the

82
land disturbed by the prospecting operations, a scheme for
the plantation of trees, restoration of local flora and water
regimes and such other measures, as may be directed from
time to time by the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate as the case may be for minimizing the adverse
effect of prospecting operations on the environment;
(vi) the details of the six monthly expenditure to be incurred
on the operations;
(vii) any other matter relevant for scientific prospecting, as
directed by the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate, as the case may be, from time to time by a
general or specific order:
Provided that the exploration plan shall be filed with the Geological
Survey of India in respect of high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, in such manner as may be notified by the
Geological Survey of India from time to time.
Suggestion received by the Committee
5.2 One of the stakeholders has observed that the Environment
Protection Act covers requirements for various mining projects and
this subject should therefore be guided by the Environment Protection
Act and should not be in the scope of this draft MMDR Bill, 2011.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
5.3 The Ministry of Mines has not accepted this demand and have
explained that Clause 21(1)(b) requires preparation and filing of an
Exploration plan in respect of HTREL or a Prospecting plan in case of
a Prospecting Licence, which includes the appropriate baseline
information of prevailing environmental conditions before the beginning
of reconnaissance or prospecting operations. The provision is kept to
access the damage (if any) done to the environment due to prospecting
operations. This will also help in deciding suitable mitigation and
compensation measures. In any case, the present bill focuses more on
the lease area, whereas the environment act covers a wider area outside
the lease area also.
Recommendation of the Committee
5.4 The Committee find the exploration plan as envisaged in
Clause 21(1)(b) very useful as it includes the appropriate baseline
information of prevailing environmental conditions before the
beginning of reconnaissance or prospecting operations. The

83
Committee, therefore, desire that the provision should remain in the
bill to access the damage (if any) done to the environment due to
prospecting operations and to help in deciding suitable mitigation
and compensation measures.
Condition of High Technology Reconnaissance-cum-Exploration/
Prospecting Licence
5.5 Clause 21(6) of the Bill reads as under:—
Any amount deposited as security, in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (4), shall unless forfeited, be returned to the
licensee at the end of six months after the expiry or termination of the
licence, as the case may be:
Provided that in case the return of the security or such part thereof
as may be payable takes place more than thirty days after the
expiry of the said period of six months, a simple interest at the
rate of six per cent. per annum shall be payable by the State
Government for the period beyond thirty days.
Suggestion received by the Committee and
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
5.6 When asked about the justification for paying a simple interest
of 6% per annum after expiry or termination of the licence by the
State Government on the amount deposited as security, which should
not be the prevailing bank rate, the Ministry of Mines have informed
the Committee that the amount deposited as security has to be returned
back to the licencee after the exploration activity is completed. The
interest component is applicable only when the State Government
delays in returning the security amount to the licencee. This will act as
a deterrent for any State Government to delay in finalising the return
of Security deposits. The interest rate was commonly agreed at 6% per
annum in consultation with the State Governments. However, the
Ministry does not have any objection to accepting the prevailing bank
rates.
Recommendation of the Committee
5.7 As regards the interests rate on the return of security payable
to the licensee unless forfeited takes place more than 30 days after
the expiry or termination of the licences as the case may be, a
provision has been made where a simple interest at the rate of 6%
per annum shall be payable by the State Governments for the period

84
beyond 30 days. Although, the Ministry of Mines have stated that
the interest rate was commonly agreed at 6% per annum in
consultation with the State Governments, the Committee recommend
that the words “six per cent” may be replaced by “prevailing bank
rate” to ensure financial propriety.
Procedure for grant of high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence and prospecting licence
5.8 Clause 22(4) of the Bill reads as under:—
22(4) Except in the case of applications for prospecting licences
received in response to a notification under sub-section (1) of
section 13 of this Act, the State Government shall grant the high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting
licence in respect of the land to the first applicant eligible under
this Act and the rules made thereunder and all other applicants
be deemed to have been refused to the extent of the area granted
to the first applicant:
Provided that in case of prospecting licence, such applications shall
also be subject to the provisions of sub-Clause (7).
Suggestions received by the Committee
5.9 The Committee have received following suggestions on this
clause:—
(i) In respect of areas where State Government does not issue
notification for inviting competitive offers is not under
section 13(1), LAPL/PL should be granted to—
(a) In single application cases to the single applicant; and
(b) In multiple application cases, to an applicant who is
judged the best in terms of well laid down objective
criteria based on parameters such as size of investment
in mineral based industry, profit/production sharing. To
ensure transparency and objectivity, weightages to be
assigned to different parameters for evaluation of offers
may be prescribed in the Rules/Policy notification itself.
for this purpose, sub-section (4) of section 22 should be
modified as per the above. (Government of Odisha).
(ii) Sub clause (4) of clause 22 of the Bill provides that State
Government shall grant high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence “only to first applicant and to none else”.
Further, clause 17 of the Bill provides that a licence can be
transferred for a consideration.

85
The aforesaid provision is undesirable because:—
(a) it prefers “licence to the first in line” principle over the
“competition bidding” route;
(b) the provision shall result into “trading in mineral
licences”; and
(c) geological data available in the country is not completely
in public domain and, therefore, the provision may be
misused by those having access to the geological data
in the technical offices of the central and the State
Governments.
(iii) Whereas clause 13 seems to favour the auctioning system
for mineral concessions, the provisions of clause 22 indicate
a preference for a first come first serve system. There is not
enough clarity on the situations under which a notification
and auctioning system would be used versus a first come
first served system. There is a lack of clarity about the nature
of a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration license.
It is not evident under what situations the high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration license would be used versus
a prospecting license.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
5.10The Ministry of Mines do not subscribe to these apprehensions/
objections and submitted the following explanations before the
Committee:—
“Concern is not correct. HTREL is specifically designed for areas
where mineralisation is not known to the Government. In such
areas, calling for competitive bidding would be administratively
impossible since mineral occurrence, in case of metallic minerals is
heterogeneous and not homogenous as in case of fuel minerals.
Further HTREL is designed to attract high technology and high
investments in exploration for deep-seated deposits, which is
severely lacking in the country. In all such cases where the investor
has discovered the minerals through his efforts, the Ministry is of
the opinion that he should be allowed the benefit from his
entrepreneurial activities either by obtaining a mining lease or
through transferring to another eligible mining company. However,
the HTREL holder would be tightly regulated through stringent
data reporting requirements, which would eventually lead to
addition to the geoscience data bank of the country.”

86
Recommendation of the Committee
5.11 It has been suggested to the Committee that Competitive
bidding should also be favoured for grant of HTREL, even if HTREL
needs to be prioritized since it is for deep seated non-bulk minerals
and is specifically designed for areas where mineralization is not
known to the Government. Although, the Government have claimed
that these deep seated minerals requires primary regional exploration,
even then the Committee feel that bidding should be invited to
gain maximum value for the minerals. The Committee are of the
firm view that Government of Chhattisgarh has put forward a
genuine suggestion and that should be considered by the Ministry
i.e. to add maximum revenue to the State Exchequer. Further more
there should not be any scope of nepotism and favouritism. The
Committee are of the view that in no case under whatever
circumstances the ‘first in line principle’ should be preferred over
‘competitive bidding’ and scope of generating more and more revenue
for exchequer cannot be restricted for want of a certain way of
discovery of minerals. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
competitive bidding should be applicable to HTREL and first proviso
to Clause 13(1) and Clause 22(4) be suitably amended.
Issue of notification where prospecting operations are to be
undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, etc.
5.12 The relevant provision of Clause 23 of the Bill reads as
under:—
23(2) The agency undertaking prospecting operation shall make a
report for every six months of its progress of reconnaissance or
prospecting in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and submit the reconnaissance or prospecting report
and the geological study, pre-feasibility study or feasibility study,
as the case may be, to the State Government at the end of the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations in such manner and such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
Suggestions received by the Committee
5.13 Department of Atomic Energy has suggested that "Prospecting
data of Atomic Minerals Directorate should be submitted internally to
the Department of Atomic Energy, and not disclosed in the public
domain. Also that Mining Plan for beach sand minerals shall be
approved by the IBM only after obtaining a NOC from the Atomic
Minerals Directorate.

87
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
5.14 The Ministry of Mines have agreed to this suggestion and
informed the Committee that this would be provided for in the sub-
legislation on Mining Plan.
Recommendation of the Committee
5.15 As Ministry of Mines have agreed to the suggestion of
Department of Atomic Energy regarding submission of Prospecting
data of Atomic Minerals Directorate internally to the Department of
Atomic Energy, and not disclosed in the public domain and Mining
Plan for beach sand minerals shall be approved by the IBM only
after obtaining a NOC from the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the
Committee expect that the Government will take care of the same at
sub-legislation stage.

88
CHAPTER VI
MINING LEASE
Conditions of a mining lease
Clause 24 of the Bill reads as under:—
24(1) Every mining lease for a major mineral or a minor mineral
shall be subject to the fulfilment of the following conditions,
namely:—
(a) all mining operations shall be in accordance with a mining
plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder;
(b) the lessee shall report to the State Government, the discovery
of any mineral in the leased area not specified in the lease
for which rights vest in the Government, within a period of
sixty days of such discovery;
(c) if any, mineral not specified in the lease is discovered in
the leased area, the lessee shall not mine and dispose of
such mineral unless such mineral is included in the lease
or a separate lease is obtained therefor;
(d) the lessee shall pay to the State Government in case of land
in which minerals vest in the State Government and to the
person in whom the minerals vest in other cases, for every
year or part thereof, except the first year of the lease, yearly
dead rent at the rate specified in the Third Schedule of the
Act subject to the provisions of section 42 of this Act:
Provided that if the lease relates to the working of more than one
mineral in the same area, the State Government or the person in
whom the minerals vest in other cases, as the case may be, shall
not charge separate dead rent in respect of each mineral:
Provided further that the lessee shall be liable to pay the dead
rent or royalty in respect of each mineral whichever is higher in
amount but not both.
(e) the lessee shall also pay, for the surface area used by him
for the purposes of mining operations, surface rent and
water rate at such rate, as may be prescribed by the State
Government;

89
(f) the lessee shall furnish the following in such manner and
in such period as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, namely:—
(i) all geological, geochemical and geophysical and
hydrological data relating to the leased area collected
by him during the course of operations to the Indian
Bureau of Mines and the State Directorate and in case
of coal minerals to the Central Government;
(ii) all information pertaining to investigations of atomic
minerals collected by him during the course of mining
operations to the Atomic Minerals Directorate;
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, mining operations shall
include the erection of machinery, laying of a tramway or construction
of a road in connection with the working of the mine.
Suggestions received by the Committee
6.2 The Committee have received various suggestions on
clause 24. Some of these are as below:—
(i) A cap should be provided on the Surface Rent. It should be
similar to earlier Surface rent rules, which was governed by
Clause 27(1)(d) of Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 which
read as under, the leasee shall also pay, for the surface area
used by him for the purposes of mining operations, surface
rent and water rate, not exceeding the land revenue, water
and cases assessable on the land, as may be specified by
the State Government in the lease.
(ii) The security deposit of rupee one lakh per hectare is very
exorbitant and not affordable by the lessee. It is suggested
that it should be rupee 15000 per hectare for broken up
area i.e. area under mining activities and that too deposited
with the lifetime of the mining lease. This should be made
rational in terms of the classification of minerals as shown
in third schedule of the proposed act as the low value
minerals deserve financial concessions matters. Further, as
laid down in the proviso Small Deposits should be clarified
specifically in this act just to avoid any further ambiguity.
(iii) The deposit to be paid in case of minor minerals and the
same has to be fixed by the State Government. It was
suggested that the ornamental natural stones may be
exempted from payment of such deposit.

90
(iv) Draft Act Provision on Surface rent, without a cap, may
lead to fixing of surface rent at abnormal rates thereby
significantly increasing mining cost. Therefore, a cap should
be provided on the Surface Rent.
(v) Clause 24(1)(f)(i) to be amended as “All geological,
geochemical and geophysical and hydrological data which
inter alia include depth, yield and quality of ground water
based on drinking water sources in the core and buffer zone,
related to the leased area collected by him during the course
of operations to the Indian Bureau of Mines and the State
Directorate and in case of coal minerals to the Central
Government”.
(vi) In clause 24 relating to conditions of a mining lease, a
condition may be incorporated that the lease deed will be
executed after the environment clearance, forestry clearance
and wildlife clearance as applicable have been obtained by
the prospective lessee after grant of letter intent.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
6.3 In response, the Ministry of Mines have submitted the
following:—
(i) On the above suggestions, the Ministry have informed the
committee that the hydrological data collected will be made
available with the concerned authorities. However, it is
difficult to measure the yield and quality of ground water
as the IBM and State Directorate of Mining will not be in
a position to assess the same.
(ii) As regards suggestion of the Ministry of Environment and
Forest, the Ministry of Mines in their submission to the
Committee informed that while a mining activity is subject
to compliance of all statutory provisions of the country, even
if not stated specifically in the draft MMDR Bill, 2011, the
proposal may be acceptable to the Ministry if it affords,
clarity. This is an existing practice as per the present MMDR
Act, 1957 also.
Recommendations of the Committee
6.4 The Committee do not accept suggestions of the stakeholders
for putting a cap on surface rent in view of low rates of land revenue
which is altogether impractical for the purpose of affixing surface
rent.

91
6.5 The suggestion received by the Committee for having
affordable security deposit for mining activities in small deposits are
worth considering and would like the Ministry to prescribe separate
security deposit for small mining leases. At the same time, for the
sake of clarity small deposits be clarified.
6.6 The Committee suggest the Ministry of Mines to find out
ways to implement the suggestion of Ministry of Drinking Water
and Sanitation in view of the importance of water data for welfare
activities and life-support of local populace.
6.7 The words “construction of road” appearing in ’Explanation’
be substituted by “infrastructure development including construction
of road”.
Mining operations to be in accordance with mining plan
6.8 Clause 26(6) of the Bill reads as under:—
26 (6) The mining plan for major minerals shall, except in case of
coal minerals and atomic minerals, be approved by officers of the
Indian Bureau of Mines, authorised by general orders in this behalf
by the Controller General, and for minor minerals the plan shall
be approved by officers of the State Directorate authorised in this
behalf, by the general order of the State Government:
Provided that the Central Government may, on being satisfied that
the State Directorate possesses the necessary technical and
management capability as may be prescribed, empower the State
Directorate to grant approvals for such major minerals and in such
circumstances as may be specified in the notification:
Provided further that in case the Central Government, at any time,
is of the opinion that the State Directorate does not possess the
requisite technical and management capability, it may suspend or
revoke the power granted and may direct it to be exercised by
officers of the Indian Bureau of Mines in accordance with the
provisions of this sub-section.
Suggestions received by the Committee
6.9 The Department of Atomic Energy has suggested the
Committee that “Prospecting data of Atomic Minerals Directorate
should be submitted internally to the Department of Atomic Energy,
and not disclosed in the public domain”. The Department further
suggested that “Mining Plan for beach sand minerals shall be approved
by the IBM only after obtaining a NOC from the Atomic Minerals
Directorate”.

92
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
6.10 The Ministry of Mines have accepted the above suggestion of
the Department of Atomic Energy and informed the Committee that
this provision would be provided for in the sub-legislation on Mining
Plan.
Recommendation of the Committee
6.11 The Committee would like the Ministry of Mines to
incorporate the suggestion of Department of Atomic Energy as agreed
to by them.
Premature termination of lease
6.12 Clause 31 of the Bill reads as under:—
31(1) Where the State Government is of the opinion that it is in
the public interest or in the interest of public safety to do so, it
may for reasons to be recorded in writing make an order of
premature termination of the mining lease in case the minerals
vest in the Government, and issue a direction to this effect to the
person in whom the minerals vest in other cases:
Provided that no premature termination of a mining lease shall be
made without giving the lessee a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
(2) In every case of premature termination of a lease, made under
sub-section (1), the State Government shall, having regard to the
nature of the loss caused to the lessee, compensate the lessee in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) A person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) or sub-
section ( 2) may apply to the National Mining Tribunal in case of
major minerals and the State Mining Tribunal in case of minor
minerals, for revision, modification or cancellation of such order,
and the National Mining Tribunal or the State Mining Tribunal, as
the case may be, may pass such order as may be appropriate.
Suggestions received by the Committee
6.13 The Committee have received the following suggestions:—
(i) Clause 31(1)—Considering that a mining lease for coal
mineral is approved and granted by the Central
Government, it is suggested that any premature termination

93
of the mining lease should also be with the prior approval
of the Central Government and not solely based on the
opinion of the State Government.
(ii) Clause 31(2)—It is suggested that apart from providing
compensation to the lease holder for such early termination,
the government should consider such lease holder for
alternate mining leases available with the Government and
endeavor to provide requisite support or assistance to the
lease holder to ensure that an alternate mining lease is
granted to the lease holder. Also, a mechanism should be
incorporated in the Bill which sets out the minimum
compensation that should be payable to the lease holder for
such early termination of the mining lease. For example, a
compensation which should be equivalent to the cost
incurred by the lease holder for mining operations and initial
construction of the power plant.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
6.14 The Ministry of Mines have responded to these objections with
the following explanations:—
(i) Clause 31(1)—These are provisions for exercise in rarest of
rare situations in public interest and public safety. Such a
decision can be challenged in the National Mining Tribunal
or any such Tribunal set up by Central Government for
coal minerals for relief. In all such cases compensation for
such premature termination safeguards loss of opportunity
to the lease holder.
(ii) Clause 31(2)—These are provisions for exercise in rarest of
rare situations in public interest and public safety, and
compensation would be sufficient.
Recommendations of the Committee
6.15 Since the mining lease for coal mineral is approved and
granted by the Central Government, the Committee observe that the
premature termination of lease should also be made with the approval
of the Central Government,. The Committee would like the
Government to amend the Clause 31 accordingly.
6.16 The Committee feel that the suggestion of some of the
stakeholders that apart from providing compensation to the lease
holder for early termination in public interest and public safety, the

94
lease holder should be given alternative mining lease is not
acceptable because without participating in any bidding process they
will get another mines. No one has any vested right to get coal
mine.
Mine Closure Plan
6.17 Clause 32(5) of the Bill reads as under:—
The Indian Bureau of Mines or the Coal Controller or the Atomic
Mineral Directorate, or the State Directorate as the case may be shall,
after consulting the concerned Panchayats convey its approval or
disapproval to the Progressive Mine Closure Plan within a period of
ninety days from its receipt:
Provided that in case the approval or disapproval is not
communicated within the said period, the Progressive Mine Closure
Plan shall be deemed to have been approved on a provisional
basis till such approval or disapproval is conveyed.
Suggestions received by the Committee
6.18 The Committee have received the following suggestions:—
(i) It is appropriate if Mine Closure Plan and Final Mine
Closure Plan form part of the Mining Plan. How do the
Panchayat be a part of process for deciding closure of mines
as such institutions are not expected to possess the required
expertise?
(ii) The Ministry of Coal has suggested in this regard that in
case of coal minerals the Mine Closer Plan/Progressive Mine
Closure Plan is approved by the Central Government and
not Coal Controller as mentioned in Sub-Clause 4&5.
Accordingly the words “Coal Controller” may be replaced
with “Central Government”.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
6.19 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions as
under:—
(i) The objective behind consultation with Panchayat is better
local area development as these bodies also plan
development and duplicity may be avoided and transparency
is to be maintained.

95
(ii) The Ministry of Mines accepting the above contention have
submitted before the Committee that the words “Coal
Controller” in the said Clause of the Draft Bill may be
considered for amendment to read as “Central Government
or any authority notified by Central Government”.
Recommendations of the Committee
6.20 The Committee agree with the objective stated by the
Ministry of Mines for consultation with panchayat to ensure
developments of the local area and to maintain transparency in the
work carried out in the area.
6.21 The Committee considering the suggestions and its
acceptance by Ministry of Mines recommend that the words “Coal
Controller” in line 3 and line 14 in page 33 of draft Bill may be
considered for amendment by the Government and it should be read
as ‘Central Government or any Authority notified by Central
Government.’
Final Mine Closure Plan
6.22 Clause 32(8) and 32(10) of the Bill read as under:—
Clause 32(8): Without prejudice to the generality of this section,
the Final Mine Closure Plan shall be based on the land use planned
for the lease area after its closure, and shall include measures to reduce
hazards, improve productivity and ensure that it supports the needs
of the host population:
Provided that the land use planned for the mining lease area after
the closure of mine shall be decided in consultation with the
Panchayats having jurisdiction, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Clause 32(10): The Final Mine Closure Plan for the last five years
period of the lease shall be approved with such modification as may
be specified by the authority approving the Progressive Mine Closure
Plan after consultation with the Panchayat concerned, within a period
of one year:
Provided that in the case where the lease is extended under the
provisions of subsection ( 1) of section 8 of the Act, the lessee shall
submit a Progressive Mine Closure Plan for the next five years in
accordance with the provisions of this Act along with a Final Mine
Closure Plan in accordance with the provisions of this section and
the last five years shall be reckoned with reference to the extended
period.

96
Suggestion received by the Committee
6.23 The Ministry of Environment and Forest have suggested the
Committee that public hearing in the penultimate year of the mine
should be included as part of the final mine closure process in order
to ensure that all loose ends are tied up. This may be suitably included
in clause 32 of the draft Bill.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
6.24 The Ministry of Mines informed the Committee that “This
will be done as per Final Mine Closure Plan which would be available
in public domain in prominent places like Panchayat. Further, the sub-
legislation would provide for third party audit also which would
adequately address this issue”.
Recommendations of the Committee
6.25 The Committee are satisfied with the clarification given by
the Ministry of Mines that final mine closure plan would be available
in public domain in prominent places like Panchayat and the sub-
legislation would provide for third party audit also which would
adequately address this issue and expect that the issue raised by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests for public hearing in the
penultimate year will be well addressed by the Ministry of Mines.
6.26 The Panchayats Extensions to Scheduled Areas Act, 1996
(PESA) envisages consultation with Gram Sabhas in Schedule 5 areas
so as to protect the interest of tribals. The Committee desire that due
note of provisions of PESA be taken during Final Mine Closure Plan.
6.27 A new proviso may be added to ensure that the leasee shall
cause to publish the progressive mine closure and final mine closure
in the vernacular/local print media of mass circulation in the leased
area of operation and also displayed in the website of the Govt. so
as to ensure wider dissemination of information to all concerned.
Mineral concessions to be in form of a registered deed
6.28 Clause 35 of Bill reads as under:—
A mineral concession granted in accordance with the provisions of
section 34 shall be in the form of a registered deed executed by the
parties on such terms and conditions as may be agreed, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, and an

97
authenticated copy of the deed shall be deposited by the person granted
the mineral concession with the State Government and the Indian
Bureau of Mines before commencing operations:
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in such deed to
the contrary, it shall be lawful for the State Government to issue
any direction to the leaseholder or to the person in whom the
minerals vest, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Suggestion received by the Committee
6.29 During evidence on 23.07.2012, as regards consent of pattedars
and owners under Clause 34, a representative of State Government of
Andhra Pradesh suggested that because small pattedars are not
conversant with the norms of agreement or the registered deed, a better
system be evolved whereby interest in the mining activity should be
sustained on a long term basis and not for a consideration.
Recommendation of the Committee
6.30 A representative from the Government of Andhra Pradesh
brought to the notice of the Committee that the applicants for mineral
concessions tend to approach “Pattedar” offering some money and
obtain their consents, taking advantage of their lack of understanding
and thereafter deed registered. It has been suggested that a developer
like concept needs to be evolved so as to sustain interest of person
in mining on long term basis. The Committee see merit in this and
suggest format of agreement or registered deed ought to specify such
details so as to sustain long term interest rather than one time
consideration. The Committee desire that the relevant clause be
amended suitably.

98
CHAPTER VII
RESERV ATION
Reservation of areas for conservation of mineral resources
Clause 37 of the Bill reads as under:—
37 (1) The State Government with the prior approval of the Central
Government, or the Central Government after consultation with
the State Government, may reserve for purposes of mineral
conservation any area not already held under a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration license, a prospecting licence or
mining lease, and shall notify the reservation specifying the reasons
and the period of reservation shall be for a period of not less than
ten years:
Provided that the period may be extended from time to time in
the public interest, for such period as may be notified in the same
manner in which it was reserved.
37 (2)  No application for mineral concession shall be entertained
in respect of an area reserved under sub-section (1) and any such
application is deemed to have never been made.
37 (3)  An area reserved for purposes of mineral conservation shall
not be used for such purposes during the period of the reservation
that is contrary to the object of such reservation.
Suggestions received by the Committee
7.2 The Committee have received the following suggestions on
the provisions of the above Clause:—
(i) The Ministry of Steel has raised the issue of reservation of
mining areas for Government Companies to be continued
as is in practice vide Section 17A(1A) of existing MMDR
Act, 1957.
(ii) Department of Atomic Energy has urged the Committee that
after clause 37, the following clause may be added:
Provision of reservation of area for mining by PSUs may be
prescribed in accordance with Section 17A, 17A(1A) and
17A(2) of MMDR Act, 1957.

99
(iii) To a query regarding the participation in the auction by
PSUs, the Committee have been informed by a representative
of the Ministry of Steel during evidence as under:—
“No doubt we can participate in the auction. If you see the
Hoda Committee Report which had gone into it in great
detail, they have also recommended in Recommendation
No. 7.2.5 wherein it is stated: “That the steel making capacity
already in existence on July 1, 2006, which do not have
captive mines may be given assured allocation of adequate
Iron ore reserves.”
(iv) The witness further added:—
“The point is if one State is insisting that the capacity should
be in my State and if a company, like RINL is located in
some other State, from where it will get the entire raw
material? Basically it may slow down the Government
owned RINL expansion plans, if Orissa Government ask the
steel maker to alter its application from mining, leases and
prospective licensing with some value addition plans for
the State. If you give power to the States, States will demand
that you set up the capacity in the State. India is one country
we really cannot have this break up because whether we
like it or not, the plant is there. Plant has been set up in
Andhra Pradesh. It is an existing plant.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
7.3 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions as
under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines have declined the demand and
informed the Committee that the reservation provisions in
the present MMDR Act, were considered in detail by the
Hoda Committee, and held that these provisions run counter
to the spirit of level playing field, which is essential if private
investment, especially FDI, is to be attracted to country's
mining sector.
(ii) The Ministry of Mines has negatived the suggestion citing
various reasons including HODA Committee Report and the
LPG Principle of “Perform or Go” and level playing field
between public and private sectors. The Ministry of Mines
have further clarified that though reservation provisions run
counter to policies of level playing field and adequate
provision has been provided in the mechanism for giving

100
techno-economic weightage to the PSUs in the selection
process in sub-clause (3) and sub-clause (6) of clause 13 of
the draft Bill. Continuation of reservation of areas under
the MMDR Act, 1957, for 10 years is envisaged in clause 38.
Recommendation of the Committee
7.4 The Committee note that Clause 17A(1A) of the existing
MMDR Act, 1957, provide for the reservation for Government
companies in the grant of mineral concessions for prospecting or
mining operations. The Committee, further, note that Clause 8(6) of
MMDR Bill, 2011 provides a Government dispensation route without
following the procedure of competitive bidding for allocatees of coal
blocks to Government companies or corporations for mining lease
for coal minerals. Clauses 37 and 38 of MMDR Bill also provide
reservation of areas for the purpose of mineral conservation. The
Ministry of Steel have forcefully submitted before the Committee
that the reservation in the grant of mineral concessions for prospecting
and mining operations for Central Government as well as State
Government PSUs should be continued, specially in case of strategic
minerals like iron ore. Keeping in view the pivotal role being played
by Central as well as State PSUs in the socio-economic development
of the country, the Committee are of the view that the reservation
for Government companies in the grant of mineral concessions for
prospecting or mining operations as provided in the existing MMDR
Act, 1957 should continue and would like the Ministry of Mines to
bring suitable amendment in the proposed bill to this effect.

101
CHAPTER VIII
ROYALTIES, COMPENSATION AND CESS
Royalty payable in respect of minerals (Clause 41)
Clause 41 of the Bill reads as under:—
41(1) The holder of a mining lease, whether granted before or
after the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything
in the instrument of lease or in any other law for the time being
in force, pay royalty in respect of any mineral removed or
consumed by him or by his agent, manager, employee or contractor
from the leased area.
41(2) The rate of royalty in respect of major minerals shall be such
as specified in the Second Schedule to this Act:
Provided that concessional rates of royalty may be specified for
such cases where the lessee beneficiates the mineral at the ore
stage.
Suggestion received by the Committee
8.2 State of West Bengal has strongly opposed the differential
treatment meted out to the State in matters of royalty etc. The State
of West Bengal has made following representation before the
Committee:—
“The provisions relating to royalty, compensation and cess have
been dealt with in Chapter VIII of the draft bill. The rates of royalty
on major minerals have been specified in the Second Schedule to
the draft bill. In the draft bill rates of royalty proposed for different
grades of coal produced in West Bengal is different from other
States. While the rates of royalty for West Bengal are specific, the
rates of other States are a combination of specific and ad valorem
rates of royalty and much higher than the rates proposed for
West Bengal. The State of West Bengal has been treated differently
from other States since the year 1991 in the matter of rate of
royalty to be charged on coal because the State of West Bengal
imposes cess on coal. We have been, over the years, repeatedly
urging the Government of India that this differential treatment in
the matter of fixation of rates of royalty vis-à-vis those States, who
do not impose cess, is unjustified, as the State Government is
empowered under the Constitution to impose cess on coal. It may

102
be mentioned here that royalty on coal and cess on coal bearing
land are levied and collected on the basis of powers assigned to
the States under two different entries, namely, Entry No. 49—Taxes
on lands and buildings and Entry No. 50—Taxes on mineral rights,
subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating
to mineral development. The Parliament has not imposed any
limitation on the taxing power on the mineral rights which the
State can impose under Entry No. 50 of the State List. It needs to
be mentioned that the issue of propriety of imposition of cess on
coal bearing land by the Government of West Bengal has been
settled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in favour of the State in
Civil Appeal Nos. 1532-33/93 in the matter of State of West Bengal
Vs. Kesoram Industries and Others in January, 2004. While passing
order, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that “The impugned
cess is a tax on coal bearing and mineral bearing land. It can at
the most be construed to be a tax on mineral rights. In earlier
case, the impugned cess is covered by the Entries 49 and 50 of
List II of the Constitution of India. The West Bengal Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1992 must be and is held to be intra vires the
Constitution.” Thus, in terms of the judgment of the Apex Court
denying a particular State of royalty on coal at the revised rate of
royalty which is different from other States on the grounds that
the State is charging cess is a challenge to our constitutional
authority to levy cess or tax on coal bearing lands.
Hence, we may strongly oppose this differential treatment in the
matter of fixation of rate of royalty on coal for West Bengal
vis-à-vis other coal producing States.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.3 The Ministry of Mines have not commented on this, saying
that this issue pertains to the Ministry of Coal. However, according to
the Ministry of Mines, the rates of royalty in respect of major minerals
(excluding coal, lignite and sand for stowing) were last revised vide
gazette notification number G.S.R. 574(E), dated 13.8.2009. The rates of
royalty in respect of Coal including Lignite were revised vide
notification number G.S.R. 349(E), dated the 10th May, 2012 by the
Ministry of Coal are as under:—
Royalty for Coal (including Lignite)
A. Coal produced in all the States and Union territories except
the State of West Bengal:
(1) Royalty on Coal:
The rate of royalty on coal shall be @ 14% (Fourteen percent)
ad-valorem on price of coal, as reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and other charges.

103
(2) Royalty on Lignite:
The rate of royalty on lignite shall be @ 6% (Six percent)
ad-valorem on transfer price of lignite, as ratified by the
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) and for
lignite sold to other consumers, the royalty shall be @ 6%
(Six percent) ad valorem  on the price of lignite as reflected
in the invoice, excluding taxes, levies and other charges.
(3) Royalty on coal and lignite produced from captive mines:
For calculating royalty on coal and lignite produced from
captive mines, the price of coal and lignite shall mean the
basic pithead price of Run of Mine (RoM) coal and lignite,
as notified by the Coal India Ltd./Singareni Collieries
Company Ltd./Neyveli Lignite Corporation, for similar
Gross Calorific Value (GCV) of coal or lignite for the mines,
nearest to that captive mine:
Provided that for the coal and lignite produced from the
coal and lignite blocks, allocated under the Government
dispensation route for commercial use, the respective
ad-valorem royalty shall be applicable on the price notified
by the respective State Governments.
(4) Adjustment of royalty against levying of cess:
For the States other than West Bengal, for the levy of cess
or other taxes specific to coal bearing lands, the royalty
allowed shall be adjusted for the local cesses or such taxes,
so as to limit the overall revenue yield.
B. Coal produced in the State of West Bengal:—
Group Quality of Coal Royalty on coal
 in Rs. per tonne
12 3
I Steel Gr-I 7.00
Steel Gr.-II
Washery-I
Direct Feed
II Washery-II 6.50
Washery-III
Semi Coking Gr.-I
Semi Coking Gr.-II
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 6701 and above
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 6401-6700
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 6101-6400

104
III Washery-IV 5.50
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 5801-6100
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 5501-5800
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 5201-5500
IV Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4901-5200 4.30
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4601-4900
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4301-4600
V Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4001-4300 2.50
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 3701-4000
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 3401-3700
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 3101-3400
Non-Coking Coal having GCV=<3100
Recommendation of the Committee
8.4 The Committee find that the rate of royalty proposed for
different Grades of coal produced in West Bengal is different from
other States. The Committee recommend that the royalty for different
grades of coal be same in all States including State of West Bengal
in all fairness. The Committee recommend that the Government
should amend Schedule-II of the proposed Bill by fixing rate of
royalty same to all States.
Royalty payable in respect of minerals [Clause 41(3) & (4)]
8.5 Clause 41(3) of the Bill reads as under:—
41(3) The Central Government may, after taking into consideration
the report and recommendations of the National Mining Regulatory
Authority, by notification, amend the Second Schedule to enhance
or reduce the rate specified therein with effect from such date as
may be specified in the notification:
Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate
of royalty in respect of any major mineral more than once during
any period of three years.
Suggestion received by the Committee
8.6 The Ministry of Coal have suggested that for coal minerals a
separate formulation as indicated below may be provided:
“In case of coal minerals, the Central Government may by notification
amend the Second Schedule to enhance or reduce the rate specified
therein with effect from such date as specified in the notification.”
12 3

105
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.7 The Ministry of Mines have accepted the contention and
submitted the following amendments in Clause 41:—
(i) In line 3 and 4 on page 36 the words “after taking into
consideration the report and recommendations of the
National Mining Regulatory Authority”, may be deleted; and
(ii) Provided further that in case of minerals other than coal,
lignite and sand for stowing, the Central Government shall
take into consideration the report and recommendations of
the National Mining Regulatory Authority.”
Recommendation of the Committee
8.8 The Committee endorses the suggestion received by them
and in view of the acceptance of the same by the Ministry of Mines
recommend that suitable amendment be made in Clause 41(3).
8.9 Clause 41(4) of the Bill reads as under:—
41(4) The State Government may, by notification from time to time,
declare the rate at which royalty shall be payable in respect of
minor minerals:
Provided that the State Government shall not enhance the rate of
royalty in respect of a minor mineral more than once during any
period of three years.
Suggestion received by the Committee
8.10 One of the stakeholders has observed as under:—
The Section 41(4) of the proposed Act deals with payment of royalty
which is to be fixed by the State Government.
The ornamental natural stone is an industrial raw material which
has gained large economic importance over the years as the
industry is export oriented. The current system of imposition of
royalty is based on volume which has proved to be controversial
and problematic.
Accordingly, they suggested that this may be dispensed with and
ad valorem based royalty shall be adopted for the ornamental natural
stone with uniformity throughout the country. We further suggest
that the phrase “enhancement of royalty” may be replace by
”revision of royalty” once in three years.

106
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.11 The Ministry of Mines have termed this suggestion as
unacceptable though without assigning any reasons.
Recommendation of the Committee
8.12 The Committee, in view of the experience gained by the
Industry in case of Mica and fluctuating prices of precious stones/
metals and petro-minerals recommend that government should
consider the above proposal and ad valorem based royalty shall be
adopted for the ornamental natural stone with uniformity throughout
the country. The Committee further agree that the phrase
“enhancement of royalty” may be replace by “revision of royalty”
once in three years.
Dead rent (Clause 42(2) & (3)
8.13 Clause 42(2) of the Bill reads as under:—
42(2) Where the holder of such mining lease becomes liable under
section 41 to pay royalty for any mineral removed or consumed
by him or by his agent, manager, employee or contractor from the
leased area, he shall be liable to pay either such royalty, or the
dead rent in respect of that area, whichever is higher.
Suggestion received by the Committee
8.14 Some of the stakeholders have raised the issue of use of word
‘contractor’ in following words:—
The sub-section uses the phrases ‘agent, manager, employee or
contractor’ in context of removal of minerals from the leased area.
The use of the word ‘contractor’ seems to suggest that a lessee
can transfer responsibility to contractors. This would open a
Pandora’s Box of issues if so allowed.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.15 The Ministry of Mines have informed the Committee that as
per law, a lease holder can engage a contractor to undertake mining
activities in his lease area, as provided in clause 18(1)(b) which provides
that a lessee can “enter into or make any arrangement, contract, or
understanding only after taking ‘previous’ approval” of the State
Government and in case of coal minerals, the previous approval in
writing of the Central Government. The draft Bill provides that even
if mineral is extracted by a contractor, royalty is required to be paid
to the State Government.

107
Recommendation of the Committee
8.16 The Committee do not consider any amendment in the
Clause relating to payment of dead rent in view of the response of
the Ministry of Mines.
8.17 Clause 42(3) of the Bill reads as under:—
42(3) The dead rent in respect of mining leases for major minerals
shall be as specified in the Third Schedule and the Central
Government may, after taking into consideration the
recommendations of the National Mining Regulatory Authority , by
notification , amend the Third Schedule so as to enhance or reduce
the rate at which the dead rent shall be payable in respect of any
area covered by a mining lease and such enhancement or reduction
take effect from such date as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate
of the dead rent in respect of any such area more than once during
any period of three years.
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.18 State Government of Rajasthan has observed as under:—
It is proposed to increase the rates of Dead Rent in the Schedule
attached with the draft Bill. The following structure of rates of
dead rent for low value minerals is proposed:
(a) From second year of lease — Rs. 5000/-
b) Third year and fourth year — Rs. 8000/-
(c) Fifth year onwards — Rs. 12000/-
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.19 The rates of dead rent would be reviewed from time to time
by the National Mining Regulatory Authority.
Recommendation of the Committee
8.20 The Committee note that rate of dead rent applicable to
leases granted for low value minerals are Rs. 200/- from second year
of lease, Rs. 500/- for third and fourth year and Rs. 1000/- for fifth
year onwards. Also for medium value minerals, the rate is two times
the rate specified above in case of lease granted, for high value

108
minerals the rate is three times specified above in case of lease
granted and in case of precious metal and stones the rate is four
times the rate specified above in case of lease granted. The
Committee do not consider any amendment in the Clause relating
to payment of dead rent in view of the response of the Ministry of
Mines as the rates of dead rent would be reviewed from time to
time by the National Mining Regulatory Authority.
Payment of compensation to owner of surface, usufruct and
traditional rights, damages, etc. [Clause 43(1) &(2)]
8.21 Clause 43(1) of the Bill reads as under:—
43 (1) In respect of land in which minerals vest in the Government,
the holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance cum-exploration licence or prospecting
licence shall be liable to pay, to every person or family holding
occupation or usufruct or traditional rights of the surface of the
land over which the licence has been granted, such reasonable
annual compensation as may be mutually agreed between the
holder of such licence and such persons or in the absence of such
agreement, which may be determined by an officer appointed, by
notification, by the State Government in this behalf in such manner
as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that such amount shall be determined before
commencement of operations and paid in advance each year, in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.22 The Committee have received the following suggestions on
the above Clause:—
(i) This provision mandates that annual compensation will be
payable to persons having rights of occupation, usufruct or
traditional rights, as may be agreed failing which by
notification. There are some issues regarding this—the owner
and users of the land will get compensation already under
the Land Acquisition Act and this seems to be (i) addition;
compensation to those having usufruct or traditional rights
is opening the gate too wide for a proponent to satisfy;
having an annual mechanism of compensation is too
burdensome and tedious to manage for the life of the license;
this is in addition to 100% of royalty being paid for R&R
to the DMF.

109
(ii) One of the stakeholders has suggested as below:—
• Major mineral are being imposed with dual levy. It is
already obligatory for National Mineral Fund and now
being imposed for the State Mineral Fund as well.
• In addition to above funds, the compensation to the
affected persons is also addressing the same objective.
• The cess proposed by Central Government need to be
in line with the specific rate mentioned for State Mineral
Fund.
• The National Mineral Fund needs to have a ceiling.
• There should not be several levies aiming for the same
objective.
(iii) Ministry of Tribal Affairs while making observation on
Section 43(1) & 43(7) has objected as:—
Reasonable annual compensation in respect of land over which
the reconnaissance/prospecting licence has been granted and
payment on account of damages, if any, to the land owner.
No provision has been made about the rehabilitation/compensation
on account of mining lease. It appears, that this has been left to
the rehabilitation and resettlement policy of the concerned State.
Rehabilitation and resettlement of displaced families/individuals
due to mining projects was suggested to be a part of the MMDR
Bill, keeping in view the nature of these projects which is purely
commercial activity compared to the hydro/irrigation projects in
public interest and benefitting the displaced families/individuals
also, though, MoTA is not in favour of projects involving
displacements of tribals. However, if the displacement becomes
unavoidable and is effected after necessary procedural formalities,
it should be the minimal.
No acquisition proceedings or displacement should be affected in
Forested Areas unless and until the provisions of FRA is fully
complied with. In the Scheduled Areas, all provisions of the PESA
Act must be scrupulously followed and the consent of every
habitation should be obtained before the acquisition or relocation
of any tribal populace or forest dweller is undertaken.
In the event of displacement the tribals may not be dislocated
before the rehabilitation arrangements are in place. They may have
a definite say in deciding the value of the rehabilitation package.

110
The package should be given preferably in the name of the lady
of the house or jointly in the names of both spouses in the case
of married couples.
This has not been provided for in the MMDR Bill (excepting
payment to women head/eldest women in the house) and need to
be incorporated suitably.
Replies of the Ministry of Mines
8.23 Para-wise replies of the above suggestions are as under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines have informed the Committee that
suitable mechanism to avoid duplicity of excess burden shall
be worked out when the LARR Bill is in place.
(ii) The Ministry of Mines did not accept the suggestions that
major minerals are being imposed with dual duty and
submitted before the Committee that both National Mineral
Fund and State Mineral Funds have defined objectives to
serve as described separately under clause 50(3) and 53(4).
The National Mineral Fund is used mainly for promoting
scientific management of mining, sustainable mining,
investigations for conservation and scientific management
of mineral resources. The state mineral fund is used to
develop capacity of the state directorates to achieve the
objective of this act. Thus they cannot be mixed together.
(iii) Clause 43(1) is applicable only for exploration activities and
in case of mining clause 43(2) has specific provisions for
sharing of mining benefits. The provision in clause 43(7)
provides for compensation in case of damages, due to
exploration and mining activities.
Recommendations of the Committee
8.24 The Committee note that words ‘reasonable compensation’
which can be at mutually agreed terms, or in the absence of
agreement by officer appointed by State Government [Clause 43(1)]
lacks clarity and opens plethora of interpretations. Further, the title
holder of land, not getting adequate compensation at prevailing
market rates on account of his/her position, cannot be ruled out.
The Committee, therefore, desire that an in- built formula, wherein
parameters like market rate of land put to use, damage/loss to land/
crop etc., factored in, in determining the mechanism of compensation,
be worked out, for the benefit of holders of the land.

111
8.25 The Committee find the explanation of the Ministry of
Mines that suitable mechanism to avoid duplicity of excess burden
shall be worked out when the LARR Bill is in place as satisfactory
and therefore recommend no change.
8.26 Clause 43(2) of the Bill reads as under:—
43(2) The holder of a mining lease shall pay annually to the District
Mineral Foundation, as referred to in section 56,—
(a) in case of major minerals (except coal and lignite) an amount
equivalent to the royalty paid during the financial year;
(b) in case of coal and lignite, an amount equal to twenty-six
per cent of the profit to be called as profit sharing percentage
(after deduction of tax paid) of the immediately preceding
financial year from mining related operations in respect of
the lease; and
(c) in case of minor minerals, such amount as may be prescribed
by the State Government with the concurrence of the
National Mining Regulatory Authority referred to in section
58, within such time and in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government for the benefit of
persons or families affected by mining related operations:
Provided that in respect of coal minerals the Central Government
may, after taking into consideration the report and
recommendations of the National Mining Regulatory Authority , by
notification, revise the profit sharing percentage, or specify such
other method as may be prescribed for calculation of amount to
be paid to the District Mineral Foundation:
Provided further that in case where the holder of a mining lease
for major minerals has commenced mining related operations but
has not commenced production, the holder of a mining lease shall
pay into the District Mineral Foundation, an amount equal to the
royalty payable on the production estimated in the first twelve
months of the year as per the approved mining plan:
Provided also that in case the holder of a mining lease for major
minerals,—
(a) was not in production for a part of a particular year, he
shall be liable to pay the amount in the second proviso on
pro-rata basis for the period during which he had not
commenced any such operations;
(b) discontinues production for a part of a particular year, he
shall be liable to pay the amount equal to the royalty on
actual production of the corresponding period of the
previous financial year.

112
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.27 The Committee have received the following suggestions on
clause 43(2):—
A. (i) allot free shares equal to twenty-six per cent through the
promoter’s quota in case the holder of lease is a company,
or, an annuity equal to twenty-six per cent of the profit
(after deduction of tax paid) in case holder of lease is a
person, on account of annual compensation; and
(ii) provide employment and or other assistance in accordance
with the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy of the State
Government concerned;
(iii) This provisions talks about sharing of 26 per cent of profit
by coal and lignite, and 100 per cent royalty payment by
all other minerals. It is too high. It will hit the industry
very hard. By this, the taxation in the mining sector in the
country goes up to about 69 per cent or 70 per cent. This
is highest in the world whereas, it is 32 per cent; Russia, it
is 35 per cent; Australia, it is about 39 per cent; and Brazil,
it is 35 per cent. It should be same for both because
otherwise the calculation of the profit will be a big problem.
The people may doubt about the profit and loss account.
This is very simple. Whatever is the percentage of royalty,
whatever material goes out of the mine, royalty is paid. So,
what we are requesting is that it should be same for coal
and non-coal minerals.
B. (i) The section 43(2) of the proposed Act deals with the
payment of compensation payable annually to the District
Mineral Foundation;
(ii) It may be kindly noted that the ornamental natural stone
sector is heavily burdened with current rate of royalty and
in some case the mines are closing as they are unable to
bear the burden of royalty. In view of this any additional
burden such as compensation to the District Mineral
Foundation will bring the ornamental natural stone mining
activity to a standstill and destroy the industry in the long
run. Hence, this proposal may be dropped for the
ornamental natural stones such as granite and marble.
C. One of the stakeholders has suggested that since the tax
burden is maximum in India, following suggestions are
made for contribution to the District Mineral Fund.

113
a. one time upfront payment—one time payment of
26 per cent of market value of the land at the time of
ML.
b. Royalty based approach.
D. One of the stakeholders has suggested to reduce
extraordinary burden of the taxes proposed in the draft
MMDR Act which could be as high as 65% of the mining
cost.
E. One of the stakeholders has suggested to bring coal
industries also on the same platform for payment of 100%
royalty to the DMF.
F. The Ministry of Coal has suggested the following
amendments in Clause 43(2)(b)—
“In case of coal and lignite, an amount equivalent to certain
percentage of royalty paid during the financial year, as
prescribed by the Central Government.
Provided that the percentage shall not be increased more
than once during any period of three years.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.28 Para-wise replies of the Ministry of Mines are as under:—
A. The Government had considered the option of provisioning
for allocation of 26% shares to the affected persons.
However, the same was not found to be administratively
not feasible due to complexities involved in distribution of
shares amongst the affected persons, and in calculation of
profits considering the fact that Indian book-keeping still
needs better transparent practices. Instead in order to
facilitate a clear and easy method of transfer of mining
benefits to the affected persons, the Government has
proposed payment of annual amount by each lease holder
to the District Mineral Foundation on the basis of royalty
paid to the State Government, offering more transparency
in monitoring the payments. With regard to developing a
sense belongingness in the mining company. The draft Bill
still provides that at least one share shall be allotted to
every person affected by mining operations.
B. Ministry of Mines have not accepted the observation/
suggestion and submitted before the Committee that the
purpose of a separate payment for every lease holder to

114
pay an amount equivalent to royalty annually to the District
Mineral Foundation is to ensure that mining benefits equally
accrue to the local population as a stakeholder.
C. The Ministry of Mines have informed the Committee in
this regard that the Ministry of Coal have proposed to the
Committee for allowing payment to District Mineral
Foundation on basis of royalty.
D. The Ministry of Mines informed the Committee that any
issue of excess revenue burden on the minors shall be looked
into by the NMRA.
E. To which Ministry of Mines nodded its acceptance during
Committee meeting with stakeholders.
F. The Ministry of Mines have addressed to this suggestion
with slight modification and urged the Committee that the
following amendments in Clause 43(2)(b) may be
considered:—
“in case of coal and lignite an amount equivalent to royalty
paid during the financial year”.
Recommendation of the Committee
8.29 The Committee after considering the claims of the
stakeholders and comments of Ministry of Mines thereon, do not
find it suitable to do away with the District Mineral Foundation
contributions and thus recommend no change. The Committee,
however, recommend that in case of coal and lignite, the mechanism
for payment to District Mineral Foundation on the basis of royalty
paid during the financial year may be worked out instead of an
amount equal to 26% of the profit and amendment be made in the
relevant Clause as proposed by the Ministry of Coal.
Allotment of non-transferable share [Clause 43 (3) & (5)]
8.30 Clause 43(3) of the Bill reads as under:—
Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), and the Companies
Act, 1956, or any other law for the time being in force, where the
holder of mining lease is a company, it shall also allot at least one
share at par for consideration other than cash to each person of
the family affected by mining related operations of the company
and such shares shall be non-transferable.

115
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.31 The Committee have received the following suggestions as
under:—
(i) It relates to paying of compensation by way of non-
transferable shares in case licensee is a company. The
Ministry of Panchayati Raj have proposed that the word
‘but inheritable’ should be added before the term ‘non-
transferrable’.
(ii) During evidence, the representative of Department of Atomic
Energy had suggested that in case of atomic minerals the
share holders should be restricted to only get financial
benefits and not be entitled to know all the details of the
working of the company.
(iii) One of the stakeholders has submitted before the Committee
that as non-transferable share to each family does not have
economic value at all, it should be made transferable.
(iv) Another stakeholder has suggested that instead of giving
one share per person if their holdings are larger than number
of shares should increased for such families and benefits be
given preferably to woman member of the family either it
is the compensation or the employment.
(v) A formula whereby shares will be allotted to each person
of the affected family on proportionate basis can be worked
out. Shares should be transferable after efflux on a reasonable
time.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.32 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions as
under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines have accepted the suggestion at
(i) above and informed the Committee that the same would
be suggested to the legislative department of the Ministry.
(ii) During evidence, the Ministry of Mines had agreed to the
suggestion at (ii) above.
(iii) The Ministry would accept any such recommendations. The
objective of issue of these shares is to allow affected persons
a stake in the mining companies operations, including in
AGM. Allowing transfer of shares would only dilute an
important stakeholder’s voice in mining operations.

116
Recommendations of the Committee
8.33 In view of the acceptance of the suggestions of Ministry of
Panchayati Raj for adding the words ‘but inheritable’ before the term
non-transferable by Ministry of Mines, the Committee recommend
suitable changes to be made in Clause 43(3).
8.34 The Committee observe that allocation of at least one share
at par to each person of a family is not based on principle of equity
and desire that persons loosing more land ought to be compensated
adequately more as compared to those loosing less land. The number
of shares allotted to each person ought to be linked with the quantum
of land put to use for mining operation. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a formula whereby shares will be allotted to each
person of the affected family on proportionate basis may be worked
out
8.35 Further as non-transferable shares does not carry any
economic value, the holder of such shares ought to be at a
disadvantage condition economically. The Committee apprehend that
dilution of shares by mining companies in the aftermath of allotment
process cannot be ruled out. The Committee feel that shares should
be transferable and blanket ban to transfer share may not be in the
interest of land holder/oustees and their financial interests need to
be protected. The Committee, therefore, recommend that as such a
proviso may be added whereby the Government may by notification
permit transfer of share allotted to person of family affected by
mining operation from the period as notified.
8.36 As regards the suggestion of the Department of Atomic
Energy, the Committee note that at least one share at par for
consideration other than cash will be allotted to each person of the
family affected by mining related operation as provided in Clause
43(3). The representative of the Department of Atomic Energy during
the course of evidence has informed the Committee that stakeholders
are entitled to know the details of the working of the company as
per the provisions of the Company Act. The Department of Atomic
Energy have, therefore, suggested that the affected persons of mining
operation who have been allotted share should be restricted to only
financial benefits since the details have never been published by the
Department. The Committee would like the Ministry of Mines to
suitably address the concern of the Department of Atomic Energy by
amending the relevant clause.

117
8.37 Clause 43(5) of the Bill reads as under:—
Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2) and sub-section (3),
the holder of a mining lease shall, in respect of any person or family
holding occupation or usufruct or traditional rights of the surface of
the land over which the lease has been granted, be liable to provide
employment or other assistance in accordance with the rehabilitation
and resettlement policy of the State Government concerned.
Suggestion received by the Committee
8.38 The Committee have been suggested that clause 43(5)
mandates that after termination of lease, the mine holder shall
determine damages and compensation and pay the same to rights
holders. This creates yet another open ended possibility of paying
uncertain amounts. It would be better to have a situation where you
can pay in advance all amounts.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.39 The Ministry of Mines have explained the Committee that
R&R policy of State Governments are still applicable on mining projects
where land is acquired. However, suitable mechanism to avoid duplicity
or excess burden shall be worked out when the LARR Bill is in place.
Recommendation of the Committee
8.40 Taking note of the fact that R&R policy of State
Governments are still applicable on mining projects where land is
acquired, the Committee expect that suitable mechanism to avoid
duplicity or excess burden shall be worked out when the LARR Bill
is in place.
Compensation payment by the Licencee
8.41 Clause 43(7) of the Bill regarding compensation is as under:—
43(7) After the termination of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence,
high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting
licence or a mining lease, the State Government shall after giving
the person or family holding occupation or usufruct or traditional
rights of the surface of the land an opportunity of being heard,
assess the damage, if any, done to the land by the reconnaissance
or prospecting or mining related operations and determine the
amount of compensation payable by the licensee or the lessee, as

118
the case may be, to the person or family holding occupation or
usufruct or traditional rights of the surface of the land in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that in case the licencee or lessee and the person or
family holding occupation or usufruct or traditional rights
mutually agree on the compensation, and communicate the same
to an officer appointed by the State Government in this behalf,
the State Government may, accordingly, determine the
compensation.
Suggestion received by the Committee
8.42 In their written submission before the Committee, one of the
stakeholders has raised doubts over the compensation and damages
provision as under:—
“This provision mandates that after termination of lease, the mine
holder shall determine damages and compensation and pay the
same to right holders. This creates yet another open ended
possibility of paying uncertain amounts. It would be better to have
a situation where you can pay in advance all amounts.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.43 The Ministry of Mines have furnished their comments to the
Committee as below:—
“Clause 43(7) should be read with section 32 wherein the various
conditions and obligations for implementation of final Mine Closure
Plan is stipulated. The expert comments/damage are generally
based on mutually agreed.”
Recommendation of the Committee
8.44 The Committee while partially agreeing with the stand of
Ministry of Mines recommend that a ‘fair agreement’ for
compensation by way of essentially involving some State officials
of suitable rank, peoples representative and mass-meetings for
disposal of such mutual agreements as envisaged in Clause 43(7) to
eradicate any chance of coercion or fraud.
Payment of compensation
8.45 Clause 43(10)(b),(c) and 43(11) of the Bill read as under:—
Clause 43(10)(b): The amount of monetary benefit may be
determined by the State Government for each district where mining
operations are being undertaken having regard to the nature and

119
extent to which such person or family is affected by mining related
operations and for improving the quality of life of the affected
person or family, but shall be equal to an amount not less than
the amount a family may be entitled under the provisions of the
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that till the amount of
monetary benefit shall be equal to an amount that such as a family
may be entitled under the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
43(10)(c): The State Government shall ensure that monetary benefits
are distributed to the persons or families holding occupational or
usufruct or traditional rights in areas affected by mining related
operations through a mechanism prescribed by the State
Government. The proviso to the said item provides that in case of
a family which is not headed by a woman, the State Government
shall ensure that half the amount of monetary benefits distributed
to families in areas affected by mining operations shall accrue to
the eldest woman member of the family.
Monetary benefits are provided under the Bill order to improve
the quality of life of affected persons, whereas MNREGA provides
a safety net for people in rural areas. It is unclear why the quantum
of entitlements under MNREGA is being used as a benchmark for
monetary benefits for people affected by mining operations.
Clause 43(11): “Sub-clause (11) of this clause provides that in case
of mining leases already granted on the date of commencement of
this Act, the cut-off date for identification of persons or families
affected by mining related operations shall be taken as first January
nineteen hundred and ninety-seven. The explanation to the said
sub-clause provides that (a) a “family” shall comprise of mother,
father and their children, including any person wholly dependent
on the head of the family, including any lineal ascendant or
descendant of the head of the family or the spouse; and (b) a
“family” may also be single member family.”
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.46 The Committee have received following suggestions:—
(i) Clarity in wording of proviso to clause 43(10C) to ensure
that half the amount of monetary benefits distributable to
any family as part of compensation should accrue to the
eldest woman member of such family while the remainder
will be distributed equally among the other members of
such family.

120
(ii) One of the stakeholders has suggested that it is not desirable
to provide retrospective effect to such payments and
provision. Hence, the provision may be deleted.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.47 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions as
under:—
(i) The Ministry of Mines have agreed to suggestion (i) above.
(ii) In this regard, in a written reply, the Ministry of Mines
submitted the following:
“The cut-off date of 1.1.1996 is merely for identification of project
affected families, and not for calculation of compensation due, and
the compensation payments will be prospective from the date the
draft Bill is brought into force.”
Recommendations of the Committee
8.48 The Committee desire that for the sake of clarity, the
Government should ensure that half the amount of monetary benefits
distributable to any family as part of compensation should accrue to
the eldest woman member of such family while the remaining be
distributed equally among other members of such family.
8.49 The Committee are satisfied with the Ministry of Mines
submission that the cut-off date of 1.1.1996 is merely for identification
of project affected families, and not for calculation of compensation
due, and the compensation payments will be prospective from the
date the draft Bill is brought into force.
Levy and collection of cess by Central Government
8.50 Clause 44 of the Bill reads as under:—
44 (1)  The Central Government may, by notification, specify, that
there shall be levied and collected a cess on major minerals for
the purposes of this Act,—
(a) as a duty of customs, where the ore is exported;
(b) as a duty of excise, where the ore is sold or otherwise
disposed to an enduser or to any other person who in turn
sells it to an end-user, or is used by the owner of the mine
in any end-use by himself, at such rate not exceeding two
and one-half per cent. of the duty as may be specified in
the notification by the Central Government:
Provided that the rate shall not be increased more than once during
any period of five years.

121
44(2) Every cess leviable under sub-section ( 1) on major minerals
shall be payable by the person by whom such major minerals are
produced, and in the case of export, the cess shall be payable by
the exporter.
44(3) The cess leviable under sub-section ( 1) on the major mineral
shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on those items
under any other law for the time being in force.
44(4) The provisions of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the rules
made thereunder and the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and
the rules made thereunder, as the case may be, including those
relating to refunds and exemptions from duties shall, as far as
may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of cess leviable
under this section and for this purpose, the provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944 and of the Customs Act, 1962, as the case
may be, shall have effect as if the aforesaid Acts provided for the
levy of cess on major minerals.
44(5) Every person or company or firm or association of persons
using or trading in or exporting or stocking major minerals shall
register himself or itself with the Indian Bureau of Mines in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that in case of coal minerals, the administration of
registration shall be done by the Central Government.
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.51 The Committee have received the following suggestions from
the various stakeholder:—
(i) Clause 44(1): Customs and Excise—The provision entitles
the Government to levy cess as a duty of excise if one is
sold or disposed off to an end user. Since there is no
manufacture involved, why should there be an imposition
of excise.
(ii) Clause 44(1)  read with clause 45(1)—Imposing both Central
and State Cess will put a needless burden on the mining
industry. It would be appropriate to have a system of one
singular levy i.e. Royalty on the mining industry.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.52 The Ministry of Mines have responded to these submissions
in their written memoranda submitted to the Committee as below:—
(i) The purpose of the cess to be levied by Central Government
as a duty of customs/excise, is for the National Mineral

122
Fund, which in turn will carry out the activities as furnished
under section 50(3). The final responsibility lies with the
State Government. Engagement of specialized agency is
simply a mechanism for the purpose of implementation of
SDF. Enough flexibility is provided for the State Governments
to choose suitable agencies for implementation. District
Mineral Foundation (DMF) covers an entire district. While
a lease may be spread over two different districts, a common
DMF cannot be set up since the objective is to address
district level development for local people. However,
accounting of minerals raised in each district boundary,
proportionate to the size of lease in each boundary,
established by means of proper surveying, would be detailed
in the sub-legislation.
(ii) The basic objective of Central Cess and State Cess are clearly
defined under section 50(3) and 53(4). Each of these funds
appropriately incentivizes and regulates activities to support
sustainable mining.
Recommendation of the Committee
8.53 The Committ ee appreciate the view of the Ministry of Mines
and endorse the objective of the said Clause in view of the federal
principles in the fiscal regime under the Constitution of India. The
Committee thus recommend no change.
Levy and collection of cess by State Government
8.54 Clause 45 of the Bill reads as under:—
45(1): The State Government may, by notification specify, that there
shall be levied and collected a cess on major minerals and minor
minerals extracted at a rate not exceeding ten per cent. of the
royalty in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that the rate shall not be increased more than once during
any period of five years.
45(2): The cess shall be paid by the person holding the mining
lease for major minerals or minor minerals, as the case may be:
Provided that where the minerals vest in a person other than the
Government, and the holder of the mining lease fails to pay the
cess, the person in whom the minerals vest shall, on demand, pay
the amount of the cess.”

123
Suggestions received by the Committee
8.55 The suggestions received by the Committee are as under:—
In the draft Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Bill, 2011, clause 45 provides for levy and collection of cess by the
State Government. Under the said clause, the State Government
may, by notification specify that there shall be levied and collected
a cess on major minerals and minor minerals extracted at a rate
not exceeding 10% of the royalty in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government on the condition that the rate
shall not be increased more than once during any period of five
years. We may not have any objection to the provision. However,
this power of the State Government to impose cess under the
proposed Act should be in addition to the power of the
State Government to impose cess under Entries 49 and 50 of List
II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and should not in
substation thereof.
Clause 45(1) of the present bill states “The State Government may,
by notification specify, that there shall be levied and collected a
cess on major minerals and minor minerals extracted at a rate not
exceeding ten per cent of the royalty…” Thus in the bill “major
mineral" has been added. Imposition of such a ceiling infringes
upon the constitutional right of the State Government.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
8.56 Under section 45(1) it is clearly stated the cess will be levied
on the 'mineral extracted at a rate not exceeding ten per cent of the
royalty. Levy of cess on land and building lies exclusively within the
ambit of Entry 49 of List II of Seventh Schedule of Constitution of
India, and this power is not being affected by the present legislation.
Recommendation of the Committee
8.57 The Committee feel that the proposed Bill is interfering
with the right of imposing Cess by the State Government. Excepting
coal mines and lignite, State Government is the owner of the mines.
Therefore, free hands should be given to the State Government for
imposing Cess. The Committee recommend that the State Government
may by notification specify the rate of Cess to be levied in case of
major minerals and minor minerals excepting coal and lignite and
minor mineral according to the State Governments wisdom and in
case of coal and lignite at a rate not exceeding fifty per cent by
introducing appropriate legislation in States.

124
CHAPTER IX
POWER TO ISSUE DIRECTIONS
Power of Central Government to Issue Direction
Clause 46(3) of the Bill reads as under:—
The State Government may with the previous approval of the
Central Government frame a State Sustainable Development Framework
not inconsistent with the National Sustainable Development Framework.
Recommendation of the Committee
9.2 The words “the State Government with the previous approval
of the Central Government” may be replaced by “the Central
Government in consultation with the State Government” so as to
maintain harmonious relations between State Government and
Central Government.
Power of Central Government to issue directions in the interest of
scientific mineral exploration and mining and sustainable
development.
9.3 Clause 46(5) of the Bill reads as under:—
46(5) The Central Government may, from time to time specify the
guidelines for scientific mining and mineral conservation within a
Sustainable Development Framework and the State Directorate shall
be responsible for implementation of the Sustainable Development
Framework in the State:
Provided that the State Government may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, confer all or any of the
functions of the State Directorate on any other specialised agency
for the purpose of better implementing the Sustainable
Development Framework.
Suggestions received by the Committee
9.4 Some of the stakeholders have sought the attention of the
Committee on the fact that the provision entitles the Government to
levy cess as a duty of excise if one is sold or disposed off to an end
user. And questioned that since there is no manufacture involved, why
should there be an imposition of excise?

125
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
9.5 The Ministry of Mines have explained to the Committee that
the final responsibility lies with the State Government. Engagement of
specialized agency is simply a mechanism for the purpose of
implementation of SDF. Enough flexibility is provided for the
State Governments to choose suitable agencies for implementation.
Recommendation of the Committee
9.6 The Committee are satisfied with the explanation of the
Ministry of Mines and suggest no change.
Representation against directives
9.7 Clause 46(6) of the Bill reads as under:—
The Central Government may issue general directions as may be
required, consistent with the provisions of the Act to the State
Governments or the National Authority referred to in section 58
or to any authority under the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, for the conservation of strategic
mineral resources or any policy matter in the national interest and
for the scientific and sustainable development and exploration of
mineral resources and recycling of such resources to the extent
practicable, and detection, prevention and prosecution of cases of
illegal mining, and to frame rules for the purpose and all such
directions shall be complied with to the extent possible.
Suggestion received by the Committee and
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
9.8 When asked about a new proviso may be added whereby in
the event of a State Government finding difficulty to comply with the
directions of the Central Government may apply for modification or
rescinding of such direction and the Central Government may either
modify or rescinding the directions to the extent possible, the Ministry
of Mines have informed the Committee that the basic rationale of this
clause is to ensure that there is no dilution in overriding matters of
'national interest’, especially involving strategic interests.
Recommendation of the Committee
9.9 A new proviso may be added whereby in the event of a
State Government finding difficulty in complying with the directions
of the Central Government, the State Government may apply
for modification or rescinding of such direction and the
Central Government may either modify or rescind the direction to
the extent possible.

126
Power to authorize Geological Survey of India and Indian Bureau
of Mines, Atomic Minerals Directorate, etc., to investigate and report
9.10 Clause 48 of the Bill reads as under:—
48(1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that for the
purpose of conservation of strategic mineral resources or for the
scientific management, exploration and exploitation of mineral
resources it is expedient to conduct a technical or scientific
investigation with regard to any mineral or any land including
lands in relation to which mineral concessions may have been
granted, the Central Government may authorise the Geological
Survey of India or the Indian Bureau of Mines or the Atomic
Minerals Directorate or such other authority as it may specify in
this behalf, to carry out such technical or scientific investigation as
may be necessary, and to submit a report within such period as
may be specified:
Provided that no such authorisation shall be made in the case of
any land in which mineral concession has been granted, except
after consultation with the State Government where minerals vest
in the State Government and with the person in whom the mineral
vests in other cases.
Suggestions received by the Committee
9.11 In this regard, during evidence on 16th July, 2012, a
representative of State Government of Jharkhand submitted before the
Committee as under:—
“The Central Government has been given the power to undertake
technical and scientific investigation for the purpose of conservation
of strategic mineral resources. Our Government feels that similar
provision should be there for the State Government also. It says
that for the purpose of conservation of strategic mineral resources,
it is expedient to conduct a technical or scientific investigation etc.
The Central Government authorize the Geological Survey or other
bodies to carry out such technical or scientific investigation. This
power has been given only to the Central Government. The
State Government may be given similar power to undertake
technical and scientific investigation at its discretion. We feel that
both the Central Government and the State Government should
have the power to do that. It should not be with the Central
Government only.”

127
Recommendation of the Committee
9.12 The Committee note that by virtue of Clause 48, the
Central Government may authorize the Geological Survey of India
or the Indian Bureau of Mines or the Atomic Mineral Directorate or
such other authorities, it may specify to carry out technical or
scientific investigation so as to conserve strategic mineral resources.
A representative from the State Government of Jharkhand during
his deposition before the Committee desired that State Government
Mineral Directorate too be authorized to undertake such works. The
Committee find merit in their argument since State Governments
are actively associated with the grant of mineral concessions on the
land owned by them. The Committee, therefore, desire that
State Directorates also be authorized to undertake such works. The
clause may, therefore, appropriately be amended.
Power of Indian Bureau of Mines, Coal Controller, Atomic Minerals
Directorate and State Directorate to issue certain directions and to
seek information
9.13 Clause 49 of the Bill reads as under:—
49(1) The Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal Controller, the Atomic
Minerals Directorate or the State Directorates or any officer
authorised by the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, may enter and inspect a mine, and examine
or direct the examination of any mineral deposit in any area under
prospecting licence or mining lease and take samples therefrom at
any time for the purposes of this Act.
49(2) If any mine or part thereof, which in the opinion of the
Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals
Directorate or the State Directorate, poses a grave and immediate
threat to the conservation of mineral resources or to the
environment, it may, by an order in writing to the owner, agent,
mining engineer or manager, require him to take such measures as
may be specified in the order and may prohibit, until the
requirements as specified in the order are complied with to its
satisfaction, the deployment of any person other than those required
for compliance with the requirement of the order.
49(3) The Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal Controller, the Atomic
Minerals Directorate or the State Directorate, as the case may be,
may by a general or specific order require the cores or specimens
of rocks and minerals obtained from specified boreholes or shafts
during prospecting or mining operation conducted under this Act,
to be preserved for any specific period.

128
49(4) Every holder of a prospecting licence or a mining lease shall
provide all reasonable facilities to persons authorised by the Indian
Bureau of Mines, the Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals
Directorate and the State Directorate for the purpose of undertaking
research or training in matters relating to mining or geology.
49(5) The holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology exclusive cum reconnaissance exploration licence,
prospecting license or mining lease, or his agent shall furnish such
information regarding his reconnaissance or exploration or
prospecting or mining operations or regarding the mine or any
matter connected therewith as the Indian Bureau of Mines, the
Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the authorized
officer of the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be, may require by an order in writing and the
information shall be furnished within such time and such period
as may be specified in the aforesaid order.
Suggestion received by the Committee
9.14 One of the stakeholders has made a submission regarding
National Mineral Fund u/s 49(3) and submitted that if the state will
spend only from the State Mineral Fund for minor minerals and larger
funds like National Mineral Fund will go to activities having no link
over local area, the condition of the areas having major minerals will
deteriorate further. The CII further suggested that in line with the
State Mineral Fund, the National Mineral Fund can also contribute to
the development of the mineralized zones of major minerals and may
be used for development projects as well.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
9.15 The Ministry of Mines are not inclined to accept the
suggestions and explained to the Committee that both National Mineral
Fund and State Mineral Funds have defined objectives to serve as
described separately under clause 50(3) and 53(4). The National Mineral
fund is used mainly for promoting scientific management of mining,
sustainable mining, investigations for conservation and scientific
management of mineral resources. The State Mineral Fund is used to
develop capacity of the state directorates to achieve the objective of
this act. Thus they cannot be mixed together.
Recommendation of the Committee
9.16 The Committee are satisfied with the explanation of the
Ministry of Mines regarding utilization of National Mineral Fund
and State Mineral Fund and suggest no change.

129
CHAPTER X
NATIONAL, STATE MINERAL FUND AND DISTRICT
MINERAL FOUNDATION
Audit of National Mineral Fund
Clause 52 of the Bill reads as under:—
52(1) The Central Government shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts,
including the profit and loss account and the balance-sheet in
respect of the National Mineral Fund in such form, as may be
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
52(2) The accounts of the National Mineral Fund shall be audited
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals
as may be specified by him.
Questions raised by the Committee and
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
10.2 Asked if the Government or the State Government, as the
case may be shall cause to lay the copies of audited account of National
Mineral Fund in both the Houses of Parliament/State legislation within
a period of three months, the Ministry of Mines have informed that
the National Mineral Fund shall be operated directly by the
Central Government. Therefore, while the funds shall not lapse at end
of the year, the revenue and expenditure shall be a part of budgetary
proposal of the Ministry.
Recommendation of the Committee
10.3 The Committee find that although the accounts of National
Mineral Fund is to be audited by C&AG, no provision exist to lay
reports of C&AG in the Parliament. To ensure accountability, the
revenue and expenditure of fund shall be part of budgetary proposal
of the Ministry. The Committee feel that in order to exercise
Parliament's scrutiny over proceed of the fund, a new provision may
be added whereunder the Central Government shall cause to lay the
copies of audited account of National Mineral Fund in both the
Houses of Parliament within a period of three months. Similarly,
provision may be made for State legislatures with respect of State
Mineral Funds.

130
Establishment of District Mineral Foundation
10.4 Clause 56(1) of the Bill reads as under:—
The State Government shall, by notification, establish a trust to be
called the District Mineral Foundation, a non-profit body, in each district
in the State where a mining lease has been granted or is in operation,
in the manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Suggestions received by the Committee
10.5 Some of the stakeholders have raised a number of issues in
connection with the DMF, including that it will take care of R&R in a
district while mining leases are not district specific but are spread over
larger areas. Specific nature of DMF will not ensure that help reaches
persons who are beyond the boundary. There has to be a mechanism
to ensure coordination and apportionment between two adjoining
DMFs. They further submitted that DMF may be unable to take on
implementation of large R&R projects and will in all probability depend
upon the lessee to execute — which has been the experience in the
past (like in Periphery Development Fund utilization in Orissa). They
have suggested that therefore provision should be introduced to take
this into account and also that the DMF constitution should include at
least 3 representatives of the affected community and there should be
prescribed a maximum cap also.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
10.6 The Ministry of mines have explained to the Committee that
District Mineral Foundation (DMF) covers an entire district. While a
lease may be spread over two different districts, a common DMF cannot
be set up since the objective is to address district level development
for local people. However, accounting of minerals raised in each district
boundary, proportionate to the size of lease in each boundary,
established by means of proper surveying, would be detailed in the
sub-legislation.
Recommendation of the Committee
10.7 While accepting the Ministry of Mines view that while a
lease may be spread over two different districts, a common DMF
cannot be set up since the objective is to address district level
development for local people, the Committee recommend that
additional provisions like audit by C&AG and involvement of
peoples’ representatives in the expenditure and utilization of District
Mineral Fund be suitably incorporated.

131
10.8 Clause 56(2) of the Bill reads as under:—
The object of the District Mineral Foundation shall be to work for
the interest and benefit of persons or families affected by mining
related operations in the district.
Suggestions received by the Committee
10.9 (i) State Government of Karnataka has suggested that the Act
or subsequent rules have to define Section 56(2) which
concerns with compensation to be paid to the person or
families affected by the mining related operations. People
are not only affected in the areas surrounding the mines
but also all along the road in which the minerals are being
transported. Therefore a fair definition is required in order
to clear the confusion that might arise in future.
(ii) As the surrounding areas/adjacent districts are also affected
by mining areas, clause 56(2) should also ensure that
District Mineral Foundation shall look after development
of affected areas of adjoining districts as well.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
10.10 (i) The Ministry of Mines have informed the Committee that
affected persons would be identified through the local
panchayats by the State Governments as per sub-legislation.
(ii) Any such amendment will create administrative difficulties
in maintaining and regulating the functions of DMF. Such
an arrangement should be ideally be provided from the
State Mineral Fund, if required.
Recommendation of the Committee
10.11 The Committee are satisfied with the submission of the
Ministry of Mines and expect that the sub-legislation will take due
care of the affected persons who would be identified through local
panchayats by the State Governments. At the same time, the
Committee feel that suitable arrangements be made from State
Mineral Fund for development of the surrounding areas/adjacent
districts which are also affected by mining.
Governing Council of District Mineral Foundation
10.12 Clause 57 of the Bill reads as under:—
57(1) The District Mineral Foundation shall be managed by a
Governing Council which consists of,—

132
(a) District Magistrate—Chairperson;
(b) Chairperson of the District Panchayat or District Council,
as the case may be—Member;
(c) all holders of mining lease in the district—Members;
(d) head of local offices of Departments concerned of the State
Government—Members;
(e) at least three representatives nominated by the District
Magistrate in consultation with the Chairperson of the
District Panchayat or District Council, as the case may be,
from amongst the affected persons or families in the areas
affected by mining operations, in the manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government—Members;
(f)r epresentative of the Indian Bureau of Mines—Member;
(g) District Mining Officer—Secretary:
Provided that in the areas specified in the Fifth Schedule of the
Constitution, where there is no District Panchayat, the Chairperson
of each of the Panchayats at intermediate level, and where there
is no Panchayat at intermediate level, the Chairperson of the Village
Panchayats within whose jurisdiction the mining operations are
undertaken shall be included as a member.
Suggestions received by the Committee
10.13 (i) The Committee have been suggested that control on
administration of DMF is skewed towards Government and
mining companies and provision should be suitably
modified to allow the affected community greater say in
deciding where the DMF money should be spent. Local
community should thus have the maximum representation
in the DMF council.
(ii) The opinion of the Ministry for making local MP/MLA as
permanent Special Invitee to the Governing Council of
District Mineral Foundation.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
10.14 The Ministry of Mines have agreed to both the suggestions
(i) and (ii) above.
Recommendation of the Committee
10.15 The Committee find that the Governing Council proposed
to manage District Mineral Foundation (DMF) will consist of District

133
Magistrate, Chairperson of District Panchayat or District Council, all
holders of mining lease in the district, head of local offices of
Department concerned of state Governments, at least three
representatives nominated from amongst the affected persons or
families, representative of IBM and District Mining Officer. The
Committee feel that there is a need to consider increasing the
representation of the local community in the council of DMF. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government that the provision
of Clause 57(1) be suitably modified to increase more representation
of the local communities and include local MP/MLA as Permanent
Special Invitee to the Governing Council for District Mineral
Foundation.

134
CHAPTER XI
NATIONAL AND STATE MINING REGULATORY AUTHORITY
Clause 59(1) of the Bill reads as under:—
59 (1)  The National Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and
not more than nine whole time Members to be appointed by the
Central Government.
Query raised by the Committee and Reply of the Ministry of Mines
11.2 Asked about the rationale behind National Authority have 10
Members, the Ministry of Mines have informed the Committee that
considering that the proposed Authority would look into wide ranging
issues relating to non-fuel mining sector covering nearly 72 minerals,
including illegal mining, the number of proposed members is necessary.
Recommendation of the Committee
11.3 The Committee feel that the composition of the National
Mining Regulatory Authority is too unwieldy since 10 members
including chairpersons are to be appointed whereas on the other
hand the composition of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(TRAI) including chairperson is 5, Telecom Dispute Settlement and
Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) (3), Petroleum and Natural Gas
Regulatory Board (5), Central Electricity Regulation Commission
(CERC) (4) etc. The Committee do not subscribe the contention of
the Government that as nearly 72 minerals, including illegal mining
is likely to be under the ambit of National Authority, the composition
thereof is a reasonable one. The Committee is of the view that mining
is restricted to some of the States/Union Territories in the country.
On the other hand telecom and electricity have much more reach as
compared to mining. Inclusion of so many members in National
Mining Regulatory Authority, thus defies logic. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should revise the strength
of National Mining Regulatory Authority and reduce it to the barest
minimum level.
Qualification for appointment as Chairperson or Member of National
Authority
11.4 Clause 60 of the Bill reads as under:—
60(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the
Chairperson of the National Authority, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-eight years of age;

135
(b) (i) has a post-graduate degree in mining, engineering,
technology, science, commerce, humanities or law from a
university recognised by the University Grants
Commission or a university or institute established by
law for the time being in force and special knowledge
and experience of not less than three years in matters
relating to policy, regulation and operations in extractive
industry; or
(ii) has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to
the Government of India or any equivalent post in the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, having experience of not less than three years
in policy or law relating to mines and mineral
concessions.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member,
unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-eight years of age;
(b) (i) has a post-graduate degree in mining, engineering,
technology, science, commerce, humanities or law from a
university recognised by the University Grants
Commission or a university or institute established by
law for the time being in force and special knowledge
and experience of not less than three years in matters
relating to policy, regulation and operations in extractive
industry or has experience of not less than three years
in the field of mining sector at the national level; or
(ii) has held the post of Joint Secretary to the Government
of India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may
be, having experience of not less than one year in policy
or law relating to mines and mineral concessions.
(3) The Chairperson and the Members of the National Authority
shall be appointed on the recommendations of the Selection Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 61.
(4) The Chairperson or the Members of the National Authority
shall not hold any other office during the period of holding his office
as such.

136
(5) The Central Government shall, within a period of one month
from the date of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the
Chairperson or Member, by reason of death, resignation or removal of
the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the superannuation
or completion of the term of office of the Chairperson or any Member,
make a reference to the Selection Committee constituted under section
61 for filling up of such vacancy.
Query raised by the Committee
11.5 The Committee have desired to know the following:—
(i) As regards the qualifications for appointment as Chairman
and Member of National Authority, included only post
graduate degree in mining/mineral/mining machinery/
surface mining/rock mechanic engineering or geo-technical
engineering or environmental engineering or geology etc.
so as to ensure technical competence.
(ii) The rationale behind keeping the post of Secretary or
Additional Secretary to the Government of India/State
Government as criteria for filling up post of chairpersons/
members of the national authorities.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
11.6 The requisite qualification has been kept in light of the fact
that the National Authority would be required to advice the
Government on wide ranging issues pertaining to the mineral sector.
These matters relate to bidding criteria, royalty fixation, strategies for
attracting long-term investment in the mining sector, understanding
the needs of the Project affected persons and for formulating policies
for the sector.
These posts have been included taking into account the knowledge,
experience and understanding of various administrative and policy
matters, acquired by the officers over the years, which could be
essential for advisory roles. However suggestions of the Committee
keeping in view the composition in other regulatory bodies would be
acceptable.
Recommendation of the Committee
11.7 The Committee observe that powers and functions assigned
to National Mining Regulatory Authorities (clause 68) are too

137
technical in nature since they are required to lay down the standard
of quality of technical regulation to be followed by State Govt./
IBM, lay down the standard of quality of report, mediate on the
issues of jurisdiction in the matter of inspection of mines, advice
mineral-wise strategy etc. Furthermore, the proceedings of national
authorities are deemed to be judicial proceedings/civil court. [68 (5)].
The Committee, therefore, feel that the qualifications prescribed for
chairpersons/ members i.e. post graduate in mining engineering
technology, science, commerce and humanity are not commensurate
with the job profile expected of these functionaries. The Committee
are of the firm opinion that the qualifications ought to be prescribed
for them needs to include post graduate degree in mining/mineral/
mining machinery/surface mining/rock mechanic engineering or geo-
technical engineering or environmental engineering or geology etc.
so as to ensure technical competence.
11.8 In view of the fact that proceedings of national authorities
ought to be judicial proceedings/civil court, the Committee feel that
post of Secretary or Addl. Secretary to Government of India/State
Government need not be criteria for filling up post of chairpersons/
members of national authorities. The Committee do not concur with
the views of the Government that knowledge, experience and
understanding of various administrative and policy matters acquired
by the officers in the rank of Secretary/Additional Secretary over
the years could be essential for advisory roles. On the other hand
there are strong apprehensions of vested interests being developed
over the years if serving officer, who do not possess technical
competence and expertise are allowed to be on board of such
authorities. This is also pre-requisite to stem clash of interest. The
Committee , therefore, recommend that members from judicial
background needs to head such authorities and High Court judges
may be appointed as Chairman of such authorities and members
having technical expertise as referred to above including MBA in
finance or law be appointed as members. The Committee desire that
similar analogous provision may be made for State Regulatory
Authorities.
11.9 As a corollary, similar qualifications be made applicable for
members to be appointed as Chairperson and members of National
Mining Tribunal (Clause 77) and judges of High Court may be drawn
and made Chairperson and members of these tribunals and the
appeal arising from National Tribunal may vest with Supreme Court
instead of High Court as envisaged in the Bill (clause 88).

138
Powers and functions of the National Mineral Regulatory Authority,
Search, seizure, Investigation and Punishment for violation of
directions of National Authority (Clauses 68, 69 and 121)
11.10 Clause 68 of the Bill reads as under:—
68(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Authority
shall discharge and exercise the following functions and powers in
respect of major minerals, namely:—(a) lay down the standards of
quality of technical regulation to be followed by the State
Governments and the Indian Bureau of Mines; (b) lay down the
standards of quality of reports and information provided in the
public domain by the State Governments, Indian Bureau of Mines
and Geological Survey of India to the investors in the 135 mining
sector; (c) mediate on the issue of jurisdiction in matters of
inspection of mining areas amongst the State Governments and
the Indian Bureau of Mines; (d) advise on mineral-wise conservation
strategies keeping in view of the national interest; (e) advise on
matters relating to framework for sustainable development of the
mining sector, including implementation and monitoring thereof.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, the National Authority may, on the
request of the Central Government or any State Government, render
advice on sustainable development framework for minor minerals;
(f) advise the Central Government and any State Government, on
a reference from them, on issues pertaining to measures to increase
transparency in the grant of mineral concessions and efficiency in
models for competitive bidding of minerals; (g) review of the
existing rates of royalty on minerals (other than coal, lignite and
sand for stowing) specified in the Second Schedule for major
minerals in terms of sub-clause (2) of clause 41 and the profit
sharing percentage payable under sub-clause (2) of clause 43 and
recommend revision of rates of royalty and profit sharing
percentage to be paid by the mining lease holder from time to
time; (h) review of the existing rates of dead rent on minerals
(other than coal, lignite and sand for stowing) specified in the
Third Schedule for major minerals in terms of sub-clause (3) of
clause 42 and recommend revision of rates of royalty from time to
time; (i) recommend suitable mechanisms to moderate royalty to
support investment in remote areas or for induction of special
technology or for promoting mineral beneficiation or to produce
downstream products of strategic value or to create infrastructure:
Provided that the recommendations of the National Authority under
this sub-clause shall be made in consultation with the State
Governments and the mining industry and shall be in the form of
a report submitted to the Central Government.

139
Provided further that the National Authority shall not recommend
increase in royalty rates or profit sharing percentage for any mineral
or fees or other charges more than once in three years.
(j) recommend strategies and institutional mechanisms to the
Central Government for attracting long-term investments in the
mining sector; (k) recommend mechanisms to protect the interests
of the end-use industries in the country for assured long-term
supply of minerals.
68(4) The National Authority or any of its officers authorised by
it may call for records, material evidence, or persons accused of
contravening any of the provisions or committing any of the
offences under this Act.
68(5) All proceedings before the National Authority in discharge
of its functions shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of sections 193, 219, 228 and for the purposes of
section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the National Authority
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195
and chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973’.
68(8) National Authority shall include in its annual report all the
cases where its recommendation or advice has not been accepted
by the Central Government along with reasons therefor.
11.11 Clause 69 of the Bill reads as under:—
69 ( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act or any other
law for the time being in force, the National Authority may, on
the basis of written complaint alleging contravention of the
provisions of this Act or alleging commission of any offence
punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder in respect
of major minerals where such contraventions or commission of
offences have been committed on large scale or on organised basis
or takes place inter-state, investigate or cause to be investigated
any such complaint or institute the prosecution against any person.
69(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of 69(1),
the National Authority may investigate or cause to be investigated
or institute the prosecution against any person where contraventions
or commission of offences have been committed on large scale or
on organised basis or have taken place inter-state, in respect of
major minerals in the following cases, namely:- (i) exploration and
mining for any mineral without licence or lease; (ii) undertaking
of mining or exploration activity outside the area granted under
licence or lease; (iii) transactions relating to or possession of mineral
stock of unknown origin, or such mineral which cannot be

140
satisfactorily accounted for; (iv) transportation, storage, trade or
export of illegally raised mineral without lawful authority.
69(3) The National Authority may, if it finds that the contravention
of any of the provisions of this Act or commission of any offence
thereunder in respect of major minerals is of a small scale or
isolated nature, refer any complaint referred to in sub-clause (1) or
sub-clause (2) to the State Government concerned for such action
as it deems fit.
69(4) The Central Government or the State Government or the
National Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint such persons as it thinks fit, possessing such qualifications
as may be prescribed, or such authority fulfilling such criteria or
appoint an Investigation Officer or Investigation Authority or
appoint legal practitioner for initiating prosecution or defending
its case before any court or Tribunal for such area as may be
specified in the notification, to investigate or initiate prosecution
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or commission
of any offence thereunder in respect of major minerals [including
cases falling under clauses (i) to (iv) of sub-clause (2)].
Explanation for the purpose of this sub-section, “legal practitioner”
means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and
includes a pleader in practice.
69 (5)  The Investigation Officer or the Investigating Authority
referred to in sub-clause (4), if so authorised by the Central
Government, shall have power—(a) to enter and search, at all
reasonable times and with such assistance, if any, as he considers
necessary, any premises in which he has reason to believe that an
offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or
is being or is about to be committed; or for the purpose of
satisfying himself that the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder are being complied with; (b) to require the production
of, and to inspect, examine and make copies of, or take extracts
from registers, records or any other documents kept by a holder
of a mining lease or licence, as the case may be, in pursuance of
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and seize
the same, if he has reason to believe that all or any of them, may
furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under
this Act or the rules made thereunder; (c) to make such examination
and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are being
complied with; (d) to exercise such other powers as may be
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act or the rules
made thereunder.

141
69(6) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall,
so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this Act
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority
of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.
69(7) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply
to the process of investigation and initiation of prosecution of the
offences in respect of major minerals under the provisions of this
Act, as they apply to the investigation or initiation of prosecution
made under the provisions of the said Code.
69(8) The Investigating Officer or Investigating Authority , as the
case may be, shall complete the process of investigation within a
period of three months from the date of authorisation for
conducting such investigation and submit the report of such
investigation to the National Authority.
69(9) The Investigation Officer or the Investigating Authority may
take the assistance of police if so becomes necessary for discharge
of its functions under this Act.
69(10) The National Authority either on its own motion (on the
basis of material in its possession) or on the basis of report referred
to in sub-clause (8) or an Investigation Officer or Investigating
Authority or any of its officer, if so authorised by the National
Authority may file a complaint before a competent court for the
contravention of the provisions of this Act or commission of any
offence thereunder in respect of major minerals.
11.12 Clause 121 of the Bill reads as under:—
Clause 121 : Whoever violates the directions of the National
Authority issued under sub-clause (4) of clause 68, shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
and in case of second or subsequent offence with a fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees and in the case of continuing
contravention with an additional fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.
Suggestions received by the Committee
11.13 Clause 68(1)/41(3)(4): Review of Royalty rates
(i) This prescribes that the National Authority shall not
recommend revised royalty and the profit share rates more
than once in every three years and the same restriction
applies to Central and State Governments. This brings
inconsistency since the iron ore prices are revised every
quarter and there may be artificial gaps created between
royalty and revenue.

142
(ii) Annual Reports of the National Mineral Regulatory
Authority should be published in the website of the Ministry
of Mines.
(iii) The National Authority is empowered to investigate—
Instead of increasing the multiplicity of agencies this power
could be given to the State Directorates or IBM.
(iv) In a written memorandum submitted to the Committee, State
Government of Chhattisgarh have stated that Clauses
68(4)&(5), clause 69 and clause 121 of the Bill be altogether
omitted from the Bill. The powers of investigation and
prosecution for violations of mining law should continue to
rest with the States only, as at present. This is necessary to
avoid multiplicity of investigation agencies also.
(v) The National Authority is empowered to investigate.
However, this power could be given to the State Directorates
or IBM. [Clause 69(10)]
(vi) Regulatory agency must be provided with the requisite
authority to intervene suo-moto on complaints on offences
of mining companies by the affected communities.
[Clause 69(2)]
(vii) One of the stakeholders suggested that as Clause 69 covers
offences that have been committed on large scale or
organized basis to be investigated by National Mining
Authority , this provision needs suitable amendment.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
11.14 As regards the above suggestions, para-wise replies of the
Ministry of Mines are as under:—
(i) Royalty is calculated on ad-valorem basis on monthly prices
as published by the Indian Bureau of Mines for most of the
minerals. This mechanism automatically captures price
fluctuations. Royalty rate regime stability is necessary for
attracting investors.
(ii) The Ministry of Mines have accepted the suggestion
regarding publishing Annual Reports of the National Mineral
Regulatory Authority in the website of the Ministry of
Mines.
(iii) The National Authority will be an independent and neutral
agency for investigating any mining related complaints, and
allow arms length regulation and fairness in investigation.

143
(iv) Considering that the State governance machineries still need
strengthening in many of the backward mining areas, and
there has been a felt need for an independent body to look
into complaints of illegal mining, the National Mining
Regulatory Authority has been given powers to investigate
and launch prosecution. This is also in terms of the
recommendation of the Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel's recommendation in its Ninth Report on Demand for
Grants (2009-10), where it has recommended that new
legislation should provide for a quasi-judicial body to
adjudicate any complaint in respect of illegal mining and
issue necessary directions.
(v) The National Authority will be an independent and neutral
agency for investigating any mining related complaints, and
allow arms length regulation and fairness in investigation.
(vi) The draft Bill provides adequate powers to the National
Mining Regulatory Authority in clause 69 for launching
investigations and prosecutions on complaints of illegal
mining or offences under the Act.
Recommendations of the Committee
11.15 The Committee note that the Ministry of Mines have aptly
resolved the fear in the mind of the stakeholders regarding
inconsistency in rates of royalty of iron ore by clarifying that royalty
is calculated on ad valorem  basis on monthly prices published by
IBM which automatically takes care of price fluctuations. Further, as
the royalty rate regime stability is necessary for attracting investors,
the Committee feel that due care has been taken to avoid artificial
gap between royalty and revenue as is apprehended by stakeholders.
11.16 Regarding suggestion of the State Government of
Chhattisgarh that the powers of investigation and prosecution for
violations of mining law should continue to rest with the States
only and Clauses 68(4)&(5), 69 and 121 of the Bill be altogether
omitted, the Committee do not agree with the same and are of the
view that the State Government mechanism still need to be
strengthened particularly in the prevention of illegal mining. The
Committee, therefore, fully endorse for the creation of an independent
agency at the Central level namely National Mineral Regulatory
Authority with power to investigate and launch proper action as
proposed in the Bill. The Committee agree with the view of the
Ministry of Mines and Steel that instead of the State Directorates,
the National Authority would be the appropriate authority for
investigating mining related complaints.

144
11.17 As regards the suggestion to publish Annual Reports of
the National Mineral Regulatory Authority on the website of the
Ministry of Mines which has also been accepted by them, the
Committee feel that it would lead to transparency in the functioning
of National Mineral Regulatory Authority.
11.18 The Committee note that by virtue of Clause 69, a National
Authority is empowered to investigate or cause to investigate, cases
of alleged acts of omissions or commissions, committed on a large
scale or on organized basis in respect of major minerals. The
Committee find that National Authority can exercise powers only
after the alleged act, contravening the provisions of the Act and the
rules framed thereunder have been committed and not otherwise.
However, there is no mechanism to pre-empt such offences and
violations. The Committee, therefore, desires that the National
Authority should not only investigate acts of omissions and
commissions committed, but also intervene where there are
apprehension of violations of such acts of omissions and
commissions. Further, the restrictive nature of investigation i.e.
investigation of large scale and on organized basis, limits the power
and the role of the National Authority. The Committee, therefore,
desire that broad based powers, ought to be assigned for the purpose
of investigations to the National Authority and it may be permitted
to investigate violation of cases which are unlikely to be not on
large scale and or organized basis. Further, for the sake of clarity,
the expression ‘not on large scale’ and ‘on organized basis’ be
defined. The relevant Clause, be amended, accordingly.
Establishment of State Mining Regulatory Authority
11.19 Clause 70 of the Bill reads as under:—
70(1) The State Government may, by notification, establish with
effect from such date as may be specified therein, a State Authority
to be known as the State Mining Regulatory Authority , to exercise
the powers and functions, mutatis mutandis , in respect of minor
minerals, as is exercisable under clauses 68 and 69 by the National
Authority.
70(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-clause (1), the
State Government may confer on the State Authority the functions
relating to monitoring and regulating the operation of the
Sustainable Development Framework in respect of minor minerals
and for major minerals after approval of the Central Government.

145
Composition and Procedures of the State Authority
11.20 Clause 71 of the Bill reads as under:—
71 The composition and procedure of the State Authority referred
to in section 70 shall be such as may be prescribed by the
State Government:
Provided that in respect of functions relating to the Sustainable
Development Framework the procedure shall be in accordance with
the provisions of section 46.
Suggestions received by the Committee
11.21 In a written memorandum submitted to the Committee, one
of the stakeholders inter-alia has stated as under:—
“The State Mining Regulatory Authority be headed by independent
judicial and technical representatives but not the former employees
of State Government. This request is based on the experience of
the industry with various State Governments.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
11.22 Composition of State Mining Regulatory Board has been
proposed in consultation with the State Governments. State Mining
Regulatory Authority would look into the issues of minor minerals.
Recommendation of the Committee
11.23 The Committee find that though the State Mining
Regulatory Authority shall be constituted and the composition and
procedure of the State Authority shall be as prescribed by the State
Governments, the proposed Bill may suggest that the composition
shall be on the pattern of Central Authority as prescribed in
Clause 60 to ensure judicial and technical representation.
Powers and procedures of the National Mining Tribunals
11.24 Clause 85 of the Bill reads as under:—
85(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Mining
Tribunal shall have the powers with respect to major minerals—
(a) to adjudicate on applications seeking directions to the Central
Government or the State Governments or an Authority of the State
Government to dispose of an application made to it, including an

146
application for grant or transfer of mineral concession under the
Act, with respect to any major mineral within such time as the
National Mining Tribunal may stipulate, in such cases where the
Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, has
failed to dispose off the application within the time specified under
this Act; (b) to hear applications from any affected person in
relation to orders and directions issued under this Act relating to
preparation, approval and implementation of Mining Plans and
Mine Closure Plans and Sustainable Development Framework; (c)
to hear applications made to it in the nature of revisions from the
affected persons and confirm or set aside any order passed by the
Central Government or the State Government or an Authority of
the State Government, as the case may be, under this Act or the
rules made thereunder as it may deem just and proper.
Sub-Clause (6) of this clause provides that on the conclusion of
proceedings, the National Mining Tribunal, shall pass such orders as
it deems fit and provide such relief as may be desirable, including the
award of such punitive damages, as it deems fit, to the affected party
at issue.
Powers and procedures of the State Mining Tribunals
11.25 Clause 99 of the Bill reads as under:—
99(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Mining Tribunal
shall have the powers with respect to minor minerals—(a) to
adjudicate on applications seeking direction to the State
Government or an Authority of the State Government, as the case
may be, to dispose of an application made to it, including an
application for grant of mineral concession under this Act, with
respect to any minor mineral within such time as the State Mining
Tribunal may stipulate, in such cases where the State Government
has failed to dispose of the application within the time specified
in the Act; (b) to hear applications from any affected person in
relation to orders or directions issued under this Act relating to
preparation, approval and implementation of Mining Plans, mining
frameworks and Mine Closure Plans and Sustainable Development
Framework; (c) to hear applications made to it in the nature of
revisions from the affected persons and confirm or set aside any
order passed by the State Government or the State Government or
an Authority of the State Government, as the case may be, under
this Act or the rules made thereunder as it may deem just and
proper.

147
Suggestions received by the Committee
11.26 The Committee have received the suggestions as under:—
(i) With the existence of National Mining Regulatory Authority
(NMRA), National Mining Tribunal can play an appellate
body role rather than hearing application from the affected
party in relation to preparation, approval and
implementation of mining plans and mine closure plans. It
could be vested with a role on the lines of Appellate
Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL).
(ii) National Mining Tribunal has the jurisdiction to hear
application against any approval of mining Plan. However
as per Clause 26, any person aggrieved by the approval or
refusal of mining plan has the right to approach the
Controller General for major minerals, Indian Bureau of
Mines for minor minerals, the State Directorate and the
Central Government for coal and atomic mineral. There
appears to be a contradiction between two provisions of
the Bill in relation to the jurisdiction to hear application
against the approval granted for mining plan.
11.27 The State Government of Chhattisgarh in their written
memorandum submitted to the Committee has raised the objections
on clauses 85(1)(c) and 85(6) as below:—
“Conferral of powers on the Tribunals to pass such orders as are
deemed fit under the revisionary jurisdiction in the matter of grant
of mineral concessions are undesirable because minerals being
public property , the power to grant concessions need to rest with
the government only. Tribunals should not be given the powers to
grant mineral concessions under the revisionary powers”.
And therefore, suggested amendments as under:—
“Therefore, clauses 85(1)(c) and 85(6) should be appropriately
reworded so as to say that while exercising the revisionary powers,
the National/State mining tribunal shall have only the following
powers—
(a) to confirm the order passed by the government; or
(b) to set aside the order of the Government and remand the
case back to the State Government for passing fresh orders
keeping in view any irregularity or illegality that may be
pointed out by the tribunal in the order passed by the
Government.”

148
Replies of the Ministry of Mines
11.28 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions
as under:—
(i) “The powers and procedure of NMRA are well defined in
clause 85(1) of MMDR Bill.”
(ii) The first stage appeal under Clause 26(7) is to be made to
the Controller General. The second stage of appeal can be
made to the National Mining Tribunal under Clause 86(1).
(iii) The Ministry of Mines have not accepted this
recommendation and justified the provision of revisionary
power of the tribunal by submitting that in the existing
MMDR Act, 1957, the revisionary powers are exercised by
the Central Government, and include powers to “confirm,
set aside or modify the order or pass such other order in
relation thereto”. In order to bring in greater transparency,
the National Mining Tribunal has been proposed in the draft
Bill to function as a quasi-judicial body for grievance redressal
against State or Central Government actions or delays, on
an arms length principle . These provisions are necessary in
larger interest of mineral development and conservation and
act as a proper check against misuse of any discretion in
the regulation of the mineral sector.
Recommendation of the Committee
11.29 The Committee find that the powers of NMRA are well
defined in clause 85(1) of MMDR Bill and with the first stage appeal
under Clause 26(7) to be made to the Controller General and second
stage of appeal can be made to the National Mining Tribunal under
Clause 86(1) for major mineral there is no ambiguity in the provision
of the Bill as claimed by the stakeholder.
11.30 The Committee do not accept the contention of the Ministry
of Mines that since under the existing Act the revisionary powers
including powers to ‘ confirm, set aside or modify the order or pass
such other order in relation thereto ’ are vested with Central
Government, the same magnitude of revisionary power should now
be vested with the proposed tribunal. Taking note of the suggestion
of Government of Chhattisgarh that in the garb of revisionary power,
the tribunal, a quasi-judicial body has been given the powers to
grant mineral concessions, the Committee feel that grant of mineral
concessions is essentially an executive function and should not be
assigned to the tribunal. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that

149
the Clause 85(1)(c) and 99(1)(c) for major and minor minerals be
reworded as under:—
“To confirm the order passed by the Government; or to set aside
the order of the Government and remand the case back to the
State Government for passing fresh orders keeping in view any
irregularity or illegality that may be pointed out by the tribunal
in the order passed by the Government.”

150
CHAPTER XII
COORDINATION COMMITTEE AND NATIONAL REPOSITORIES
Constitution of Central Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee
Clause 102 of the Bill reads as under:—
102 (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a
Central Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee consisting of
representatives of the Central Government and the State
Governments to achieve the objects of the Act.
(2) The functions of the Central Coordination-cum-Empowered
Committee shall be such as may be notified.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of the foregoing, the Central
Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee may consider and make
recommendations regarding any of the following, namely:—
(a) improvement in procedure for grant of mineral concessions;
(b) coordination among agencies entrusted with according
statutory clearances;
(c) maintenance of internet-based databases including a mining
tenement registry;
(d) development, implementation and evaluation of sustainable
development frameworks; and
(e)p revention and detection of illegal mining.
Constitution of State Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee
12.2 Clause 103 of the Bill reads as under:—
103. (1)  The State Government shall by notification constitute a
State Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee with representatives
of the concerned Departments of State Government and local
representative of Central organisations such as Railways, Highways,
Ports and Customs, headed by Chief Secretary or Additional Chief
Secretary of the State Government;

151
(2) The function of the State Coordination-cum-Empowered
Committee shall be,—
(i) to oversee clearance by various Departments of the State
Government necessary to ensure timely grant of mineral
concessions;
(ii)r eview of activities in and around leased areas pursuant to
the Corporate Social Responsibility document;
(iii) to monitor implementation of Sustainable Development
Framework and Final Mine Closure Plans;
(iv) coordination of operations for prevention, detection and
prosecution of cases of illegal mining; and
(v) any other functions as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(3) The State Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee shall meet
at least once in two months.
Suggestions received by the Committee
12.3 The following suggestions have been received by the
Committee in memoranda submitted by the stakeholders:-
• This creates yet another agency which has recommendatory
powers. Either the powers should be restricted to ironing
out procedural issues and clogging, coordination between
various agencies.
• The power of Coordination Committees and National
Repositories should be extended to include the operations
of the District Mineral Fund and the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement policies of the State. When the operations of
the District Mineral Fund and the resettlement policies are
not adequately addressing the issues-there should be an
opportunity for the Coordination Committee under this
chapter to look into these issues and make
recommendations—the logic that the Committee would only
look at the Sustainable Development Framework is
inadequate.
Replies of the Ministry of Mines
12.4 Para-wise replies of the Ministry of Mines on the above
suggestions are as under:—
• These statutory Committees are necessary to coordinate and
streamline any administrative delays in grant of mineral
concessions, delays in getting Environment clearances, or

152
addressing issues on coordination on matters pertaining to
sustainable development and illegal mining. These
Committees are set in terms of the recommendations of the
Hoda Committee, which while accepting that single-window
clearance is not possible in the country due to multiplicity
of laws and agencies, has recommended setting up of such
Committees for better coordination”.
• This suggestion is not acceptable to the Ministry .
Coordination-cum-Empowered Committees have a mandate
to review the regulatory aspects of grant of concessions.
Recommendation of the Committee
12.5 In the absence of any established mechanism of single
window clearance for mining projects and due to multiplicity of
law and order agencies, the Committee feel that these proposed
Statutory Committees will help to coordinate and streamline any
administrative delays in grant of mineral concessions, delays in
getting Environment clearances, or addressing issues on coordination
on matters pertaining to Sustainable development and illegal mining.
However, the composition of such Committees has not been clearly
spelled out in the Act. The Ministry should explicitly provide the
composition of such Committees in the Act itself rather leaving it to
the executive discretion. The Committee desire that the
recommendations of these bodies should have binding effect on the
decision making process.
National Repositories
12.6 Clause 104 of the Bill reads as under:—
104 (1)  The Central Government may, by notification, establish a
National Drill Core Repository for preservation and archiving of
drill cores generated during mineral exploration and a National
Geophysical Data Repository for holding, authenticating and
disseminating geophysical data for the purposes of this Act.
104 (2)  The Repositories shall be managed or maintained in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
104 (3)  The holder of any mineral concession shall, at his own
expense, cause to be deposited,—(a) a representative portion of
cores selected with the National Drill Core Repository; and (b) all
geophysical data collected by him during or part of his
reconnaissance, exploration and prospecting operation, with the
National Drill Core Repository and National Geophysical Data
Repository respectively, in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.

153
104 (4)  The Central Government shall prescribe the procedure for
making available data from the Repositories to interested persons
on such charges as may be prescribed by it. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that the Repositories, referred to in
sub-clause (3) shall not disclose information with respect to any
drill core or any geophysical data received by it under this clause
till after lapse of six months from the date of termination of the
mineral concession, or relinquishment of the area from which the
drill core has been drawn or geophysical data has been generated.
Suggestions received by the Committee
12.7 In a written memorandum submitted to the Committee, one
of the stakeholders has suggested as follows:—
“This provision mandates that a sample portion of the core shall
be deposited with the Repository. This is a new concept and creates
another agency to engage with. It would be better if the IBM
deals with this aspect too rather than creating a new mechanism.
Also guidelines ought to be framed as to in what manner are
these to be stored and to what extent shall be required. Half of
the sample is sent for analysis and half is preserved. Not clear as
to what is meant by “representative sample”.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
12.8 The Ministry of Mines have informed that Geological Survey
of India is the nodal agency which is primarily responsible for country's
regional exploration and for survey of new deposits. Suitable guidelines
on definition of representative sample of drill core, maintenance of
such sample shall be detailed by the GSI.
Recommendation of the Committee
12.9 The Committee observe that Geological Survey of India is
the nodal agency which is primarily responsible for country’s regional
exploration and for survey of new deposits. According to the Ministry
of Mines, suitable guidelines on definition of representative sample
of drill core, maintenance of such sample shall be detailed by the
GSI. The Committee expect that these guidelines framed under the
Clause will take care of the apprehension of the stakeholder.

154
CHAPTER XIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Punishment for reconnaissance, prospecting and mining operations
without licence or lease
Clause 110 of the Bill reads as under:—
Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of clause 4, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to,—
(i) in cases of exploration without licence, two years, or with fine
which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees per hectare or
part thereof subject to a maximum of fifteen lakh rupees in case
of prospecting, or with both; (ii) in cases of mining without a
lease, three years, or with fine which may extend to ten times the
value of the mineral mined, or with both.
Suggestions received by the Committee
13.2 One of the stakeholders in a written memorandum to the
Committee on Clause 110 has requested for deletion of penalty
provisions from the draft MMDR Bill, 2011 and keep the penalties for
offences as per existing MMDR Act, 1957.
Replies of the Ministry of Mines
13.3 The Ministry of Mines in their reply on the above suggestion
stated that these provisions will act as deterrents and discourage illegal
mining.
Recommendation of the Committee
13.4 The Committee agree with the views expressed by the
Ministry of Mines and feel that the proposed penalty provisions are
required to discourage illegal mining and to act as deterrents to
unscrupulous elements. However, the provisions of this Clause ought
to be implemented judiciously.
Penalty for non-implementation of final mine closure plan
13.5 Clause 111 of the Bill reads as under:—
A lessee, who fails to implement a Final Mine Closure Plan in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, or, abandons the mine
or any portion of the mining lease area, which is likely to be a
danger to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the area,
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one thousand
rupees per day per hectare for the period of such default.

155
Penalty for disobeying direction of the State Government, etc.
13.6 Clause 112 of the Bill reads as under:—
112(1) : Whoever disobeys any direction given by the State
Government or the Indian Bureau of Mines or any other authority
empowered in this behalf under this Act or any other law for the
time being in force shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
to ten thousand rupees per day for the period of such disobedience.
112(2): Any person, who fails to comply with the directions of the
State Government under sub-clause (4) of clause 30, shall be liable
to be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three
years.
Suggestions received by the Committee
13.7 The Committee have inter-alia received the following
suggestions on the provisions of above Clause:—
(i) Instead of Rs 1000/- per hectare per day for the period of
default for non-implementation of Final Mine Closure Plan
confiscation of financial assurance is adequate punishment.
(ii) Under Clause 112 of new Draft Act, offence and penalties
which are extremely harsh and not practically justified.
Penalty to the tune of Rs. 10,000 per day per hectare is
unbelievable. It is requested to reduce them to not more
than Rs. 1,000 per day for large mines and to Rs. 50 per
day for B Class Mines.
(iii) The provision provides for penalties in the event of anyone
disobeying orders of the State Government or IBM “or any
other authority empowered in this behalf under this Act.”
This phrase is vague and includes any authority whatsoever.
Also there should not be penalization without an
opportunity to rectify.
(iv) Another stakeholder in a written memorandum submitted
to the Committee have suggested that Penalty for disobeying
directions of State Government/IBM is not required as there
are enough safeguards in the existing law.
Replies of the Ministry of Mines
13.8 The Ministry of Mines responded to the above suggestions as
under:—
(i)&(ii) The Ministry of Mines in their reply on the above
suggestions have stated that these provisions will act as
deterrents and discourage illegal mining. The Ministry have

156
further stated that such classification is not available in the
existing MMDR Act, 1957 also. Regulation for such manually
operated mines are similar in all matters, including grant of
concessions, need for plan of operations, and reporting and
compliance with law.
(iii) The phrase “or any other authority” means any Authority
which is authorized under the draft Bill in future for
performing some specialized regulatory role. However,
redressal against such authorities lies with the National
Mining Tribunal.
(iv) The Ministry of Mines in their reply on the above suggestion
have stated that these provisions will act as deterrents and
discourage illegal mining.
Recommendations of the Committee
13.9 The Committee concur with the view of the Ministry of
Mines and feel that there should be heavy penalty imposed on the
lessee who fails to implement a Final Mine Closure Plan in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, or, abandons the mine or
any portion of the mining lease area, which is likely to be a danger
to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the surrounding areas.
At the same time, the Committee feel that the argument put forward
for formation of separate category of ‘B Class Mines’ (where minerals
occur in small patches/areas) may also be considered by the
Government not only for grant of concession, plan of operation, etc.
but also for imposing penalty for not complying with the provisions
made separately.
13.10 The Committee find that the term ‘any other authority’ has
been inserted to include authority authorized under the draft Bill in
future for performing some specialized regulatory role. Thus, the
clarification given by the Ministry of Mines on the apprehension
raised by the stakeholder that the phrase ‘or any other authority’ is
sufficient. While observing that redressal against such authorities lies
with the National Mining Tribunal, the Committee are of the opinion
that the provision for punishment for persons who fail to comply
with the direction of State Government will act as deterrent and
discourage illegal mining. The Committee are, however, of the view
that the principle of natural justice should be followed while
imposing such punishment/penalty.
Offences by companies
13.11 Clause 115 of the Bill reads as under:—
115(1): If the person committing an offence under this Act or any
rules made thereunder is a company, every person who at the
time the offence was committed was directly in charge of, and

157
was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of offence and be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
nothing contained in this sub-clause shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
115(2): Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), where
an offence under this Act has been committed by the company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
The explanation to the sub-clause provides that (a) “company”
means any body corporate and includes a firm or cooperative or
other association of individuals; and (b) “director” in relation to a
firm means a partner in the firm.
Suggestions received by the Committee
13.12 One of the stakeholders in the written memorandum to the
Committee has submitted as under:—
“Holding the director, secretary or even manager responsible for
all the offences by companies will dilute the requirement of a
professionally managed statutory organization.
Implementing of this section will certainly create an environment,
where the senior executives of the company will be frequently
harassed and this provision can be misused on flimsy grounds or
for minor violations and hence needs to modified accordingly.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
13.13 The basic philosophy behind this clause is that senior
management is equally accountable for any contraventions during
mining operations. However, suitable provisions have been given under
clause 115(1) that if the person proves that he exercise all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence than the person will not be
liable to any punishment.

158
Recommendation of the Committee
13.14 While not accepting the suggestion of one of the stakeholder
that holding the director, secretary or even manager responsible for
all the offences by companies will dilute the requirement of a
professionally managed statutory organization, the Committee feel
that making the senior management accountable would act as a
deterrent and will percolate a strong message down to the junior
level. However, adequate protection needs to be ensured against the
misuse of power by the implementing agencies.

159
CHAPTER XIV
MISCELLANEOUS
Power of entry and inspections
Clause 123 of the Bill reads as under:—
123(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the position of the working,
actual or prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine or for any
other purpose connected with this Act or the rules made
thereunder, any person authorised by the Indian Bureau of Mines
or the State Directorate in this behalf by general order, may,—
(a) enter and inspect any mine; (b) survey and take measurements
in any such mine; (c) weigh, measure or take measurements of the
stocks of minerals lying at any mine; (d) examine any document,
book, register, or record in the possession or power of any person
having the control of, or connected with, any mine and place marks
of identification thereon, and take extracts from or make copies of
such document, book, register or record; (e) order the production
of any such document, book, register, record, referred to in clause
(d); and (f) examine any person having the control of, or connected
with, any mine.
Suggestions received by the Committee
14.2 Department of Atomic Energy in a written memorandum
submitted to the Committee has suggested as under:—
“that after the word IBM in Clause 123(1), the following shall be
included: any person authorized by Atomic Minerals Directorate
(AMD), Department of Atomic Energy.”
14.3 Department of Atomic Energy has justified their suggestion
by adding that AMD has been authorized for approval of mining plan
in respect of atomic minerals. For beach sand minerals, based on the
NOC given by AMD, the concerned State Governments grant lease to
the applicants. Therefore, incorporation of the name of AMD is the
prime importance.
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
14.4 In a written reply submitted to the Committee, the Ministry
of Mines have agreed to the above suggestion of Department of Atomic
Energy.

160
Recommendation of the Committee
14.5 Taking note of the suggestion made by the Department of
Atomic Energy and its acceptance by the Ministry of Mines, the
Committee recommend that the Clause 123(1) be suitably amended
by incorporating the words “any person authorized by Atomic
Minerals Directorate (AMD), Department of Atomic Energy” after
the words IBM.
Special provisions to deal with certain contingencies
14.6 Clause 127 of the Bill reads as under:—
127(1) It shall be the duty of the Indian Bureau of Mines or any
authority of the Central Government as may be designated in
respect of coal and atomic minerals, to render such assistances as
may be required by the State Government to ensure that mining
activities are regulated in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
127(2) Where the Indian Bureau of Mines or authority designated
under sub-clause (1), on the basis of information available to it is
of the opinion that the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder are not being complied with and that illegal or
unscientific mining is going on in any State, the Indian Bureau of
Mines or such authority shall make a report to this effect to the
Central Government, and the Central Government may issue such
direction as it may consider necessary to the State Government,
relating to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) investigation and prosecution of offences; (b) revocation of
mineral concessions; and (c) any measures to strengthen the
administrative machinery for better regulation of mining in
accordance with the provisions of Act.
127(3) Where it appears to the Central Government that the
directions referred to in sub-clause (2) have not been complied
with or where it appears that despite the purported compliance of
the directions further steps are necessary, the Central Government
may direct the authority referred to in sub-clause (2), for:—
(a) making written complaints under clause 61 for the investigation
and prosecution of offences; (b) revocation of mineral concessions
in accordance with the provisions of the Act; and (c) any other
measures as may be deemed fit in the circumstances.
Suggestions received by the Committee
14.7 State Government of Chhattisgarh in their written
memorandum to the Committee have stated as follows:—
“Clause 127 of the Bill authorizes the Central Government to issue
directions to State Governments and it further provides that if
such directions are not complied with, Central Government can

161
direct the Indian Bureau of Mines or the designated authority to
carry out the directions.
Articles 256 and 257 of the constitution have provisions and context
under which it may become necessary for the Union to issue
directions to State Governments. In the proposed bill, conferral of
powers on the Union to issue directions to States appear to have
been amplified many fold. Powers in regard to issuance of directions
to the State Governments by the Central Government in the field
of exploitation of minerals, which are owned by the States, is to
an extent an encroachment into the domain of the States.”
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
14.8 Clause 127 is flowing out of policy directions in para 2.6 of
the National Mineral Policy, 2008 wherein it is enunciated that the
“States will be assisted to overcome the problem of illegal mining
through operational and financial linkages with the Indian Bureau of
Mines”. While State Governments are primary on-field authorities for
controlling illegal and unscientific mining outside the lease areas, rather
than have a passive role for IBM in such matters, clause 127(1) provides
that the IBM or any authority of the Central Government may render
assistance to the State Governments, and the Central Government may
intervene in such cases on a Report on illegal mining or unscientific
mining outside lease area, and direct State Government in specific cases
to investigate and prosecute, revoke mineral concessions (in case a
concession holder is involved in illegal mining), and take measures to
improve administrative machinery. Such proactive action is a necessity,
considering that State governance machineries still need strengthening
in many of the backward mining areas.
Recommendation of the Committee
14.9 As regards the complaints of some of the State Governments
that the proposed Clause 127 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to issue directions to the States amounts to interference
by the Central Government or encroachment into the domain of the
States may not be valid one. The Committee find that clause 127(1)
provides that the IBM or any authority of the Central Government
may render assistance to the State Governments, and the Central
Government may intervene in such cases on a Report on illegal
mining or unscientific mining outside lease area, and direct State
Government in specific cases to investigate and prosecute, revoke
mineral concessions (in case a concession holder is involved in illegal
mining), and take measures to improve administrative machinery.

162
The Committee strongly feel that these provisions are necessary to
facilitate the State Governments in preventing illegal mining in view
of the failure of some State Governments to stop illegal mining in
the recent past. While concurring with the views of the Ministry of
Mines, the Committee also feel that there is no need to dilute or
amend the provision of the said Clause and to overcome the problem
of illegal mining the States should not treat it as an intervention of
the Central Government but as an assistance being rendered to them.
Transitory provisions
14.10 Clause 137 of the Bill reads as under:—
137(1) All applications received under the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957:—(i) for grant of
prospecting licence or a mining lease after completing exploration
under a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence, as the
case may be, or, (ii) for which prior approval of the Central
Government for grant of mineral concessions, has been given or,
(iii) where a letter of intent (by whatever name it is called) has
been issued by the State Government to grant reconnaissance permit
or prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, and
was pending grant of the concession under this Act for fulfilment
of the conditions of the letter of intent, and the application for
grant of the mineral concessions is pending with the State
Government at the time of commencement of this Act, shall be
processed in accordance with the provisions of this Act for grant
of concession. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the
State Government may impose special conditions relating to
payment of application fees , licence fee, security, at the time of
grant of mineral concessions to holder of application considered in
terms of this sub-clause to comply with the provisions of this Act.
The explanation to the said sub-clause clarifies that in case of an
application for reconnaissance permit considered under this Act,
in terms of this sub-clause, the State Government shall grant a
non-exclusive reconnaissance licence.
137(2)  In case of such area where applications for grant of
prospecting licence or mining lease received before the
commencement of this Act have become ineligible in terms of the
provisions of the Act, the area applied for under such applications
shall be notified by the State Government for inviting applications
in accordance with the provisions of Clause 13 for prospecting or
for mining, as may be appropriate, having regard to the available
evidence of mineralisation. The proviso to the said sub-clause

163
provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Clause 13,
the State Government may amalgamate areas or expand areas
covered by such applications in the interest of scientific mining
and may invite applications within a period of twelve months
from the commencement of this Act.
The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in case no
notification is issued within the period specified in the first proviso,
the area shall be made available, subject to the provisions of
sub-clause (5) for grant of prospecting licence under the provisions
of clause 22.
137(3) Aplications for renewal of mineral concessions made under
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
and pending on the date of commencement of this Act shall be
disposed off as applications for extension in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
137(4) A person who holds a reconnaissance permit prior to the
commencement of this Act shall be entitled to continue to hold
the permit to the exclusion of all others for a period of two years
or till the validity of the permit whichever is earlier, and during
such period no other reconnaissance or high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence applications shall be
entertained for the area covered by the reconnaissance permit, and
the permit holder shall be deemed to be the holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence for the purpose of sub-clause (6)
of Clause 22.
137(5) No application for prospecting licence shall be entertained
by the State Government for a period of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act in respect of major minerals (except
coal minerals and atomic minerals), other than such applications
made in accordance with the provisions of sub Clause (7) of clause
22, unless the State Government, by notification, invites applications
for grant of prospecting licences:
Provided that the State Government may invite applications in
different Districts of the State on different dates:
Provided further that the Central Government may extend the
period specified in this sub-clause for a period not exceeding one
year by notification for reasons of scientific mining or proper
regulation of mineral development on a request from the State
Government.

164
Suggestions received by the Committee
14.11 The Committee have received the following suggestions as
under:—
• There are no provisions to secure priority rights for licence
holders who have yet to file an application but have been
doing reconnaissance and prospecting under licences granted
in the existing regime.
• All pending applications as per existing Act should be
considered valid under the provisions of New Act.
• Entrepreneurs have put in their hand-work and money to
locate the industrial minerals and thereafter have applied
for grant of PL/ML and have also invested in the survey
and in establishing the mineral reserves beneath the land
and thereafter applied for PL/ML. With one stroke as per
above section all these applications will be cancelled and
will thereafter be auctioned as per the new Act. All
applications lying pending with the State Governments or
with the Government of India should not be cancelled, but
should be sympathetically considered and disposed off
expeditiously within a time frame and schedule as per
existing Act.
• Regarding 137(5) it has been suggested that this will result
in chaos and stoppage of economic and exploration activities
in the country. Applications should be allowed at all points
of time.
• Regarding 137(5), another stakeholder has stated that this
proposal will result into slow down in the exploration
activities; therefore, the work of compilation of data should
be completed as fast as possible and suggested that reducing
the moratorium period from two years to maximum one
year for applying fresh applications for Prospecting Licence,
as mentioned in Clause 137(5) of proposed bill.
• One of the stakeholders submitted before the Committee
that the transitory provisions of this Bill do not tackle all
situations. It leaves out many situations where the mining
companies have applied for mining concessions and have
spent on operations but their applications are still pending.
In such situations if the mining companies are asked to
begin afresh.

165
Reply of the Ministry of Mines
14.12 Responding to the above suggestions, the Ministry of Mines
have submitted as under:—
• The mineral concessions granted under the existing regime
are saved by the proviso to Clause 4(1). These concessions
automatically enjoy same facilities of transition to next stage,
and the applications filed for this purpose are protected
under Clause 4(6)(a).
• Regarding suggestion of stakeholders on Clause 137(2), the
Ministry of Mines have stated that under the new bill,
provisions for treating the existing applications are made
under section 4(6). The applications fulfilling the conditions
of seamless transition will be entertained. This provision
has been introduced for undertaking the grant of concessions
through the process of bidding/auction which otherwise will
be defeated.
• The Ministry is of the view that the State Government
should normally have disposed all pending applications in
a timely manner. Since there are lot of applications for grant
of mineral concessions pending in the State Governments,
and considering the fact that the State would be required to
allot concessions on competitive bidding, all pending
applications, excepting those where Central Government has
given its prior approval or where State Government has
given Letter of Intent, or where application has been filed
for next stage concession, have to be treated as null and
void. Such a measure is necessary for undertaking the grant
of concessions through the process of bidding, which
otherwise will be defeated.
• Under the draft Bill, provisions for treating the existing
applications are made under section 4(6). The applications
fulfilling the conditions of seamless transition will be
entertained. This provision has been introduced for
undertaking the grant of concessions through the process of
bidding/auction which otherwise will be defeated.
• The moratorium period of two years has been kept with an
objective to enable the States to notify the areas for inviting
applications for grant of PL through competitive bidding.

166
Recommendation of the Committee
14.13 The Committee note that the mineral concessions granted
under the existing regime are saved by the proviso to Clause 4(1)
whereby nothing in this sub-clause shall affect any reconnaissance,
prospecting, general exploration, detailed exploration or mining
operation undertaken in any area in accordance with the terms and
conditions of a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining
lease granted before the commencement of this Act. The Committee
also observe that under the new bill, provisions for treating the
existing applications are made under section 4(6). The Committee
thus feel that the transitory provision as envisaged in Clause 137 are
satisfactory as any amendment suggested by various stakeholders will
defeat the very purpose of grant of concession through the process
of bidding/auction.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
06 May, 2013 Chairman,
16 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

167
APPENDIX I
LIST OF CENTRAL MINISTRIES/ORGANIZATIONS/INSTITUTIONS/
INDIVIDUALS WHICH APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
FOR EVIDENCE AND STATE GOVERNMENTS WITH WHOM
THE COMMITTEE HAD DISCUSSIONS
Sl. Date of Subject
No. Sitting
12 3
1. 30.01.2012 Briefing by the Ministry of Mines.
2. 13.02.2012 Briefing by the Ministry of Mines.
3. 15.03.2012 Oral Evidence of the Ministries of Coal, Mines
and Steel.
4. 25.04.2012 Oral Evidence of the Ministries of Coal, Mines
and Steel.
5. 11.05.2012 Oral Evidence of the Ministries of Coal, Mines
and Steel.
6. 01.06.2012 To hear the views of the representatives of
Tata Steel Ltd., New Delhi, Law Office,
Dr. Harsh Pathak & Associates, Delhi; Indian
Chamber of Commerce, Kolkata; Institute for
Studies in Industrial Development (ISID),
New Delhi; The Coastal Environment and
Ecological Conservation Committee (CEECC),
Thisaiyanvilai, Tirunelveli District, Tamil Nadu;
Bengal Chamber of Commerce & Industry
(BCCI), Kolkata; Asian Centre for Human
Rights (ACHR), New Delhi; Mines, Minerals
& People, New Delhi; Federation of Mining
Associations of Rajasthan; Udaipur Chamber
of Commerce & Industry; JSW Steel Ltd.,
New Delhi; and VISA Steel Ltd., New Delhi.
7. 25.01.2012 To hear the views of the representatives of
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
and Industry (FICCI), New Delhi; Geomysore
Exploration Services (India) Pvt. Ltd.,

168
Bangalore; PRS Legislative Research,
New Delhi; Federation of India Mineral
Industries (FIMI), New Delhi; Beach Mineral
Producers Association, Tirunelveli District,
Tamil Nadu; All India Granites and Stone
Association, Bangalore; Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII), New Delhi;
Infrastructure Development Finance Company
Ltd. (IDFC), New Delhi; Cement
Manufacturers Association, New Delhi; Coal
Producers Association, Delhi; Essar Group; and
Balipara Tract & Frontier Foundation, Sonitpur,
Assam.
 8. 02.07.2012 To hear the views of representatives of
Ministry of Corporate Affairs; Ministry of
Environment & Forests; Ministry of Tribal
Affairs; Ministry of Panchayati Raj; Department
of Atomic Energy; and Ministry of Rural
Development.
 9. 16.07.2012 To hear the views of representatives of State
Governments of Rajasthan; West Bengal;
Madhya Pradesh; and Jharkhand.
10. 23.07.2012 To hear the views of representatives of State
Governments of Andhra Pradesh; Chhattisgarh;
Gujarat; and Karnataka.
11. 03.08.2012 To hear the views of representatives of State
Governments of Odisha; Maharashtra; and
Tamil Nadu.
12. 30.10.2012 Oral Evidence of the Ministry of Mines.
13. 16.11.2012 Oral Evidence of the Ministry of Mines.
 12 3

169
APPENDIX II
LIST OF VARIOUS STAKEHOLDERS WHO SUBMITTED
THEIR VIEWS/SUGGESTIONS ON THE BILL
Sl. No. Name Of Organisation/Individual
 12
1. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(FICCI), New Delhi
2. Balipara Tract & Frontier Foundation, Sonitpur, Assam
3. Shri Sachin Shantaram Raut, Maharashtra
4. Southern District Land Owners Association, Kanyakumari
5. Shri M. Anandan, Villupuram Constituency , Chennai, T.N.
6. Southern Region Mines and Mineral Based Workers Welfare
Association, Tisaiyanvilai, T.N.
7. Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi
8. Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), New Delhi
9. Infrastructure Development Finance Company Ltd. (IDFC),
New Delhi
10. Mines, Minerals & People, New Delhi
11. Kalinga Spouge Iron Ltd. (KSIL), Rourkela, Orissa
12. JSW Steel Ltd., New Delhi
13. Indian Chamber of Commerce, Kolkata
14. VISA Steel Ltd., New Delhi
15. Kalinga Nagar Industries Association, Cuttack, Orissa
16. All Odisha Steel Federation, Orissa
17. The Mining, Geological & Metallurgical Institute of India,
Kolkata
18. Aluminium Association of India (AAI), Bangalore
19. India 800 Foundation, New Delhi

170
20. Shri Sarvamittra Sharma, Kanpur, U.P .
21. Society of Geoscientists and Allied Technologists (SGAT),
Bhubaneswar
22. Bikaner District Mine Owners Association, Bikaner
23. Shri G.P. Mathur, Jaipur
24. Soumya K. De & C.S. Banerjee, Kolkata
25. Geomysore Exploration Services (India) Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore
26. PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi
27. Tata Steel Ltd., New Delhi
28. Beach Mineral Producers Association, Tirunelveli District, T.N.
29. Federation of India Mineral Industries (FIMI), New Delhi
30. Rio Tinto India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
31. Shri Jagdishwar Toppo, Mumbai
32. Government of Odisha, Steel & Mines Department, Bhubaneswar
33. All India Granites and Stone Association, Bangalore
34. Orkash Services Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon, Haryana
35. Association of Power Producers (APP), New Delhi
36. Coal Producers Association, New Delhi
37. Cement Manufacturers’ Association, New Delhi
38. Montreal Barfanisai Enterprises Inc., Canada
39. Institute for Studies in Industrial Development (ISID), New Delhi
40. The Coastal Environment and Ecological Conservation
Committee (CEECC) , Thisaiyanvilai, Tirunelveli District, T.N.
41. KIOCL Ltd., Bangalore
42. S.S. Kothari Mehta & Co., New Delhi
43. Law Office, Dr. Harsh Pathak & Associates, Delhi
44. Shri P .C. Gupta, Former CMD, NMDC
45. Bengal Chamber of Commerce & Industry (BCCl), Kolkata
46. Shri A.K. Basu, Ex. Director of Mines & Minerals, Government
of West Bengal
 12

171
47. Asian Centre for Human Rights (ACHR), New Delhi
48. Shri Ajay Singh
49. Shri P .N. Hajra, Bokaro, Jharkhand
50. Dankuni Coal Complex, Contractor’s Labour Union, Hooghly
51. Canada India Foundation, Canada
52. Shri P .K. Chaturvedi
53. Ministry of Corporate Affairs
54. Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
55. Department of Land Resources
56. Ministry of Environment & Forests (Forest Conservation
Division)
57· Ministry of Environment and Forests (Impact Assessment
Division)
58. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
59. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
60. Department of Atomic Energy
61. Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region
62. Minerals Resources Department, Government of Chhattisgarh
63. Government of Karnataka
64. Principal Secretary, Department of Industries & Commerce,
Government of Punjab
65. Orissa Legislative Assembly (2 Nos.)
66. Federation of Mining Associations of Rajasthan (3 Nos.)
67· Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani, MP (LS)
68. Shri Virbhadra Singh, Minister of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises
69. Shri Mohan Jena, MP (LS)
70. Udaipur Chamber of Commerce & Industry
71. State Government of West Bengal
72. Shri Sudhir Mungantiwar, MLA
 12

172
APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 30 JANUARY, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1600 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
3. Shri Ismail Hussain
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
7. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
8. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Ms. Mabel Rebello
10. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
12. Shri R.C. Singh
13. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Md. Aftab Alam — Deputy Secretary

173
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Chandramani Sharma, Director
5. Shri Ranjan Sahai, COM, IBM
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, DCOM, IBM
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
and apprised them of the provisions of Direction  58 of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Chairman mentioned that the sitting
of the Committee has been convened in connection with briefing by
the Ministry of Mines on “The Mines and Minerals (Development &
Regulation) Bill, 2011”.
3. The Committee also decided to obtain the written views from
various State  Governments/Union Territory on the bill and take oral
evidence of the select State Governments.
4. The Committee then discussed certain provisions of the Bill in
brief. The Members raised various issues and sought clarifications from
Ministry of Mines on the subject. Some of the points were clarified by
the representatives of Ministry of Mines. It was decided that the
Committee would examine and discuss the provisions of the Bill clause
by clause in its future sittings.
5. ** ** ** ** **
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
** Do not pertain to this Report.

174
APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 13 FEBRUARY, 2012
IN COMMIITEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1600 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
5. Shri Ismail Hussain
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
11. Shri K. Sugumar
12. Shri Manohar Tirkey
13. Dr. G. Vivekanand
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
15. Ms. Mabel Rebello
16. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
17. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
19. Shri R.C. Singh

175
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Chandramani Sharma, Director
5. Shri Ranjan Sahai, COM, IBM
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, DCOM, IBM
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with briefing by the Ministry of Mines on
“The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Bill, 2011” and
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then discussed in detail some of the important
clauses contained in chapter-I and II of the Bill and sought clarifications
from the representatives of the Ministry of Mines.
4. The Committee then decided to further examine and discuss
the provisions of the Bill at their future sittings.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

176
APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 15 MARCH, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 0900 hours to 1045 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Dr. G. Vivekanand
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
12. Shri R.C. Singh
13. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

177
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Chandramani Sharma, Director
5. Shri Ranjan Sahai, COM — Indian Bureau of Mines
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, DCOM — Indian Bureau of Mines
7. Shri M.S. Jairam, Director — GSI
Ministry of Steel
1. Shri P .K. Misra, Secretary
2. Shri S. Machendranathan, AS&FA
3. Dr. Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Udai Pratap Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh, Joint Secretary
6. Smt. Indrani Kaushal, Director
7. Shri Sanjay Mangal, Director
Ministry of Coal
1. Shri Alok Perti, Secretary
2. Smt. Zohra Chatterji, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri AK. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Anjali Srivastava, Jt. Secretary & FA
5. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Sharad Ghodke, Director
7. Shri N. Kumar, Director (T) — Coal India Ltd.
8. Shri A.K. Sinha, Dir. (Fin.) — Coal India Ltd.
9. Shri A.K. Singh, CMD — CMPDIL
10. Shri Narsingh Rao, CMD — SCCL
11. Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD — NLC

178
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretaries and
representatives of the Ministries of Mines, Coal and Steel to the sitting
of Committee convened to take oral evidence in connection with
examination of “The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation)
Bill, 2011” and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then discussed in detail some of the important
clauses contained in the Bill and sought clarifications from the
representatives of the Ministries of Mines, Steel and Coal.
4. The Committee decided to further examine and discuss the
provisions of the Bill with the three Ministries at their sittings scheduled
to be held on 20th March, 2012.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

179
APPENDIX VI
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE·
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 20 MARCHl 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’ PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 0900 hours to 0915 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
7. Dr. G. Vivekanand
8. Shri Pakauri Lal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Chandramani Sharma, Director

180
5. Shri Ranjan Sahali, COM — Indian Bureau of Mines
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, DCOM — Indian Bureau of Mines
7. Shri M.S. Jairam, Director — GSI
Ministry of Steel
1. Shri P .K. Misra, Secretary
2. Shri S. Machendranathan, AS&FA
3. Dr. Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Udai Pratap Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh, Joint Secretary
6. Smt. Indrani Kaushal, Director
7. Shri Sanjay Mangal, Director
Ministry of Coal
1. Shri Alok Perti, Secretary
2. Smt. Zohra Chatterji, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Anjali Srivastava, Jt. Secretary & FA
5. Shri S.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Sharad Ghodke, Director
7. Shri D.N. Prasad, Director
8. Shri A.K. Singh, CMD — CMPDIL
2. In the absence of required quorum to constitute a sitting of
the Committee, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal & Steel
decided to adjourn the sitting as per the Rule 259(2) of ‘Rules of
Procedure and conduct of Buslness in Lok Sabha’.
The Committee then adjourned .

181
APPENDIX VII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 27 MARCH, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hanjsraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
8. Dr. G. Vivekanand
Rajya Sabha
9. Smt. Smriti Irani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter he apprised the Members that the
meeting has been convened to pass a resolution to seek extension of
time for presentation of Report on “The Mines and Minerals
(Development & Regulation) Bill, 2011”.

182
3. The Committee then approved the same and authorised the
Chairman to request Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to grant extension of
time upto last week of Monsoon Session of Parliament for presentation
of the Report on the Bill.
The Committee then adjourned.

183
APPENDIX VIII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 25 APRIL, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee sat from 0900 hours to 1015 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
3. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
7. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
8. Shri K. Sugumar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Chandramani Sharma, Director

184
5. Shri Ranjan Sahai, COM — Indian Bureau of Mines
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, DCOM — Indian Bureau of Mines
7. Shri S.K. Wadhawan, DDG — GSI
Ministry of Steel
8. Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary, Secretary
9. Shri Udai Pratap Singh, Joint Secretary
10. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh, Joint Secretary
11. Shri Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Coal
12. Shri Alok Perti, Secretary
13. Smt. Zohra Chatterji, Additional Secretary
14. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretaries and
representatives of the Ministries of Mines, Coal and Steel to the sitting
of Committee convened to take oral evidence in connection with
examination of “The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation)
Bill, 2011” and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then discussed in detail some of the important
clauses contained in the Bill on which Ministry of Steel and Ministry
of Coal have some reservations. Thereafter, the Committee sought
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministries of Mines in
this regard.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

185
APPENDIX IX
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 11 MAY, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1645 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
4. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
7. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
8. Shri Pakauri Lal
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
10. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
11. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

186
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Special Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Steel
4. Dr. Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Udai Pratap Singh, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Coal
6. Shri Alok Perti, Secretary
7. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretaries and
representatives of the Ministries of Mines, Coal and Steel to the sitting
of Committee convened to take oral evidence in connection with
examination of “The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation)
Bill, 2011” and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then discussed in detail some of the important
clauses contained in the Bill on which Ministry of Steel and Ministry
of Coal have some reservations. Thereafter, the Committee sought
clarifications from the representatives of the Ministries of Mines in this
regard.
4. The Committee, then decided to take oral evidence of
stakeholders from whom memoranda have been received in connection
with examination of “The Mines and Minerals (Development &
Regulation) Bill, 2011” on 31.5.2012 and 1.6.2012.
5. ** ** ** **
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.

187
APPENDIX X
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 01 JUNE, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. and 1430 hrs. to
1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Ismail Hussain
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
11. Dr. G. Vivekanand
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Jugul Kishore
13. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
14. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
15. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
16. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
17. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu

188
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
PART I
(1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
1. Tata Steel Ltd., New Delhi
(i) Shri Sanjay Patnaik, Chief Raw Material (Strategic Group)
(ii) Shri Chanakya Chaudhary, Chief Resident Executive
2. Law Office, Dr. Harsh Pathak & Associates, Delhi
(i) Dr. Harsh Pathak, Advocate
(ii) Shri Ashish Kumar Sahu, Advocate
3. Indian Chamber of Commerce, Kolkata
(i) Shri Sumit Mazumdar, Vice-President, ICC
(ii) Shri Lokesh Kumar Roy , Director, Joy Mining Services India
Pvt. Ltd.
4. Institute for Studies in Industrial Development (ISID), New Delhi
Shri Nilmadhab Mohanty, Honorary Senior Fellow
5. The Coastal Environment and Ecological Conservation Committee
(CEECC), Thisaiyanvilai, Tirunelveli District, T.N.
Shri R. Srinivasan, Technical Consultant, Former Director of
Geology and Mining, Tamil Nadu State

189
PART II
(1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs.)
1. Bengal Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI), Kolkata
(i) Shri Sandeep Kumar, MD, S&T Mining Company Ltd.
(ii) Shri Gautam Dhar, CGM, Coal India Ltd. (Corporate
Planning).
2. Asian Centre for Human Rights (ACHR), New Delhi
Shri Suhas Chakma, Director
3. Mines, Minerals and People, New Delhi
(i) Shri Ravi Rebbapragada, Secretary-General
(ii) Dr. Sreedhar, Chairperson
4. Federation of Mining Associations of Rajasthan
(i) Shri Akshyadeep Mathur, Secretary-General
(ii) Shri Shridhar Sharma, Vice-President
5. Udaipur Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(i) Shri Arvind Singal, Patron UCCI
(ii) Shri M.L. Lunawath, Senior Member
6. JSW Steel Ltd., New Delhi
(i) Shri Sheshagiri Rao, JMD & Group CFO
(ii) Shri Prashant Jain, Head Corporate Strategy & Development
7. VISA Steel Ltd., New Delhi
(i) Shri Vishal Aggarwal, MD
(ii) Shri Vishambhar Saran, Chairman
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”. The non-official witnesses
of different organizations were called individually and apprised of the
provisions of Directions 57 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.

190
3. The Committee then heard the reservations and views of
representatives of all the organizations called to tender evidence on
some of the important clauses contained in the Bill. Thereafter, the
Members also sought clarifications from the representatives of these
organizations and also from the representatives of Ministry of Mines
on certain provisions of the Bill.
4. The Committee, then decided to take oral evidence of some of
the other stakeholders from whom memoranda have been received in
connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Bill ,2011” on 25.6.2012.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

191
APPENDIX XI
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 25 JUNE, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. and 1430 hrs. to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhury
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Shri K. Sugumar
11. Shri Manohar Tirkey
12. Dr. G. Vivekanand
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Jugul Kishore
14. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
15. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
16. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
17. Shri Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
18. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey

192
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
PART I
(1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)
1. Ministry of Mines
(i) Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
(ii) Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines, Indian Bureau of
Mines
2. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(FICCI) Delhi
(i) Shri Anand Goel, Member, FICCI, Sub-committee on MMDR
Bill
(ii) Shri Pankaj Satija, Member , FICCI Sub-committee on MMDR
Bill
3. Geomysore Exploration Services (India) Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore
(i) Shri Charles E.E. Devenish, Chairman
(ii) Dr. V .N. Vasudev, Director-Exploration
4. PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi
(i) Dr. M.R. Madhavan, Head of Research
(ii) Shri Karan Malik, Research Analyst
5. Federation of Indian Mineral Industries (FIMI), New Delhi
(i) Shri P .K. Mukherjee, President
(ii) Shri R.K. Sharma, Secretary-General
6. Beach Mineral Producers Association (BMPA), Tirunelveli District,
T.N.
(i) Shri Vaikundarajan, Secretary
(ii) Shri Thangaraj, Committee Member

193
7. All India Granites and Stone Association, Bangalore
(i) Shri J.B. Surana, President, AIGSA
(ii) Shri K. Raghav Reddy, Life Member, AIGSA
PART II
(1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs.)
1. Confederation of Industry (CII), New Delhi
(i) Shri H.C. Daga, Group Executive president, Aditya Birla
Group
(ii) Shri Anurag Dixit, Chief Khondbond Project, Tata Steel Ltd.
2. Infrastructure Development Finance Company Ltd. (IDFC),
New Delhi
(i) Shri R.V . Shahi, Chairman, Energy Advisory Board, IDFC
(ii) Shri V .S. Ailawadi, Member, Energy Advisory Board, IDFC
3. Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi
(i) Shri U.R. Raju, Executive Director, Dalmia Cement (Bharat)
Ltd.
(ii) Dr. S.K. Handoo, Advisor (Tech.)
4. Coal Producers Association (CPA)
(i) Shri M.K. Thapar, Vice-Chairman
(ii) Shri A.K. Jethi, Secretary-General
5. Essar Group
(i) Dr. M.M. Seam, Advisor
(ii) Shri B.M. Verma, Advisor
6. Balipara Tract and Frontier Foundation, Sonitpur, Assam
(i) Shri Kamal Nain Pandya, Trustee
(ii) Shri Anish Dayal, Legal Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and,
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”. The non-official witnesses
of different organizations were called individually and apprised of the
provisions of Directions 57 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.

194
3. The Committee then heard the views and reservations of
representatives of all the organizations/stakeholders called to tender
evidence on different clauses contained in the Bill. Thereafter, the
Members also sought clarifications from the representatives of these
organizations and also from the representatives of Ministry of Mines
on certain provisions of the Bill which were duly responded by them.
4. The Committee, then decided to take oral evidence of some of
the Central Ministries from whom memoranda have been received in
connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Bill, 2011” on 02.7.2012.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

195
APPENDIX XII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 2 JULY, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhury
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
7. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
8. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
9. Dr. G. Vivekanand
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Jugul Kishore
12. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
13. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
14. Shri C.M. Ramesh
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
16. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari

196
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Ministry of Mines
I. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
II. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
2. Ministry of Corporate Affairs
I. Shri Sudhir Mittal, Special Secretary
II. Shri Rakesh Chandra, Director (Inspection & Investigation)
3. Ministry of Environment and Forests
I. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC)
II. Shri H.C. Chowdhary, AIG (FC)
4. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
I. Shri A.K. Dubey, Joint Secretary
II. Ms. Santosh, Director
5. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
I. Shri Sushil Kumar, Joint Secretary
II. Mrs. Susan D. George, Director
6. Department of Atomic Energy
I. Dr. R.K. Sinha, Secretary & Chairman, Atomic Energy
Commission
II. Shri P.S. Parihar, Director, Atomic Minerals Directorate for
Exploration & Research, Hyderabad
III. Shri K.A.P . Sinha, Joint Secretary , DAE Branch Sectt.
7. Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources)
I. Shri Prabhudayal Meena, Additional Secretary
II. Shri Charanjit Singh, Director

197
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”. The Committee then heard
the views and reservations of representatives of various Central
Ministries called to tender evidence on different clauses contained in
the Bill. Thereafter, the Members also sought clarifications from the
representatives of these Ministries and also from the representatives of
Ministry of Mines on certain provisions of the Bill which were duly
responded by them. The Chairman also directed the representatives of
various Ministries to furnish written replies to the points on which
information was not readily available with them.
3. The Committee, then decided to take oral evidence of some of
the Stakeholders/State Governments from whom memoranda have been
received in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development & Regulation) Bill, 2011”.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

198
APPENDIX XIII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 16 JULY, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
4. Advocate Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
5. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Shri K. Sugumar
11. Shri Manohar Tirkey
12. Dr. G. Vivekanand
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
15. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
16. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
17. Shri Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
18. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari

199
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Ministry of Mines
(i) Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
(ii) Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines, IBM
(iv) Shri Abhay Aggarwal, Deputy Controller of Mines, IBM
(v) Shri M.S. Jairam, Director, GSI
2. State Government of Rajasthan
(i) Shri Ajitabh Sharma, Director, Department of Mines &
Geology.
(ii) Shri R.K. Nalwaya, Suptdg. Mining Engineer (HQ),
Department of Mines & Geology.
3. State Government of West Bengal
Shri Alapan Bandyopadhyay, Principal Secretary, Commerce
and Industries.
4. State Government of Madhya Pradesh
Shri S.K. Shah, Director, Department of Mines & Geology.
5. State Government of Jharkhand
(i) Shri A.K. Sarkar, Additional Chief Secretary, Department of
Mines & Geology.
(ii) Shri B.B. Singh, Director Mines, Department of Mines &
Geology.
6. State Government of Andhra Pradesh
B. Srinivasulu, Principal Secretary, Mines
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”. The Committee then heard

200
the views and reservations of representatives of various State
Governments called to tender evidence on different clauses contained
in the Bill. Thereafter, the Members also sought clarifications from the
representatives of these State Governments and also from the
representatives of Ministry of Mines on certain provisions of the Bill
which were duly responded to by them.
3. The Principal Secretary, Mines, Government of Andhra Pradesh,
then seek extension of time to submit the views of the State
Government at the next sitting of the Committee which was agreed to
by the Committee.
4. The Committee, then decided to take oral evidence of
representatives of State Government of Andhra Pradesh and some other
State Governments on 23.07.2012 in connection with examination of
“The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned .

201
APPENDIX XIV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 23 JULY, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Udyanraje Bhonsle
3. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhary
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Advocate Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
9. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
11. Shri K. Sugumar
12. Shri Manohar Tirkey
13. Dr. G. Vivekanand
14. Shri Pakouri Lal
15. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  alias Lalan Singh
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Jugul Kishore
17. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
18. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh

202
20. Shri Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
21. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh
23. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Ministry of Mines
(i) Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
(ii) Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines, IBM
(iv) Shri Abhay Aggarwal, Deputy Controller of Mines, IBM
(v) Shri M.S. Jairam, Director, GSI
2. State Government of Andhra Pradesh
(i) D. Sreenivasulu, Principal Secretary, Department of Industries
and Commerce
(ii) Shri Rafi Ahmad, Joint Director of Mines and Geology
(iii) Shri Venkata Sai, Assistant Geologist
3. State Government of Chhattisgarh
(i) Shri Shivraj Singh, Vice Chairman, State Planning
Commission
(ii) Shri Vijayendra, Secretary , Mineral Resources Department
4. State Government of Gujarat
(i) Shri Vinay V . Vyasa, IAS, Commissioner of Geology and
Mines
5. State Government of Karnataka
(i) Shri Anil Kumar Jha, IAS, Secretary, Department of
Commerce and Industries
(ii) Shri H.R. Srinivas, IAS, Director, Department of Mines and
Geology.

203
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) BiII, 2011”. The Committee then heard
the views and reservations of representatives of State Governments of
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat and Karnataka called to tender
evidence on different clauses contained in the Bill. Thereafter, the
Members sought clarifications from the representatives of these State
Governments and also from the representatives of Ministry of Mines
on certain provisions of the Bill which were duly responded to by
them.
3. The Committee, then decided to take oral evidence of
representatives of State Governments of Maharashtra, Odisha and
Tamil Nadu on 03.08.2012 in connection with examination of “The
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

204
APPENDIX XV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL  HELD ON 3 AUGUST, 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
3. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Advocate Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Kalyan Singh
11. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
12. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
13. Shri K. Sugumar
14. Shri Manohar Tirkey
15. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
17. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
18. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
19. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
20. Shri Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu

205
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Ministry of Mines
(i) Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
(ii) Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines, IBM
(iii) Shri Abhay Aggarwal, Deputy Controller of Mines, IBM
(iv) Shri M.S. Jairam, Director, GSI·
2. State Government of Odisha
(i) Shri Rajesh V erma, Principal Secretary, Steel and Mines
Department
(ii) Shri Deepak Mohanty, Director of Mines
(iii) Shri Harihar Panigrahy, Consultant, Steel and Mines
Department
3. State Government of Maharashtra
Shri V .S. Sawakhande, Director, Geology and Mining
4. State Government of Tamil Nadu
Shri Atul Anand, Commissioner (Geology) (Head of
Department of Geology and Mining)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of Committee
convened in connection with examination of “The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011”. The Committee then heard
the views and reservations of representatives of State Governments of
Odisha, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu on different clauses contained
in the Bill. Thereafter, the Members also sought clarifications from the
representatives of these State Governments and also from the
representatives of Ministry of Mines on certain provisions of the Bill
which were duly responded to by them.

206
3. The Committee also decided that the verbatim proceedings of
all the sittings held till date in connection with examination of “The
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011” be
circulated to all the Members of the Committee after taking due
permission of Hon’ble Speaker.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

207
APPENDIX XVI
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 30 OCTOBER 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. and from 1330 hrs.
to 1500 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
7. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
8. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
9. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
10. Kumari Saroj Pandey
11. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
12. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
14. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
15. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
16. Shri Sanjay Raut
17. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
18. Shri Nand Kumar Sai

208
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal — Additional Director
4. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri R.H. Khwaja, Secretary - Ministry of Mines
2. Ms. Gauri Kumar, Addl. Secretary - Ministry of Mines
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary (MR) - Ministry of Mines
4. Shri Rokhum Lalremruata, Director - Ministry of Mines
5. Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines - Indian Bureau of
  Mines
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, - Indian Bureau of
   Dy. Controller of Mines   Mines
7. Shri M.S. Jairam, Director (Geology) - Geological Survey of
  India
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Mines and other officers to the sitting of Committee convened in
connection with examination of the subject, “The Mines & Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011” and apprised of  Direction
58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Mines and other officials then briefed
the Committee about the main objectives and important clauses of the
Bill. Thereafter, the Committee deliberated on various provisions of
the Bill and Members raised various queries and sought clarifications
on issues like status of pending applications for mineral concession,
minimum limit of 10 hectares area for mining, notifications by the
State Governments in grant of mineral concessions for Scheduled Area
specified in Fifth and Sixth Schedule of Constitution, transfer of mining
lease to a person in adjoining area, payment of royalty/profit sharing
and utilization of District Mineral Fund for development of mining
affected areas, etc.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

209
APPENDIX XVII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 16 NOVEMBER 2012
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ’D’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
4. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
5. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
6. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
7. Shri Rajaram Pal
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
12. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
13. Shri Jugul Kishore
14. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

210
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri R.H. Khwaja, Secretary
2. Shri Naresh Kumar, Joint Secretary (E)
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary (MR)
4. Shri Rokhum Lalremruata, Director
5. Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines, Indian Bureau of Mines
6. Shri Abhay Aggarwal, Dy. Controller of Mines, Indian Bureau
of Mines
7. Shri M.S. Jairam, Director (Geology), Geological Survey of India
MINISTRY OF COAL
1. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Mines and other officers to the sitting of Committee convened in
connection with examination of “The Mines & Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Bill, 2011" and apprised them of the Direction 58 of
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then deliberated on various provisions of the
Bill including royalty and cess especially with regard to royalty on
coal in West Bengal, utilization of District Mineral Funds, constitution,
powers and functions of National and State Mining Authorities and
Tribunals etc.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

211
APPENDIX XVIII
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 06 MAY, 2013
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
4. Shri Pakauri Lal
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Shri Rajaram Pal
7. Kumari Saroj Pandey
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
9. Dr. Pradeep KumarBalmuchu
10. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Balshekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

212
**Do not pertain to this Report.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) Report on “The Mines and Minerals (Development &
Regulation) Bill, 2011” relating the Ministry of Mines; and
(ii) **  ** ** **
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

213
APPENDIX XIX
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 1 10 of 201 1
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2011
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Declaration as to the expediency of Union control.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
G
ENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON MINERAL CONCESSIONS
4. Reconnaissance, prospecting and mining operations to be under
licence.
5. Eligibility for grant of mineral concessions.
6. Maximum and Minimum area of mineral concessions.
7. Period of grant and extension of licence and deposit of security.
8. Grant and extension of mineral concession.
9. Prospecting licence and mining lease of an area under
reconnaissance.
10. Special provisions in respect of atomic minerals.
11. Mineral concession to be void if in contravention of Act.
12. Cancellation of a mineral concession or disqualification.
13. Notification of certain areas for grant of mineral concessions.
14. Time limit for disposal of applications for grant of mineral
concessions.

214
CLAUSES
15. Rights of a holder of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting
licence or mining lease.
16. Act and rules to apply to all extension of mineral concessions.
17. Transfer of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and prospecting licence .
18. Transfer of a mining lease.
CHAPTER III
NON-EXCLUSIVE RECONNAISSANCE LICENCE
19. Conditions of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence.
20. Procedure for grant of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence.
CHAPTER IV
HIGH TECHNOLOGY RECONNAISSANCE-CUM-EXPLORATION
LICENCE AND PROSPECTING LICENCE
21. Conditions of a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence and prospecting licence.
22. Procedure for grant of high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence and prospecting licence.
23. Issue of notification where prospecting operations are to be
undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, etc.
CHAPTER V
MINING LEASE
24. Conditions of a mining lease.
25. Procedure for grant of mining lease.
26. Mining operations to be in accordance with mining plan.
27. Rights of a lessee.
28. Extension of mining lease .
29. Lapsing of leases and revival.
30. Determination of lease.
31. Premature termination of lease.
32. Mine Closure Plan .
33. Closure .

215
CHAPTER VI
MINERAL CONCESSIONS IN C ASES WHERE MINERALS DO NOT
VEST EXCLUSIVELY WITH G OVERNMENT
CLAUSES
34. Applications in case minerals vest with private persons.
35. Mineral concessions to be in the form of a registered deed.
36. Cases where minerals vest partly with Government.
CHAPTER VII
RESERVATION
37. Reservation of areas for conservation of mineral resources.
38. Saving of reserved areas.
39. Expiry and revocation of reservation.
40. Conservation of mineral.
CHAPTER VIII
R
OYALTIES, COMPENSATION AND CESS
41. Royalty payable in respect of minerals.
42. Dead rent payable by lessee.
43. Payment of compensation to owner of surface, usufruct and
traditional rights, damages, etc.
44. Levy and collection of cess by Central Government.
45. Levy and collection of cess by State Government.
CHAPTER IX
POWER TO ISSUE DIRECTIONS
46. Power of Central Government to issue directions in the interest
of scientific mineral exploration and mining and sustainable
development.
47. Power of State Government to issue directions generally.
48. Power to authorise Geological Survey of India and Indian Bureau
of Mines, Atomic Minerals Directorate, etc., to investigate and
report.
49. Power of Indian Bureau of Mines, Coal Controller, Atomic
Minerals Directorate and State Directorate to issue certain
directions and to seek information.
CHAPTER X
N
ATIONAL, S TATE M INERAL F UND AND D ISTRICT M INERAL F OUNDATION
50. National Mineral Fund.

216
CLAUSES
51. Administration and Management of Fund.
52. Audit of Accounts of National Mineral Funds.
53. State Mineral Fund.
54. Administration and Management of State Mineral Fund.
55. Audit of Accounts of State Mineral Fund.
56. Establishment of District Mineral Foundation.
57. Governing Council.
CHAPTER XI
N
ATIONAL M INING R EGULATORY A UTHORITY AND S TATE
MINING R EGULATORY A UTHORITY
58. Establishment of National Mining Regulatory Authority.
59. Composition of National Authority.
60. Qualification for appointment as Chairperson or Member of
National Authority.
61. Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members.
62. Term of office, salary and allowances of Chairperson and
Members of National Authority.
63. Resignation.
64. Removal of suspension of Chairperson or Members of National
Authority.
65. Member of National Authority to act as its Chairperson in certain
cases.
66. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of National
Authority.
67. Officers and other employees of National Authority.
68. Powers and functions of National Authority.
69. Search, seizure and investigation.
70. Establishment of State Mining Regulatory Authority.
71. Composition and procedures of State Authority.
72. Powers and functions of State Authority.
73. Powers of Central Government to supersede National Authority.
74. Power of State Government to supersede State Authority.

217
CHAPTER XII
NATIONAL M INING T RIBUNAL AND S TATE M INING T RIBUNAL
CLAUSES
75. Establishment of National Mining Tribunal and benches thereof.
76. Composition of National Mining Tribunal.
77. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or Members of
National Mining Tribunal.
78. Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members.
79. Terms of office, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and
Members of National Mining Tribunal.
80. Resignation.
81. Removal and suspension of Chairperson or Members of National
Mining Tribunal.
82. Member of National Mining Tribunal to act as its Chairperson
in certain cases.
83. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of National Mining
Tribunal.
84. Staff of National Mining Tribunal.
85. Powers and procedure of the National Mining Tribunal.
86. Application to National Mining Tribunal.
87. Transfer of revisions pending before Central Government to
National Mining Tribunal.
88. Appeal to High Court.
89. Establishment of State Mining Tribunal.
90. Composition of State Tribunal and benches thereof.
91. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson of Member of
State Mining Tribunal.
92. Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members
of State Mining Tribunal.
93. Terms of office, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and
Members of State Mining Tribunal.
94. Resignation.
95. Removal and suspension of Chairperson or Members of State
Mining Tribunal.
96. Member of State Mining Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in
certain cases.

218
CLAUSES
97. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Mining
Tribunal.
98. Staff of State Mining Tribunal.
99. Powers and procedure of State Mining Tribunal.
100. Application to State Mining Tribunal.
101. Appeal to High Court.
CHAPTER XIII
COORDINATION C OMMITTEES AND N ATIONAL R EPOSITORIES
102. Central Coordination-cum Empowered Committee.
103. State Coordination-cum Empowered Committee.
104. National Repositories.
CHAPTER XIV
S
PECIAL C OURTS
105. Constitution of Special Courts.
106. Procedures and powers of Special Courts.
107. Special Court to have powers of court of sessions.
108. Appeal and revision.
109. Review.
CHAPTER XV
O
FFENCES AND P ENALTIES
110. Punishment for reconnaissance prospecting and mining
operations without licence or lease.
111. Penalty for non-implementation of final mine closure plan.
112. Penalty for disobeying direction of State Government, etc.
113. Penalty.
114. Recovery, seizure, etc., of minerals raised by any person without
lawful authority.
115. Offences by companies.
116. Cognizance of offences by court.
117. Compounding of offences.
118. Recovery of certain sums as arrears of land revenue.
119. Ineligibility for grant of mineral concession.

219
CLAUSES
120. Punishment for vexatious complaints.
121. Punishment for violation of directions of National Authority.
122. Punishment for obstructing Investigation officer or Investigating
Authority.
CHAPTER XVI
MISCELLANEOUS
123. Power of entry and inspections.
124. Power to search, enter and inspect.
125. Declaration of a mineral as a major mineral.
126. Accreditation of agencies.
127. Special provisions to deal with certain contingencies.
128. Approval of Central Government to State Government.
129. Bar of jurisdiction.
130. Delegation of powers.
131. Power of Central Government to make rules.
132. Power of State Government to make rules.
133. Laying of rules.
134. Members and staff of Tribunals to be public servants.
135. Application of other laws not barred.
136. Protection of action taken in good faith.
137. Transitory provisions.
138. Repeal and saving.
139. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.

220
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 1 10 of 201 1
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the scientific development
and regulation of mines and minerals under the control of the Union.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-
second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into
force of that provision.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient
in the public interest that the Union should
take under its control the regulation of mines
and mineral development to the extent
hereinafter provided.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Declaration
as to the
expediency
of Union
control.

221
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “atomic minerals” means the
minerals specified in Part ‘B’ of the First
Schedule;
(b) “Atomic Minerals Directorate”
means the Atomic Minerals Directorate for
Exploration and Research, Hyderabad,
under the control of the Department of
Atomic Energy, Central Government;
(c) “beach sand mineral” includes
ilmenite, rutile, leucoxene minerals, and any
other titanium bearing mineral that can be
extracted from placer sand as specified in
Part ‘C’ of the First Schedule;
(d) “cess” means,—
(i) a duty in the nature of duty of
excise and customs levied and collected
on major minerals by the Central
Government; and
(ii) a duty on royalty levied and
collected on major and minor minerals
by the State Government, for the
purposes of this Act;
(e) “Coal Controller” means the person
appointed as such by the Central
Government under the Coal Controller
Organisation (Group ‘A’ Posts) Recruitment
Rules, 1986 for the time being in force;
(f) “coal minerals” means the minerals
specified in Part ‘A’ of the First Schedule;
(g) “detailed exploration” means a
detailed three-dimensional delineation of a
known deposit achieved through close
spaced sampling, pitting, trenching and
drilling in a grid, and includes an analysis
of outcrops, trenches, boreholes, shafts and
tunnels, so that the size, shape, structure,
grade of the deposit are established with
high degree of accuracy, in order to conduct
a feasibility study;
Definitions.

222
(h) “feasibility study” means the report
prepared by duly accredited agencies after
conducting a study of a mineral deposit in
accordance with the United Nations
Framework Classification System, assessing
in detail the technical soundness and
economic viability of a mining project,
including an audit of all geological,
engineering, environmental, legal and
economic information accumulated on the
project;
(i) “forest area” means any area to
which the provisions of the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, is applicable;
(j) “general exploration” means the
process of initial delineation of an identified
deposit in an area using surface mapping,
wide spaced sampling, trenching and
drilling for preliminary evaluation of
mineral quantity and quality, including
mineralogical tests on laboratory scale, and
any indirect method of mineral
investigation, in order to conduct a pre-
feasibility study and further detailed
exploration;
(k) “high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence” means a licence
granted under this Act for reconnaissance
and prospecting, including general and
detailed exploration;
(l) “licence” means the licence granted
for the purposes of reconnaissance or
prospecting or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration;
(m) “major minerals” means the
minerals specified in the First Schedule;
(n) “mineral concession” means a
reconnaissance licence, a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, a
prospecting licence, or a mining lease in
respect of major minerals and minor
69 of 1980.

223
minerals and includes quarrying permits
and any other mineral concessions
permitting the mining of minor minerals
in accordance with such rules as may be
made by the State Government in this
behalf;
(o) “mining lease” means a lease
granted by the competent authority for the
purpose of undertaking mining operations,
in accordance with the provisions of this
Act, and in respect of minor minerals, shall
include quarrying permits and other
mineral concessions permitting the mining
of minor minerals, in accordance with such
rules as may be made by the State
Government;
(p) “minor minerals” means the
minerals other than the major minerals
specified in the First Schedule;
(q) “National Authority” means the
National Mining Regulatory Authority
established under section 58;
(r) “National Mining Tribunal” means
the National Mining Tribunal established
under section 75;
(s) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(t) “non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence” means a licence to conduct a
systematic study for identifying areas of
enhanced mineral potential through
reconnaissance on regional scale;
(u) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(v) “prospecting” means the systematic
process of searching for a mineral deposit
by narrowing down an area of promising
enhanced mineral potential through outcrop
identification, geological mapping,

224
geophysical and geochemical studies,
trenching, drilling, sampling, etc., in order
to facilitate general and detailed
exploration;
(w) “prospecting licence” means a
licence granted under the provisions of this
Act to conduct prospecting, general
exploration and detailed exploration
operations;
(x) “prospecting report” means a report
containing all relevant information on a
mineral in an area on the basis of results
of prospecting, general exploration and
detailed exploration giving details of ore
bodies in terms of size, shape, grade,
quantity of mineralisation and geological
assessment represented by codes in the
United Nations Framework Classification
System, including baseline and geo-
environmental study data;
(y) “reconnaissance” means a systematic
study to identify areas of enhanced mineral
potential on a regional scale based primarily
on the results of regional geological,
geophysical and geochemical studies
through remote sensing, aerial and ground
sampling surveys including, preliminary
field inspections, in order to facilitate
further investigation for deposit
identification;
(z) “reconnaissance report” means a
report containing all relevant information
on mineral occurrences in an area of
enhanced mineral potential on regional
scale obtained through reconnaissance;
(za) “Schedules” means the Schedules
appended to this Act;
(zb) “Special Courts” means the Special
Courts constituted under section 105 of this
Act;
(zc) “State Directorate” means the
Directorate of Mining and Geology (by

225
whatever name called) of the State
Government headed by a Director (or any
other designation of this nature) responsible
for regulation of mining activities within
the State;
(zd) “State Authority” means the State
Mining Regulatory Authority established
under section 70;
(ze) “State Mining Tribunal” means the
State Mining Tribunal established under
section 89;
(zf) “sustainable development
framework” means the National sustainable
development framework or a State
sustainable development framework
prepared in accordance with the provisions
of section 46;
(zg) “United Nations Framework
Classification” refers to the classification of
mineral reserves or resources made by the
United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe and as may be adopted and notified
by the Central Government for the
purposes of this Act;
(zh ) the expressions “agent”,
“manager”, “mine” and “owner” shall have
the meanings respectively assigned to them
in the Mines Act, 1952.
CHAPTER II
G
ENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON MINERAL CONCESSIONS
4. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, no person shall undertake any
reconnaissance, prospecting, general
exploration, detailed exploration or mining in
respect of any major or minor minerals except
under a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence,
high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence or mining lease in
case of major minerals or any other mineral
concession in case of minor minerals, as the
case may be, granted in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder:
Reconnaiss-
ance,
prospecting
and
mining
operations
to be
under
licence.
35 of 1952.

226
Provided that nothing in this sub-section
shall affect any reconnaissance, prospecting,
general exploration, detailed exploration or
mining operation undertaken in any area in
accordance with the terms and conditions of a
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or
mining lease granted before the commencement
of this Act.
(2) No licence shall be necessary in respect
of reconnaissance or prospecting operations
undertaken by the Geological Survey of India,
the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the Mineral
Exploration Corporation Limited, the Singareni
Collieries Limited, the Neyveli Lignite
Corporation Limited and the Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute Limited being
Government companies within the meaning of
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 or the
Directorate of Mining and Geology (by
whatever name called) of any State
Government and such other Government
agencies as may be notified by the Central
Government from time to time in respect of
any land where rights on minerals vest in the
State Government:
Provided that all such operations shall be
notified by the State Government and may be
undertaken for a period not exceeding three
years in respect of reconnaissance and six years
in respect of prospecting, as may be specified
in such notification:
Provided further that no such
reconnaissance or prospecting shall be
undertaken in an area for which a licence or
mining lease has been granted or for which
application for a grant of licence or mining
lease is pending.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, in respect of the Mineral Exploration
Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries
Limited, the Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited, the Central Mine Planning and Design
1 of 1956.

227
Institute Limited and the other Government
agencies as may be notified under this sub-
section, the provisions of this sub-section shall
apply with respect to promotional work
undertaken on behalf of the Central
Government or the State Government, as the
case may be.
(3) No person shall be entitled to make
any application for mineral concession in the
area covered by the notification during the
period specified in the notification issued under
sub-section ( 2), and on expiry of the said
period or such earlier period as may be
notified by the State Government, the area shall
be deemed to be available for grant of mineral
concessions.
(4) In respect of land on which prospecting
operations are conducted in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section ( 2), before the
expiry of the period specified in the notification
issued by the State Government, the Central
Government in case of coal minerals, and the
State Government in case of all other minerals,
may by notification, invite competitive offers
for grant of concession under section 13 or may
set aside the entire land or any portion of the
land for a period not exceeding three years
for grant of mineral concession under section
13 and no application for grant of any mineral
concession shall lie during this period or on
the expiry thereof, except in accordance with
a notification issued under sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section ( 4) of section 13 of this Act, as the
case may be.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(6), no mineral concession shall be granted
except on an application made to the State
Government after the commencement of this
Act and in accordance with the provisions
thereof along with the application fee and
earnest money, in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.

228
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby clarified that applicants who made
the applications before the commencement of
this Act shall be required to make fresh
applications under this Act, and no right
[except as otherwise provided under sub-
section ( 6)] shall accrue to such applicants
under this Act by virtue of having made an
application before such commencement.
(6) The provisions of sub-section ( 5) shall
not be applicable in case of applications made
in accordance with any law for the time being
in force, before the commencement of this
Act,—
(a) for grant of prospecting licence or a
mining lease after completing exploration
under a reconnaissance permit or a
prospecting licence, as the case may be; or
(b) for which prior approval of the
Central Government for grant of mineral
concessions, has been given; or
(c) where a letter of intent (by whatever
name called) has been issued by the State
Government to grant reconnaissance permit
or prospecting licence or mining lease, as
the case may be, and was pending grant
of the concession under this Act for
fulfilment of the conditions of the letter of
intent,
and the application for grant of the mineral
concessions is pending with the State
Government at the time of commencement of
this Act.
(7) In case a person submits his application
for grant of mineral concession in respect of
major as well as minor minerals in the same
area, the application shall be considered for
all the minerals applied for in accordance with
the provisions of this Act applicable to major
minerals.
(8) No person shall transport or store, or
cause to be transported or stored, any minerals
otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.

229
(9) An application for grant of mining lease
for atomic minerals may be considered and
granted by the State Government after
obtaining prior approval of the Department of
Atomic Energy in such cases and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government:
Provided that no lease shall be necessary
in respect of mining of atomic minerals
undertaken by the Atomic Minerals Directorate
or such other Government agencies as may be
notified by the Central Government from time
to time.
(10) In any reconnaissance or prospecting
operations undertaken by the Geological
Survey of India, the Atomic Minerals
Directorate, the Mineral Exploration
Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries
Limited, the Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited, the Central Mine Planning and Design
Institute Limited and such other Government
agencies, in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 2), such agency conducting the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations shall
publish, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, a report of the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations and
intimate the publication to the State
Government in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government to
enable the State Government to set aside the
area under sub-section ( 4) or notify the area
under section 13 for prospecting or mining, as
the case may be:
Provided that where the State Government
fails to take a decision to set aside the area or
notify the area under section 13, it shall publish
such data in its official website, that would be
available to the general public in such manner
as may be prescribed by the State Government.
5. ( 1) No person shall be eligible for grant
of a mineral concession unless such person is
a citizen of India or a company as defined in
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Companies
Eligibility
for grant
of mineral
concessions.

230
Act, 1956, or a firm registered under the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 and has registered
himself with the Indian Bureau of Mines or
the State Directorate or any other agency
authorised by a notification issued by the
Central Government, in such manner, as may
be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that for the purposes of mineral
concessions for small deposits in any area
referred to in sub-section ( 6) of section 6, a
co-operative society registered with the State
Government under the law made by it and
registered in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section ( 2) shall be eligible for grant of
such mineral concession:
Provided further that in respect of any
concession or an application for grant or
renewal of a mineral concession pending with
the State Governments at the commencement
of this Act in terms of sub-section ( 6) of section
4, the applicant of such application shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to register with
the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate, as the case may be, within such
time as may be notified and such application
shall not be rejected solely on the ground of
non-registration with the Indian Bureau of
Mines or the State Directorate, as the case may
be.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, the firm or association or co-operative
shall be eligible where all the members of such
firm or association or co-operative are citizens
of India.
(2) Subject to any notification issued under
sub-section ( 1), the registration process in
respect of mineral concessions,—
(a) for major minerals shall be
administered by the Indian Bureau of
Mines;
1 of 1956.
9 of 1932.

231
(b) for minor minerals shall be
administered by the State Directorate; and
(c) for coal minerals shall be
administered by the Central Government.
(3) No person shall be entitled to operate
a mineral concession if he contravenes any of
the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder, which renders him ineligible for
grant of a mineral concession:
Provided that a person who is holding a
mineral concession prior to the commencement
of this Act shall not be deemed to be
contravening the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder merely on account of
the fact that the area of such concession is less
than the mining area specified under section
6.
6. ( 1) The maximum area which can be
held under mineral concession at any time by
a person in respect of any mineral or
prescribed group of associated minerals in a
State shall be,—
(a) ten thousand square kilometres in
respect of non-exclusive reconnaissance
licences;
(b) five thousand square kilometres in
respect of high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licences;
(c) five hundred square kilometres in
respect of prospecting licences; and
(d) one hundred square kilometres in
respect of mining leases:
Provided that a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence shall be
granted for such group of associated minerals
(other than iron ore, bauxite, limestone, coal
minerals or other bulk minerals) as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and
subject to such general conditions regarding use
of advanced technologies and methodologies as
may be notified from time to time by the
Central Government:
Maximum
and
Minimum
area of
mineral
concessions.

232
Provided further that in case of coal
minerals, if the Central Government is of the
opinion that in the interest of development of
coal minerals, it is necessary so to do, it may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, permit
any person to acquire one or more prospecting
licence or mining lease covering an area in
excess of the maximum area specified in
sub-section ( 1).
(2) In respect of major minerals, the
minimum area for grant of,—
(a) a high-technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence shall be one
hundred square kilometres;
(b) a prospecting licence shall be one
square kilometre; and
(c) a mining lease shall be ten hectares.
(3) In respect of minor minerals the
minimum area for grant of,—
(a) a non-exclusive reconnaissance or a
prospecting licence shall be ten hectares;
and
(b) a mining lease shall be five hectares:
Provided that the State Government in
consultation with the Ministry of Environment
and Forest in the Central Government for
reasons to be recorded in writing may, in
respect of any area and any minor mineral,
notify a minimum area other than the area
specified in this sub-section.
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub-
sections ( 1), ( 2) and ( 3), the area held by a
person as a member of a co-operative society,
company or other corporation and a Hindu
undivided family and a partner of a firm or
as an individual shall be jointly computed.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), a person holding a
high technology reconnaissance-cum-

233
exploration licence, or a prospecting licence or
a mining lease shall be entitled to be
considered and granted a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence, as the case may be, for
the same minerals for an area lower than the
minimum area referred to in sub-section ( 2) or
sub-section ( 3), as the case may be, in an area
contiguous to the area already held by him
under the licence or lease, as the case may be.
(5) The holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, and
prospecting licence shall surrender area out of
such licence annually, as may be specified in
the licence, in the manner prescribed by the
Central Government so that at the end of the
last year after the commencement of operations
of the non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, the
area held does not exceed the maximum
eligibility of the licence holder for a
prospecting licence and at the end of the last
year of the high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence or prospecting licence,
the area held does not exceed the maximum
eligibility of the licence holder for a mining
lease in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 1).
(6) No mining lease shall be granted in
respect of any area which is not compact and
contiguous or otherwise not suitable to
scientific development:
Provided that in respect of small deposits
not suitable to scientific mining in isolated
patches, a mining lease may be granted for a
cluster of such deposits within a defined area
of not less than the area specified in
sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), as the case
may be, in accordance with such procedure and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.

234
(7) In case of the Scheduled area specified
in the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution and
the tribal area specified in the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution, the State Government may,
by notification, give preference as may be
specified in the notification in grant of mineral
concessions on an area referred to in sub-
section ( 6) to a Co-operative of the Scheduled
Tribes.
(8) Any rules made by the State
Governments for minor minerals shall be in
accordance with the provisions of sub-sections
(1) to ( 7).
7. ( 1) A non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence shall be granted for a period of not
less than one year and not more than three
years.
(2) A high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence shall be granted for a period
of not less than three years and not more than
six years:
Provided that the period may be extended,
on an application made by the licensee for a
further period not exceeding two years in
respect of such part of the area as may be
specified in the licence.
(3) A prospecting licence shall be granted
for a period of not less than two years and
not more than three years:
Provided that the period may be extended
on an application made by the licensee for a
further period not exceeding two years in
respect of such part of area as may be specified
in the licence.
(4) A mining lease for a major mineral shall
be granted for a period of not less than twenty
years and not more than thirty years:
Provided that in an area which is already
held under a mining lease and a new mineral
is found in such area, the period of mining
Period of
grant and
extension
of licence
and
deposit of
security.

235
lease granted for such new mineral shall be
co-terminus with the period of the existing
mining lease:
Provided further that in the interest of
mineral development, amalgamation of two or
more adjoining leases held by a lessee may be
approved by the authority competent to grant
the lease and the period of the amalgamated
leases shall be co-terminus with the period of
lease which expires later.
(5) A mining lease for a minor mineral
shall be granted for a period not less than five
years and may be extended for such period as
may be notified by the State Government:
Provided that different periods may be
specified for different minerals having regard
to the nature and manner of occurrence of
mineral deposits:
Provided further that in respect of any
minor mineral, where a minimum area is
notified in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 6) of section 6,
the State Government may notify a minimum
period of less than five years in consultation
with the Central Government.
(6) A mining lease for a major mineral may
be extended, on an application made by the
lessee, in respect of such part of the area as
may be specified and for such period not
exceeding twenty years at a time, as may be
required to ensure full exploitation of the
run-of-the-mine in a scientific manner:
Provided that no such extension shall be
granted, except after approval in the prescribed
manner, of a fresh mining plan for the area
for which the lease is sought to be extended.
(7) For the purposes of sub-section ( 6), all
mining leases granted before the
commencement of this Act, and which has not
contravened any of the terms and conditions

236
of a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence
or mining lease granted before the
commencement of this Act, shall be considered
for extension irrespective of the size of the area
of such mining lease.
8. ( 1) In respect of any land in which the
minerals vest in the Government (other than
in respect of lands reserved under the
provisions of Chapter VII), the State
Government shall grant non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence and mining lease and
extend the high technology reconnaissance
exploration licence, prospecting licence and
mining lease in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder:
Provided that in respect of minor minerals,
the State Government may, by notification,
restrict the grant of licence to such types of
mineral concessions as are appropriate having
regard to the nature of occurrence of the minor
mineral:
Provided further that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence and mining lease in respect
of coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach
sand minerals shall be granted and extended
by the State Government with the prior
approval of the Central Government.
(2) Every person, granted a licence or lease,
as the case may be, under sub-section ( 1), shall
deposit such sum as security deposit as may
be specified by the Central Government.
(3) A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence
shall not be issued in respect of any area held
under a high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence or
a mining lease.
Grant and
extension
of mineral
concession.

237
(4) A prospecting licence shall not be issued
in an area held under high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and vice
versa.
(5) A high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence
shall not be issued in respect of an area held
under a mining lease.
(6) A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence,
high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, prospecting licence or
mining lease for coal minerals shall be granted
by the State Government to a company
approved by the Central Government on such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed by
it and such licence or lease be granted through
competitive bidding and auction in such
manner as may be prescribed by it:
Provided that the provisions of this sub-
section shall not be applicable for grant of
mineral concession,—
(a) to a Government company or
corporation for mining or such other
specified end use;
(b) to a company or corporation which
has been awarded a power project
(including Ultra Mega Power Project) on
the basis of competitive bids for tariff.
(7) The reconnaissance licence, prospecting
licence and mining lease (by whatever name
called) in respect of any mineral underlying
the ocean within the territorial waters or the
continental shelf of India shall be granted by
the Central Government in accordance with the
provisions of any law for the time being in
force.
(8) The State Government, and every
holder of a mineral concession, shall make
available data relating to grant, extension,
relinquishment, termination and plan of

238
operations in the official website in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(9) For the purpose of this section, the onus
of proving that ownership of a mineral vests
in a person other than the State Government
shall be on the person making the claim.
9. ( 1) Notwithstanding that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licensee is operating in such
area, a high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, prospecting licence or a
mining lease may be granted on that area
under the provisions of this Act.
(2) A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence
holder who applies for a prospecting licence
under sub-section ( 7) of section 22 shall, on
grant of such licence, be entitled to get such
areas vacated as may have been granted a
prospecting licence to any person under sub-
section ( 1) subsequent to the grant of the
reconnaissance licence:
Provided that a person holding a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or a person holding a prospecting
licence granted under sub-section ( 7) of section
22 or a person granted a mining lease shall
not be required to vacate the area.
10. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act, the holder of a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence or mining lease for a
mineral other than a minor mineral may also
undertake incidental prospecting or mining
operations in respect of atomic minerals in the
area held, subject to the fulfilment of the
following conditions, namely:—
(a) if in the course of prospecting or
mining operations, he discovers any atomic
mineral, he shall within a period of sixty
days from the date of discovery of such
mineral, report the fact of such discovery
Prospecting
licence and
mining
lease of an
area under
reconnais-
sance.
Special
provisions
in respect
of atomic
minerals.

239
to the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the
Geological Survey of India, the Indian
Bureau of Mines and the State Directorate
of the State in which the prospecting or
mining operations are carried on or
proposed to be carried on;
(b) the quantities of atomic minerals
recovered incidental to such prospecting or
mining operations shall be collected and
stacked separately and a report to that
effect sent to the Atomic Minerals
Directorate every three months for such
further action to be taken by the licensee
or lessee, as the case may be, which may
be directed by the Atomic Minerals
Directorate.
(2) The licensee or lessee, as the case may
be, referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall, within
a period of sixty days from the date of
discovery of atomic mineral, apply to the
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy,
Mumbai, along with the recommendations of
the State Government, for grant of a licence or
lease to handle the said atomic minerals in
accordance with the provisions of the Atomic
Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 made
under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, and on
grant of such licence or grant of lease to
handle, the licensee or lessee, as the case may
be, may apply for inclusion of such atomic
minerals in his licence or lease, as the case
may be:
Provided that if in the opinion of the
Department of Atomic Energy, the atomic
mineral recovered incidental to such
prospecting or mining operations is not of an
economically exploitable grade or the quantity
found is insignificant, the licensee or lessee
need not apply for inclusion of such atomic
mineral in his licence or lease, as the case may
be.
(3) In case of grant of a lease referred to
in sub-section ( 2), the lessee shall remove and
dispose off the atomic mineral on payment of
royalty to the State Government.
33 of 1962.

240
(4) For obtaining a separate licence or lease
for atomic minerals, the licensee or lessee, as
the case may be, shall, within a period of sixty
days from the date of discovery of atomic
mineral, apply to the Secretary, Department of
Atomic Energy , Mumbai, along with the
recommendations of the State Government, for
grant of licence to handle the said atomic
mineral in terms of the Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 made under
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and no licence or
lease be granted except in accordance with the
conditions of such licence granted under the
provisions of the Atomic Energy (Radiation
Protection) Rules, 2004.
11. ( 1) Any mineral concession granted,
extended, held or acquired in contravention of
the provisions of this Act or any rules or orders
made thereunder, shall be void and of no
effect, subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2).
(2) Where a person has acquired more than
one non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence or mining lease, as
the case may be, and the aggregate area
covered by such licences or leases in respect
of a mineral in a State, as the case may be,
exceeds the maximum area permissible under
section 6, only that non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence or mining lease the
acquisition of which has resulted in such
maximum area being exceeded, shall be
deemed to be void.
(3) In every case where a mineral
concession is void under sub-section ( 1), the
earnest money or security deposit as the case
may be deposited in respect of that application
shall stand forfeited, and the mineral
concession shall be granted to the next eligible
Mineral
concession
to be void
if in
contravention
of Act.
33 of 1962.

241
applicant or notified for grant of mineral
concession, as the case may be, in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
12. ( 1) In respect of any land in which
minerals vest in the Government,—
(a) where any person fails to conduct
reconnaissance or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration or
prospecting or mining operations in
accordance with a reconnaissance, or
exploration plan or a prospecting or mining
plan, as the case may be, prepared in the
manner provided in this section, the State
Government may after issuing a notice to
show cause and giving him an opportunity
of being heard, by an order, forfeit all or
any part of the security deposit and may
suspend, curtail or revoke the licence or
lease having regard to the circumstances of
the case.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
sub-section the framework of mining
operations in respect of minor minerals not
requiring a mining plan shall be deemed
to be the mining plan;
(b) in every case where a part or all of
the security deposit has been forfeited, the
licensee or the lessee, as the case may be,
shall furnish security to make up the
deficiency before recommencing the
operations under the licence or lease, as the
case may be;
(c) without prejudice to the provisions
contained in clauses ( a) and ( b), the State
Government may also issue notice directing
a person who fails to conduct
reconnaissance or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration or
prospecting or mining operations in
accordance with the reconnaissance plan or
an exploration plan or a prospecting or a
mining plan, to show cause, and after
Cancellation
of a
mineral
concession
or
disqualifi-
cation.

242
giving him an opportunity of being heard,
by an order, declare him to be ineligible
for consideration for any mineral concession
in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (3) of section 20 or sub-section (3)
of section 22, as the case may be, for such
period as it may specify, not exceeding five
years, having regard to the circumstances;
(d) where at the expiry of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence, the licensee
fails to comply with the conditions of the
licence, the State Government may, within
a period of six months from the date of
expiry of the licence, or the time given for
fulfilment of the conditions, whichever is
later, issue a notice asking him to show
cause, and after giving him an opportunity
of being heard, by an order, forfeit all or
any part of the security deposit and may
declare him to be ineligible for
consideration for any mineral concession in
accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (3) of section 20 or sub-section (3)
of section 22, as the case may be, for such
period, as it may specify, not exceeding five
years, having regard to the circumstances;
(e) orders under this sub-section shall
be made by the State Government,—
(i) in respect of any major mineral
where the Indian Bureau of Mines has
approved the mining plan and mine
closure plans, after consultation with
the Indian Bureau of Mines on technical
issues pertaining to such mining plan
and mine closure plan; and
(ii) in case of coal minerals, atomic
minerals and beach sand minerals, in
consultation with the Central
Government:
Provided that in case the Indian Bureau of
Mines or the Central Government, as the case
may be, does not express any opinion within

243
a period of three months, the State Government
may presume the concurrence of the Indian
Bureau of Mines or the Central Government,
as the case may be.
(2) In respect of any mineral concession
relating to a land where the minerals vest with
a private person, and the operations are not
conducted in accordance with the
reconnaissance, prospecting or mining plan, as
the case may be, the State Government may,
in the interest of mineral conservation and
development, after giving such private person
an opportunity of being heard, issue a direction
to him to suspend, curtail or revoke the
mineral concession and take any other action
in accordance with the terms and conditions
thereof as may be specified in such direction.
13. ( 1) In respect of any land where the
minerals vest in the Government, the State
Government shall, by notification, invite
applications in the form of competitive offers
for any mineral except coal minerals for grant
of a prospecting licence over any area where
reconnaissance has been conducted and
sufficient evidence of enhanced mineralisation
of the specified minerals has been established:
Provided that no application for a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence is pending relating to such area:
Provided further that no such notification
shall be issued, in respect of an area in which
reconnaissance or exploration or prospecting
operations were completed under a licence, till
the lapse of the period of six months from the
date of the expiry of the licence, unless the
area has been relinquished:
Provided also that in case where no
application is received on an area notified
under this sub-section, the State Government
shall within a period of three months from
the date of the said notification either re-notify
the area or notify it as being available for grant
of mineral concession under section 22.
Notification
of certain
areas for
grant of
mineral
concessions.

244
(2) Where an application or applications
for grant of prospecting licence has been filed
on an area and the State Government has not
issued any notification, the State Government
may notify such area or areas within a period
of one month from the date of receipt of the
first application by amalgamating or expanding
all or any of the applied areas, if required, in
the interest of scientific mining, and the State
Government may invite applications in the
form of competitive offers for any mineral,
except coal and atomic minerals for grant of a
prospecting licence:
Provided that the area so notified shall not
include any area for which there has been or
is an application pending for more than one
month prior on the date of the notification:
Provided further that where the State
Government has notified an area, it shall
provide an opportunity to an applicant who
filed an application prior to such notification
within a period of one month from the date
of the provisional determination of the best
offer for the purposes of sub-section ( 4) and
to submit a competitive offer in terms of the
said notification after being informed of the
details of the best offer received by the State
Government subsequent to the said notification
of the area, and the State Government shall
consider the applications in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section ( 4) and grant the
licence to the best overall offer:
Provided also that only those applicants
who had applied suo motu  without any
notification of such area by the State
Government shall be afforded an opportunity
to submit a competitive offer under the second
proviso, and any such offer shall be limited in
respect of only the area notified irrespective of
the areas for which such applicant had applied
earlier:

245
Provided also that where the State
Government fails to notify the area within the
specified period under this sub-section, the
applications for grant of prospecting licence
shall be considered in accordance with the
provisions of section 22.
(3) A notification issued under sub-sections
(1) and ( 2) may specify that any application
received shall be considered with reference to
such criteria including all or any one of the
following as per weightages assigned, as may
be specified in the notification, namely:—
(a) specific knowledge and experience
of prospecting possessed or accessed by the
applicant;
(b) nature and quality of technical
resources proposed to be employed;
(c) value addition such as mineral
processing and beneficiation;
(d) end use including industries based
on the mineral;
(e) provision of ore-linkage through
long-term agreements with domestic
industry;
(f) in the case of prospecting for iron
ore, bauxite and limestone, having finished
products production capacity at the time
of commencement of this Act and captive
ore resources which are likely to be
exhausted in the near future; and
(g) a financial bid quoted either as a
lump sum recoverable in instalments at the
time of mining or a percentage of royalty
or a profit sharing of mineral production.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section,—
(i) the financial bid shall offer the State
Government to recover a value, —
(A) for its efforts in managing
information relating to survey or
regional exploration work including

246
computer databases and samples for
minerals; and
(B) for the mineral on the basis of
market consideration to be based on a
floor price set by the State Government
on the available reconnaissance data;
(ii) the weightage shall be numerical in
character and enable a composite ranking
based on numerical marks assigned for each
of the criteria listed in the notification in
order to determine the best offer.
(4) The applications received in accordance
with the conditions specified in the notification
issued under sub-sections ( 1), ( 2) and ( 3) shall
be considered in accordance with such criteria
and weightage as specified in the notification,
and the eligible applicant obtaining the best
marks as per weightages, be granted the
prospecting licence in accordance with the rules
made under this Act:
Provided that the licence may include
special conditions under which a mining lease
shall be granted on an application made under
sub-section ( 3) of section 25, including
restrictions arising from requirements of value-
addition or ore-linkage or restrictions on sale
of ore in the case of captive resources.
(5) In such areas where prospecting has
been conducted and sufficient evidence of
enhanced mineralisation has been established
through a prospecting report and feasibility
study, and where no application for a mining
lease is pending, the State Government shall
by notification invite applications in the form
of competitive bids for any minerals excepting
coal minerals, for grant of mining lease, to the
bidder who in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section ( 6) quotes the best financial bid
including the bid for the prospecting report
and feasibility study for the area so notified:
Provided that no such notification shall be
issued, in respect of an area in which
prospecting operations were completed under

247
a licence, until the lapse of the period of six
months from the date of expiry of the licence
unless the area has been relinquished:
Provided further that before issuing the
notification under this sub-section in respect
of any forest or wildlife area, the State
Government shall obtain,—
(i) all forest clearances under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 and wildlife
clearance under the Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972, or any other law for the time
being in force, so as to enable the
commencement of operations; and
(ii) all necessary permissions from the
owners of the land and those having
occupation rights.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section,—
(i) the financial bid shall offer the State
Government either as a lump sum,
recoverable in instalments or a percentage
of royalty or a profit sharing, as may be
specified in the notification, and the
purpose of the financial bid for the
prospecting report and feasibility study is
to allow the State Governments to recover
a value,—
(A) for its efforts in acquiring and
managing information through detailed
survey, exploration, feasibility studies,
including computer databases, and
cores and samples, computer databases
and samples for minerals; and
(B) for the mineral on the basis of
market consideration to be based on a
floor price set by the State Government
on the available prospecting data;
(ii) the expression “forest clearance”
shall comprise conditional clearance on the
basis of the recommendations of the
committee constituted for the purpose.
69 of 1980.
53 of 1972.

248
(6) A notification issued under sub-section
(5) may specify that bids received shall be
considered with reference to such criteria
including all or any one or more of the
following, as per weightages assigned, as may
be specified in such notification, namely:—
(a) special knowledge and appropriate
experience in scientific mining and mineral
beneficiation;
(b) bringing new and advanced
technologies;
(c) investments in value addition such
as mineral processing and beneficiation;
(d) having industrial capacity based on
the mineral or having set up industry
based on the mineral, and achieved
financial closure for such project;
(e) providing ore-linkage through long-
term agreements with domestic industry;
(f) constructing transportation networks
(road and rail) and other infrastructure
facilities in the mineral bearing area;
(g) in the case of iron ore, bauxite and
limestone, having finished products
production capacity at the time of
commencement of this Act and captive ore
resources which are likely to be exhausted
in the near future; and
(h) financial bid including the bid for
the prospecting report and feasibility study
for the area so notified.
Explanation .—For the purposes of
determination of best bid, the weightage shall
be numerical in character and enable a
composite ranking based on bid price and
numerical marks assigned for each of criteria
specified in the notification.
(7) The bids received under sub-section ( 5)
shall be evaluated in the prescribed manner
and the best eligible bid shall be issued the

249
letter of intent for awarding the mining lease
after obtaining all necessary statutory approvals
and clearances, on such conditions as may be
specified having regard to the criteria stated
in the notification issued under sub-section ( 6)
and the response thereto.
(8) In respect of atomic minerals and beach
sand minerals, notification inviting applications
and grant of the mineral concession shall be
made with the prior approval of the Central
Government.
(9) In respect of coal minerals, notification
for inviting and grant of mineral concessions
shall be made by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed by it.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section, notification of an area for inviting
applications in respect of public lands in areas
covered by the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution, shall be issued
after consultation with the Gram Sabhas or
District Councils, as the case may be, and in
respect of non-Scheduled areas, after
consultation with the District Panchayat.
(11) The State Government shall invite and
entertain applications for grant of prospecting
licence in an area relinquished by a holder of
a high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence
only after such area is notified by the State
Government for inviting applications for grant
of prospecting licence under the provisions of
sub-section (1) of section 13 or notified as being
available for grant of concessions for the
purpose of section 22:
Provided that if the State Government fails
to notify such relinquished area within three
months of such relinquishment, any person
interested may apply to the State Government
and in case it fails to notify the area within a
further period of three months, the applicant

250
may apply to the National Mining Tribunal in
case of major minerals and State Mining
Tribunal in case of minor minerals for
notification of that area and the concerned
Tribunal may direct the State Government to
notify the area within such period as it may
specify.
(12) The procedure for notifying an area
for inviting applications for major minerals and
grant of mineral concessions shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(13 ) In respect of minor minerals,
notwithstanding anything in this section, the
procedure for notification and grant of mineral
concessions shall be such as may be prescribed
by the State Government:
Provided that before granting mineral
concession for minor minerals in an area
covered by the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution, the Gram Sabha
or the District Council, as the case may be,
shall be consulted.
14. (1) In respect of any lands where the
minerals vest in the Government, the State
Government shall dispose off the applications
for grant of non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence
within the following period reckoned from the
date of receipt of applications, namely:—
(a) within a period of three months in
respect of non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence;
(b) within a period of four months in
respect of high technology reconnaissance
exploration licence and prospecting licence.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
clause, where applications for prospecting
licence are received in response to a notification
under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) or
Time limit
for
disposal of
applications
for grant
of mineral
concessions.

251
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, the time period
for disposal shall be reckoned from the last
date notified for receipt of applications.
(2) The State Government shall dispose of
the applications for grant of mining lease in
the following manner and within the time limit
specified hereunder, namely:—
(a) a letter of intent or recommendation
to the Central Government for giving prior
approval if required, shall be issued within
a period of four months,—
(i) from the opening of bids in
respect of applications received under
section 13; or
(ii) from the date of application in
respect of application received under
section 25; and
(b) the mining lease shall be executed
within three months of intimation by means
of a written communication by the
applicant holding the letter of intent of his
having obtained all clearances and
approvals specified in the letter of intent.
(3) In any matter requiring the prior
approval of the Central Government, the matter
shall be disposed off by the Central
Government, within a period of three months
from the date of receipt of proposal from the
State Government, and the State Government
shall issue a letter of intent within a period of
one month from the date of such approval by
the Central Government.
(4) Where any application or written
communication is deficient in information or
documentation, the State Government shall, by
notice issued within sixty days of receipt
thereof, require the applicant to supply the
omission within such period as may be
specified having regard to the nature of the
document or information, but not being a
period of less than fifteen days and not more

252
than sixty days, and such period is excluded
from the time limits specified in sub-sections
(1) and ( 2).
(5) Where an applicant for mineral
concession fails to furnish documents and
information as required under sub-section ( 4)
for processing the application or written
communication, the State Government after
issuing a notice to show cause and giving him
an opportunity of being heard, may by order
forfeit the earnest money and reject his
application for grant of mineral concession.
(6) Where an application is not disposed
off within the limit specified in sub-section ( 1),
(2) or ( 3) subject to the provisions of sub-
section ( 4), the applicant may apply to the
National Mining Tribunal in the case of major
minerals and the State Mining Tribunal in case
of minor minerals, for a direction to the Central
Government or State Government, as the case
may be, to dispose of the application within
such reasonable period as may be specified by
the National Mining Tribunal or the State
Mining Tribunal, as the case may be.
15. On issue of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence or mining lease under this
Act, it shall be lawful for the holder of such
licence or lease, his agents or his servants or
workmen to enter the lands over which such
licence or lease had been granted at all times
during its currency and carry out all such
reconnaissance, prospecting or mining
operations as permitted:
Provided that no person shall enter into
any building or upon an enclosed court or
garden attached to a dwelling-house (except
with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at
least seven days notice in writing of his
intention to do so.
Rights of a
holder of
non-
exclusive
reconnais-
sance
licence,
high
technology
reconnais-
sance-cum-
exploration
licence or
prospecting
licence or
mining
lease.

253
16. The provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder shall apply in relation to the
extension after the commencement of this Act
of any prospecting licence or mining lease
granted before such commencement as they
apply in relation to the extension of a
prospecting licence or mining lease granted
after such commencement.
17.  ( 1) A holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or
prospecting licence may , except in the case of
coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand
minerals, after the expiry of a notice of not
less than ninety days to the State Government
concerned, transfer his licence to any person
eligible to hold such licence in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder:
Provided that the holder of a prospecting
licence, granted prior to the commencement of
this Act and valid under the provisions of this
Act, may after giving a notice of not less than
ninety days to the State Government
concerned, transfer his prospecting licence only
to a person holding a prospecting licence or
mining lease in the adjoining area, and any
transfer in contravention of this proviso shall
be void:
Provided further that the original licensee
shall intimate to the State Government the
consideration payable or paid by the successor-
in-interest for the transfer, including the
consideration in respect of the reconnaissance
or prospecting operations already undertaken
and the reports and data generated during the
operations:
Provided also that no such transfer shall
take place if the State Government, within the
period specified in the notice for reasons to be
communicated in writing, disapproves the
transfer on the grounds that the transferee is
not eligible as per the provisions of the Act.
Act and
rules to
apply to
all
extension
of mineral
concessions.
Transfer of
non-
exclusive
reconnais-
sance
licence,
high
technology
reconnais-
sance-cum-
exploration
licence and
prospecting
licence.

254
(2) A non-exclusive reconnaissance licence
or high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence in
respect of coal minerals, atomic minerals and
beach sand minerals shall be transferred only
with the prior approval of the Central
Government.
(3) On transfer of the licence, all rights and
liabilities of, and under, the licence shall be
transferred to the successor-in-interest.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1),
the holder of a licence may transfer his rights
and liabilities within a period of six months
after the expiry of the mineral concession
period to a person eligible under this Act to
hold a licence.
(5) On transfer of rights and liabilities, the
successor-in-interest shall be entitled to
consideration in terms of section 22 or
section 25, as the case may be, as if he was
the original holder of the mineral concession.
(6) The State Government may charge such
fees for transfer of the mineral concession as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(7) Nothing contained in this section shall
be deemed to enable a holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or a prospecting licence, in respect of
land where the minerals vest in a private
person, to transfer such licence other than in
accordance with the terms and conditions of
the mineral concession agreement.
18. ( 1) The holder of a mining lease shall
not, without the previous approval in writing
of the State Government, and in the case of
coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand
minerals, the previous approval in writing of
the Central Government,—
(a) assign, sublet, mortgage, or in any
other manner, transfer the mining lease, or
any right, title or interest therein; or
Transfer of
a mining
lease.

255
(b) enter into or make any
arrangement, contract, or understanding
whereby the lessee may be directly or
indirectly financed to a substantial extent
by, or under which the lessee’s operations
or undertakings may be substantially
controlled by any person or body of
persons other than the lessee:
Provided that where the mortgagee is an
institution or a bank or a corporation notified
for the purpose by the Central Government
under this Act, it shall not be necessary for
the lessee to obtain any such approval of the
State Government.
(2) Where a holder of a mining lease has
filed an application to the State Government
for approval of transfer of a mining lease and
the State Government, having regard to the
prospecting report if any, and approved Mining
Plan and mining schemes and other related
documents filed by the mining lease holder, is
of the opinion that the amount of consideration
between the transferor and the transferee is
not adequate, it may issue a notification in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government, inviting competitive financial
bids, within one month of filing of the
application for transfer, giving a last date,
which shall not be more than thirty days from
the date of notification, from the interested
persons eligible under this Act, to submit their
financial bids for the mining lease sought to
be transferred.
(3) In all cases where the notification has
been issued by the State Government under
sub-section ( 2), it shall complete the evaluation
of bids within a period of one month from
the last date specified in the notification and,—
(a) permit the holder of mining lease
to transfer the lease to the transferee at the
amount of consideration stated in the
application if the bid amount of the highest

256
eligible bidder is not greater by twenty per
cent. than the amount of such consideration
stated in application; or
(b) direct the holder of mining lease to
transfer the lease to the highest eligible
bidder if the bid is higher than the
consideration by more than twenty per
cent., and the highest eligible bidder shall
pay to such holder of mining lease, a sum
equal to the amount of consideration stated
in the application for transfer along with
an additional amount equal to twenty per
cent. thereof, and the remaining amount
of bid shall be paid to the State
Government in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that in all cases of applications
for transfer of a mining lease granted by the
State Government prior to the commencement
of this Act under the provisions of sub-section (5)
of section 11 of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, as it
stood before its repeal, the State Government
may collect an additional fee, as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, for such
transfer:
Provided further that in case the State
Government fails to complete the process of
inviting competitive offers referred to in sub-
section ( 2) within the period specified therein
without any sufficient and adequate reasons
for such failure, the holder of the mining lease
may apply to the National Mining Tribunal for
appropriate directions in this regard.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, the highest eligible bidder shall be a
person who gave the highest bid and is eligible
to be granted the mining lease on the day of
the determination of the bids.
(4) The State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be, shall not give
its approval to transfer of a mining lease unless
the transferee has accepted all the conditions
67 of 1957.

257
and liabilities under any law for the time-being
in force to which the transferor was subject to
in respect of such mining lease.
(5) No transfer of a mining lease shall be
made to a person not eligible under this Act
to hold the lease and no transfer be made by
a person in contravention of the condition of,
and subject to which the lease was granted.
(6) An application for transfer of mining
lease shall,—
(a) state the reason for the transfer;
(b) state the consideration for the
transfer;
(c) have attached to it, an agreement
between the holder of mining lease who
has applied for transfer of mining lease and
the transferee setting out the terms and
conditions of the offer and acceptance, with
a validity period of at least a period of six
months from the date of application;
(d) state whether the mining lease had
been granted prior to the commencement
of this Act under the provisions of sub-
section ( 5) of section 11 of the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957, as it stood before its repeal; and
(e) give such other particulars as may
prescribed by the Central Government.
(7) No transfer of a mining lease shall be
permitted, if,—
(a) it leads to fragmentation or
unscientific mining;
(b) it is not in the interest of mineral
development; and
(c) it is against the national interest.
(8) Where the mining lease is in respect of
land where the minerals vest in a private
person, no transfer shall be permitted except
in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the mineral concession agreement in regard
to the consent of such person.
67 of 1957.

258
(9) The State Government may charge fees
for the transfer of the mining lease in case of
a major mineral as may be prescribed by the
Central Government and in case of minor
minerals, as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(10) The Central Government and the State
Government shall take into account the
consideration payable by the transferee to the
transferor while prescribing the fee under
sub-section ( 9).
CHAPTER III
N
ON-EXCLUSIVE R ECONNAISSANCE L ICENCE
19. ( 1) In respect of every non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence granted for major and
minor minerals under this Act and the rules
made thereunder, the licence holder shall,—
(a) progressively relinquish the area
granted under the licence as shall be
specified in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder;
(b) file a reconnaissance plan in case of
major minerals other than coal minerals
with the Geological Survey of India, the
Indian Bureau of Mines, and the State
Directorate, and in case of coal minerals
with the Central Government, and in case
of minor minerals with the State Directorate
concerned in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government,
which shall include,—
(i) the particulars of the area such
as aerial extent, in terms of latitude and
longitude;
(ii) the scale of the plan and the
area of geological mapping;
(iii) the particulars of the machines
and instruments to be used, and the
nature of the data proposed to be
collected;
Conditions
of a non-
exclusive
reconnais-
sance
licence.

259
(iv) a quarterly plan of operations;
and
(v) the quarterly detailed projection
of expenditure on the operations:
Provided that in respect of minerals other
than coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach
sand minerals, with the prior approval of the
State Directorate and in case of coal minerals,
atomic minerals, beach sand minerals with the
prior approval of the Central Government, the
licence holder may modify the plan of
operations or the State Directorate or the
Central Government, as the case may be, may
direct the licensee to modify his plan of
operations, if it appears that ground operations
proposed may be in conflict with the ground
operations of another licensee who has already
filed his plan.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
clause, the quarterly plan of operations shall
be prepared so as to exclude overlapping of
ground operation of the non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence holders who have
already filed the plan of operations for the
area;
(c) make available all data including all
the aerial, photo-geological, geophysical,
geochemical and such other data collected
by him to the Geological Survey of India,
the State Directorate and in case of coal
minerals, atomic minerals, beach sand
minerals to the Central Government, in
such manner and within such intervals as
may be prescribed by the Central
Government;
(d) in case radiometric instruments are
used, make available all radiometric data
available to the Atomic Minerals
Directorate;
(e) maintain detailed and accurate
accounts of all the expenses incurred by
him on the non-exclusive reconnaissance
operations;

260
(f) submit reports to the Geological
Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of
Mines, the State Directorate and in case of
coal minerals, atomic minerals, beach sand
minerals to the Central Government, in
such manner and within such intervals as
may be prescribed by it and while
submitting reports, the licence holder may
specify that the whole or any part of the
report or data submitted by him shall be
kept confidential; and the Geological Survey
of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines, the
State Directorate, and in case of coal
minerals, the Central Government,
thereupon shall, keep the specified portions
as confidential for a period of six months
from the expiry of the licence, or
abandonment of operations or termination
of the licence, whichever is earlier;
(g) allow every officer authorised by the
Central Government or the State
Government as the case may be, in case of
major minerals and the State Governments
in case of minor minerals, to examine the
accounts maintained;
(h) furnish to the Geological Survey of
India, the Indian Bureau of Mines, and the
State Directorate in case of major minerals,
in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals,
beach sand minerals to the Central
Government, and in case of minor minerals
to the State Directorate concerned, such
information and returns as may be required
in relation to the reconnaissance operations;
(i) allow any officer authorised by the
Geological Survey of India or the State
Directorate in case of major minerals and
the officers of State Directorate in the case
of minor minerals to inspect any
reconnaissance operations carried on by the
licence holder;
(j) pay to the State Government in
respect of land in which minerals vest in
the Government, and to the person in

261
whom the minerals vests in other cases,
a licence fee as may be notified by the
Central Government, being an amount of
not less than fifty rupees per square
kilometre per year and not more than five
hundred rupees per square kilometre per
year or part thereof:
Provided that the Central Government
may, by a notification, specify different rates
for each successive year;
(k) obtain clearance from the Ministry
of Defence in the Central Government, in
case any Defence establishments lies in the
area proposed for exploration;
(l) comply with such other conditions
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(2) The non-exclusive reconnaissance licence
may contain such other general conditions as
may be prescribed in the interest of public
safety or national security by the Central
Government which, inter alia , may include the
condition that a representative of the
Directorate General, the Civil Aviation or the
Ministry of Defence shall be present during
the aerial surveys.
(3) The Central Government, in case of coal
minerals, and the Indian Bureau of Mines in
case of other major minerals, may issue
direction to a non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence holder to ensure compliance with the
conditions of the licence and the licence holder
shall be bound to comply with such directions.
(4) The licence holder shall before starting
operations, deposit as security an amount equal
to the licence fee levied for the first year and
in case of breach of any condition imposed on
a holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence by or under this Act, the State
Government may by order in writing, suspend,
curtail or revoke the licence, and may forfeit
in whole or in part, the amount deposited by
the licence holder as security:

262
Provided that no such order shall be made
without issuing a notice to the licence holder
to show cause and giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard:
Provided also that in case of land in which
the minerals vest in a person other than the
Government, the State Government shall give
such person an opportunity of being heard and
may issue directions to him to suspend, curtail
or revoke the mineral concession or forfeit the
security in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the mineral concession agreement.
(5) In every case where a part or all of the
security deposit has been forfeited, the licensee,
shall furnish security deposit to make up the
deficiency before recommencing operations
under the licence.
(6) Any amount deposited as security
deposit in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 3) shall unless forfeited, be
returned to the licencee at the end of the six
month period following the expiry or
termination of the licence:
Provided that in case the return of the
security or such part thereof as may be payable
takes place more than thirty days after the
expiry of the six months period, a simple
interest at the rate of six per cent per annum
shall be payable for the period beyond thirty
days.
20. ( 1) An application for grant of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence in respect of
any land in which the minerals vest in the
Government shall be made to the State
Government concerned in such form and
manner, alongwith such application fee and
earnest money as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(2) The State Government shall
acknowledge the receipt of the applications and
cause them to be registered in such manner as
Procedure
for grant
of non-
exclusive
reconnais-
sance
licence.

263
may be prescribed by the Central Government
in a register that shall be open to inspection
by the public.
(3) The State Government shall grant the
non-exclusive reconnaissance licence to every
applicant who is eligible in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.
(4) In all cases where the State Government
refuses an application, it shall communicate the
reasons therefor:
Provided that no application shall be
refused,—
(a) without communicating the grounds
and giving the applicant an opportunity to
represent within a reasonable period of not
less than thirty days; and
(b) on grounds of incompleteness of
material particulars without requiring the
applicant to supply the requisite documents
or information.
(5) Grant of every non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence shall be notified in the
Official Gazette, and in the official website by
the State Government.
CHAPTER IV
H
IGH TECHNOLOGY RECONNAISSANCE-CUM-
EXPLORATION LICENCE AND PROSPECTING LICENCE
21. ( 1) In respect of every high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence granted
for major minerals and prospecting licence
granted for major minerals and minor minerals
under this Act and the rules made thereunder,
the licence holder shall,—
(a) progressively relinquish the area
granted under the licence as shall be
specified in accordance with the provisions
of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
Conditions
of a high
technology
reconnais-
sance-cum-
exploration
licence and
prospecting
licence.

264
(b) prepare and file an exploration plan
in respect of a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting plan in case of a prospecting
licence with the Geological Survey of India,
the Indian Bureau of Mines and the State
Directorate in respect of major minerals
(other than coal minerals) and in case of
coal minerals with the Central Government,
and the State Directorate in the case of
minor minerals including such particulars
and, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, which shall
include,—
(i) the particulars of the area being
prospected;
(ii) the scale of the plan and the
area of geological mapping;
(iii ) a six monthly plan of
operations including—
(a) the number of pits, trenches,
and bore holes which he proposes
to put in the area;
(b) the number of samples
proposed to be drawn and
analysed;
(c) the particulars of the
machines to be used;
(d) the details of exploratory
mining if any, proposed to be
undertaken;
(e) the beneficiation studies
proposed to be undertaken.
(iv) appropriate baseline information
of prevailing environmental conditions
before the beginning of reconnaissance
or prospecting operations;
(v) steps proposed to be taken for
protection of environment which shall
include prevention and control of air
and water pollution, progressive

265
reclamation and rehabilitation of the
land disturbed by the prospecting
operations, a scheme for the plantation
of trees, restoration of local flora and
water regimes and such other measures,
as may be directed from time to time
by the Indian Bureau of Mines or the
State Directorate as the case may be for
minimizing the adverse effect of
prospecting operations on the
environment;
(vi) the details of the six monthly
expenditure to be incurred on the
operations;
(vii) any other matter relevant for
scientific prospecting, as directed by the
Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate, as the case may be, from
time to time by a general or specific
order:
Provided that the exploration plan
shall be filed with the Geological
Survey of India in respect of high
technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, in such manner as
may be notified by the Geological
Survey of India from time to time;
(c) carry out the reconnaissance or
prospecting operations in accordance with
the exploration plan or prospecting plan
submitted by him, with such modifications,
if any, as directed by the Indian Bureau of
Mines or the State Directorate and in case
of coal minerals the Central Government,
as the case may be:
Provided that where the licencee
proposes to conduct reconnaissance or
prospecting operations in a manner at
variance with the plan already submitted,
he shall prepare and file a revised or
supplementary exploration plan or
prospecting plan in such manner as may
be prescribed by the Central Government;

266
(d) make available all data collected by
him during prospecting operations to the
Geological Survey of India, Indian Bureau
of Mines and the State Directorate, in case
of coal minerals to the Central
Government, and in case of atomic
minerals, to the Atomic Minerals
Directorate in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that such data shall be made
available to the Geological Survey of India
in respect of high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence, to such an extent
as may be notified by the Geological Survey
of India from time to time;
(e) maintain complete and correct
accounts of all the expenses incurred by
him during the reconnaissance or
prospecting operations;
(f) submit a report on progress of
operations under the exploration plan or
prospecting Plan to the Indian Bureau of
Mines and the State Directorate and in case
of coal minerals to the Central Government,
in such manner and intervals as may be
prescribed by the Central Government;
(g) pay to the State Government in
respect of any land in which the minerals
vest with it, and to the person in whom
the minerals vest in other case such licence
fee, as may be notified by the Central
Government, being an amount not
exceeding rupees fifty per hectare of land
covered by the licence for each year or part
of a year of the period for which the licence
is granted or extended:
Provided that the notification of the
Central Government may specify a rate that
may be different for each of the successive
years;
(h) within a period of three months
after the determination of the licence or the

267
date of abandonment of the prospecting
operations, whichever is earlier, securely
plug all bores and fill up or fence all
excavations in the land covered by the
licence:
Provided that if in any part of the area
the licencee receives a letter of intent for
grant of mining lease within this period he
may carry out such amount of work as may
be consistent with the mining operations
under such lease;
(i) in case the minerals vest in the
Government, report to the State Directorate
the discovery of any major mineral not
specified in the licence within a period of
sixty days from the date of such discovery
and consequent upon such reporting, such
newly discovered minerals (except coal
minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand
minerals) are deemed to have been
included in the high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or
prospecting licence, as the case may be:
Provided that in case of high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, only major minerals (other than iron
ore, bauxite, limestone, coal minerals or
other bulk minerals) shall be included in
the licence;
(j) take immediate measures, in such
manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, to restore, as far as
possible and at least to the extent given in
the exploration plan or prospecting Plan,
the areas in which prospecting operations
have been conducted, including replacement
of soil cover, removal of contaminants and
pollutants introduced during prospecting
operations, restoration of local flora and
water regimes in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government;
(k) pay to the person holding
occupation rights of the surface of the land
such compensation as may be notified;

268
(l) obtain clearance from the Central
Government in the Ministry of Defence, in
case the Defence establishments are situated
in the area proposed for exploration;
(m) comply with such other conditions
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(2) A high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence may
contain such other general conditions which
are as follows, namely:—
(a) compensation for damage to land
in respect of which the licence has been
granted;
(b) indemnity to Government against
the claims of a third party for any damage,
injury or disturbance caused to him by the
licensee;
(c) restrictions regarding felling of trees
on occupied and unreserved Government
land;
(d) restrictions on reconnaissance or
prospecting operations in any area
prohibited by any competent authority;
(e) operations in a reserved or protected
forest;
(f) entry on occupied land;
(g) facilities to be given by the licencee
for working other minerals in the licenced
area or adjacent areas; and
(h) filing of civil suits or petitions
relating to disputes arising out of the area
under the high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence or a prospecting
licence.
(3) The Central Government in case of coal
minerals, and Indian Bureau of Mines in case
of other major minerals, or the State Directorate
may issue directions to a holder of a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration

269
licence or a prospecting licence to ensure
compliance with the conditions of the licence
and the licence holder shall comply with such
directions.
(4) Before grant of a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence, as the case may be, the
applicant shall deposit a sum equal to the
licence fee for the first year as security and in
case of breach of any condition imposed on
any holder of a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence, as the case may be, by or
under this Act, the State Government may, by
order in writing, suspend, curtail or cancel the
licence and may forfeit, in whole or part, the
amount deposited by the licensee:
Provided that no such order shall be made
without issuing a notice to the licensee to show
cause and giving him a reasonable opportunity
of being heard:
Provided further that in case of land in
which the minerals vest in a private person,
the State Government shall afford such person
an opportunity of being heard and may issue
directions to him to suspend, curtail or revoke
the mineral concession or forfeit the security
in accordance with the terms and conditions
thereof.
(5) In every case where a part or all of the
security deposit has been forfeited, the licensee
shall furnish security to make up the deficiency
before recommencing operations under the
licence.
(6) Any amount deposited as security , in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4),
shall unless forfeited, be returned to the
licensee at the end of six months after the
expiry or termination of the licence, as the case
may be:

270
Provided that in case the return of the
security or such part thereof as may be payable
takes place more than thirty days after the
expiry of the said period of six months, a
simple interest at the rate of six per cent. per
annum shall be payable by the State
Government for the period beyond thirty days.
22. ( 1) Applications for grant of a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence in respect of any
land in which minerals vest in the Government
shall be made to the State Government
concerned in such form and manner, alongwith
such application fee and earnest money as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The State Government shall
acknowledge the receipt of the application and
the same shall be recorded in a register in such
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, which shall be open to public for
inspection in such manner as may be specified
by it.
(3) The State Government shall consider
only such applications as are eligible in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and
the rules made thereunder and refuse all
ineligible applications for reasons to be
communicated to the applicants:
Provided that the applications received
later to the first eligible application in respect
of an area shall not be considered till disposal
of all applications received earlier and
communication to the applicants of the reasons
for the disposal:
Provided further that in case of grant of
prospecting licence, such applications shall also
be subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 7).
(4) Except in the case of applications for
prospecting licences received in response to a
notification under sub-section ( 1) of section 13
Procedure
for grant
of high
technology
reconnais-
sance-cum-
exploration
licence and
prospecting
licence.

271
of this Act, the State Government shall grant
the high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence in
respect of the land to the first applicant eligible
under this Act and the rules made thereunder
and all other applicants be deemed to have
been refused to the extent of the area granted
to the first applicant:
Provided that in case of prospecting
licence, such applications shall also be subject
to the provisions of sub-section ( 7).
(5) In all cases where the State Government
refuses an application and proceeds to consider
a subsequent application, it shall communicate
the reasons therefor:
Provided that no application shall be
refused,—
(a) without communicating the grounds
and giving the applicant an opportunity to
represent within a reasonable period of not
less than thirty days; and
(b) on grounds of incomplete material
particulars in the application, without
requiring the applicant to supply the
requisite documents or information.
(6) In case of grant of prospecting licence,
the application shall not be refused on the
ground that other applications have been
received for grant of non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence or high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence in the
area applied.
(7) In case of grant of prospecting licence,
the application of a person eligible under this
Act, made within six months of completion of
reconnaissance operations under a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence held by him
or held by his predecessor-in-interest has the
first right to the exclusion of other applications
notwithstanding anything in sub-sections ( 3)

272
and (4) to the contrary and where there is more
than one such application for the same land,
the application received later shall not be
considered till disposal of all applications
received earlier and communication of reasons
for the disposal, and the State Government
shall grant the licence to the earliest applicant
eligible for the licence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, the person who intends to invest in
reconnaissance operations, directly or by
acquiring the reconnaissance data shall have
the legitimate expectation that his investment
will enable him to acquire prospecting rights
to the exclusion of a person who makes no
such investment.
(8) Grant of every high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence shall be notified in the
Official Gazette and in the official website of
the State Government.
23 . ( 1) Where a reconnaissance or
prospecting operation in respect of lands in
which minerals vest in the Government is to
be undertaken by the Geological Survey of
India, the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the
State Directorate, the Mineral Exploration
Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries
Limited or the Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited, the Central Mine Planning and Design
Institute Limited or such other agencies as may
be notified in this behalf under section 4, the
State Government shall issue a notification
giving details of the area, and the period for
which the reconnaissance or the prospecting
operations are to be undertaken:
Provided that such period shall not be for
more than six years.
(2) The agency undertaking prospecting
operation shall make a report for every six
months of its progress of reconnaissance or
Issue of
notification
where
prospecting
operations
are to be
undertaken
by the
Geological
Survey of
India, etc.

273
prospecting in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and
submit the reconnaissance or prospecting report
and the geological study, pre-feasibility study
or feasibility study, as the case may be, to the
State Government at the end of the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations in
such manner and such terms and conditions
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The State Government may revoke a
notification issued under sub-section ( 1), if the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations have
been completed before the expiry of the period
stated in the notification.
(4) The State Government shall not
entertain any application for grant of any non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence or high
technology reconnaissance cum exploration
licence or prospecting licence or mining lease
to any person for an area or part thereof in
relation to which a notification has been issued
under sub-section ( 1), for the period that the
notification is in operation, and such
application is deemed never to have been
made.
CHAPTER V
M
INING LEASE
24. ( 1) Every mining lease for a major
mineral or a minor mineral shall be subject to
the fulfilment of the following conditions,
namely:—
(a) all mining operations shall be in
accordance with a mining plan prepared in
accordance with the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder;
(b) the lessee shall report to the State
Government, the discovery of any mineral
in the leased area not specified in the lease
for which rights vest in the Government,
within a period of sixty days of such
discovery;
Conditions
of a
mining
lease.

274
(c) if any mineral not specified in the
lease is discovered in the leased area, the
lessee shall not win and dispose of such
mineral unless such mineral is included in
the lease or a separate lease is obtained
therefor;
(d) the lessee shall pay to the State
Government in case of land in which
minerals vest in the State Government and
to the person in whom the minerals vest
in other cases, for every year or part
thereof, except the first year of the lease,
yearly dead rent at the rate specified in
the Third Schedule of the Act subject to
the provisions of section 42 of this Act:
Provided that if the lease relates to the
working of more than one mineral in the
same area, the State Government or the
person in whom the minerals vest in other
cases, as the case may be, shall not charge
separate dead rent in respect of each
mineral:
Provided further that the lessee shall
be liable to pay the dead rent or royalty in
respect of each mineral whichever is higher
in amount but not both;
(e) the lessee shall also pay, for the
surface area used by him for the purposes
of mining operations, surface rent and
water rate at such rate, as may be
prescribed by the State Government;
(f) the lessee shall furnish the following
in such manner and in such period as may
be prescribed by the Central Government,
namely:—
(i) all geological, geochemical and
geophysical and hydrological data
relating to the leased area collected by
him during the course of operations to
the Indian Bureau of Mines and the
State Directorate and in case of coal
minerals to the Central Government;

275
(ii) all information pertaining to
investigations of atomic minerals
collected by him during the course of
mining operations to the Atomic
Minerals Directorate;
(g) the lessee shall commence mining
operations within a period of two years
from the date of execution of the lease deed
and thereafter conduct such operations in
a scientific, skillful and workman-like
manner.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause,
mining operations shall include the erection of
machinery, laying of a tramway or construction
of a road in connection with the working of
the mine;
(h) the lessee shall,—
(i) at his own expense, erect and at
all times maintain and repair boundary
marks and pillars necessary to indicate
the demarcation shown in the plan
annexed to the lease;
(ii) not carry on, or allow to be
carried on, any mining operations at
any point within a distance of fifty
metres from any railway line, except
under and in accordance with the
written permission of the railway
administration concerned or under or
beneath any ropeway or ropeway trestle
or station, except under and in
accordance with the written permission
of the authority owning the ropeway
or from any reservoir, canal or other
public works, or buildings, except
under and in accordance with the
previous permission of the State
Government;
(iii) strengthen and support, to the
satisfaction of the railway
administration concerned or the State
Government, as the case may be, any

276
part of the mine which in its opinion
requires such strengthening or support
for the safety of any railway, reservoir,
canal, roads or any other public works
or buildings;
(i) the lessee shall keep accurate and
correct accounts showing the quantity and
other particulars of all minerals obtained
and dispatched from the mine, the number
and nationality of the persons employed
therein, and complete plans of the mine,
and allow any officer authorised by the
Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be in this
behalf, by general or special order, to
examine at any time any accounts, plans
and records maintained by him and furnish
the Central or the State Government, as the
case may be, with such information and
returns as it or any officer authorised by it
in this behalf may require;
(j) the lessee shall keep in such manner
and in respect of such matters as may be
prescribed by the Central Government,
accurate records of all trenches, pits and
drillings made by him in the course of
mining operations carried on by him under
the lease, and allow any officer authorised
by the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, in this
behalf by general or special order to inspect
the same;
(k) the lessee shall allow any officer
authorised by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be,
in this behalf by general or special order
to enter upon any building, excavation or
land comprised in the lease for the purpose
of inspecting the same;
(l) the lessee shall carry on his
operations in accordance with the approved
mining plan and take immediate measures
in such manner as may be prescribed by

277
the Central Government to restore, as far
as possible and at least to the extent given
in the mining plan, the areas in which
mining operations have been conducted,
including replacement of soil cover, removal
of contaminants and pollutants introduced
during mining operations, restoration of
local flora, and water regimes in such
manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government;
(m) the lessee shall pay to the District
Mineral Foundation such amount as
specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 43;
(n) the lessee shall deposit with the
State Government in case of major minerals
that vest in the Government, an amount
calculated at the rate of rupees one lakh
per hectare of the lease area payable in
equal instalments over the mining plan
period as security for due observance of
the terms and conditions of the lease:
Provided that the Central Government
may from time to time, by notification, vary
the amount of the deposit in respect of
leases granted or extended after such
notification:
Provided further that in case the
mineral vests in a person other than the
Government, such person shall require to
deposit such sum not less than the rate
specified in the first proviso:
Provided also that in case of small
deposits the lessee shall be required to pay
security deposit for the broken up area,
mineral storage and waste and over-burden
area in the mining lease as per the rate
prescribed by the Central Government in
this sub-section:
Provided also that in the case of minor
minerals the deposit shall be such as may
be notified by the State Government and
the provisions of this section apply mutatis
mutandis to minor minerals;

278
(o) the lessee shall set up a grievance
redressal mechanism in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Central
Government, to address concerns of persons
affected by mining operations in accordance
with the requirements of the Sustainable
Development Framework in terms of
section 46;
(p) the lessee shall comply with such
other conditions as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government in case of coal
minerals and the Indian Bureau of Mines in
case of other major minerals or the State
Directorate may issue directions to a lessee to
ensure compliance with the conditions of the
lease and the lessee shall comply with such
directions.
(3) If the lessee does not allow entry or
inspection in respect of any matter covered
under sub-section ( 1), or does not comply with
directions issued under sub-section ( 2) where
it relates to land in which minerals vest in the
Government, the State Government shall give
notice in writing to the lessee requiring him
to show cause within such time as may be
specified in the notice, which is not less than
two days and not more than fifteen days, as
to why the lease not be determined and his
security deposit forfeited, and if the lessee fails
to show cause within the aforesaid time to the
satisfaction of the State Government, in respect
of land in which mineral vest in the
Government, the State Government may
determine the lease and forfeit the whole or
part of the security deposit:
Provided that in respect of any land in
which the minerals vest in a person other than
the Government, the Government may, after
giving an opportunity of being heard to such
person, direct him to determine the lease and
forfeit the whole or part of the security deposit.

279
(4) If the lessee makes any default in the
payment of royalty as required under section
41 or payment of dead rent as required under
section 42 or payment of compensation to the
District Mineral Foundation as required under
section 43 or payment of cess as required
under section 45 or section 46 or commits a
breach of any of the conditions specified in
sub-section (1), the State Government shall give
a show cause notice to the lessee requiring him
to pay the royalty or dead rent or payment of
compensation to District Mineral Foundation
or cess, as the case may be, along with interest
at the rate of fifteen per cent. per annum or
remedy the breach, as the case may be, within
a period of thirty days from the date of the
receipt of the notice and if the royalty or dead
rent or payment of compensation to District
Mineral Foundation or cess is not duly paid
alongwith the interest or the breach is not
remedied within the said period, the State
Government in case the minerals vest in it,
may without prejudice to any other
proceedings that may be taken against him,
determine the lease and forfeit the whole or
part of the security deposit:
Provided that in respect of land where the
minerals vest in a person other than the
Government, the Government may, after giving
an opportunity of being heard to such person,
direct him to determine the lease and forfeit
the whole or part of the security deposit.
(5) In every case where part or all of the
security has been forfeited the lessee shall
furnish security to make up the deficiency
before recommencing operations under the
lease.
(6) Any amount deposited as security
deposit in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 4) shall, unless forfeited, be
returned to the lessee at end of the six months
period after the expiry or termination of the
lease:

280
Provided that in case the return of the
security deposit or such part thereof as may
be payable takes place more than thirty days
after the expiry of the six months period,
simple interest at the rate of six per cent. per
annum shall be payable for the period beyond
thirty days.
25. ( 1) The mining lease in respect of land
in which minerals vest in the Government
shall, except in case where a mining lease is
granted in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section ( 5) of section 13, be granted only
on application made by a person who has held
a high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence for
the area and no other applications shall be
entertained in this regard.
(2) The State Government shall
acknowledge the receipt of the application and
the same shall be registered in a register in
such manner, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, which shall be open to
public for inspection in such manner as may
be specified by it.
(3) The application of a person, eligible
under this Act, made within six months of
completion of operations under a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence held by him or
held by his predecessor-in-interest shall be
approved for grant of mining lease subject to
eligibility and the fulfilment of general
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and such special conditions as
specified under proviso to sub-section ( 4) of
section 13:
Provided that in case such application for
mining lease is rejected, no other application
shall be considered and the area shall be
notified for grant of mineral concession under
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 5) of section 13,
as the case may be.
Procedure
for grant
of mining
lease.

281
(4) In every case of an approval for grant
of mining lease under sub-section ( 3), the State
Government shall issue a letter of intent to
the applicant enabling him to obtain the
statutory approvals and clearances necessary
for the execution of the lease deed.
(5) Grant of every letter of intent and lease
shall be notified in the Official Gazette and in
the official website of the State Government.
26. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act
and rules made thereunder, mining operations
shall be undertaken in accordance with a
mining plan, prepared for the entire leased area
in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, which may include
scientific methods of mining within a
Sustainable Development Framework,
beneficiation and economic utilisation and
induction of technology to ensure extraction
and best utilisation of the run of the mine:
Provided that a mining Plan shall not be
required in respect of such minor minerals as
are notified for the purpose by the State
Government in consultation with the Indian
Bureau of Mines:
Provided further that in respect of any
minor mineral for which a mining plan is not
required, the State Government, in consultation
with the Indian Bureau of Mines, shall
prescribe a framework within which mining
operations shall be carried out and the mining
framework is deemed to be in the nature of a
general direction issued under section 46 of
this Act:
Provided also that for the purposes of
section 12, and section 24, the framework is
deemed to be the mining plan.
(2) On acceptance of an application for a
mining lease, and before the execution of the
lease deed, the applicant shall cause to be
prepared and approved a mining Plan for the
Mining
operations
to be in
accordance
with
mining
plan.

282
entire area proposed to be granted for lease in
such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of
the provisions of the mining plan, there shall
be attached to the mining plan in respect of
all major minerals, a corporate social
responsibility document, comprising of a
scheme for annual expenditure by the lessee
on socio-economic activities in and around the
mine area for the benefit of the host population
in the panchayats adjoining the lease area and
for enabling and facilitating self employment
opportunities, for such population, and the
lease holder shall, at the end of each financial
year, publish in his annual report and display
on the website, the activities undertaken during
the year and the expenditure incurred thereon.
(4) No mining plan shall be approved,
unless it is prepared by a qualified person or
firm or other association of persons accredited
in this behalf in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) No person shall be accredited for
purposes of sub-section ( 4) unless he,—
(a) is qualified as a mining engineer or
geologist;
(b) has fulfilled the requisite experience
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government; and
(c) meets such other requirements as
may be prescribed by the Central
Government in order to further the
objective of scientific mining:
Provided that in respect of persons
being firms or other association of persons
or companies, the eligibility and conditions
of accreditation shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided further that the Central
Government may prescribe different
eligibility and other conditions for different
grades of accreditation.

283
(6) The mining plan for major minerals
shall, except in case of coal minerals and
atomic minerals, be approved by officers of the
Indian Bureau of Mines, authorised by general
orders in this behalf by the Controller General,
and for minor minerals the plan shall be
approved by officers of the State Directorate
authorised in this behalf, by the general order
of the State Government:
Provided that the Central Government may,
on being satisfied that the State Directorate
possesses the necessary technical and
management capability as may be prescribed,
empower the State Directorate to grant
approvals for such major minerals and in such
circumstances as may be specified in the
notification:
Provided further that in case the Central
Government, at any time, is of the opinion that
the State Directorate does not possess the
requisite technical and management capability,
it may suspend or revoke the power granted
and may direct it to be exercised by officers
of the Indian Bureau of Mines in accordance
with the provisions of this sub-section.
(7) Any person aggrieved by the approval
or refusal under sub-section ( 6) in respect of a
mining Plan for major minerals other than coal
and atomic minerals, may apply to the
Controller General, the Indian Bureau of Mines,
for reversal or modification of such an order
and the Controller General may confirm,
modify or set aside the order or direction in
respect of the mining plan.
(8) Any person aggrieved by the order or
direction under sub-section ( 6) in respect of a
mining plan or a framework for minor
minerals may apply to the Director of the State
Directorate for cancellation or modification of
such an order and the Director may confirm,
modify or set aside the order or direction in
respect of the mining plan or framework, as
the case may be.

284
(9) No person shall conduct mining
operations in any area except in accordance
with a mining plan as approved under this
Act.
(10) The Controller General or authorised
officer of the Indian Bureau of Mines or the
officer authorised in this behalf by the State
Directorate, as the case may be, may require
the holder of a mining lease to make such
modifications in the mining plan or impose
such conditions as may be considered
necessary by an order in writing if such
modifications or imposition of conditions are
considered necessary,—
(a) in the light of the experience of
operation of mining plan; and
(b) in view of the change in the
technological environment.
(11) In respect of coal minerals and atomic
minerals, the provisions of this section shall
be applied, mutatis mutandis,  by the Central
Government.
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act or
any law for the time being in force, the lessee
with respect to the land leased to him shall
have the right for the purpose of mining
operations on that land, to—
(a) work the mines;
(b) sink pits and shafts and construct
buildings and roads;
(c) erect plant and machinery;
(d) quarry and obtain building material
and road materials and make bricks;
(e) use water and take timber;
(f) use land for stacking purpose;
(g) install fuel pumps or stations for
diesel or petrol for own use;
(h) construct magazine for explosives,
and storage sheds for explosive related
substances with permission from the
licencing authority concerned;
Rights of a
lessee.

285
(i) store overburden material in areas
identified for the purpose;
(j) divert public roads, overhead electric
lines passing through the lease area, to
facilitate scientific mining; and
(k) do any other thing as specified in
the lease.
28. ( 1) An application for the extension of
a mining lease shall be made in such manner
as may be prescribed by the State Government
through such officer or authority as it may
specify in this behalf, or the person in whom
the minerals vest, as the case may be, at least
twenty four months before the date on which
the lease is due to expire.
(2) The extension of a lease which is
required to be granted with the prior approval
of the Central Government shall be extended
with the prior approval of the Central
Government.
(3) An application for extension made
under sub-section ( 1) shall be disposed of by
the authority competent to grant a lease for
the mineral within twelve months from the
date of receipt of the application and the
provisions of sub-sections ( 4), ( 5) and ( 6) of
section 14 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to
applications for extension:
Provided that before granting approval for
a second or subsequent extension of a mining
lease, in respect of land in which minerals vest
in the Government, the State Government shall
seek a report from the Indian Bureau of Mines
in respect of major minerals other than coal
and atomic minerals and the State Directorate
in the case of minor minerals, as to whether it
is in the interest of mineral development to
grant the extension of the mining lease:
Provided further that in case a report is
not received from the Indian Bureau of Mines
within a period of three months of receipt of
Extension
of mining
lease.

286
the communication from the State Government,
it would be deemed that the Indian Bureau of
Mines has no objection to the grant of
extension of the mining lease.
(4) If an application for the extension of a
mining lease made within the time referred to
in sub-section ( 1) is not disposed off by the
State Government before the date of expiry of
the lease, the period of the lease shall be
deemed to have been extended till the State
Government passes an order thereon or the
person in whom the minerals vest
communicates his approval or rejection of the
application, as the case may be.
(5) The State Government may, by an order
condone the delay in an application for
extension of mining lease made after the time
limit specified in sub-section ( 1) if the
application has been made before the expiry
of the lease and there are sufficient reasons, to
be recorded in writing, to condone the delay,
and the provisions of sub-section ( 4) shall be
applicable in such case.
29. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, in respect of land in which the
minerals vest in the Government, where mining
operations are not commenced within a period
of two years from the date of execution of the
lease, or discontinued for a continuous period
of two years after the commencement of such
operations, the State Government may after
issuing a notice to the lease holder to show
cause and giving him an opportunity of being
heard, declare that the lease has lapsed and
without prejudice to the foregoing, the State
Government on being satisfied that the lessee
did not show due diligence, may also declare
him to be in breach of the conditions of such
lease and, therefore, ineligible for consideration
under sub-section ( 3) of section 20 or sub-
section ( 3) of section 22 or sub-section ( 3) of
section 25, as the case may be, for such period
not exceeding five years as may be specified,
having regard to the nature of the breach.
Lapsing of
leases and
revival.

287
(2) A lessee who is unable to commence
the mining operations within a period of two
years from the date of execution of the mining
lease, or discontinues mining operations for a
period exceeding two years for reasons beyond
his control, may , at least three months before
the expiry of such period, seek extension of
period for commencing or recommencing
mining operations, as the case may be, and
the State Government on being satisfied the
adequacy and genuineness of the reasons for
non-commencement of mining operations or
discontinuance thereof, pass an order
condoning the period of delay in
commencement or recommencement of the
mining operations, as the case may be:
Provided that such an order shall be
passed by the State Government within a
period of three months from the date of receipt
of the application.
(3) A lessee who is unable to commence
the mining operations within a period of two
years from the date of execution of the mining
lease, or discontinues mining operations for a
period of exceeding two years for reasons
beyond his control, may within a period of six
months from the date of its lapse, seek revival
of the lease and the State Government on being
satisfied about the adequacy of the reasons for
non commencement of mining operations or
discontinuance, may pass an order reviving the
lease:
Provided that such an order shall be
passed within a period of six months from the
date of making an application for revival:
Provided further that the lease has not
been revived earlier under this sub- section for
more than twice during the entire period of
the lease:
Provided also that in respect of coal, atomic
minerals and beach sand minerals, prior
approval of the Central Government shall be
obtained before orders are issued under this
section.

288
(4) The manner, the procedures for
condonation of delay and the reasons for
commencement or recommencement in respect
of matters specified in sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3)
shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order,
passed by the State Government under sub-
sections ( 1), ( 2) or ( 3) or by failure of the State
Government to pass an order within the period
specified therein, may apply to the National
Mining Tribunal or State Mining Tribunal, as
the case may be, and the Tribunal concerned
may issue appropriate direction.
30. ( 1) A lessee shall not determine the
lease except after notice in writing of not less
than twelve calendar months to the State
Government or to such officer, or the authority
as the State Government may specify in this
behalf in respect of land in which minerals
vest with the Government and to the person
in whom the minerals vest in other cases, in
accordance with the terms and conditions of
the mineral concession:
Provided that where a lessee, holding a
mining lease for a mineral or for a group of
minerals, applies for the surrender of the lease
or part area thereof or any mineral from the
lease on the ground that deposits of that
mineral have since exhausted or depleted to
such an extent that it is no longer economical
to work the mineral, he shall give notice of
not less than six months and the State
Government or the person in whom the
minerals vest, as the case may be, may permit
the lessee to surrender that lease or part area
thereof or minerals, as the case may be, subject
to conditions as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(2) In every case where a lease is
determined or surrendered under sub-section
(1) the lessee shall at his own cost prepare
Determination
of lease.

289
and implement a Final Mine Closure Plan in
accordance with the provisions of section 32
and shall close the mine or part thereof in
accordance with the provisions of section 33.
(3) In respect of any land in which the
minerals vest in the Government, in the event
of breach of any of the conditions of the lease,
the State Government may by an order, after
giving an opportunity of being heard to the
lessee, determine the lease or forfeit in whole
or in part, the amount deposited as security
by the lessee, and in case the lease is
determined shall direct the lessee to prepare
and implement a Final Mine Closure Plan in
accordance with the provisions of the sections
32 and 33, and in the event of his failure to
do so, may prepare and implement the Plan
at the cost of the lessee.
(4) Where it appears to the Central
Government, upon any investigation conducted
by the Central Government agency under the
National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 or any
other law for the time being in force, that the
mining activities in any area under lease is
related to or aiding or abetting organised crime
or anti-national activities of outlawed or
insurrectionist organisations or that such
mining activities is prejudicial to the national
security, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, direct the State Government to
determine the mining lease and the State
Government shall determine the lease forthwith
in case the minerals vest with the State
Government, and in case the minerals vest in
a person other than the State Government, the
State Government shall issue a direction to
such person to determine the lease and such
person shall forthwith comply with such
direction.
(5) In respect of any land in which the
minerals vests in a private person where the
lease is determined due to breach of any of
34 of 2008.

290
the conditions of the lease, such person shall
prepare and implement the Final Mine Closure
Plan at his cost.
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order,
made under sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4),
may apply to the National Mining Tribunal in
respect of an order issued by the Central
Government or an order issued by the State
Government, as the case may be, in respect of
major mineral, and to the State Mining Tribunal
in respect of minor mineral, and the National
Mining Tribunal or the State Mining Tribunal,
as the case may be, may after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the party,
confirm, modify or set aside the order.
31. ( 1) Where the State Government is of
the opinion that it is in the public interest or
in the interest of public safety to do so, it may
for reasons to be recorded in writing make an
order of premature termination of the mining
lease in case the minerals vest in the
Government, and issue a direction to this effect
to the person in whom the minerals vest in
other cases:
Provided that no premature termination of
a mining lease shall be made without giving
the lessee a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
(2) In every case of premature termination
of a lease, made under sub-section ( 1), the State
Government shall, having regard to the nature
of the loss caused to the lessee, compensate
the lessee in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(3) A person aggrieved by an order under
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) may apply to
the National Mining Tribunal in case of major
minerals and the State Mining Tribunal in case
of minor minerals, for revision, modification
or cancellation of such order, and the National
Mining Tribunal or the State Mining Tribunal,
as the case may be, may pass such order as
may be appropriate.
Premature
termination
of lease.

291
32. ( 1) Every mining lease shall have a
Mine Closure Plan prepared in terms of a
Sustainable Development Framework, which
shall consist of—
(i) a progressive mine closure plan for
each mine; and
(ii) a final mine closure plan.
(2) Every Mine Closure Plan shall be
available for inspection by the public in the
office of the authority competent to approve
such a Plan, and also in the office of the
Panchayat having jurisdiction and such other
places as may be notified.
(3) A Progressive Mine Closure Plan shall
be prepared for each mine for a period of five
years at a time commencing with the period
of the lease, and for every period of five years
thereafter, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the Progressive Mine Closure
Plan shall include details of closure,
rehabilitation and restoration activities
proposed to be carried out in the five years
period and the projected investments in this
respect, and except in the case of the first
progressive mine closure plan, the details of
activities actually carried out and the
expenditure incurred in each of the preceding
progressive closure plans.
(4) The lessee shall submit the Progressive
Mine Closure Plan to the Indian Bureau of
Mines and the State Directorate in the case of
major minerals other than coal and atomic
minerals, to the Coal Controller in case of coal
minerals, and to the Atomic Minerals
Directorate in case of atomic minerals, and to
the State Directorate in the case of minor
minerals and a copy thereof shall be sent to
the Panchayats of the area:
Provided that in respect of a mining lease
for a minor mineral for which a mining plan
has been dispensed with under sub-section ( 1)
Mine
Closure
Plan.

292
of section 26, the State Government in
consultation with the Indian Bureau of Mines
may, having regard to the nature of the
mineral, exempt any such lease from preparing
a Mine Closure Plan, subject to suitable
provision in the mining Framework in respect
of that mineral in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and the
mining framework shall be deemed to be the
Progressive Mine Closure Plan and the Final
Mine Closure Plan for the purposes of this Act.
(5) The Indian Bureau of Mines or the Coal
Controller or the Atomic Mineral Directorate,
or the State Directorate as the case may be
shall, after consulting the concerned Panchayats
convey its approval or disapproval to the
Progressive Mine Closure Plan within a period
of ninety days from its receipt:
Provided that in case the approval or
disapproval is not communicated within the
said period, the Progressive Mine Closure Plan
shall be deemed to have been approved on a
provisional basis till such approval or
disapproval is conveyed.
(6) No mining operation shall be carried
out in a mine in respect of which a Progressive
Mine Closure Plan has not been approved, or
in a manner contrary to the approved
Progressive Mine Closure Plan:
Provided that the authority responsible for
approving the Progressive Mine Closure Plan
may at any time inspect the mining operations
to satisfy itself in this regard, and may issue
any direction necessary to ensure compliance
to the provisions of the Plan.
(7) A Final Mine Closure Plan shall be
prepared for lease area in such manner as may
be prescribed by the Central Government, and
approved by the authority competent to
approve the Progressive Mine Closure Plan in
respect of the mine.

293
(8) Without prejudice to the generality of
this section, the Final Mine Closure Plan shall
be based on the land use planned for the lease
area after its closure, and shall include
measures to reduce hazards, improve
productivity and ensure that it supports the
needs of the host population:
Provided that the land use planned for the
mining lease area after the closure of mine
shall be decided in consultation with the
Panchayats having jurisdiction, in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(9) The Final Mine Closure Plan shall be
revised for every five years having regard to
the progress of mining operations and be
submitted alongwith every Progressive Mine
Closure Plan.
(10) The Final Mine Closure Plan for the
last five years period of the lease shall be
approved with such modification as may be
specified by the authority approving the
Progressive Mine Closure Plan after
consultation with the Panchayat concerned,
within a period of one year:
Provided that in the case where the lease
is extended under the provisions of sub-section (1)
of section 8 of the Act, the lessee shall submit
a Progressive Mine Closure Plan for the next
five years in accordance with the provisions
of this Act along with a Final Mine Closure
Plan in accordance with the provisions of this
section and the last five years shall be reckoned
with reference to the extended period.
(11) The manner of preparation and
implementation of the mine closure plan for
Coal minerals and atomic minerals shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(12) Every progressive and final mine
closure plan referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
be prepared by a qualified firm or other

294
association of persons or company accredited
in this behalf in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section ( 5) of section 26 in terms of a
Sustainable Development Framework as may
be notified by the Central Government under
sub-section ( 2) of section 46.
33. ( 1) The lessee shall not determine the
lease or part thereof unless a final mine closure
plan, approved by the Indian Bureau of Mines
in respect of major minerals other than coal
minerals and atomic minerals, or any authority
as may be designated by the Central
Government in respect of coal minerals or
atomic minerals, or the State Directorate in
respect of minor minerals, as the case may be
is duly implemented by the lessee.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the
lessee shall be required to obtain a certificate
from the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Atomic
Minerals Directorate or the authority as may
be designated by the Central Government in
respect of coal minerals or the State Directorate
in respect of minor minerals, as the case may
be, to the effect that protective, reclamation,
restoration and rehabilitation work in
accordance with the approved mine closure
plan or with such modifications as approved
by the competent authority have been carried
out by the lessee.
(3) In every case where a lessee has made
default in implementing a progressive Mine
Closure Plan, the State Government may by
an order suspend the mining operation till the
default is remedied and may demand
additional security so as to ensure deposit of
security to the extent of the maximum specified
under sub section ( 1) of section 24 for the
remaining period of the lease, and for any or
all other leases of the lessee for reasons to be
specified in a show cause notice, and in case
the lessee fails to show adequate cause, or fails
to furnish the additional security, as the case
Closure.

295
may be, within a reasonable period not
exceeding thirty days, the State Government
may determine the lease in respect of which
such security was not furnished.
(4) If the lessee makes default in
implementing the final Mine Closure Plan or
abandons a mine, without prejudice to any
action under section 53, the State Government
may after serving a notice to the lessee, cause
the plan to be implemented by such other
authority as it may direct, at the cost of the
lessee, that the lease may be determined in
such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government and the lessee shall be
declared to be ineligible for the purpose of any
mineral concessions under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
M
INERAL CONCESSION IN CASES WHERE MINERALS
DO NOT VEST EXCLUSIVELY WITH G OVERNMENT
34. Applications for mineral concessions in
respect of any mineral which vest exclusively
in a person other than the Government shall
be made to such person and all mineral
concessions be granted subject to the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
35. A mineral concession granted in
accordance with the provisions of section 34
shall be in the form of a registered deed
executed by the parties on such terms and
conditions as may be agreed, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder, and an authenticated copy
of the deed shall be deposited by the person
granted the mineral concession with the State
Government and the Indian Bureau of Mines
before commencing operations:
Provided that notwithstanding anything
contained in such deed to the contrary, it shall
be lawful for the State Government to issue
any direction to the leaseholder or to the
person in whom the minerals vest, in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Applications
in case
minerals
vest with
private
persons.
Mineral
concessions
to be in
the form
of a
registered
deed.

296
36. In respect of lands where minerals vest
partly in the Government and partly with a
private person, the provisions of this Act shall
apply in the same manner as they apply in
respect of land where minerals vest exclusively
with the Government:
Provided that the dead rent and royalty
payable in respect of minerals which vest
partly in Government and partly in private
person shall be shared by the Government and
by that person in proportion to the share they
have in the minerals.
CHAPTER VII
R
ESERVATION
37. (1) The State Government with the prior
approval of the Central Government, or the
Central Government after consultation with the
State Government, may reserve for purposes
of mineral conservation any area not already
held under a high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration license, a prospecting licence
or mining lease, and shall notify the reservation
specifying the reasons and the period of
reservation shall be for a period of not less
than ten years:
Provided that the period may be extended
from time to time in the public interest, for
such period as may be notified in the same
manner in which it was reserved.
(2) No application for mineral concession
shall be entertained in respect of an area
reserved under sub-section ( 1), and any such
application is deemed to have never been
made.
(3) An area reserved for purposes of
mineral conservation shall not be used for such
purposes during the period of the reservation
that is contrary to the object of such
reservation.
Cases
where
minerals
vest partly
with
Government.
Reservation
of areas
for
conservation
of mineral
resources.

297
38. Subject to the provisions of section 37,
all areas reserved under the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957, as it stood before its repeal, and the rules
made thereunder, shall continue to be reserved
under this Act for a period of ten years from
the date of the commencement of this Act or
up to the date specified in such reservation
order, whichever is earlier.
39 . On the expiry of the period of
reservation under section 37 or section 38, or
such earlier date as may be notified by the
Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, an area reserved under
section 37 or section 38, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be available for grant of
the mineral concessions after a lapse of thirty
days or from such earlier date as may be
notified for the purpose.
40. ( 1) Where the Central Government is
of the opinion that any mineral or a particular
grade of mineral needs to be conserved in view
of its strategic value, it may, by notification,
ban the grant of mineral concession in respect
of that mineral or a particular grade of mineral
or impose such restrictions on grant of mineral
concessions or operation of such concession as
may be specified in the said notification:
Provided that such a ban or restriction shall
not apply in respect of applications for grant
of mining leases under sub-section ( 3) of
section 25.
(2) The notification referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shall be for a period of not less
than ten years.
(3) The Central Government may renew the
notification, as referred to in sub-section ( 1),
for a further period not less than ten years.
CHAPTER VIII
R
OYALTIES, COMPENSATION AND CESS
41. ( 1) The holder of a mining lease,
whether granted before or after the
commencement of this Act shall,
notwithstanding anything in the instrument of
Saving of
reserved
areas.
Expiry and
revocation
of
reservation.
Conservation
of mineral.
Royalty
payable in
respect of
minerals.
67 of 1957.

298
lease or in any other law for the time being in
force, pay royalty in respect of any mineral
removed or consumed by him or by his agent,
manager, employee or contractor from the
leased area.
(2) The rate of royalty in respect of major
minerals shall be such as specified in the
Second Schedule to this Act:
Provided that concessional rates of royalty
may be specified for such cases where the
lessee beneficiates the mineral at the ore stage.
(3) The Central Government may, after
taking into consideration the report and
recommendations of the National Mining
Regulatory Authority, by notification, amend
the Second Schedule to enhance or reduce the
rate specified therein with effect from such date
as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that the Central Government shall
not enhance the rate of royalty in respect of
any major mineral more than once during any
period of three years.
(4) The State Government may, by
notification from time to time, declare the rate
at which royalty shall be payable in respect of
minor minerals:
Provided that the State Government shall
not enhance the rate of royalty in respect of a
minor mineral more than once during any
period of three years.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act, the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall
not apply to or in relation to mining leases
granted before the 25th day of October, 1949,
in respect of coal, but the Central Government,
if it is satisfied that it is expedient so to do,
may, by notification, direct that all or any of
the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder apply to or in relation to such
leases subject to such exceptions and
modifications, if any, as may be specified in
that notification.

299
42. ( 1) The holder of a mining lease,
whether granted before or after the
commencement of the Act, shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in the
instrument of lease or in any other law for
the time being in force, pay every year, dead
rent at such rate as may be specified, for all
the areas included in the instrument of lease.
(2) Where the holder of such mining lease
becomes liable under section 41 to pay royalty
for any mineral removed or consumed by him
or by his agent, manager, employee or
contractor from the leased area, he shall be
liable to pay either such royalty, or the dead
rent in respect of that area, whichever is higher.
(3) The dead rent in respect of mining
leases for major minerals shall be as specified
in the Third Schedule and the Central
Government may, after taking into
consideration the recommendations of the
National Mining Regulatory Authority, by
notification, amend the Third Schedule so as
to enhance or reduce the rate at which the
dead rent shall be payable in respect of any
area covered by a mining lease and such
enhancement or reduction take effect from such
date as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that the Central Government shall
not enhance the rate of the dead rent in respect
of any such area more than once during any
period of three years.
(4) The State Government may by
notification from time to time, declare the rate
at which dead rent shall be payable in respect
of minor minerals:
Provided that the State Government shall
not enhance the rate of the dead rent in respect
of any such area more than once during any
period of three years:
Provided further that in respect of such
portion of a lease as is for both major and
minor minerals, dead rent if payable, shall be
the higher of the two dead rents.
Dead rent
payable by
lessee.

300
(5) In order to encourage mining of small
deposits in cluster, dead rent for the area shall
be determined having regard to the actual area
required for mining operations.
43. ( 1) In respect of land in which minerals
vest in the Government, the holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance cum exploration
licence or prospecting licence shall be liable to
pay, to every person or family holding
occupation or usufruct or traditional rights of
the surface of the land over which the licence
has been granted, such reasonable annual
compensation as may be mutually agreed
between the holder of such licence and such
persons or in the absence of such agreement,
which may be determined by an officer
appointed, by notification, by the State
Government in this behalf in such manner as
may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that such amount shall be
determined before commencement of
operations and paid in advance each year, in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(2) The holder of a mining lease shall pay
annually to the District Mineral Foundation,
as referred to in section 56,—
(a) in case of major minerals (except
coal and lignite) an amount equivalent to
the royalty paid during the financial year;
(b) in case of coal and lignite, an
amount equal to twenty-six per cent. of the
profit to be called as profit sharing
percentage (after deduction of tax paid) of
the immediately preceding financial year
from mining related operations in respect
of the lease; and
(c) in case of minor minerals, such
amount as may be prescribed by the State
Government with the concurrence of the
Payment
of
compensation
to owner
of surface,
usufruct
and
traditional
rights,
damages,
etc.

301
National Mining Regulatory Authority
referred to in section 58,
within such time and in such manner as may
be prescribed by the State Government for the
benefit of persons or families affected by
mining related operations:
Provided that in respect of coal minerals
the Central Government may, after taking into
consideration the report and recommendations
of the National Mining Regulatory Authority,
by notification, revise the profit sharing
percentage, or specify such other method as
may be prescribed for calculation of amount
to be paid to the District Mineral Foundation:
Provided further that in case where the
holder of a mining lease for major minerals
has commenced mining related operations but
has not commenced production, the holder of
a mining lease shall pay into the District
Mineral Foundation, an amount equal to the
royalty payable on the production estimated
in the first twelve months of the year as per
the approved mining plan:
Provided also that in case the holder of a
mining lease for major minerals,—
(a) was not in production for a part of
a particular year, he shall be liable to pay
the amount in the second proviso on pro-
rata basis for the period during which he
had not commenced any such operations;
(b) discontinues production for a part
of a particular year, he shall be liable to
pay the amount equal to the royalty on
actual production of the corresponding
period of the previous financial year.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section
(2), and the Companies Act, 1956, or any other
law for the time being in force, where the
holder of mining lease is a company, it shall
also allot at least one share at par for
1 of 1956.

302
consideration other than cash to each person
of the family affected by mining related
operations of the company and such shares
shall be non transferable.
(4) The articles of association of the
company, referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall
contain provisions enabling the company to
allot shares in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section ( 3).
(5) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section
(2) and sub-section ( 3), the holder of a mining
lease shall, in respect of any person or family
holding occupation or usufruct or traditional
rights of the surface of the land over which
the lease has been granted, be liable to provide
employment or other assistance in accordance
with the rehabilitation and resettlement policy
of the State Government concerned.
(6) The amount payable under this section
shall be in addition to any other amount or
compensation payable to the person or family
holding occupation or usufruct or traditional
rights of the surface of the land under any
other law for the time being in force.
(7) After the termination of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence or a mining lease, the State
Government shall after giving the person or
family holding occupation or usufruct or
traditional rights of the surface of the land an
opportunity of being heard, assess the damage,
if any, done to the land by the reconnaissance
or prospecting or mining related operations
and determine the amount of compensation
payable by the licensee or the lessee, as the
case may be, to the person or family holding
occupation or usufruct or traditional rights of
the surface of the land in such manner as may
be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that in case the licencee or lessee
and the person or family holding occupation
or usufruct or traditional rights mutually agree

303
on the compensation, and communicate the
same to an officer appointed by the State
Government in this behalf, the State
Government may, accordingly, determine the
compensation.
(8) In case,—
(a) the licensee fails to make payment
to the persons holding occupation or
usufruct or traditional rights in terms of
sub-section ( 1), the State Government may
forfeit the security deposit and make
payment therefrom, and may recover any
balance amount as provided in section 118
of this Act, and may also declare the
licensee or lessee ineligible for the purposes
of any mineral concessions under this Act;
(b) the lessee fails to make payment to
the District Mineral Foundation in terms of
sub-section ( 2), the State Government may
initiate necessary proceedings to recover the
arrears and may also take action against
the lessee for non-compliance of conditions
of the lease in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section ( 4) of section 24;
(c) the lessee or the licensee, as the case
may be, fails to pay the compensation
within three months of its determination
under section 30, the State Government
may on an application made to it by the
aggrieved person, either forfeit the security
deposit and make payment therefrom, or
may recover the amount as provided in
section 118 of this Act, and may also
declare the licensee or lessee ineligible for
the purposes of any mineral concessions
under this Act.
(9) Where there is a dispute as to whether
a person or family holds occupation or usufruct
or traditional rights, the Collector of the
District may after consulting the Gram Sabha,
or the Gram Panchayat or District Council, as
the case may be, make a determination which
shall be binding for the purposes of this Act.

304
(10) ( a) The State Government shall cause
identification of the person or families affected
by mining related operations in such manner
as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(b) The amount of monetary benefit may
be determined by the State Government for
each district where mining operations are being
undertaken, having regard to the nature and
extent to which such person or family is
affected by mining related operations and for
improving the quality of life of the affected
person or family, and such amount of monetary
benefit shall not be less than the amount a
family may be entitled under the provisions
of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005:
Provided that till the amount of monetary
benefit is determined by the State Government,
the amount of monetary benefit shall be equal
to an amount that such as a family may be
entitled under the provisions of the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005.
(c) The State Government shall ensure that
monetary benefits under this Act are
distributed to the persons or families in areas
affected by mining related operations through
a mechanism prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that in case of a family not
headed by a woman, the State Government
shall ensure that half the amount of monetary
benefits distributed to families in areas affected
by mining operations shall accrue to the eldest
women member of the family.
(11) For the purposes of this section, in
case of a mining lease already granted on or
before the date of commencement of this Act,
the date for identification of person or families
affected by mining related operations shall be
reckoned as first January Nineteen Hundred
and Ninety Seven.
42 of 2005.
42 of 2005.

305
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) a “family” shall comprise of mother,
father and their children or any person
wholly dependent on the head of the
family, including any lineal ascendant or
descendant of the head of the family or
his spouse; and
(b) a “family” may also be single
member family.
44. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
notification, specify, that there shall be levied
and collected a cess on major minerals for
the purposes of this Act,—
(a) as a duty of customs, where the
ore is exported;
(b) as a duty of excise, where the ore
is sold or otherwise disposed to an end-
user or to any other person who in turn
sells it to an end-user, or is used by the
owner of the mine in any end-use by
himself, at such rate not exceeding two
and one-half per cent. of the duty as may
be specified in the notification by the
Central Government:
Provided that the rate shall not be
increased more than once during any period
of five years.
(2) Every cess leviable under sub-section ( 1)
on major minerals shall be payable by the
person by whom such major minerals are
produced, and in the case of export, the cess
shall be payable by the exporter.
(3) The cess leviable under sub-section ( 1)
on the major mineral shall be in addition to
any cess or duty leviable on those items under
any other law for the time being in force.
(4) The provisions of the Central Excise
Act, 1944 and the rules made thereunder and
Levy and
collection
of cess by
Central
Government.
1 of 1944.

306
the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and
the rules made thereunder, as the case may
be, including those relating to refunds and
exemptions from duties shall, as far as may
be, apply in relation to the levy and collection
of cess leviable under this section and for this
purpose, the provisions of the Central Excise
Act, 1944 and of the Customs Act, 1962, as the
case may be, shall have effect as if the
aforesaid Acts provided for the levy of cess
on major minerals.
(5) Every person or company or firm or
association of persons using or trading in or
exporting or stocking major minerals shall
register himself or itself with the Indian Bureau
of Mines in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government:
Provided that in case of coal minerals, the
administration of registration shall be done by
the Central Government.
45. ( 1) The State Government may, by
notification specify, that there shall be levied
and collected a cess on major minerals and
minor minerals extracted at a rate not
exceeding ten per cent. of the royalty in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that the rate shall not be
increased more than once during any period
of five years.
(2) The cess shall be paid by the person
holding the mining lease for major minerals
or minor minerals, as the case may be:
Provided that where the minerals vest in a
person other than the Government, and the
holder of the mining lease fails to pay the cess,
the person in whom the minerals vest shall,
on demand, pay the amount of the cess.
52 of 1962.
Levy and
collection
of cess by
State
Government.

307
CHAPTER IX
POWER TO ISSUE DIRECTIONS
46. ( 1) The Central Government shall take
all such steps as may be necessary for the
conservation of strategic mineral resources in
the national interest and for the scientific
development and exploitation of all mineral
resources.
(2) The Central Government in order to
facilitate the scientific development and
exploration of mineral resources and to ensure
the protection of the environment and
prevention and control of pollution from
prospecting and mining related operations,
shall cause to be developed a National
Sustainable Development Framework in
consultation with the State Governments.
(3) The State Government may with the
previous approval of the Central Government
frame a State Sustainable Development
Framework not inconsistent with the National
Sustainable Development Framework.
(4) The National Sustainable Development
Framework shall contain guidelines enabling
formulation of project-level practices for
sustainable mining, and include the following,
namely:—
(i) specification of factors and
parameters influencing sustainable and
scientific mining;
(ii) broad criteria beyond which mining
may not be deemed sufficiently sustainable
or scientifically manageable;
(iii) systemic measures needed to be
taken or built-in to increase sustainability
of mining operations considering its entire
life cycle, inter alia ,—
(a) ensuring minimal adverse
impact on quality of life of the local
communities;
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions
in the
interest of
scientific
mineral
exploration
and
mining
and
sustainable
development.

308
(b) protecting interests of affected
persons including host population;
(c) creating new opportunities for
socio-economic development including
for sustainable livelihood;
(d) mineral conservation both in
terms of mining technologies or
practices and mineral beneficiation;
(e) reduction in waste generation
and related waste management
practices and promotion of recycling of
materials;
(f) minimising and mitigating
adverse environmental impacts
particularly in respect of ground water,
air, ambient noise and land;
(g) ensuing minimal ecological
disturbance, in terms of bio-diversity,
flora, fauna and habitat;
(h) promoting restoration and
reclamation activities so as to make
optimal use of mined out land for the
benefit of the local communities;
(i) measurable indicators of
sustainable development;
(j) consultative mechanisms with
stakeholder groups right from pre-
mining stages through the life cycle and
up to post-closure stages to ensure
stakeholder groups involvement and
participation in identifying and
addressing the sustainability issues; and
(k) system of public disclosure of
mining related activities and
environmental parameters including
indicators and mechanisms to facilitate
formal and informal sustainability
audits.
(5) The Central Government may, from
time to time specify the guidelines for scientific
mining and mineral conservation within a

309
Sustainable Development Framework and the
State Directorate shall be responsible for
implementation of the Sustainable Development
Framework in the State:
Provided that the State Government may,
with the previous approval of the Central
Government, confer all or any of the functions
of the State Directorate on any other specialised
agency for the purpose of better implementing
the Sustainable Development Framework.
(6) The Central Government may issue
general directions as may be required,
consistent with the provisions of the Act to
the State Governments or the National
Authority referred to in section 58 or to any
authority under the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, for the
conservation of strategic mineral resources or
any policy matter in the national interest and
for the scientific and sustainable development
and exploration of mineral resources and
recycling of such resources to the extent
practicable, and detection, prevention and
prosecution of cases of illegal mining, and to
frame rules for the purpose and all such
directions shall be complied with to the extent
possible.
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of
this section, the Central Government for the
purpose of scientific management and
exploration of mineral resources, may prescribe
a framework for disclosure of information
related to mineral resources and their
exploration and exploitation, and recycling
including the development of websites and
Portals and databases; and such framework
shall specify the nature and extent of the
information required to be disclosed and the
person or authority responsible for such
disclosure and any such person or authority
shall comply except where the information is
of a nature that is exempted under section 8
of the Right to Information Act, 2005 in relation
to a public authority.
22 of 2005.

310
47. ( 1) The State Government may , in the
interest of systematic development of mineral
deposits, conservation of minerals, scientific
mining, sustainable development and
protection of the environment, issue directions
to the owner, agent, mining engineer, geologist
or manager of a mine.
(2) Every direction issued under sub-section (1)
shall be complied within such period as may
be specified, not being a period of less than
one week:
Provided that where there is difficulty in
giving effect to any direction, the owner, agent,
mining engineer, geologist or manager of the
mine, as the case may be, may apply for
modification or rescinding of such direction
and the State Government, may either modify
or rescind the direction or confirm it:
Provided further that in case the State
Government does not pass any order
modifying or rescinding such direction within
a period of thirty days from the date of
application, the direction shall be deemed to
have been confirmed.
(3) Any direction issued under sub-sections (1)
and ( 2) shall be issued in consultation with
the Indian Bureau of Mines in such classes of
cases as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(4) Any person aggrieved by a direction
or order under this section may apply to the
National Mining Tribunal in case of major
minerals under section 85 or the State Mining
Tribunal in case of minor minerals under
section 99, as the case may be.
48. ( 1) Where the Central Government is
of the opinion that for the purpose of
conservation of strategic mineral resources or
for the scientific management, exploration and
exploitation of mineral resources it is expedient
Power of
State
Government
to issue
directions
generally.
Power to
authorise
Geological
Survey of
India and
Indian
Bureau of

311
to conduct a technical or scientific investigation
with regard to any mineral or any land
including lands in relation to which mineral
concessions may have been granted, the
Central Government may authorise the
Geological Survey of India or the Indian
Bureau of Mines or the Atomic Minerals
Directorate or such other authority as it may
specify in this behalf, to carry out such
technical or scientific investigation as may be
necessary, and to submit a report within such
period as may be specified:
Provided that no such authorisation shall
be made in the case of any land in which
mineral concession has been granted, except
after consultation with the State Government
where minerals vest in the State Government
and with the person in whom the mineral vests
in other cases.
(2) On issue of an authorisation under sub-
section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Geological
Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines,
the Atomic Mineral Directorate or the specified
authority or agency, and its employees,—
(a) to enter upon such land;
(b) to dig or bore into the sub-soil,
conduct studies and take samples;
(c) to do all other acts necessary to
determine the nature and extent of any
mineral available in or under such land;
(d) to set out boundaries of the land in
which any mineral is expected to be found,
and to mark such boundaries and line by
placing marks; and
(e) where otherwise the survey cannot
be completed on the boundaries and line
marked, to cut down and clear away any
part to any standing crop, fence or jungle
with the approval of the authority
concerned:
Mines,
Atomic
Minerals
Directorate,
etc., to
investigate
and report.

312
Provided that no such authority or agency,
as the case may be, shall enter into any
building or upon any enclosed court or garden
attached to a dwelling-house without
previously giving such occupier at least seven
days’ notice in writing of its intention to do
so.
(3) Whenever any action of the nature
specified in sub-section ( 2) is to be taken, the
Central Government shall, before or at the time
when such action is taken, pay or tender
payment for the damage which is likely to be
caused, and in case of dispute as to the
sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered
or as to the person to whom it shall be paid
or tendered, the Central Government shall refer
the dispute to the Collector of the District in
which the land is situated for determination.
(4) The fact that there exists any such
dispute, as is referred to in sub-section ( 3),
shall not be a bar to the taking of any action
under sub-section ( 2).
(5) After the completion of the
investigation, the Geological Survey of India,
the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Atomic
Minerals Directorate or the specified authority
or agency by which the investigation was made
shall submit a report to the Central
Government indicating therein the nature and
extent of any mineral which lies deposited in
or under the land and such other information
as may be necessary.
(6) The costs of the investigation made
under this section shall be borne by the Central
Government:
Provided that any portion of the cost may
be paid out of the National Mineral Fund in
accordance with the provisions of section 50.
(7) The Central Government may, having
regard to the utility of the report submitted
under sub-section ( 5), and the public interest,

313
make available the report to such persons and
at such cost and in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
49. ( 1) The Indian Bureau of Mines, the
Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals
Directorate or the State Directorates or any
officer authorised by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be,
may enter and inspect a mine, and examine
or direct the examination of any mineral
deposit in any area under prospecting licence
or mining lease and take samples therefrom at
any time for the purposes of this Act.
(2) If any mine or part thereof, which in
the opinion of the Indian Bureau of Mines,
the Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals
Directorate or the State Directorate, poses a
grave and immediate threat to the conservation
of mineral resources or to the environment, it
may, by an order in writing to the owner,
agent, mining engineer or manager, require him
to take such measures as may be specified in
the order and may prohibit, until the
requirements as specified in the order are
complied with to its satisfaction, the
deployment of any person other than those
required for compliance with the requirement
of the order.
(3) The Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal
Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or
the State Directorate, as the case may be, may
by a general or specific order require the cores
or specimens of rocks and minerals obtained
from specified boreholes or shafts during
prospecting or mining operation conducted
under this Act, to be preserved for any specific
period.
(4) Every holder of a prospecting licence
or a mining lease shall provide all reasonable
facilities to persons authorised by the Indian
Bureau of Mines, the Coal Controller, the
Atomic Minerals Directorate and the State
Directorate for the purpose of undertaking
research or training in matters relating to
mining or geology.
Power of
Indian
Bureau of
Mines,
Coal
Controller,
Atomic
Minerals
Directorate
and State
Directorate
to issue
certain
directions
and to
seek
information.

314
(5) The holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
exclusive cum reconnaissance exploration
licence, prospecting license or mining lease, or
his agent shall furnish such information
regarding his reconnaissance or exploration or
prospecting or mining operations or regarding
the mine or any matter connected therewith
as the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal
Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or
the authorised officer of the Central
Government or the State Government, as the
case may be, may require by an order in
writing and the information shall be furnished
within such time and such period as may be
specified in the aforesaid order.
CHAPTER X
N
ATIONAL, STATE MINERAL FUND AND
DISTRICT MINERAL FOUNDATION
50. (1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a fund to be called the
National Mineral Fund for the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The proceeds of the cess levied under
sub-section ( 1) of section 44 shall first be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India,
and the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans
such sums of money as the Central
Government may consider necessary to the
National Mineral Fund from time to time,
after deducting the expenses of collection, for
being utilised exclusively for the purposes of
sub-section ( 3).
(3) The amount standing to the credit of
the National Mineral Fund shall be utilised
for—
(a) making grants to the National
Mining Regulatory Authority and the
National Mining Tribunal of such sums of
National
Mineral
Fund.

315
money as are required to pay salaries and
allowances payable to the Chairperson and
the members and the administrative
expenses including the salaries, allowances
and pension payable to or in respect of
officers and other employees of the
Authority and the Tribunal;
(b) promoting scientific management of
mining activities and mine closures,
including research and development and
training;
(c) research and development in
sustainable mining and recycling of
resources;
(d) developing capacity of the Indian
Bureau of Mines or office of the coal
controller, and any other agency as may be
determined by the Central Government to
enforce the provisions of this Act;
(e) detecting and preventing illegal
mining including commissioning of surveys
and studies, and developing awareness
amongst local communities and the mining
sector;
(f) investigations for the conservation
and scientific management, of mineral
resources in accordance with the provisions
of section 48 of the Act;
(g) promotion of information technology
applications in support of the mining and
minerals sector;
(h) providing grants-in-aid for
promoting techno-economic studies for the
mineral sector; and
(i) providing grants-in-aid for holding
of and participation in National or
International minerals and mining
workshops, conferences and promotional
events.
51. ( 1) The National Mineral Fund shall be
under the control of the Central Government,
and the balance to the credit of the National
Mineral Fund not lapse at the end of the
Financial Year.
Administration
and
Management
of Fund.

316
(2) The Central Government shall be
responsible for the administration and
management of the National Mineral Fund.
(3) The Central Government for the
purpose of this Act may,—
(a) formulate criteria for allocation of funds
for such projects which are required to be
implemented;
(b) approve schemes and sanction grants
and loans from the National Mineral Fund to
institutions and authorities as may be decided
and monitor their utilisation; and
(c) implement directly or through the
Geological Survey of India or the Indian
Bureau of Mines or coal controller or any other
agency as may be determined by the Central
Government, projects for the purposes of sub-
section ( 3) of section 50 and for this purpose
it may authorise the Director General,
Geological Survey of India and the Controller
General, Indian Bureau of Mines to incur such
expenditure from the National Mineral Fund
as may be necessary in this regard.
52.  ( 1) The Central Government shall
maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts, including the profit and loss account
and the balance-sheet in respect of the National
Mineral Fund in such form, as may be
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the National Mineral
Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as
may be specified by him.
53. ( 1) The State Government may, by
notification, establish a fund to be called the
State Mineral Fund for the purposes of this
Act.
Audit of
Accounts
of National
Mineral
Funds.
State
Mineral
Fund.

317
(2) The proceeds of the cess levied under
sub-section ( 1) of section 45 shall first be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State
and the State Government may, if the
Legislature of the State by appropriation made
by law in this behalf so provides, credit by
way of grants or loans such sums of money
as the State Government may consider
necessary to the State Mineral Fund from time
to time, after deducting the expenses of
collection, for being utilised exclusively for the
purposes of sub-section ( 4).
(3) The State Mineral Fund shall be held
and administered on behalf of the State
Government in such manner and by such
authority as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(4) The amount standing to the credit of
the State Mineral Fund shall be utilised for,—
(a) developing capacity of the State
Directorate to achieve the objects of this
Act;
(b) promotion of information technology
applications in support of the mining and
mineral sector;
(c) setting up and operation of Special
Courts under section 105 of the this Act;
(d) setting up and operation of the State
Mining Regulatory Authority and the State
Mining Tribunal under section 70 and
section 89 respectively;
(e) financial assistance to the District
Mineral Foundations by way of loan, capital
grants or other payment;
(f) compensating lessees whose leases
are prematurely terminated under section
31 of this Act;
(g) prevention and detection of illegal
mining, including expenditures incidental to
enforcement of the provisions of section 114
of this Act and to reward whistle-blowers
on illegal mining;

318
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section a whistle-blower is a person who
provides credible information of illegal
mining;
(h) such other public purposes in
relation to the objects of the Act, as may
be deemed expedient by the State
Government from time to time.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing provisions, the State Government
may sanction grants out of the State Mineral
Fund to an authority for implementation of a
mine closure plan under sub-section ( 4) of
section 33 and cause the recovery of the cost
thereof from the lessee in accordance with the
provisions of section 118 and deposit the same
into the State Mineral Fund.
54. ( 1) The State Mineral Fund shall be
under the control of the State Government, and
the balance to the credit of the State Mineral
Fund shall not lapse at the end of the Financial
Year.
(2) The State Government shall be
responsible for the administration and
management of the State Mineral Fund.
(3) The State Government for the purposes
of this Act may,—
(a) formulate criteria for allocation of
funds for such projects which are required
to be implemented;
(b) implement directly or through the
State Directorate by way of grant-in-aid,
projects for the purposes of sub-section ( 4)
of section 53 and for this purpose, may
authorise the Director of the State
Directorate to incur such expenditure from
the State Mineral Fund as may be
necessary in this regard.
55.  ( 1) The State Government shall
maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts, including the profit and loss account
Administration
and
Management
of State
Mineral
Fund.
Audit of
Accounts
of State
Mineral
Fund.

319
and the balance-sheet in respect of the State
Mineral Fund in such manner, as may be
prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the State Mineral Fund
shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as
may be specified by him.
56. ( 1) The State Government shall, by
notification, establish a trust to be called the
District Mineral Foundation, a non-profit body,
in each district in the State where a mining
lease has been granted or is in operation, in
the manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(2) The object of the District Mineral
Foundation shall be to work for the interest
and benefit of persons or families affected by
mining related operations in the district.
(3) The Governing Council of the District
Mineral Foundation shall be responsible for,—
(a) distribution of monetary benefit to
persons or families affected by mining
related operations in the district; and
(b) undertaking such other activities as
are in furtherance of the object of the
Foundation, including creation,
management and maintenance of such local
infrastructure for socio-economic purposes
in areas affected by mining related
operations and facilitating the
implementation of the Sustainable
Development Framework.
(4) The State Government may give
financial assistance to any District Mineral
Foundation by way of loan, capital grants or
other payments.
(5) The State Government shall maintain a
register, which shall be open to the members
of the public for inspection at any reasonable
Establishment
of District
Mineral
Foundation.

320
time, containing the following in relation to
each District Mineral Foundation,—
(a) a copy of the current constitution;
(b) a copy of the latest annual accounts
and of any report of the auditor of the
accounts of the District Mineral Foundation;
and
(c) a copy of the latest annual report
of the District Mineral Foundation.
(6) The amount standing to the credit of
the District Mineral Foundation shall be
utilised, in the following order of priority,
namely:—
(i) payment of monetary benefits
payable monthly or quarterly to members
of the family of the person holding
occupation or usufruct or traditional rights
in areas affected by mining related
operations:
Provided that the State Government
may make a scheme to systematically
regulate the amount of payment of
monetary benefits to different categories
based on the nature and extent to which
they are affected by the mining related
operation;
(ii) such other expenditure as may be
prescribed by the Central Government
subservient to the objects of the Foundation;
(iii) payment of administrative expenses
necessary for working of the District
Mineral Foundation, not exceeding five per
cent of the total annual payment received
by it in a financial year.
57. ( 1) The District Mineral Foundation
shall be managed by a Governing Council
which consists of,—
(a) District Magistrate — Chairperson;
(b) Chairperson of the District
Panchayat or District Council, as the case
may be—Member;
Governing
Council.

321
(c) all holders of mining lease in the
district—Members;
(d) head of local offices of Departments
concerned of the State Government—
Members;
(e) at least three representatives
nominated by the District Magistrate in
consultation with the Chairperson of the
District Panchayat or District Council, as
the case may be, from amongst the affected
persons or families in the areas affected by
mining operations, in the manner as may
be prescribed by the State Government—
Members;
(f) representative of the Indian Bureau
of Mines—Member;
(g) District Mining Officer—Secretary:
Provided that in the areas specified in the
Fifth Schedule of the Constitution, where there
is no District Panchayat, the Chairperson of
each of the Panchayats at intermediate level,
and where there is no Panchayat at
intermediate level, the Chairperson of the
Village Panchayats within whose jurisdiction
the mining operations are undertaken shall be
included as a member.
(2) The Governing Council for the District
Mineral Foundation shall be responsible for,—
(a) drawing-up the annual budget for
utilisation of the fund available with the
Foundation;
(b) approving the disbursal of the
amounts to the entitled persons or families
affected by mining related operations; and
(c) approving such other expenditure,
in furtherance of the objects of the
Foundation, from the Fund available with
the District Mineral Foundation in such
manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.

322
(3) The District Mineral Foundation shall,
at the end of each year, prepare an Annual
Report in respect of the activities undertaken
under the fund available with the District
Mineral Foundation, and shall forward it to
the State Government, which shall forthwith
cause the Report to be published on the
Government website.
(4) The District Mineral Foundation shall
maintain a register giving details of,—
(a) the list of lease holders in the
district and the annual payments made by
them to the District Mineral Foundation;
and
(b) the disbursal of benefits to the
affected persons;
(c) annual audited accounts of the
District Mineral Foundation, and the same
shall be available on the website of the
Foundation and for inspection by members
of the public.
(5) For the purposes of the Right to
Information Act, 2005, the District Mineral
Foundation is deemed to be a public authority.
(6) The District Mineral Foundation shall
maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts, including the profit and loss account
and the balance-sheet in respect of the fund
available with the District Mineral Foundation
in such manner, as may be prescribed by the
State Government in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(7) The accounts of the District Mineral
Foundation shall be audited at such intervals
and in such manner as may be prescribed by
the State Government in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(8) The accounts of the District Mineral
Foundation, as certified by the District
Magistrate, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
22 of 2005.

323
State Government by the District Mineral
Foundation and the State Government shall
cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House
of the State Legislature where there are two
Houses, and where there is one House of the
State Legislature, before that House.
CHAPTER XI
NATIONAL MINING REGULATORY AUTHORITY AND
STATE MINING REGULATORY AUTHORITY
58. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a National Authority to
be known as the National Mining
RegulatoryAuthority, to exercise the powers
conferred on, and to perform the functions
assigned to it under this Act in relation to
major minerals (other than coal minerals).
(2) The National Authority shall be a body
corporate, by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with
power to acquire, hold and dispose of
properties, both movable and immovable, and
to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue
or be sued.
(3) The head office of the National
Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The National Authority may, with the
prior approval of the Central Government,
establish its offices at any other place in India.
59. ( 1) The National Authority shall consist
of a Chairperson and not more than nine
whole time Members to be appointed by the
Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson of the National
Authority may, if considered necessary, invite
any one or more persons having specialised
knowledge and experience in a particular case
to assist the National Authority.
Establish-
ment of
National
Mining
Regulatory
Authority.
Composition
of National
Authority.

324
60. ( 1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as the Chairperson of the National
Authority, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-eight years
of age;
(b) ( i) has a post-graduate degree in
mining, engineering, technology, science,
commerce, humanities or law from a
university recognised by the University
Grants Commission or a university or
institute established by law for the time
being in force and special knowledge and
experience of not less than three years in
matters relating to policy, regulation and
operations in extractive industry; or
(ii) has held the post of Secretary or
Additional Secretary to the Government of
India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or the State Government, as
the case may be, having experience of not
less than three years in policy or law
relating to mines and mineral concessions.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Member, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-eight years
of age;
(b) ( i) has a post-graduate degree in
mining, engineering, technology, science,
commerce, humanities or law from a
university recognised by the University
Grants Commission or a university or
institute established by law for the time
being in force and special knowledge and
experience of not less than three years in
matters relating to policy, regulation and
operations in extractive industry or has
experience of not less than three years in
the field of mining sector at the national
level; or
(ii) has held the post of Joint Secretary
to the Government of India or any
Qualification
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
or Member
of National
Authority.

325
equivalent post in the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may
be, having experience of not less than one
year in policy or law relating to mines and
mineral concessions.
(3) The Chairperson and the Members of
the National Authority shall be appointed on
the recommendations of the Selection
Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 61.
(4) The Chairperson or the Members of the
National Authority shall not hold any other
office during the period of holding his office
as such.
(5) The Central Government shall, within
a period of one month from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the
Chairperson or Member, by reason of death,
resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a
Member and six months before the
superannuation or completion of the term of
office of the Chairperson or any Member, make
a reference to the Selection Committee
constituted under section 61 for filling up of
such vacancy.
61. ( 1) The Central Government shall, for
the purpose of selection of the Chairperson and
Members of the National Authority constitute
a Selection Committee, consisting of the
following, namely:—
(a) Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in the Ministry of Mines—
Member;
(c) Secretary in the Ministry of Law
and Justice—Member.
(2) The Secretary in the Ministry of Mines,
Government of India, shall be the Convenor
of the meeting of the Selection Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise
the selection of the Chairperson and Members
of the National Authority within one month
Selection
Committee
for
selection of
Chairperson
and
Members.

326
from the date on which the reference is made
to it under sub-section ( 5) of section 60.
(4) The Selection Committee shall
recommend a panel of two names in order of
preference for every vacancy referred to it and
the Central Government shall make
appointment from such panel.
(5) Before recommending any person for
appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of
the National Authority, the Selection Committee
shall satisfy itself that such person does not
have any financial or other interest, which is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be.
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson or
a Member of the National Authority shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in
the Selection Committee.
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections
(1) to ( 6), the Selection Committee may regulate
its own procedure.
62. ( 1) The Chairperson and Member of
the National Authority shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date on which they
enter upon their office or up to the age of
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1), the Chairperson and every
Member shall hold office at the pleasure of
the Central Government.
(3) The salary and other allowances
payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson and other
members of, the National Authority shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government:
Provided that the salary and other
allowances or other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members
of the National Authority shall not be varied
to their disadvantage after appointment.
Term of
office,
salary and
allowances
of
Chairperson
and
Members
of National
Authority.

327
63. The Chairperson or a Member of the
National Authority may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the Central
Government, resign his office:
Provided that a Chairperson or a Member
of the National Authority shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
64. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
order, remove from office, the Chairperson or
any Member of the National Authority, if the
Chairperson or such other Member, as the case
may be,—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as a Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) No Chairperson or any other Member
of the National Authority shall be removed
from office except by an order of the Central
Government on the ground of his proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after the Central
Government, has, on an inquiry, held in
accordance with the procedure prescribed in
this behalf by the Central Government, come
to the conclusion that the Chairperson or
Member, as the case may be, ought on any
such ground to be removed.
Resignation.
Removal
or
suspension
of
Chairperson
or
Members
of National
Authority.

328
(3) The Central Government may suspend
the Chairperson or a Member of the National
Authority, as the case may be, in respect of
whom an inquiry under sub-section ( 2) is being
initiated or pending until the Central
Government has passed an order on receipt of
the report of the inquiry .
65. ( 1) In the event of the occurrence of
any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
of the National Authority by reason of his
death or resignation, the senior-most Member
of the National Authority shall act as the
Chairperson until the date on which a new
Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, to fill such vacancy,
enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the National
Authority is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the senior-most Member, shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson until the date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
66. No act or proceeding of the National
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason
of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the National Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person as the Chairperson or a Member of
the National Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the National Authority not affecting the
merits of the case.
67. ( 1) The National Authority shall have
under it such numbers and categories of
officers and other employees, as the Central
Government may determine in consultation
with the Chairperson of the National Authority
from time to time, to assist the National
Authority in the discharge of its functions.
Member of
National
Authority
to act as
its
Chairperson
in certain
cases.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of National
Authority.
Officers
and other
employees
of National
Authority.

329
(2) The National Authority may appoint its
officers and other employees in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The officers and other employees of the
National Authority appointed under sub-section
(2) shall discharge their functions under the
general superintendence of the Chairperson.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees
of the National Authority shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
68. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the National Authority shall discharge and
exercise the following functions and powers in
respect of major minerals, namely:—
(a) lay down the standards of quality
of technical regulation to be followed by
the State Governments and the Indian
Bureau of Mines;
(b) lay down the standards of quality
of reports and information provided in the
public domain by the State Governments,
Indian Bureau of Mines and Geological
Survey of India to the investors in the
mining sector;
(c) mediate on the issue of jurisdiction
in matters of inspection of mining areas
amongst the State Governments and the
Indian Bureau of Mines;
(d) advise on mineral-wise conservation
strategies keeping in view of the national
interest;
(e) advise on matters relating to the
framework for sustainable development of
the mining sector, including implementation
and monitoring thereof:
Provided that notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, the National
Authority may, on the request of the
Powers
and
functions
of National
Authority.

330
Central Government or any State
Government, render advice on sustainable
development framework for minor
minerals;
(f) advise the Central Government and
any State Government, on a reference from
them, on issues pertaining to measures to
increase transparency in the grant of
mineral concessions and efficiency in
models for competitive bidding of minerals;
(g) review of the existing rates of
royalty on minerals (other than coal, lignite
and sand for stowing) specified in the
Second Schedule for major minerals in
terms of sub-section ( 2) of section 41 and
the profit sharing percentage payable under
sub-section ( 2) of section 43 and
recommend revision of rates of royalty and
profit sharing percentage to be paid by the
mining lease holder from time to time;
(h) review of the existing rates of dead
rent on minerals (other than coal, lignite
and sand for stowing) specified in the Third
Schedule for major minerals in terms of
sub-section ( 3) of section 42 and
recommend revision of rates of royalty from
time to time;
(i) recommend suitable mechanisms to
moderate royalty and profit sharing
percentage to support investment in remote
areas or for induction of special technology
or for promoting mineral beneficiation or
to produce downstream products of
strategic value or to create infrastructure:
Provided that the recommendations of
the National Authority under this sub-
section shall be made in consultation with
the State Governments and the mining
industry and shall be in the form of a
report submitted to the Central
Government:

331
Provided further that the National
Authority shall not recommend increase in
royalty rates or profit sharing percentage
for any mineral or fees or other charges
more than once in three years.
(j) recommend strategies and
institutional mechanisms to the Central
Government for attracting long-term
investments in the mining sector;
(k) recommend mechanisms to protect
the interests of the end-use industries in
the country for assured long-term supply
of minerals.
(2) The National Authority shall have the
power to regulate its own procedure thereof
in all matters arising out of the exercise of its
powers or of the discharge of its functions.
(3) The National Authority shall ensure
transparency in exercising its powers and
discharging its functions.
(4) The National Authority or any of its
officers authorised by it may call for records,
material evidence, or persons accused of
contravening any of the provisions or
committing any of the offences under this Act.
(5) All proceedings before the National
Authority in discharge of its functions shall be
deemed to be judicial proceedings within the
meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228, for the
purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal
Code and the National Authority shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 75, the order of the National Authority
shall not be subject to revision by the National
Mining Tribunal.
(7) The recommendation or advice of the
National Authority under this section shall be
in the form of a report to the Central
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

332
Government and the Central Government shall
take a decision thereon within a period of three
months:
Provided that where the Government takes
a decision at variance with the recommendation
or advice of the National Authority, it shall
record the reasons therefor and intimate the
same to the National Authority.
(8) The National Authority shall include in
its annual report all the cases where its
recommendation or advice has not been
accepted by the Central Government along
with reasons therefor.
69. ( 1) Without prejudice to any other law
for the time being in force, the National
Authority may, on the basis of written
complaint alleging contravention of the
provisions of the Act or alleging commission
of any offence punishable under this Act or
the rules made thereunder in respect of major
minerals where such contraventions or
commission of offences have been committed
on large scale or on organised basis or takes
place inter-state, investigate or cause to be
investigated any such complaint or institute
prosecution against any person.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of
the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the National
Authority may investigate or cause to be
investigated or institute prosecution against any
person where contraventions or commission of
offences have been committed on large scale
or on organised basis or have taken place inter-
state, in respect of major minerals in the
following cases, namely:—
(i) exploration and mining for any
mineral without licence or lease;
(ii ) undertaking of mining or
exploration activity outside the area granted
under licence or lease;
Search,
seizure
and
investigation.

333
(iii ) transactions relating to or
possession of mineral stock of unknown
origin, or such mineral which cannot be
satisfactorily accounted for;
(iv) transportation, storage, trade or
export of illegally raised mineral without
lawful authority:
(3) The National Authority may, if it finds
that the contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act or commission of any offence
thereunder in respect of major minerals is of a
small scale or isolated nature, refer any
complaint referred to in sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section ( 2) to the State Government concerned
for such action as it deems fit.
(4) The Central Government or the State
Government or the National Authority may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such
persons as it thinks fit, possessing such
qualifications as may be prescribed, or such
authority fulfilling such criteria or appoint an
Investigation officer or Investigating Authority
or appoint legal practitioner for initiating
prosecution or defending its case before any
Court or Tribunal for such area as may be
specified in the notification, to investigate or
initiate prosecution into contravention of any
of the provisions of this Act or commission of
any offence thereunder in respect of major
minerals [including cases falling under clauses
(i) to ( iv) of sub-section ( 2)].
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, “legal practitioner” means an advocate,
vakil or an attorney of any High Court, and
includes a pleader in practice.
(5) The Investigation Officer or the
Investigating Authority referred to in sub-
section ( 4), if so authorised by the Central
Government, shall have the power—
(a) to enter and search, at all reasonable
times and with such assistance, if any, as
he considers necessary, any premises in

334
which he has reason to believe an offence
under this Act or the rules made thereunder
has been or is being committed;
(b) to require the production of, and to
inspect, examine and make copies of, or
take extracts from registers, records or any
other documents kept by a holder of a
mining lease or licence, as the case may
be, in pursuance of the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder and seize
the same, if he has reason to believe that
all or any of them, may furnish evidence
of the commission of an offence punishable
under this Act or the rules made
thereunder;
(c) to make such examination and
inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain
whether the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder are being complied
with;
(d) to exercise such other powers as
may be necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act or the rules made
thereunder.
(6) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply
to any search or seizure under this Act as they
apply to any search or seizure made under
the authority of a warrant issued under section
94 of the said Code.
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply
to the process of investigation and initiation
of prosecution of the offences in respect of
major minerals under the provisions of this
Act, as they apply to the investigation or
initiation of prosecution made under the
provisions of the said Code.
(8) The Investigating Officer or
Investigating Authority, as the case may be,
shall complete the process of investigation
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

335
within a period of three months from the date
of authorisation for conducting such
investigation and submit the report of such
investigation to the National Authority.
(9) The Investigation Officer or the
Investigating Authority may take the assistance
of police if it so becomes necessary for
discharge of its functions under this Act.
(10) The National Authority either on its
own motion (on the basis of material in its
possession) or on the basis of report referred
to in sub-section ( 8) or an Investigation Officer
or Investigating Authority or any of its officer,
if so authorised by the National Authority may
file a complaint before a competent court in
respect of contravention of the provisions of
this Act or commission of any offence
thereunder in respect of major minerals.
70. ( 1) The State Government may, by
notification, establish with effect from such date
as may be specified therein, a State Authority
to be known as the State Mining Regulatory
Authority, to exercise the powers and functions,
mutatis-mutandis, in respect of minor minerals,
as is exercisable under sections 68 and 69 by
the National Authority.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section ( 1), the State Government may
confer on the State Authority the functions
relating to monitoring and regulating the
operation of the Sustainable Development
Framework in respect of minor minerals and
for major minerals after approval of the Central
Government.
71. The composition and procedure of the
State Authority referred to in section 70 shall
be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that in respect of functions
relating to the Sustainable Development
Framework the procedure shall be in
accordance with the provisions of section 46.
Establishment
of State
Mining
Regulatory
Authority.
Composition
and
procedures
of State
Authority.

336
72. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the State Authority shall have the powers to
authorise investigation and institute prosecution
against any person for offences under this Act
in respect of minor minerals or major minerals
in the following cases, namely:—
(a) exploration and mining operations
for any mineral without licence or lease;
(b) undertaking of any mining or
exploration activity outside the area granted
under licence or lease;
(c) transactions relating to possession of
mineral stock of unknown origin, or such
mineral which cannot be satisfactorily
accounted for;
(d) transportation, storage, trade or
export, of illegally raised mineral without
lawful authority;
(e) any other matter pertaining to
illegal mining referred to the State
Authority by the State Government:
Provided that in any case where the matter
is under investigation or prosecution by the
National Authority, the State Authority shall
not carry out any further investigation or
prosecution except with the approval of the
National Authority.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 85, the order of the State Authority
shall not be subject to revision by the National
Mining Tribunal.
73.  ( 1) If, at any time, the Central
Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the National
Authority, it is unable to discharge the
functions or perform the duties imposed on
it by or under the provisions of this Act;
or
Powers
and
functions
of State
Authority.
Powers of
Central
Government
to
supersede
National
Authority.

337
(b) that the National Authority has
persistently defaulted in complying with
any direction given by the Central
Government under this Act or in the
discharge of the functions or performance
of the duties imposed on it by or under
the provisions of this Act and as a result
of such default the financial position of the
National Authority or the administration of
the National Authority has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which
render it necessary in the public interest
so to do, the Central Government may for
reasons to be recorded, by notification,
supersede the National Authority for such
period, not exceeding one year, as may be
specified in the notification and appoint a
person or persons as the President may
direct to exercise powers and discharge
functions under this Act:
Provided that before issuing any such
notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the National
Authority to make representations against the
proposed supersession and shall consider the
representations, if any, of the National
Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section ( 1) superseding the National
Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other members
shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or
on behalf of the National Authority shall,
until the National Authority is reconstituted
under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and
discharged by the person or persons
referred to in sub-section ( 1); and

338
(c) all properties owned or controlled
by the National Authority shall, until the
National Authority is reconstituted under
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central
Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the
period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government shall reconstitute the
National Authority by a fresh appointment of
its Chairperson and other members and in such
case any person who had vacated his office
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a
copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each
House of Parliament at the earliest.
74.  ( 1) If, at any time, the State
Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the State Authority ,
it is unable to discharge the functions or
perform the duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the State Authority has
persistently defaulted in complying with
any direction given by the State
Government under this Act or in the
discharge of the functions or performance
of the duties imposed on it by or under
the provisions of this Act and as a result
of such default the financial position of the
State Authority or the administration of the
State Authority has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which
render it necessary in the public interest
so to do, the State Government may for
reasons to be recorded, by notification,
Power of
State
Government
to
supersede
State
Authority.

339
supersede the State Authority for such
period, not exceeding one year, as may be
specified in the notification and appoint a
person or persons as the Governor may
direct to exercise powers and discharge
functions under this Act:
Provided that before issuing any such
notification, the State Government shall give a
reasonable opportunity to the State Authority
to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the
representations, if any, of the State Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section ( 1) superseding the State
Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other members
shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or
on behalf of the State Authority shall, until
the State Authority is reconstituted under
sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged
by the person or persons referred to in sub-
section ( 1); and
(c) all properties owned or controlled
by the State Authority shall, until the State
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section
(3), vest in the State Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the
period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the
State Government shall reconstitute the State
Authority by a fresh appointment of its
Chairperson and other members and in such
case any person who had vacated his office
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The State Government shall cause a
copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken

340
under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each
House of the State Legislature where it consists
of two Houses, or where such Legislature
consists of one House, before that House.
CHAPTER XII
NATIONAL M INING T RIBUNAL AND
STATE M INING T RIBUNAL
75. The Central Government shall by
notification establish with effect from such
date as may be specified therein, a Tribunal
to be known as the National Mining Tribunal,
to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on such Tribunal by or under this
Act.
76. (1) The National Mining Tribunal shall
consist of a full time Chairperson and not more
than seven judicial Members and seven expert
Members to be appointed, by notification, by
the Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson of the National Mining
Tribunal may, if considered necessary, invite
any one or more persons having specialised
knowledge and experience in a particular case
before the Tribunal to assist the Tribunal in
that case.
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this
Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of
the National Mining Tribunal may be exercised
by Benches thereof as may be notified by the
Central Government.
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this
Act, a Bench shall consist of three Members
with Chairperson or an Expert Member and
one Judicial Member and third Member who
may be either Expert Member or Judicial
Member.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1), the Chairperson may transfer
a Member from one Bench to another Bench.
Establishment
of National
Mining
Tribunal
and
benches
thereof.
Composition
of National
Mining
Tribunal.

341
(6) Subject to the other provisions of this
Act, the Benches of the National Mining
Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at Delhi (which
shall be known as the Principal Bench) and at
such other places as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify.
77. ( 1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Chairperson of the National
Mining Tribunal, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of
age;
(b) has special knowledge and
experience of not less than four years in
law relating to mines and exploration; and
(c) has experience of quasi-judicial
functions:
Provided that a person who is, or has been
in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person
has held the post of Secretary or Additional
Secretary to the Government of India or any
equivalent post in the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be, for
a period of not less than three years.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Judicial Member unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of
age;
(b) has held a judicial office in the
territory of India for at least ten years; or
has been a member of the Indian Legal
Service and has held a post in Grade I of
that service or any equivalent post for at
least three years, or has been an advocate
for at least ten years with experience in
dealing with mining related matters.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as an Expert Member, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of
age;
Qualifications
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
or Member
of National
Mining
Tribunal.

342
(b) has experience in the field of
mining sector at the national level, and has
held the post of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or any equivalent
post in the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, for
at least five years.
(4) The Central Government shall within
one month from the date of occurrence of any
vacancy by reason of death, resignation or
removal of the Chairperson or a Member and
six months before the superannuation or end
of tenure of the Chairperson or any Member,
make a reference to the Selection Committee
for filling up of the vacancy.
78. ( 1) The Central Government shall, for
the purpose of selection of the Chairperson and
Members of the National Mining Tribunal
constitute a Selection Committee, consisting of
the following, namely:—
(a) Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in the Ministry of Mines—
Member;
(c) Secretary in the Ministry of Law and
Justice—Member;
(d) one expert to be nominated by the
Ministry of Mines—Member.
(2) The Secretary in the Ministry of Mines,
Government of India shall be the Convenor of
the meeting of the Selection Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise
the selection of the Chairperson and Members
within one month from the date on which the
reference is made to it.
(4) The Selection Committee shall
recommend a panel of two names in order of
preference for every vacancy referred to it and
the Government shall make appointment from
such panel.
Selection
Committee
for
selection of
Chairperson
and
Members.

343
(5) Before recommending any person for
appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of
the National Tribunal, the Selection Committee
shall satisfy itself that such person shall not
have any financial or other interest, which is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
Chairperson or Member.
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson or
a Member of the National Mining Tribunal
shall be invalid merely by reason of any
vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections
(1) to ( 6), the Selection Committee may regulate
its own procedure.
79. ( 1) The Chairperson of the National
Mining Tribunal shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters
upon his office or upto the age of sixty-seven
years, whichever is earlier.
(2) A Member of the National Mining
Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon
his office or upto the age of sixty-five years,
whichever is earlier.
(3) The salary or honorarium and other
allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and
other Members of the National Mining
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Central Government:
Provided that neither the salary or
honorarium and other allowances nor the other
terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and other Members of the
National Mining Tribunal shall be varied to
their disadvantage after appointment.
80. A Chairperson and a Member of the
National Mining Tribunal may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign his office:
Terms of
office,
salaries
and
allowances
of
Chairperson
and
Members
of National
Mining
Tribunal.
Resignation.

344
Provided that a Chairperson and a Member
of the National Mining Tribunal shall, unless
he is permitted by the Central Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
81. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
order, remove from office, the Chairperson or
any Member of the National Mining Tribunal,
if the Chairperson or such other Member, as
the case may be, in its opinion—
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as a member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has engaged at any time during his
term of office in any other employment.
(2) No Chairperson or any other Member
of the National Mining Tribunal shall be
removed from office except by an order of the
Central Government on the ground of his
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the
Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held
in accordance with the procedure prescribed
in his behalf by the Central Government, come
to the conclusion that the Chairperson or
Member, as the case may be, ought on any
such ground to be removed.
(3) The Central Government may suspend
the Chairperson or a Member of the National
Mining Tribunal, as the case may be, in respect
Removal
and
suspension
of
Chairperson
or
Members
of National
Mining
Tribunal.

345
of whom an inquiry under sub-section ( 2) is
being initiated or pending until the Central
Government has passed an order on receipt of
the report of the inquiry .
82. ( 1) In the event of the occurrence of
any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
of the National Mining Tribunal by reason of
his death or resignation, the senior-most expert
Member of the National Mining Tribunal shall
act as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until
the date on which a new Chairperson,
appointed in accordance with the provisions
this Act to fill such vacancy , enters upon his
office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the National
Mining Tribunal is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other
cause, the senior-most expert Member of the
National Mining Tribunal, shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson until date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
83. No act or proceeding of the National
Mining Tribunal shall be invalid merely by
reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
Constitution of, the National Mining
Tribunal;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person as the Chairperson or a Member;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the National Mining Tribunal not affecting
the merits of the case.
84. ( 1) The Central Government shall
determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist
the National Mining Tribunal in the discharge
of its functions.
(2) The recruitment of the officers and
other employees of the National Mining
Tribunal shall be made by the Chairperson in
such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government;
Member of
National
Mining
Tribunal to
act as its
Chairperson
in certain
cases.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of National
Mining
Tribunal.
Staff of
National
Mining
Tribunal.

346
(3) The officers and other employees of the
National Mining Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of
the Chairperson; and
(4) The salaries and allowances and
conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the National Mining Tribunal
shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
85. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the National Mining Tribunal shall have the
powers with respect to major minerals—
(a) to adjudicate on applications seeking
directions to the Central Government or the
State Governments or an Authority of the
State Government to dispose of an
application made to it, including an
application for grant or transfer of mineral
concession under this Act, with respect to
any major mineral within such time as the
National Mining Tribunal may stipulate, in
cases where the Central Government or the
State Government or an Authority of the
State Government, as the case may be, has
failed to dispose of the application within
the time specified under this Act.
(b) to hear applications from any
affected person in relation to orders and
directions issued under this Act relating to
preparation, approval and implementation
of Mining Plans, Mine Closure Plans and
Sustainable Development Framework;
(c) to hear applications made to it in
the nature of revisions from the affected
persons and confirm or set aside any order
passed by the Central Government or the
State Government or an Authority of the
State Government, as the case may be,
under this Act or the rules made
thereunder as it may deem just and proper.
Powers
and
procedure
of the
National
Mining
Tribunal.

347
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder, the National
Mining Tribunal shall have the power to
regulate its own procedure and the procedure
of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of
the exercise of its powers or of the discharge
of its functions.
(3) Subject to other provisions of this Act,
the National Mining Tribunal may call for the
records of the case and pass such order or
direction in respect of the matter specified in
sub-section ( 1), as it may deem fit:
Provided that the National Mining Tribunal
shall, before passing any order or direction,
under this sub-section issue notice to the
Central Government or the State Government
or an Authority of the State Government, as
the case may be, and give a reasonable
opportunity to the affected parties and if
necessary any other authority, as the case may
be, of being heard:
Provided further that the National Mining
Tribunal shall dispose of the case within a
period of six months from the date of filing of
the application unless for reasons to be
recorded, the National Mining Tribunal extends
the time period for such disposal.
(4) The National Mining Tribunal shall
have, for the purposes of discharging its
functions under this Act, the same powers as
are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him an oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and
production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections
123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, requisition any public record or
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.

348
document or copy of such record or
document from any other;
(e) issuing commissions for the
examination of witness or documents;
(f) reviewing its decision;
(g) dismissing an application for default
or deciding it ex parte ;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal
of any application for default or any order
passed by it ex parte ;
(i) pass an interim order (including
granting an injunction or stay) after
providing the parties concerned an
opportunity to be heard, on any
applications made or appeal filed under this
Act;
(j) any other matter which may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) All proceedings before the National
Mining Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193,
219 and 228 for the purposes of section 196 of
the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal shall
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes
of section 195 and chapter XXVI of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(6) On the conclusion of proceedings, the
National Mining Tribunal, shall pass such
orders as it deems fit and provide such relief
as may be desirable, including the award of
such punitive damages, as it deems fit, to the
affected party at issue.
(7) Every order made by the National
Mining Tribunal, under sub-section ( 6) shall be
signed by the Chairperson or Member or
Members who heard the case and passed the
order.
86. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by an order
of the Central Government or the State
Government or an Authority of the State
Government, as the case may be, may make
an application to the National Mining Tribunal,
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Application
to National
Mining
Tribunal.

349
in such form and accompanied by such fee as
may be prescribed by the Central Government,
within a period of ninety days from the date
on which a copy of such order is received by
such aggrieved person:
Provided that the National Mining Tribunal
may entertain an application after the expiry
of the said period of ninety days if it is
satisfied, for reasons to be recorded that there
was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.
(2) Where an application before the
National Mining Tribunal is found to be
frivolous or vexatious, it shall, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, dismiss the application
and make an order that the applicant shall pay
to the respondent such costs as may be
specified in the order.
87. All revision cases pending under section
30 of the Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1957, as it stood before
its repeal, before the Central Government shall,
on commencement of this Act, stand
transferred to the National Mining Tribunal on
its establishment and to be disposed of as an
application under section 85 of this Act.
88. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in any
other law for the time being in force, an appeal
shall lie against any order, not being an
interlocutory order, of the National Mining
Tribunal to the High Court on one or more
grounds specified in section 100 of that Code.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision
or order made by the National Mining Tribunal
with the consent of the parties.
89 . The State Government may, by
notification, establish with effect from such date
as may be specified therein, a Tribunal to be
known as the State Mining Tribunal, to exercise
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on
such Tribunal by or under this Act.
Transfer of
revisions
pending
before
Central
Government
to National
Mining
Tribunal.
Appeal to
High
Court.
Establishment
of State
Mining
Tribunal.
67 of 1957.
5 of 1908.

350
90. The State Mining Tribunal shall consist
of a full time Chairperson and two other
Members of which one shall be a judicial
Member and other shall be an Expert Member,
to be appointed by the State Government.
91. ( 1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Chairperson of the State
Mining Tribunal, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of
age;
(b) has special knowledge and
experience of not less than four years in
law relating to mines and exploration; and
(c) has experience of quasi-judicial
functions:
Provided that a person who is, or has been
in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person
has held the post of Principal Secretary to the
State Government or any equivalent post, as
the case may be, for a period of not less than
three years.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Judicial Member unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of
age;
(b) has held a judicial office in the
territory of India for at least seven years
or has been a member of the Indian Legal
Service and has held a post in Grade II of
that service or any equivalent post for at
least three years, or has been an advocate
for at least ten years with experience in
dealing with mining related matters.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Expert Member, unless he,—
(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of
age;
Composition
of State
Tribunal
and
benches
thereof.
Qualifications
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
of Member
of State
Mining
Tribunal.

351
(b) has experience in the field of
mining sector at the State level, and has
held the post of Secretary to the State
Government or any equivalent post for at
least five years.
(4) The State Government shall within one
month from the date of occurrence of any
vacancy by reason of death, resignation or
removal of the chairperson or a Member and
six months before the superannuation or end
of tenure of the Chairperson or any Member,
make a reference to the Selection Committee
for filling up of the vacancy.
92. ( 1) The State Government shall, for the
purpose of selection of the Chairperson and
Members of the State Mining Tribunal
constitute a Selection Committee, consisting of
the following, namely:—
(a) Chief Secretary—Chairperson;
(b) Principal Secretary in the
Department of Mines in the State
Government—Member;
(c) Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs in the State Government—Member;
(d) One expert to be nominated by the
Chief Secretary—Member.
(2) The Principal Secretary to the State
Government dealing with mines shall be the
Convenor of the meetings of the Selection
Committee.
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise
the selection of the Chairperson and Members
within one month from the date on which the
reference is made to it.
(4) The Selection Committee shall
recommend a panel of two names in order of
preference for every vacancy referred to it and
the State Government shall make appointment
from such panel.
Selection
Committee
for
selection of
Chairperson
and
Members
of State
Mining
Tribunal.

352
(5) Before recommending any person for
appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of
the State Mining Tribunal, the Selection
Committee shall satisfy itself that such person
does not have any financial or other interest,
which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as Chairperson or Member.
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson or
a Member of the State Mining Tribunal shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in
the Selection Committee.
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections
(1) to ( 6), the Selection Committee shall
regulate its own procedure.
93. (1) The Chairperson of the State Mining
Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon
his office or upto the age of sixty- seven years,
whichever is earlier.
(2) A Member of the State Mining Tribunal
shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office or
upto the age of sixty-five years, whichever is
earlier.
(3) The salary or honorarium and other
allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the chairperson and
other members of the State Mining Tribunal
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Provided that neither the salary or
honorarium and other allowances nor the other
terms and conditions of service of the
chairperson and other members of the State
Mining Tribunal shall be varied to their
disadvantage after appointment.
94. A Chairperson and a Member of the
State Mining Tribunal may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the State
Government, resign his office:
Terms of
office,
salaries
and
allowances
of
Chairperson
and
Members
of State
Mining
Tribunal.
Resignation.

353
Provided that a Chairperson and a Member
of the State Mining Tribunal shall, unless he is
permitted by the State Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
95. ( 1) The State Government may, by
order, remove from office, the Chairperson or
any Member, if the Chairperson or such other
Member of the State Mining Tribunal, as the
case may be, in its opinion,—
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the State
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as a member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has engaged at any time during his
term of office in any other employment.
(2) No Chairperson or any other Member
of the State Mining Tribunal shall be removed
from office except by an order of the State
Government on the ground of his proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after the State
Government, has, on an inquiry, held in with
the procedure prescribed in his behalf by the
State Government, come to the conclusion that
the Chairperson or Member, as the case may
be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
(3) The State Government may suspend the
Chairperson or any Member of the State
Mining Tribunal in respect of whom an inquiry
Removal
and
suspension
of
Chairperson
or
Members
of State
Mining
Tribunal.

354
under sub-section ( 2) is being initiated or
pending until the State Government has passed
an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
96. ( 1) In the event of the occurrence of
any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
of the State Mining Tribunal by reason of his
death or resignation, the senior-most expert
Member of the State Mining Tribunal shall act
as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until the
date on which a new Chairperson, appointed
in accordance with the provisions of this Act
to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the State
Mining Tribunal is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other
cause, the senior-most expert Member of the
State Mining Tribunal, shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson until date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
97. No act or proceeding of the State
Mining Tribunal shall be invalid merely by
reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the State Mining Tribunal;
or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person as the Chairperson or a Member;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the State Mining Tribunal not affecting the
merits of the case.
98 . ( 1) The State Government shall
determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist
the State Mining Tribunal in the discharge of
its functions.
(2) The recruitment of the officers and
other employees of the State Mining Tribunal
shall be made by the Chairperson in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government;
Member of
State
Mining
Tribunal to
act as its
Chairperson
in certain
cases.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of State
Mining
Tribunal.
Staff of
State
Mining
Tribunal.

355
(3) The officers and other employees of the
State Mining Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of
the Chairperson; and
(4) The salaries and allowances and
conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the State Mining Tribunal shall
be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
99. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the State Mining Tribunal shall have the
powers with respect to minor minerals—
(a) to adjudicate on applications seeking
directions to the State Government or an
authority of the State Government, as the
case may be, to dispose off an application
made to it, including an application for
grant of mineral concession under this Act,
with respect to any minor mineral within
such time as the State Mining Tribunal may
stipulate, in cases where the State
Government has failed to dispose off the
application within the time specified in the
Act.
(b) to hear applications from any
affected person in relation to orders or
directions issued under this Act relating to
preparation, approval and implementation
of Mining Plans, mining frameworks and
Mine Closure Plans and Sustainable
Development Framework;
(c) to hear applications made to it in
the nature of revisions from the affected
persons and confirm or set aside any order
passed by the Central Government or the
State Government or an Authority of the
State Government, as the case may be,
under this Act or the rules made
thereunder as it may deem just and proper.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder, the State
Mining Tribunal shall have the power to
Powers
and
procedure
of State
Mining
Tribunal.

356
regulate its own procedure and the procedure
in all matters arising out of the exercise of its
powers or of the discharge of its functions.
(3) Subject to other provisions of this Act,
the State Mining Tribunal may call for the
records of the case and pass such order or
direction in respect of the matter specified in
sub-section ( 1), as it may deems fit:
Provided that the State Mining Tribunal
shall, before passing any order or direction,
under this sub-section issue notice to the State
Government or an Authority of the State
Government, as the case may be, and give a
reasonable opportunity to the affected persons
and if necessary any other authority, as the
case may be, of being heard:
Provided further that the State Mining
Tribunal shall dispose of the case within a
period of six months from the date of filing of
the application unless for reasons to be
recorded, the Tribunal extends the time period
for such disposal.
(4) The State Mining Tribunal shall have,
for the purposes of discharging its function
under this Act, the same powers as are vested
in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him an oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and
production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections
123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 requisitioning any public record or
document or copy of such record or
document from any other;
(e) issuing commissions for the
examination of witness or documents;
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.

357
(f) reviewing its decision;
(g) dismissing an application for default
or deciding it ex parte ;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal
of any application for default or any order
passed by it ex parte ;
(i) pass an interim order (including
granting an injunction or stay) after
providing the parties concerned an
opportunity to be heard, on any
applications made or appeal filed under this
Act;
(j) any other matter which may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(5) All proceedings before the State Mining
Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193,
219 and 228, and for the purposes of section
196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195 and chapter XXVI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(6) on the conclusion of proceedings, the
State Mining Tribunal, shall pass such orders
as it deems fit and provide such relief as may
be desirable, including the award of such
punitive damages, as it deems fit, to the
affected party at issue.
(7) Every order made by the State Mining
Tribunal, under sub-section ( 6) shall be signed
by the Chairperson or Member or Members
who heard the case and passed the order.
100. ( 1) Every application to the State
Mining Tribunal against an order of the State
Government or an Authority of the State
Government, shall be filed within a period of
ninety days from the date on which a copy of
the order made by the State Government, is
received by the aggrieved party, and it shall
be in such form and be accompanied by such
fee as may be prescribed by the State
Government:
Application
to State
Mining
Tribunal.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

358
Provided that the State Mining Tribunal
may entertain an application after the expiry
of the said period of ninety days if it is
satisfied, for reasons to be recorded that there
was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.
(2) Where an application before the State
Mining Tribunal is found to be frivolous or
vexatious, it shall, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, dismiss the application and make
an order that the applicant has to pay to the
respondent such costs as may be specified in
the order.
101 . ( 1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
or in any other law for the time being in force,
an appeal shall lie against any order, not being
an interlocutory order, of the State Mining
Tribunal to the High Court on one or more
grounds specified in section 100 of that Code.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision
or order made by the State Mining Tribunal
with the consent of the parties.
CHAPTER XIII
CO-ORDINATION COMMITTEES AND
NATIONAL REPOSITORIES
102. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, constitute a Central Coordination-
cum-Empowered Committee consisting of
representatives of the Central Government and
the State Governments to achieve the objects
of the Act.
(2) The functions of the Central
Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee shall
be such as may be notified.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of
the foregoing, the Central Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee may consider and
Appeal to
High
Court. 5 of 1908.
Central
Coordination-
cum-
Empowered
Committee.

359
make recommendations regarding any of the
following, namely:—
(a) improvement in procedure for grant
of mineral concessions;
(b) coordination among agencies
entrusted with according statutory
clearances;
(c) maintenance of internet-based
databases including a mining tenement
registry;
(d) development, implementation and
evaluation of sustainable development
frameworks; and
(e) prevention and detection of illegal
mining.
(4) The Central Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee shall meet at least once
in three months.
103. ( 1) The State Government shall by
notification constitute a State Coordination-
cum-Empowered Committee with
representatives of the concerned Departments
of State Government and local representative
of Central organisations such as Railways,
Highways, Ports and Customs, headed by
Chief Secretary or Additional Chief Secretary
of the State Government;
(2) The function of the State Coordination-
cum-Empowered Committee shall be,—
(i) to oversee clearance by various
Departments of the State Government
necessary to ensure timely grant of mineral
concessions;
(ii) review of activities in and around
leased areas pursuant to the Corporate
Social Responsibility document;
(iii ) to monitor implementation of
Sustainable Development Framework and
Final Mine Closure Plans;
State
Coordination-
cum-
Empowered
Committee.

360
(iv) coordination of operations for
prevention, detection and prosecution of
cases of illegal mining; and
(v) any other functions as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The State Coordination-cum-Empowered
Committee shall meet at least once in two
months.
104. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
notification, establish a National Drill Core
Repository for preservation and archiving of
drill cores generated during mineral
exploration and a National Geophysical Data
Repository for holding, authenticating and
disseminating geophysical data for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Repositories shall be managed
and maintained in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) The holder of any mineral concession
shall, at his own expense, cause to be
deposited,—
(a) a representative portion of cores
selected with the National Drill Core
Repository; and
(b) all geophysical data collected by
him during or part of his reconnaissance,
exploration and prospecting operation,
with the National Drill Core Repository and
National Geophysical Data Repository
respectively, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall prescribe
the procedure for making available data from
the Repositories to interested persons on such
charges as may be prescribed by it:
Provided that the Repositories, referred to
in sub-section ( 3) shall not disclose information
with respect to any drill core or any
National
Repositories.

361
geophysical data received by it under this
section till after lapse of six months from the
date of termination of the mineral concession,
or relinquishment of the area from which the
drill core has been drawn or geophysical data
has been generated.
CHAPTER XIV
S
PECIAL C OURTS
105. ( 1) The State Government may , for the
purposes of providing speedy trial of offences
referred to in sections 110, 111, 112 and 113 by
notification, constitute as many Special Courts
as may be necessary for such area or areas, as
may be specified in the notification.
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single
Judge who shall be appointed by the State
Government with the concurrence of the High
Court.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Judge of a Special Court
unless he was, immediately before such
appointment, of the rank of at least an
Additional District and Sessions Judge.
(4) Where the office of the Judge of a
Special Court is vacant, or such Judge is absent
from the ordinary place of sitting of such
Special Court, or he is incapacitated by illness
or otherwise in the performance of his duties,
any urgent business of the Special Court shall
be disposed of in accordance with the direction
of the District and Sessions Judge having
jurisdiction over the ordinary place of sitting
of the Special Court, as notified under sub-
section ( 1):
Provided that the High Court of the State
may, in case it is necessary or expedient to do
so, direct that any business of the Special Court
as may be specified shall be disposed of by
any other Special Court or person qualified to
be a Judge of a Special Court.
Constitution
of Special
Courts.

362
106 . ( 1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, every offence punishable under sections
110, 111, 112 and 113 of this Act shall be triable
only by the Special Court within whose
jurisdiction such offence has been committed.
(2) Where it appears to any court in the
course of any inquiry or trial that an offence
is punishable under sections 110, 111, 112 and
113 of this Act it shall transfer such case to
such Special Court having jurisdiction, and
thereupon the case shall be tried and disposed
of by such Special Court in accordance with
the provisions of this Act:
Provided that it shall be lawful for such
Special Court to act on the evidence, if any,
recorded by any court in the case of presence
of the accused before the transfer of the case
to such Special Court:
Provided further that if such Special Court
is of opinion that further examination, cross-
examination and re-examination of any of the
witnesses whose evidence has already been
recorded, is required in the interest of justice,
it may re-summon any such witness and after
such further examination, cross-examination or
re-examination, if any, as it may permit, the
witness shall be discharged.
(3) The Special Court may, notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section ( 1) of section
260 or section 262 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, try the offence referred to in
sections 110, 111, 112, and 113 of this Act in a
summary way in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in the said Code and the
provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the said
Code shall, so far as may be, apply to such
trial:
Provided that where in the course of a
summary trial under this sub-section, it appears
to the Special Court that the nature of the case
Procedures
and
powers of
Special
Courts.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

363
is such that it is undesirable to try such case
in a summary manner, the Special Court shall
recall any witness who may have been
examined and proceed to re-hear the case in
the manner provided by the provisions of the
said Code for the trial of such offence:
Provided further that in case of any
conviction in a summary trial under this
section, it shall be lawful for a Special Court
to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years.
(4) A Special Court may, with a view to
obtaining the evidence of any person supposed
to have been directly or indirectly concerned
in or privy to, any offence tender pardon to
such person on condition of his making a full
and true disclosure of the circumstances within
his knowledge relating to the offence and to
every other person concerned whether as
principal or abettor in the commission thereof,
and any pardon so tendered shall, for the
purposes of section 308 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, be deemed to have
been tendered under section 307 thereof.
(5) The Special Court may determine the
civil liability against a person in terms of
money for raising, transporting or causing to
be raised or transported without any lawful
authority any mineral from any land, which
shall not be less than an amount equivalent to
two times of the value of mineral and the
amount of liability so determined shall be
recovered as if it were a decree of civil court.
(6) The civil liability so determined finally
by the Special Court shall be payable to the
State Government or to the person in whom
the mineral vests, as the case may be.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section, civil liability means loss or damage
incurred by the State Government or concerned
authorities, as the case may be, due to the
commission of an offence, under sections 110,
111, 112 and 113.
2 of 1974.

364
107. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in so
far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, shall apply to the
proceedings before the Special Court, and the
Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court
of Session and shall have all powers of a Court
of Session and the person conducting a
prosecution before the Special Court is deemed
to be a Public Prosecutor.
108. The High Court may exercise, so far
as may be applicable, all the powers conferred
by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, as if the Special
Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the High Court is a District Court, or as
the case may be, the Court of Session, trying
cases within the local limits of jurisdiction of
the High Court.
109. The Special Court may, on a petition
or otherwise and in order to prevent
miscarriage of justice, review its judgment or
order passed under this section, but no such
review petition shall be entertained except on
the ground that it was such order passed under
a mistake of fact, ignorance of any material
fact or any error apparent on the face of the
record:
Provided that the Special Court shall not
allow any review petition and modify or set
aside its previous order or judgment without
hearing the parties affected.
CHAPTER XV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
110. ( 1) Whoever contravenes any of the
provisions of section 4, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to,—
(i) in cases of exploration without
licence, two years, or with fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees per
hectare or part thereof subject to a
maximum of fifteen lakh rupees in the case
of prospecting, or with both;
Special
Court to
have
powers of
court of
sessions.
Appeal
and
revision.
Review.
Punishment
for
reconnais-
sance
prospecting
and
mining
operations
without
licence or
lease.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

365
(ii) in cases of mining without a lease,
three years, or with fine which may extend
to ten times the value of the mineral
mined, or with both.
111. A lessee, who fails to implement a
Final Mine Closure Plan in accordance with
the provisions of this Act, or, abandons the
mine or any portion of the mining lease area,
which is likely to be a danger to the health
and safety of the inhabitants of the area, shall
be liable to a penalty which may extend to
one thousand rupees per day per hectare for
the period of such default.
112. ( 1) Whoever disobeys any direction
given by the State Government or the Indian
Bureau of Mines or any other authority
empowered in this behalf under this Act or
any other law for the time being in force shall
be liable to a penalty which may extend to
ten thousand rupees per day for the period of
such disobedience.
(2) Any person who fails to comply with
the directions of the State Government under
sub-section ( 4) of section 30, shall be liable to
be punished with imprisonment for a term not
less than three years.
113. Whoever contravenes any provision of
this Act or the rules made thereunder shall, if
no penalty is provided elsewhere be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both,
and in the case of continuing contravention,
with an additional fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees for every day during
which such contravention continues after
conviction for the first such contravention.
114. ( 1) Whenever any person raises,
without any lawful authority, any mineral from
any land, without prejudice to any other action
under the law for the time being in force, the
State Government may recover from such
person, or from such other person to whom
Penalty for
non-
implement-
ation of
final mine
closure
plan.
Penalty for
disobeying
direction
of State
Government,
etc.
Penalty.
Recovery,
seizure,
etc., of
minerals
raised by
any person
without
lawful
authority .

366
the mineral may have been transferred, the
mineral so raised, and the cost of its disposal
or, where such mineral has already been
disposed off, the price of the mineral so
disposed off, and may also recover from such
person the rent, royalty, tax or cess, as the case
may be, for the period during which the land
was occupied by such person without such
lawful authority.
(2) Whenever any person raises, transports
or causes to be raised or transported, without
any lawful authority, any mineral from any
land, and, for that purpose, uses any tool,
equipment, vehicle or any other thing, any
officer empowered by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be,
by general or special order in this behalf may
seize such mineral, tool, equipment, vehicle or
any other thing, and the court having
jurisdiction may order the confiscation and
disposal of any such mineral, tool, equipment,
vehicle or any other thing so seized.
115. ( 1) If the person committing an offence
under this Act or any rules made thereunder
is a company, every person who at the time
the offence was committed was directly in
charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the company,
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
guilty of offence and be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment, if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge
and that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this
Act has been committed by the company and
it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of,
Offences
by
companies.

367
or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer
of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed
to be guilty of that offence and be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly .
Explanation .— For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “company” means any body
corporate and includes a firm or co-
operative or other association of
individuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm
means a partner in the firm.
116. No court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Act or any rules
made thereunder except upon a complaint in
writing made by a person authorised in this
behalf by general or special order of the
Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be.
117. ( 1) Any offence punishable under this
Act or any rule made thereunder which
provides for imprisonment may , either before
or after the institution of prosecution, be
compounded by the person authorised under
section 116 to make a complaint to the court
with respect to that offence, on payment to
that person, for credit to the Government, of
such sum as the compounding fee at such rate
as may be prescribed which shall not exceed
five times the maximum rate of the fine for
the offence.
(2) Where an offence is compounded under
sub-section ( 1), no proceeding or further
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken
against the offender in respect of the offence
so compounded, and the offender, if in custody ,
shall be released forthwith.
Cognizance
of offences
by court.
Compound-
ing of
offences.

368
118. ( 1) Any rent, royalty, tax, cess, fee or
other sum due to the Government either under
this Act or any rule made thereunder or under
the terms and conditions of any non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence or mining lease may, on a
certificate of such officer as may be specified
by the State Government in this behalf by
general or special order, be recovered in the
same manner as if it were an arrear of land
revenue and every such sum which becomes
due to the Government on or after the
commencement of this Act, together with the
interest due thereon shall be a first charge on
the assets of the holder of the non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case
may be:
Provided that in respect of a mineral
concession relating to a land in which the
mineral vests in a private person, such sum
may also be recovered in the same manner
from such person.
119. ( 1) Any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, or any other
person convicted of an offence punishable
under this Act, or a company or its director,
manager, secretary or any other person
punishable with fine under this Act, such
company or its director, manager, secretary or
other officer or any other such person shall be
ineligible for the purpose of grant of any
mineral concession under this Act for a period
of five years from the date of conviction, or
imposition of fine, as the case may be.
(2) If any person convicted of an offence
under sections 110, 111, 112 and 113 of this
Act holds a mineral concession under this Act
at the time of such conviction, the State
Government, having regard to the nature and
gravity of the offence, may cancel or determine
any or all such mineral concessions:
Recovery
of certain
sums as
arrears of
land
revenue.
Ineligibility
for grant
of mineral
concession.

369
Provided that in respect of a mineral
concession relating to land the minerals of
which vest in a private person, the Government
may direct such person to determine the lease:
Provided further that no such order shall
be made without giving an opportunity of
being heard to the person holding the mineral
concession and recording reasons:
Provided also that provisions of sub-section
(3) of section 30 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply
to every such case under this section.
120. Whoever files any written complaint,
referred to in of sub-section ( 1) of section 69,
to the National Authority which is found to
be frivolous or vexatious, shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
121. Whoever violates the directions of the
National Authority issued under sub-section ( 4)
of section 68, shall be punishable with a fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees and
in case of second or subsequent offence with a
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
and in the case of continuing contravention
with an additional fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees for every day during
which the default continues.
122. Whoever, obstructs an Investigation
Officer or the Investigating Authority exercising
the power of the Investigation Officer, in the
exercise of his power or discharge of his duties
under this Act or the rules made thereunder,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years or with
fine or with both.
CHAPTER XVI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
123. ( 1) For the purpose of ascertaining the
position of the working, actual or prospective,
of any mine or abandoned mine or for any
other purpose connected with this Act or the
Punishment
for
vexatious
complaints.
Punishment
for
violation
of
directions
of National
Authority.
Punishment
for
obstructing
Investigation
officer or
Investigating
Authority.
Power of
entry and
inspections.

370
rules made thereunder, any person authorised
by the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate and in the case of coal minerals by
the Central Government in this behalf by
general order, may,—
(a) enter and inspect any mine;
(b) survey and take measurements in
any such mine;
(c) weigh, measure or take measure-
ments of the stocks of minerals lying at
any mine;
(d) examine any document, book,
register, or record in the possession or
power of any person having the control of,
or connected with, any mine and place
marks of identification thereon, and take
extracts from or make copies of such
document, book, register or record;
(e) order the production of any such
document, book, register, record, referred to
in clause ( d); and
(f) examine any person having the
control of, or connected with, any mine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, the expression “record” includes any
electronic record as referred to in clause ( t) of
section 2 of the Information Technology Act,
2000.
(2) Every person authorised by the Indian
Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate and
in the case of Coal minerals by the Central
Government under sub-section ( 1) shall be
deemed to be a public servant within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code
and every person to whom an order or
summons is issued by virtue of the power
conferred by clause ( c) or clause ( f) of sub-
section ( 1) shall comply with such order or
summons, as the case may be.
21 of 2000.
45 of 1860.

371
124.  ( 1) If any officer of the Central
Government or a State Government authorised
by the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be, in this behalf
by general or special order has reason to
believe that any mineral has been raised in
contravention of the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder or any document
or thing in relation to such mineral is secreted
in any place or vehicle, he may search for such
mineral, document or thing and the provisions
of section 100 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall apply to every such
search.
(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the
position of the working, actual or prospective,
of any mine or abandoned mine or for any
other purpose connected with this Act or the
rules made thereunder, any person authorised
by the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be, in this behalf
by general or special order, may,—
(a) enter and inspect any mine or
mining operations or mineral bearing area;
(b) survey and take measurements in
any such mine or area;
(c) weigh, measure or take measure-
ments of the stocks of minerals lying at
any mine;
(d) examine any document, book,
register, or record in the possession or
power of any person having the control of,
or connected with, any mine or mining
operations and place marks of identification
thereon, and take extracts from or make
copies of such document, book, register or
record;
(e) order the production of any such
document, book, register, record, as is
referred to in clause ( d); and
(f) examine any person having the
control of, or connected with, any mine or
mining operations.
Power to
search,
enter and
inspect.
2 of 1974.

372
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section, the expression “record” includes
electronic record as referred to in clause ( t) of
section 2 of the Information Technology Act,
2000.
(3) Every person authorised by the Central
Government or a State Government, as the case
may be, under sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed
to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and every
person to whom an order or summons is
issued by virtue of the power conferred by
clause ( c) or clause ( f) of that sub-section shall
comply with such order or summons, as the
case may be.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section, the expression “Mining operations”
includes any activity relating to the raising of
any mineral, whether licenced or not.
125. The Central Government may, by
notification, declare any mineral, or any grade
thereof as a major mineral for all or any
specified purpose or omit any mineral from
the list of major minerals, and upon doing so,
the First Schedule to the Act shall be deemed
to have been amended.
126.  The Central Government may
prescribe the qualifications and conditions of
accreditation of agencies authorised to prepare
feasibility studies in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Framework
Classification adopted and notified by the
Central Government for the purposes of this
Act or any other notified code of practice
including preparation of mining plans, mine
closure plans and plans under Sustainable
Development Framework, and the Indian
Bureau of Mines shall function as the
accreditation grant agency for the purpose.
127. ( 1) It shall be the duty of the Indian
Bureau of Mines or any authority of the
Central Government as may be designated in
respect of coal and atomic minerals, to render
such assistances as may be required by the
21 of 2000.
45 of 1860.
Declaration
of a
mineral as
a major
mineral.
Accreditation
of
agencies.
Special
provisions
to deal
with
certain
contingen-
cies.

373
State Government to ensure that mining
activities are regulated in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Where the Indian Bureau of Mines or
authority designated under sub-section ( 1), on
the basis of information available to it is of
the opinion that the provisions of this Act and
the rules made thereunder are not being
complied with and that illegal or unscientific
mining is going on in any State, the Indian
Bureau of Mines or such authority shall make
a report to this effect to the Central
Government, and the Central Government may
issue such direction as it may consider
necessary to the State Government, relating to
all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) investigation and prosecution of
offences;
(b) seeking revocation of mineral
concessions; and
(c) any measures to strengthen the
administrative machinery for better
regulation of mining in accordance with the
provisions of Act.
(3) Where it appears to the Central
Government that the directions referred to in
sub-section ( 2) have not been complied with
or where it appears that despite the purported
compliance of the directions further steps are
necessary, the Central Government may direct
the authority referred to in sub-section ( 2),
for—
(a) making written complaints under
section 69 for the investigation and
prosecution of offences;
(b) revocation of mineral concessions in
accordance with the provisions of the Act;
and
(c) any other measures as may be
deemed fit in the circumstances.

374
128. Where in any case previous approval
of the Central Government is required under
this Act or the rules made thereunder, the
request for such approval shall be made to
the Central Government by the State
Government along with the recommendations
of the State Government on the matters for
which the prior approval of the Central
Government is sought, and all facts relevant
to the matter on which such approval is
sought.
129. No civil court shall have jurisdiction
to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect
of any matter which the Special Court or the
National Mining Tribunal and the State Mining
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act
to determine, and no injunction shall be
granted by any court or other authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under
this Act.
130. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
notification, direct that any power exercisable
by it under this Act may, in relation to such
matters and subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified in the notification, be also
exercisable by,—
(a) such officer or authority subordinate
to the Central Government; or
(b) such State Government or such
officer or authority subordinate to a State
Government,
as may be specified in the notification.
(2) The State Government may, by
notification may, direct that any power
exercisable by it under this Act may, in relation
to such matters and subject to such conditions,
if any, as may be specified in the notification,
be exercisable also by such officer or authority
subordinate to the State Government as may
be specified in the notification.
Approval
of Central
Government
to State
Government.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Delegation
of powers.

375
(3) Any rule made by the Central
Government under this Act may confer powers
and impose duties or authorise the conferring
of powers and imposition of duties upon any
State Government or any officer or authority
subordinate thereto.
131. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the form and manner of application
to be made to the State Governments along
with application fee and earnest money
under sub-section ( 5) of section 4;
(b) the manner of grant of mining lease
for atomic minerals by the State
Government under sub-section ( 9) of
section 4;
(c) the manner of publication of the
report of the reconnaissance or prospecting
operations and the manner of intimation
of the same to the State Government under
sub-section ( 10) of section 4;
(d) the manner in which a person is to
be registered with Indian Bureau of Mines
or the State Directorate or any other agency
authorised by the Central Government
under sub-section ( 1) of section 5;
(e) identification of mineral or group
of associated minerals for the purpose of
granting of high-technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licences under
sub-section ( 1) of section 6;
(f) the manner of surrender of area out
of licence by the holder of a non- exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and
prospecting licence under sub-section ( 5) of
section 6;
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.

376
(g) procedure and condition for grant
of mining lease for small deposits under
sub-section ( 6) of section 6;
(h) the manner of approval of mining
plan for extension of mining lease under
sub-section ( 6) of section 7;
(i) the manner, terms and conditions in
which competitive bidding and auction for
coal minerals to take place under sub-
section ( 6) of section 8;
(j) the manner of making available the
data relating to the grant, extension,
termination and plan of operations in the
official website under sub-section ( 8) of
section 8;
(k) the manner of evaluation of bids
under sub-section ( 7) of section 13;
(l) the manner of inviting applications
in grant of mineral concessions for coal
minerals under sub-section ( 9) of section 13;
(m) the procedure for notifying an area
for inviting applications for major minerals
and grant of mineral concessions under
sub-section ( 12) of section 13;
(n) the amount of fee to be charged by
the State Governments for transfer of the
mineral concession under sub-section ( 6) of
section 17;
(o) the manner of payment of remaining
amount of bid to the State Government
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section
18;
(p) the additional fee to be fixed by
the Central Government under the proviso
to clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section
18;
(q) the other particulars for transfer of
mining lease in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 4)
of section 18;
(r) the fee to be charged for transfer of
mining lease in case of a major mineral
under sub-section ( 9) of section 18;

377
(s) the manner of submission of
reconnaissance plan under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1) of section 19;
(t) the manner of providing data by the
licence holder within such intervals under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 19;
(u) the manner of submitting reports
by the licence holder within such intervals
under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section
19;
(v) the other conditions for grant of
non-exclusive reconnaissance licence under
clause ( l) of sub-section ( 1) of section 19;
(w) the general conditions relating
to the non-exclusive licence under
sub-section ( 2) of section 19;
(x) the form and manner of application
to be made to the State Governments along
with application fee and earnest money
under sub-section ( 1) of section 20;
(y) the manner of acknowledging and
registering of applications under sub-section
(2) of section 20;
(z) conditions for high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and
prospecting licence to be fulfilled by the
licence holder under sub-section ( 1) of
section 21;
(za) the form and manner of application
to be made to the State Governments for
grant of high-technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence and prospecting
licence along with application fee and
earnest money under sub-section ( 1) of
section 22;
(zb) the manner of acknowledging and
registering of applications under sub-section
(2) of section 22;
(zc) the manner of submission of report
relating to the prospecting operations by
the holder of high-technology

378
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and
a prospecting licence to the State
Government under sub-section (2) of section
23;
(zd) the particulars to be furnished by
the lessee relating to mining lease under
clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 24;
(ze ) the manner and period of
submission of report relating to the data
relating to mining lease under sub-section(1)
of section 24;
(zf) the manner of restoration of a
mining area under clause ( l) of sub-section
(1) of section 24;
(zg) the amount of security deposits to
be paid by the lessee under clause ( n) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 24;
(zh) the manner of setting up of a
grievance redressal mechanism by the lessee
under clause ( o) of sub-section ( 1) of section
24;
(zi) conditions for mining to be fulfilled
by the lessee under clause ( p) of sub-section
(1) of section 24;
(zj) the manner of acknowledging and
registering of applications under sub-section
(2) of section 25;
(zk) general conditions to be fulfilled
for grant of mining lease under sub-section
(3) of section 25;
(zl) the manner of preparation of a
mining plan under section 26;
(zm) empanelment and accreditation of
qualified persons for preparation of mining
plan under sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5) of
section 26;
(zn ) technical and management
capability of the State Directorate for grant
of approval for major minerals under sub-
section ( 6) of section 26;

379
(zo) the manner of extension of mining
lease under sub-section ( 1) of section 28;
(zp) the procedure for condoning delay
and revival or commencement or re-
commencement of mining operations under
sub-section ( 4) of section 29;
(zq) conditions for determination of
mining lease under sub-section ( 1) of
section 30;
(zr ) the manner of providing
compensation to the lessee under sub-
section ( 2) of section 31;
(zs) the manner of preparation of
progressive mine closure plan and final
mine closure plan under section 32;
(zt) the manner of determination of
costs of mine closure under sub-section ( 4)
of section 33;
(zu) the method of calculation for the
payment to be made by the lessee for coal
minerals under the proviso to sub-section
(2) of section 43;
(zv) the manner of registration of
person or company or firm or association
using or trading in or exporting or stocking
mineral with the Indian Bureau of Mines
under sub-section ( 5) of section 44;
(zw) sustainable development frame-
work under sub-section ( 6) of section 46;
(zx) matters in which State Government
may issue directions under section 47;
(zy) the manner and availability of
reports to such persons and at such costs
under sub-section ( 7) of section 48;
(zz) maintenance of accounts in respect
of National Mineral Fund under sub-section
(1) of section 52;
(zza) the other expenditure utilised for
the District Mineral Foundation under
sub-section ( 6) of section 56;

380
(zzb) the manner of approving such
other expenditure available with the District
Mineral Foundation under clause ( c) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 57;
(zzc) the salary and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and Members of the
National Authority under sub- section ( 3)
of section 62;
(zzd) the procedure for conducting any
inquiry under sub-section ( 2) of section 64;
(zze) the manner of appointment of the
officers and other employees of the
National Authority under sub-section ( 2) of
section 67;
(zzf) the salary and other allowances
payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and
other employees of the National Authority
under sub-section ( 4) of section 67;
(zzg) qualifications for appointment of
Investigation Officer under sub-section ( 4)
of section 69;
(zzh) the salary and other allowances
payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and other
members of the National Mining Tribunal
under sub-section ( 3) of section 79;
(zzi ) the manner of removal of
Chairperson or any Member of the National
Mining Tribunal under sub-section ( 2) of
section 81;
(zzj) the manner of recruitment, salaries,
allowances and conditions of service of
officers and other employees of National
Mining Tribunal under section 84;
(zzk) the other powers of National
Mining Tribunal under section 85;
(zzl ) the form and manner of
application to National Mining Tribunal
along with application fee under section 86;

381
(zzm) the manner of managing the
National Repositories and the data under
sub-section ( 2) of section 104;
(zzn) the rate of compounding fee for
credit to the Government under sub-section
(1) of section 117; and
(zzo) any other matter which is to be,
or may be prescribed under this Act.
132. ( 1) The State Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of publication of data
that would be available to the general
public under the proviso to sub-section ( 10)
of section 4;
(b) the manner of making available the
data on mineral concessions to the public
under sub-section ( 8) of section 8;
(c) the procedure for notification for
grant of mineral concession of minor
mineral under sub-section ( 13) of section
13;
(d) the manner in which a notification
may be issued for inviting competitive
financial bids under sub-section ( 2) of
section 18;
(e) the fee to be charged for the transfer
of the mining lease in case of a minor
mineral under sub-section ( 7) of section 18;
(f) the rate and in the manner of levy
of surface rent and water rate under
clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 24;
(g) the manner of payment of
compensation to the owner of surface,
usufruct and traditional rights under
sub-section ( 1) of section 43;
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.

382
(h) the amount to be paid by the holder
of the mining lease to the District Mineral
Foundation in case of minor minerals under
sub-section ( 2) of section 43;
(i) the manner of identification of the
persons or families affected by mining
related operations, determination of
monetary benefit to each person or family
and monitoring mechanism under sub-
section ( 10) of section 43;
(j) the manner of administration of State
Mineral Fund under sub-section ( 3) of
section 53;
(k) the manner of audit of State Mineral
Fund under section 55;
(l) the manner of constitution of District
Mineral Foundation under sub-section ( 1)
of section 56;
(m) the manner of consultation with
affected persons or families under sub-
section ( 1) of section 57;
(n) the manner of preparation of annual
statement of accounts by District Mineral
Foundation and audit under sub-section ( 6)
of section 57;
(o) the manner of composition and
procedures of State Authority under section
71;
(p) the terms of office, salaries and
allowances of the Chairperson and
members of State Mining Tribunal under
sub-section ( 3) of section 93;
(q) the manner of removal of
Chairperson or any Member of the State
Mining Tribunal under sub-section ( 2) of
section 95;
(r) the manner of recruitment, salaries,
allowances and conditions of service of
officers and other employees of State
Mining Tribunal under section 98;
(s) the other powers of the State Mining
Tribunal under section 99;

383
(t) the form and manner of application
to State Mining Tribunal along with
application fee under section 100;
(u) the other functions of State
Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee
under section 103; and
(v) any other matter which is to be, or
may be prescribed under this Act.
133. ( 1) Every rule made under this Act,
and notification issued under sub-section ( 3)
of section 41, sub-section ( 3) of section 42 and
section 125 of this Act, shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule
or notification or both Houses agree that the
rule or notification should not be made or
issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under the rule or notification.
(2) Every rule made by the State
Government under this Act and notification
issued under sub-section ( 4) of section 41 and
sub-section ( 4) of section 42 shall be laid as
soon as may be, after it is made, before the
State Legislature, where it consists of two
Houses, or where such legislature consists of
one House, before that House.
134. The Chairperson and other Members
and the officers and other employees of the
National Mining Regulatory Authority, National
Mining Tribunal, State Mining Regulatory
Authority and State Mining Tribunal are
deemed to be the public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
Laying of
rules.
Members
and staff
of
Tribunals
to be
public
servants.
45 of 1860.

384
135. The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other laws for the time being
in force.
136. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against any person for
anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act.
137. (1) All applications received under the
Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957, as it stood before its
repeal,—
(i) for grant of prospecting licence or a
mining lease after completing exploration
under a reconnaissance permit or a
prospecting licence, as the case may be; or
(ii) for which prior approval of the
Central Government for grant of mineral
concessions, has been given; or
(iii ) where a letter of intent (by
whatever name it is called) has been issued
by the State Government to grant
reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence
or mining lease, as the case may be, and
was pending grant of the concession under
this Act for fulfilment of the conditions of
the letter of intent,
and the application for grant of the mineral
concessions is pending with the State
Government at the time of commencement of
this Act shall be processed in accordance with
the provisions of this Act for grant of
concession:
Provided that the State Government may
impose special conditions relating to payment
of application fee, licence fee, security, at the
time of grant of mineral concession to the
holder of application considered under this
sub-section to comply with the provisions of
this Act.
Application
of other
laws not
barred.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Transitory
provisions.
67 of 1957.

385
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, it is hereby clarified that in case of an
application for reconnaissance permit
considered under this Act, in terms of this sub-
section, the State Government shall grant a
non-exclusive reconnaissance licence.
(2) In case of such area, where applications
for grant of prospecting licence or mining lease
received before the commencement of this Act
have become ineligible in terms of the
provisions of the Act, the area applied for
under such applications shall be notified by
the State Government for inviting applications
in accordance with the provisions of section 13
for prospecting or for mining, as may be
appropriate, having regard to the available
evidence of mineralisation:
Provided that notwithstanding anything
contained in section 13, the State Government
may amalgamate areas or expand areas covered
by such applications in the interest of scientific
mining and may invite applications within a
period of twelve months from the date of the
commencement of this Act:
Provided further that in case no notification
is issued within the period specified in the first
proviso, the area shall be made available,
subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 5), for
grant of prospecting licence under the
provisions of section 22.
(3) Applications for renewal of mineral
concessions made under the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957, as it stood before its repeal, and pending
on the date of commencement of this Act shall
be disposed off as applications for extension
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(4) A person, who holds a reconnaissance
permit prior to the commencement of this Act,
shall be entitled to continue to hold the permit
to the exclusion of all others for a period of
67 of 1957.

386
two years or till the validity of the permit
whichever is earlier, and during such period
no other reconnaissance or high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence
applications shall be entertained for the area
covered by the reconnaissance permit, and the
permit holder shall be deemed to be the holder
of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence for
the purpose of sub-section ( 6) of section 22.
(5) No application for prospecting licence
shall be entertained by the State Government
for a period of two years from the date of the
commencement of this Act in respect of major
minerals (except coal minerals and atomic
minerals), other than such applications made
in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section ( 7) of section 22, unless the State
Government, by notification, invites
applications for grant of prospecting licences:
Provided that the State Government may
invite applications in different Districts of the
State on different dates:
Provided further that the Central
Government may extend the period specified
in this sub-section for a period not exceeding
one year by notification for reasons of scientific
mining or proper regulation of mineral
development on a request from the State
Government.
138.  ( 1) The Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, is
hereby repealed.
(2) All rules made under the Mines and
Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957, as it stood before its repeal, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are
deemed to have been made under this Act
where such rules were made and shall continue
in force unless and until they are superseded
or amended by any rules made under this Act.
Repeal and
saving. 67 of 1957.
67 of 1957.

387
(3) All acts done, proceedings taken or
notifications or orders issued and sentences
passed under the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, as it
stood before its repeal, shall be valid and
operative as if they had been done, taken,
passed or issued in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, and no suit or other
legal proceeding shall be maintained or
continued against any person whatsoever, on
the ground that any such acts, proceedings or
sentences were not done, taken or passed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(4) Notwithstanding such repeal, any act
done or order passed under that Act are
deemed to have been done or passed under
this Act except to the extent that such act or
order is inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act.
(5) The mention of particular matters in
sub-section ( 4) shall not be held to prejudice
or affect the general application of section 6 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to
the effect of repeal.
139. If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published make
such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary for the purpose of removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of a period
of two years from the date of the
commencement of this Act.
67 of 1957.
10 of 1897.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

388
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 3( a), ( c), ( f), ( p), ( m) and section 125)
MAJOR MINERALS
PART A. Coal Minerals
1. Coal and Lignite.
PART B. Atomic Minerals
1. Beryl and other beryllium-bearing minerals.
2. Lithium-bearing minerals.
3. Monazite and other thorium ore minerals, including thorium
(monazite) bearing tailings left over from ores or beach sand
mineral deposits after extraction of ilmenite or other heavy
minerals.
4. Niobium-bearing minerals.
5. Phosphorites and other phosphatic ores containing Uranium.
6. Rare earth minerals.
7. Tantalum-bearing minerals.
8. Uranium, pitchblende and other uranium ore minerals,
including uranium bearing tailings left over from ores after
extraction of copper and gold.
9. Zirconium bearing minerals and ores including zircon.
PART C. Beach sand Minerals
1. Titanium ore and concentrates (Ilmenite, Rutile and
Leucoxene)
PART D. Other Major Minerals
1. Asbestos
2. Andalusite
3. Antimony
4. Agate

389
5. Alexandrite
6. Apatite
7. Ball Clay
8. Bauxite
9. Barytes
10. Calcite
11. Cadmium
12. Chalk
13. China clay or kaolin
14. Clay (Others including white shale and white clay)
15. Chromite
16. Cobalt ore
17. Copper ore
18. Corundum
19. Diamond
20. Diaspore
21. Dolomite
22. Dunite
23. Emerald
24. Felspar
25. Felsite
26. Fireclay (including plastic, pipe, lithomargic and natural
pozzolanic clay)
27. Fluorite (fluorspar)
28. Garnet (abrasive and Gem)
29. Gold ore
30. Graphite
31. Gypsum
32. Iron ore (including Banded Iron Formations)
33. Jasper
34. Kyanite

390
35. Laterite
36. Lead ore
37. Limekankar (but other than notified as minor minerals)
38. Limeshell (but other than notified as minor minerals)
39. Limestone (but other than notified as minor minerals)
40. Magnesite
41. Manganese ore
42. Marl
43. Mica
44. Molybdenum ore
45. Nickel Ore
46. Ochre
47. Opal
48. Perlite
49. Phosphorite or rock phosphate
50. Potash
51. Pyrites
52. Pyrophyllite
53. Pyroxenite
54. Quartz
55. Quartzite (including fulschite but other than notified as
minor minerals)
56. Rock Salt
57. Ruby
58. Sapphire
59. Silica Sand moulding sand (but other than notified as minor
minerals)
60. Selenite
61. Shale (but other than notified as minor minerals)
62. Sillimanite
63. Silver ore

391
64. Slate (but other than notified as minor minerals)
65. Steatite or Talc or Soapstone
66. Sulphur (Native)
67. Tin ore
68. Tungsten ore
69. Vanadium ore
70. V ermiculite
71. Wollastonite
72.  Zinc ore
73. Any other mineral with industrial use not listed above (but
other than notified minor minerals).

392
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 41)
RATES OF ROYALTY
1. Apatite and Rock Phosphate
(i) Apatite (all grades) : Five per cent. of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
(ii) Rock Phosphate :
(a) Above 25 per cent. P2O5 Eleven per cent. of sale
price on ad valorem basis.
(b) Up to 25 per cent. P2O5 Six per cent. of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
2. Asbestos:
(a) Chrysotile Eight hundred eighty
rupees per tonne.
(b) Amphibole Fifteen per cent. of sale
price on ad valorem basis.
3. Barytes Five and half per cent. of
sale price on ad valorem
basis.
4. Bauxite and Laterite ( a) Zero point five zero per
cent of London Metal
Exchange Aluminium metal
price chargeable on the
contained aluminium metal
in ore produced for those
despatched for use in
alumina and aluminium
metal extraction.
(b)T wenty five per cent. of
sale price on ad valorem
basis for those despatched
for use other than alumina
and aluminium metal
extraction and export.

393
5. Brown Ilmenite (Leucoxene), Two per cent. of sale price
Ilmenite, Rutile and Zircon on ad valorem basis.
6. Cadmium Fifteen per cent. of sale
price on ad valorem  basis.
7. Calcite Fifteen per cent. of sale
price on ad valorem  basis.
8. China clay/Kaolin
(including ball clay,
white shale and white clay):
(a)C rude Eight per cent. of sale price
on ad valorem  basis.
(b)P rocessed (including washed) Ten per cent. of sale price
on ad valorem  basis.
9. Chromit Ten per cent. of sale price
on a d valorem  basis.
10. COAL AND LIGNITE:
A. Coal produced in all States and Union territories except the State
of West Bengal.
(1) Royalty on Coal:
The rates of royalty, which shall be a combination of specific and
ad valorem  rates of royalty which shall be as follows:
R (Royalty Rupees tonnes) = a+bP
Where ‘P’ (price) shall mean basic pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as reflected in the invoice, excluding taxes,
levies and other charges and the values of ‘a’ (fixed component) and
‘b’ (variable or ad valorem component) would be as follows:
Group Grade of Coal Royalty on coal in Rupees per
tonne
Group-I Steel Gr. I a = Rs. 180.00
Steel Gr. II b = 5 per cent.
Washery-I i.e. Rs. 180 + 5 per cent. where
Direct Feed ‘P’ (price) shall mean basic
pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as
reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and
other charges.

394
Group-II Washery-II a = Rs. 130.00
Washery-III b = 5 per cent.
Semi Coking Gr. I i.e. Rs. 130 + 5 per cent. where
‘P’ (price) shall mean basic
pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as
reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and
other charges.
Semi Coking Gr. II
Grade A
Grade B
Group-III Washery-IV a = Rs. 90.00
Grade C b = 5 per cent.
i.e. Rs. 90 + 5 per cent. where
‘P’ (price) shall mean basic
pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as
reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and
other charges.
Group-IV Grade D a = Rs. 70.00
Grade E b = 5 per cent.
i.e. Rs. 70 + 5 per cent. where
‘P’ (price) shall mean basic
pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as
reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and
other charges.
Group-V Grade F a = Rs. 55.00
Grade G b = 5 per cent.
i.e. Rs. 55 + 5 per cent. where
‘P’ (price) shall mean basic
pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as
reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and
other charges.

395
(2) Royalty on Lignite:
a = Rs. 45.00
b = 2 per cent.
i.e. Rs. 45 + 2 per cent. of
basic pithead price of ROM
(run-of-mine) coal lignite as
reflected in the invoice
excluding taxes, levies and
other charges.
(3) Royalty on middlings:
(i) Useful Heat Value>1300 rate applicable to corresponding grade
of coal (based on Useful Heat Value);
(ii) Useful Heat Value=<1300 a = Rs. 45 b = 5 per cent. of price
i.e. Rs. 45 + 5 per cent. of
existing actual involve price
(excluding taxes and other
levies).
The royalty shall not be
charged on such middlings
or rejects wherein royalty
has been charged on raw
coal price to its washing in
order to avoid double
charging of royalty.
(4) Adjustment of royalty against levying of cess:
For States other than West Bengal that levy cess or other taxes
specific to coal bearing lands, the royalty allowed shall be
adjusted for the local cesses or such taxes so as to limit the
overall revenue to the formula based yield.
B. Coal produced in the State of West Bengal:
(i) Group of Coals:
(a) Coking coal Seven rupees only per tonne.
Steel Grade-I
Steel Grade-II
Washery Grade-I

396
(ii) Group II of Coals:
(a) Coking Coal Six rupees and fifty paisa only
Washery Grade-II per tonne.
Coking Coal Washery
Grade-III
(b) Semi-Coking Coal
Grade-I
Semi-Coking Coal
Grade-II
(c) Non-Coking Coal
Grade-A
Non-Coking Coal
Grade-B
(iii) Group III of Coals:
(a) Coking Coal Five rupees and fifty paisa only
Washery Grade-IV per tonne.
(b) Non-Coking Coal
Grade-C
(iv) Group IV of Coals:
(a) Non-Coking Coal Four rupees and thirty paisa
Grade-D only per tonne.
(b) Non-Coking Coal
Grade-E
(v) Group V of Coals:
(a) Non-Coking Coal Two r upees and fifty paisa only
Grade-F per tonne.
(b) Non-Coking Coal
Grade-G
11. Columbite-tantalite Ten per cent. of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
12. Copper Four point two per cent. of
London Metal Exchange copper
metal price chargeable on the
contained copper metal in ore
produced.

397
13. Diamond Eleven point five per cent. of
sale price on ad valorem  basis.
14. Dolomite Sixty three rupees per tonne.
15. Felspar Twelve per cent of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
16. Fireclay Twelve per cent. of sale price
(including plastic, pipe, on ad valorem basis.
lithomargic and natural
pozzolanic clay)
17. Fluorspar Six point five per cent. of sale
(also called fluorite) price on ad valorem basis.
18. Garnet :
(a) Abrasive Three per cent. of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
(b) Gem Ten per cent. of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
19. Gold:
(a) Primary Two per cent. of London
Bullion Market Association
price (commonly referred to as
“London Price” ) chargeable on
the contained gold metal in ore
produced.
(b) By-product gold Three point three per cent. of
London Bullion Market
Association price (commonly
referred to as “London Price”)
chargeable on by-product gold
metal actually produced.
20. Graphite:
(a) with 40 per cent. or Two per cent. of sale price on
more fixed carbon ad valorem basis.
(b) with less than 40 per cent. Twelve per cent. of sale price
fixed carbon on  ad valorem basis.
21. Gypsum Twenty per cent. of sale price
on ad valorem basis.

398
22. Iron Ore (lumps, fines and Ten per cent. of sale price on
concentrates all grades): ad valorem basis.
23. Lead Seven per cent. of London
Metal Exchange lead metal
price chargeable on the
contained lead metal in ore
produced.
Twelve point seven per cent. of
London Metal Exchange lead
metal price chargeable on the
contained lead metal in the
concentrate produced.
24. Limestone:
(a) L.D. grade (less than one Seventy two rupees per tonne.
and half per cent. silica
content)
(b) Others Sixty three rupees per tonne.
25. Lime kankar Sixty three rupees per tonne.
26. Limeshell Sixty three rupees per tonne.
27. Magnesite Three per cent. of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
28. Manganese:
(a) Ore of all grades Four point two per cent. of sale
price on ad valorem  basis.
(b) Concentrates One point four per cent. of sale
price on ad valorem  basis.
29. Crude Mica, Waste Mica Four per cent. of sale price on
and Scrap Mica ad valorem basis.
30. Monazite One hundred and twenty five
rupees per tonne.
31. Nickel Zero point one two per cent.
of London Metal Exchange
nickel metal price chargeable
on contained nickel metal in
ore produced.
32. Ochre Twenty rupees per tonne.

399
33. Pyrites Two per cent of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
34. Pyrophyllite Twenty per cent of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
35. Quartz Fifteen per cent. of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
36. Ruby Ten per cent. of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
37. Silica sand, Moulding sand Eight per cent. of sale price on
and Quartzite ad valorem basis.
38. Sand for Stowing Three rupees per tonne.
39. Selenite Ten per cent of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
40. Sillimanite Two and half per cent of sale
price on ad valorem basis.
41. Silver
(a) By-product Seven per cent of London
Metal Exchange price
chargeable on by-product silver
metal actually produced.
(b) Primary silver Five per cent of London Metal
Exchange silver metal price
chargeable on the contained
silver metal in ore produced.
42. Slate Forty five rupees per tonne.
43. Talc, Steatite and Soapstone Eighteen per cent of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
44. Tin Seven point five per cent of
London Metal Exchange tin
metal price chargeable on the
contained tin metal in ore
produced
45. Tungsten T wenty rupees per unit per
cent of contained WO3 per
tonne of ore and on pro rata
basis.

400
46. Uranium Royalty on mineral uranium at
the rate of two per cent of the
compensation amount received
by M/s. Uranium Corporation
of India Limited (UCIL), for the
mineral uranium and the total
amount of royalty will be
apportioned among the
different states on the basis of
data provided by Department
of Atomic Energy.
47. Vanadium Twenty per cent of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
48. Vermiculite Three per cent of sale price on
ad valorem basis.
49. Wollastonite Twelve per cent of sale price
on ad valorem basis.
50. Zinc Eight per cent of London Metal
Exchange zinc metal price on
ad valorem basis chargeable on
contained zinc metal in ore
produced.
Eight point four per cent of
London Metal Exchange zinc
metal price on ad valorem basis
chargeable on contained zinc
metal in concentrate produced.
51. All other minerals not here-in- Ten per cent of sale price on
before specified [Agate, Chalk, ad valorem basis.
Clay (Others), Corundum,
Diaspore, Dunite, Felsite,
Fuschite, Kyanite, Quartzite,
Jasper, Perlite, Rock Salt, Shale,
Pyroxenite, etc.]
Explanation:
1. For the purpose of grading of coal the specification of each
grade of the coal shall be as prescribed under rule 3 of the Colliery
Control Rules, 2004.

401
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 42)
RATES OF DEAD RENT
1. Rate of dead rent applicable to the leases granted for low value
minerals are as under:
Rates of dead rent in rupees per hectare per annum
From second years Third year and Fifth year
of lease fourth year onward
200 500 1000
2. Two times the rate specified under (1) above in case of lease
granted for medium value mineral(s).
3. Three times the rates specified under (1) above in case of lease
granted for high value mineral(s).
4. Four times the rates specified under (1) above in case of lease
granted for precious metals and stones.
Note: 1. For the purpose of this notification—
(a) “precious metals and stones” means gold, silver, diamond,
ruby, sapphire and emerald, alexandrite and opal;
(b) “high value minerals” means semi-precious stones (agate,
gem garnet), corundum, copper, lead, zinc, asbestos (chrysotile
variety), platinum group of elements and mica;
(c) “medium value minerals” means chromite, manganese ore,
kyanite, sillimanite, vermiculite, magnesite, wollastonite, perlite,
diaspore, apatite, rock phosphate, fluorite (fluorspar) and barytes;
(d) “low value minerals” means minerals other than precious
metals and stones, high value minerals and medium value
minerals.

402
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
was enacted so as to provide for the regulation of mines and
development of minerals under the control of the Union. The aforesaid
Act was amended in the years 1958, 1972, 1986, 1987, 1994 and 1999.
2. The first National Mineral Policy was enunciated by the Central
Government in 1993 for liberalization of the mining sector. With the
passage of time and the economic development of the country, which
requires a vibrant energy, metal and commodities sector to meet the
infrastructure, manufacturing and other sectoral demands, the nature
and requirements of the mineral sector has changed. Based on the
recommendations of a High Level Committee set up in the Planning
Commission, Government of India, in consultation with State
Governments, had replaced the National Mineral Policy, 1993 with a
National Mineral Policy on the 13th March, 2008. The new National
Mineral Policy provides for a change in the role of the Central
Government and the State Governments particularly in relation to
incentivizing private sector investment in exploration and mining and
ensuring level playing field and transparency in the grant of
concessions and promotion of scientific mining within a sustainable
development framework so as to protect the interest of local population
in mining areas. This necessitated a new legislation for harmonization
with the new National Mineral Policy.
3. Since the existing law had already been amended several times
and as further amendments may not clearly reflect the objects and
reasons emanating from the new National Mineral Policy, it is
considered necessary to reformulate the legislative framework in the
light of the new National Mineral Policy, 2008 by repealing the Mines
and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957.
4. The salient features of the Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) Bill, 2011, inter alia,  are as follows:—
(a) it provides for a simple and transparent mechanism for
grant of mining lease or prospecting licence through competitive
bidding in areas of known mineralization, and on the basis of
first-in-time in areas where mineralization is not known;
(b) it enables the mining holders to adopt the advanced and
sophisticated technologies for exploration of deep-seated and
concealed mineral deposits, especially of metals in short supply
through a new mineral concession;

403
(c) it enables the Central Government to promote scientific
mineral development, through Mining Plans and Mine Closure
Plans enforced by a central technical agency namely the Indian
Bureau of Mines, as well as the Regulatory Authorities and
Tribunals;
(d) it empowers the State Governments to cancel the existing
concessions or debar a person from obtaining concession in future
for preventing the illegal and irregular mining;
(e) it empowers the Central Government and State
Governments to levy and collect cess;
(f) establishment of the Mineral Funds at National and State
level for funding the activities pertaining to capacity building of
regulatory bodies like Indian Bureau of Mines and for research
and development issues in the mining areas;
(g) it provides for reservation of an area for the purpose of
conservation of minerals;
(h) it enables the registered co-operatives for obtaining mineral
concessions on small deposits in order to encourage tribals and
small miners to enter into mining activities;
(i) it empowers the Central Government to institutionalise a
statutory mechanism for ensuring sustainable mining with
adequate concerns for environment and socio-economic issues in
the mining areas, through a National Sustainable Development
Framework;
(j) it provides for establishment of the National Mining
Regulatory Authority which consists of a Chairperson and not
more than nine members to advise the Government on rates of
royalty, dead rent, benefit sharing with District Mineral Foundation,
quality standards, and also conduct investigation and launch
prosecution in cases of large scale illegal mining;
(k) it provides for establishment of the State Mining Regulatory
Authority consisting of such persons as may be prescribed by the
State Government to exercise the powers and functions in respect
of minor minerals;
(l) it provides for establishment of a National Mining Tribunal
and State Mining Tribunals to exercise jurisdiction, powers and
authority conferred on it under the proposed legislation;
(m) it empowers the State Governments to constitute Special
Courts for the purpose of providing speedy trial of the offences
relating to illegal mining;

404
(n) it empowers the Central Government to intervene in the
cases of illegal mining where the concerned State Government
fails to take action against illegal mining;
(o) it provides for stringent punishments for contravention of
certain provisions of the proposed legislation; and
(p) to repeal the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957.
5. A notable feature of the Bill is to provide a simple mechanism
which ensures that revenues from mining are shared with local
communities at individual as well as community level so as to
empower them, provide them with choices, enable them to create and
maintain local infrastructure and better utilise infrastructure and other
services provided for their benefit.
6. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
of the proposed Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
DINSHA PATEL.
   N
EW D ELHI;
The 23rd November,  2011.
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 16(83)/2009-M. VI/605 dated 15.11.2011 from
Shri Dinsha Patel, Minister for Mines to the Secretary-General, Lok
Sabha]
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011,
recommends the introduction of the Bill in the House under clause
(1) of article 117 of the Constitution.

405
Notes on Clauses
Clause  1.—This clause relates to the short title, extent and
commencement of the proposed legislation. This clause enables the
Central Government to appoint a date with respect to the
commencement of the proposed legislation. However, different dates
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Clause 2.—This clause relates to Declaration as to the expediency
of Union control.
This clause provides a declaration that it is expedient in the public
interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of
mines and mineral development to the extent provided in the proposed
legislation.
Clause 3.—This clause defines certain expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 4.—This clause relates to reconnaissance, prospecting and
mining operations to be under a licence or lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no person shall
undertake any reconnaissance, prospecting, general exploration,
detailed exploration or mining in respect of any major or minor
minerals except under a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high-
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence
or mining lease in case of a major minerals or any other mineral
concession in case of minor minerals, as the case may be, granted in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that nothing
in this sub-clause shall affect any reconnaissance, prospecting, general
exploration, detailed exploration or mining operation undertaken in
any area in accordance with the terms and conditions of a
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease granted
before the commencement of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no licence shall be
necessary in respect of reconnaissance or prospecting operations
undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, the Atomic Minerals
Directorate, the Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited, the Singareni

406
Collieries Limited, the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited and the
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited being a
Government company within the meaning of section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956 or the Directorate of Mining and Geology (by
whatever name called) of any State Government and such other
Government agencies as may be notified by the Central Government
from time to time in respect of any land where rights on minerals
vest in the State Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that all such operations shall be notified by the State
Government and may be undertaken for a period not exceeding three
years in respect of reconnaissance and six years in respect of
prospecting, as may be specified in such notification. The proviso to
the said sub-clause further provides that no such reconnaissance or
prospecting shall be undertaken in an area for which a licence or
mining lease has been granted or for which application for a grant of
licence or mining lease is pending.
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that in respect of
the Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries
Limited, the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited, the Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute Limited and the other Government
agencies as may be notified under this sub-clause, the provisions of
this sub-clause shall apply with respect to promotional work
undertaken on behalf of the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that no person shall be
entitled to make any application for mineral concession in the area
covered by the notification during the period specified in the
notification issued under sub-clause (2), and on expiry of the said
period or such earlier period as may be notified by the State
Government, the area shall be deemed to be available for grant of
mineral concessions.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that in respect of land on
which prospecting operations are conducted in accordance with the
provisions of sub clause (2), before the expiry of the period specified
in the notification issued by the State Government, the Central
Government in case of coal minerals, and the State Government in
case of all other minerals, may by notification invite competitive offers
for grant of concession under clause 13 of this Act or may set aside
the entire land or any portion of the land for a period not exceeding
three years for grant of mineral concession under clause 13 and no
application for grant of any mineral concession shall lie during this

407
period or on the expiry thereof, except in accordance with a notification
issued under sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (4) of clause 13 of this Act,
as the case may be.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of sub-clause (6), no mineral concession shall be granted except on an
application made to the State Government after the date of the
commencement of this Act in accordance with the provisions thereof
along with the application fee and earnest money, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed. The explanation to the said sub-clause
provides that subject to the provisions of sub-clause (6), no mineral
concession shall be granted except on an application made to the
State Government from the date of the commencement of this Act
along with the application fee and earnest money, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed. The Explanation to the said sub-clause
also provides that the applicants who made the applications before
the commencement of this Act shall be required to make fresh
applications under this Act, and no right [except as otherwise provided
under sub-clause (6)] shall accrue to such applicants under this Act
by virtue of having made an application earlier, before such
commencement.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the provisions of sub-
clause (5) shall not be applicable in case of applications made in
accordance with any law for the time being in force , prior to the
commencement of the Act, (a) for grant of prospecting licence or a
mining lease after completing exploration under a reconnaissance
permit or a prospecting licence, as the case may be, or, (b) for which
prior approval of the Central Government for grant of mineral
concessions, has been given or, (c) where a letter of intent (by whatever
name called) has been issued by the State Government to grant
reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence or mining lease, as the
case may be, and was pending grant of the concession under this Act
for fulfilment of the conditions of the letter of intent, and the
application for grant of the mineral concessions is pending with the
State Government at the time of commencement of this Act.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that in case a person submits
his application for grant of mineral concession in respect of major as
well as minor minerals in the same area, the application shall be
considered for all the minerals applied for in accordance with the
provisions of this Act applicable to major minerals.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that no person shall transport
or store, or cause to be transported or stored, any minerals otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.

408
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that an application for grant
of mining lease for atomic minerals may be considered and granted
by the State Government after obtaining prior approval of the
Department of Atomic Energy in such cases and in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Central Government. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that no lease shall be necessary in respect of
mining of atomic minerals undertaken by the Atomic Minerals
Directorate or such other Government agencies as may be notified by
the Central Government from time to time.
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that in any reconnaissance
or prospecting operations undertaken by the Geological Survey of
India, the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the Mineral Exploration
Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries Limited, the Neyveli
Lignite Corporation Limited, the Central Mine Planning and Design
Institute Limited and such other Government agencies, in accordance
with the provisions of sub-clause (2), such agency conducting the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations shall publish, in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, a report of the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations and intimate the publication
to the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government to enable the State Government to set aside the
area under sub-clause (4) or notify the area under clause 13 for
prospecting or mining, as the case may be. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that where the State Government does not take a
decision to set aside the area or notify the area under clause 13, it
shall publish such data in its official website, that would be available
to the general public in the manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 5.—This clause relates to the eligibility for grant of mineral
concession.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no person shall be eligible
for grant of a mineral concession unless such person is a citizen of
India or a company as defined in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
Companies Act, 1956, or a firm registered under the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932 and has registered himself with the Indian Bureau of Mines
or the State Directorate or any other agency authorised by a
notification issued by the Central Government, in such manner, as
may be prescribed by the Central Government. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that for the purposes of mineral concessions
for small deposits in any area referred to in sub-clause (6) of clause
6, a cooperative society registered with the State Government under
the law made by it and registered in accordance with the provisions

409
of sub-clause (2) shall be eligible for grant of such mineral concession.
The said proviso further provides that in respect of any concession or
an application for grant or renewal of a mineral concession pending
with the State Governments at the commencement of this Act in terms
of sub-clause (6) of clause 4, the applicant of such application shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to register with the Indian Bureau
of Mines or the State Directorate as the case may be, within such
time as may be notified and such application shall not be rejected
solely on the ground of non-registration with the Indian Bureau of
Mines or the State Directorate, as the case may be. The Explanation to
the said sub-clause provides that the firm or association or cooperative
shall be eligible where all the members of such firm or association or
cooperative are citizens of India.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that subject to any
notification issued under sub-clause (1), the registration process in
respect of mineral concessions for,– (a) major minerals shall be
administered by the Indian Bureau of Mines; (b) minor minerals shall
be administered by the State Directorate; and (c) coal minerals shall
be administered by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that no person shall be
entitled to operate a mineral concession if he contravenes any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, which renders
him ineligible for grant of a mineral concession.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that a person who is
holding a mineral concession prior to the commencement of this Act
shall not be deemed to be contravening the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder merely on account of the fact that the
area of such concession is less than the mining area specified under
clause 6 of the Act.
Clause 6.— This clause relates to the area limits for grant of mineral
concession.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the maximum area which
can be held under mineral concession at any time by a person in
respect of any mineral or prescribed group of associated minerals in
a State shall be, (a) ten thousand square kilometres in respect of non-
exclusive reconnaissance licences; (b) five thousand square kilometres
in respect of high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licences;
(c) five hundred square kilometres in respect of prospecting licences;
and (d) one hundred square kilometres in respect of mining leases.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that a high-technology

410
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence shall be granted for such group
of associated minerals (other than iron ore, bauxite, limestone, coal
minerals or other bulk minerals) as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and subject to such general conditions regarding use of
advanced technologies and methodologies as may be notified from
time to time by the Central Government. The said proviso further
provides that in case of coal minerals, if the Central Government is
of the opinion that in the interest of development of coal minerals, it
is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
permit any person to acquire one or more prospecting licence or
mining lease covering an area in excess of the maximum area specified
in sub-clause (1).
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that in respect of major
minerals, the minimum area for grant of,— (a) a high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence shall be one hundred square
kilometres; (b) a prospecting licence shall be one square kilometre;
and (c) a mining lease shall be ten hectares.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in respect of minor
minerals the minimum area for grant of,— (a) a non-exclusive
reconnaissance or a prospecting licence shall be ten hectares; and (b)
a mining lease shall be five hectares. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that the State Government in consultation with the
Ministry of Environment and Forest in the Central Government for
reasons to be recorded in writing may, in respect of any area and any
minor mineral, notify a minimum area other than the area specified
in this sub-clause.
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that the area held
by a person as a member of a co-operative society, company or other
corporation and a Hindu Undivided Family and a partner of a firm
or as an individual shall be jointly computed.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-clauses (2) and (3), a person holding a
high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, or a
prospecting licence or a mining lease shall be entitled to be considered
and granted a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence
or a prospecting licence for the same mineral for an area lower than
the minimum area referred to in sub-clause (2) or sub-clause (3), as
the case may be, in an area contiguous to the area already held by
him under the licence or lease, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, and prospecting licence shall surrender area out

411
of such licence or leases annually, as may be specified in the licence,
in the manner prescribed by the Central Government so that at the
end of the last year after the commencement of operations of the
non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, the area held does not exceed
the maximum eligibility of the licence holder for a prospecting licence
and at the end of the last year of the high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence or prospecting licence, the area held does not
exceed the maximum eligibility of the licence holder for a mining
lease in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (1).
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that no mining lease shall
be granted in respect of any area which is not compact and contiguous
or otherwise not suitable to scientific development. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that in respect of small deposits not
suitable to scientific mining in isolated patches, a mining lease may
be granted for a cluster of such deposits within a defined area of not
less than the area specified in sub-clause (2) or sub-clause (3), as the
case may be, in accordance with such procedure and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that in case of the Scheduled
area specified in the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution and the tribal
area specified in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution, the State
Government may, by notification, give preference as may be specified
in the notification in grant of mineral concessions on an area referred
to in sub-clause (6) to a Co-operative of the Scheduled Tribes.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that any rules made by the
State Governments for minor minerals shall be in accordance with
the provisions of sub-clauses (1) to (7).
Clause 7.—This clause relates to the period of grant and extension
of licence and deposit of security.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence shall be granted for a period of not less than
one year and not more than three years.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence shall be granted for a period
of not less than three years and not more than six years. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that the period may be extended, on
an application made by the licensee for a further period not exceeding
two years in respect of such part of the area as may be specified in
the licence.

412
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides a prospecting licence shall
be granted for a period of not less than two years and not more than
three years. The proviso to said sub-clause provides that the period
may be extended on an application made by the licencee in respect
of such part of area as may be specified in the licence for a further
period of not exceeding two years.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that a mining lease for a
major mineral shall be granted for a period of not less than twenty
years and not more than thirty years. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that in an area which is already held under a mining
lease and a new mineral is found in such area, the period of mining
lease granted for such new mineral shall be co-terminus with the
period of the existing mining lease. The proviso to the said sub-
clause further provides that in the interest of mineral development,
amalgamation of two or more adjoining leases held by a lessee may
be approved by the authority competent to grant the lease and the
period of the amalgamated leases shall be co-terminus with the period
of lease which expires later.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that a mining lease for a
minor mineral shall be granted for a period not less than five years
and may be extended for such period as may be notified by the State
Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that different
periods may be specified for different minerals having regard to the
nature and manner of occurrence of mineral deposits. The proviso to
the said sub-clause also provides that where in respect of any minor
mineral, a minimum area is notified in accordance with the provisons
of sub-clause (3) of clause 6 or sub-clause (6) of clause (6), the State
Government may notify a minimum period less than five years in
consultation with the Central Government.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that a mining lease for a
major mineral may be extended, on an application made by the lessee,
in respect of such part of the area as may be specified and for such
period not exceeding twenty years at a time, as may be required to
ensure full exploitation of the run-of-the-mine in a scientific manner.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no such extension
shall be granted, except after approval in the prescribed manner, of
a fresh mining plan for the area for which the lease is sought to be
extended.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that, for the purposes of
sub-clause (6), all mining leases granted before the commencement of
this Act, and which has not contravened any of the terms and

413
conditions of a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining
lease granted before the commencement of this Act, shall be considered
for extension irrespective of the size of the area of such mining lease.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to the grant and extension of mineral
concession.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of any land
in which the minerals vest in the Government (other than in respect
of lands reserved under the provisions of Chapter VII),—(a) the State
Government shall grant non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence
and mining lease and extend the high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, prospecting licence and mining lease in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in respect of minor
minerals, the State Government may, by notification, restrict the grant
of licence to such types of mineral concessions as are appropriate
having regard to the nature of occurrence of the minor mineral. The
proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence and mining lease in respect of coal
minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals shall be granted
and extended by the State Government with the prior approval of the
Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every person, granted
a licence or lease, as the case may be, under sub-clause (1), shall
deposit such sum as security deposit as may be specified by the
Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence shall not be issued in respect of any area held
under a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence or a mining lease.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that a prospecting licence
shall not be issued in an area held under high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and vice versa .
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting licence shall
not be issued in respect of an area held under a mining lease.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence or mining lease for coal minerals shall be

414
granted by the State Government to a company approved by the
Central Government on such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed by it and such licence or lease be granted through
competitive bidding and auction in such manner as may be prescribed
by it. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the provisions
of this sub-clause shall not be applicable for grant of mineral
concession, (a) to a Government company or corporation for mining
or such other specified end use; (b) to a company or corporation
which has been awarded a power project (including Ultra Mega Power
Project) on the basis of competitive bids for tariff.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that the non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence and mining lease in respect of any mineral
underlying the ocean within the territorial waters or the continental
shelf of India shall be granted by the Central Government in
accordance with the provisions of the law for the time being in force.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that the State Government,
and every holder of a mineral concession, shall make available data
relating to grant, extension, relinquishment, termination and plan of
operations in the official website in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that for the purpose of this
clause, the onus of proving that ownership of a mineral vest in a
person other than the State Government shall be on the person making
the claim.
Clause 9.—This clause relates to the prospecting licence and mining
lease of an area under reconnaissance.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that notwithstanding that a
non-exclusive reconnaissance licencee is operating in such area, a high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence
or a mining lease may be granted on that area under the provisions
of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence holder who applies for a prospecting licence
under sub-clause (7) of clause 22 shall, on grant of such licence, be
entitled to get such areas vacated as may have been granted a
prospecting licence to any person under sub-clause (1) subsequent to
the grant of the non-exclusive reconnaissance licence. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that a person holding a high technology

415
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a person holding a
prospecting licence granted under sub-clause (7) of clause 22 or a
person granted a mining lease shall not be required to vacate the
area.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to the special provisions in respect
of atomic minerals.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, the holder of a high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting licence or
mining lease for a mineral other than a minor mineral may also
undertake incidental prospecting or mining operations in respect of
atomic minerals in the area held, subject to the fulfilment of the
following conditions, namely,— (a) if in the course of prospecting or
mining operations, he discovers any atomic mineral, he shall within
sixty days from the date of discovery of such mineral, report the fact
of such discovery to the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the Geological
Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines and the State Directorate
of the State in which the prospecting or mining operations are carried
on or proposed to be carried on; (b) the quantities of atomic minerals
recovered incidental to such prospecting or mining operations shall
be collected and stacked separately and a report to that effect sent to
the Atomic Minerals Directorate every three months for such further
action to be taken by the licencee or lessee, as the case may be,
which may be directed by the Atomic Minerals Directorate.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the licensee or lessee,
as the case may be, referred to in sub-clause (1) shall, within a period
of sixty days from the date of discovery of atomic mineral, apply to
the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai, along with the
recommendations of the State Government, for grant of a licence to
handle the said atomic minerals in accordance with the provisions of
the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 made under the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962, and on grant of such licence or grant of
lease to handle, the licencee or lessee, as the case may be, may apply
for inclusion of such atomic minerals in his licence or lease, as the
case may be. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that if in
the opinion of the Department of Atomic Energy the atomic mineral
recovered incidental to such prospecting or mining operations is not
of an economically exploitable grade of the quantity found is
significant, it shall not be necessary for the licensee of lessee to apply
for inclusion of such atomic mineral in the licence or lease, as the
case may, under the Act or the rules made thereunder for the atomic
minerals.

416
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in case of grant of a
lease referred to in sub-clause (2), the lessee shall remove and dispose
off the atomic mineral on payment of royalty to the State Government.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that for obtaining a separate
licence or lease for atomic minerals, the licensee or lessee, as the case
may be, shall, within sixty days from the date of discovery of atomic
mineral, apply to the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai,
along with the recommendations of the State Government, for grant
of licence to handle the said atomic mineral in terms of Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 made under the Atomic Energy
Act, 1962 and no licence or lease be granted except in accordance
with the conditions of such licence granted under the provisions of
the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that if in the opinion of the Department
of Atomic Energy the atomic mineral recovered incidental to such
prospecting or mining operations is not of an economically exploitable
grade or the quantity found is insignificant, it shall not be necessary
for the licencee or lessee to apply for inclusion of such atomic mineral
in the licence or lease, as the case may be, under the Act or the rules
made thereunder for the atomic minerals.
Clause 11.—This clause relates to the Mineral concession to be
void if in contravention of Act.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any mineral concession
granted, extended, held or acquired in contravention of the provisions
of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder, shall be void and
of no effect, subject to the provisions of sub-clause (2).
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where a person has
acquired more than one non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence
or mining lease, as the case may be, and the aggregate area covered
by such licences or leases in respect of a mineral in a State, as the
case may be, exceeds the maximum area permissible under clause 6,
only that non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence or mining
lease the acquisition of which has resulted in such maximum area
being exceeded, shall be deemed to be void.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in every case where a
mineral concession is void under sub-clause (1), the earnest money or
security deposit as the case may be deposited in respect of that
application shall stand forfeited, and the mineral concession shall be

417
granted to the next eligible applicant or notified for grant of mineral
concession, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of
the Act.
Clause 12.—This clause relates to the cancellation of a mineral
concession or disqualification.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of any land
in which minerals vest in the Government,—(a) where any person
fails to conduct reconnaissance or high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration or prospecting or mining operations in accordance
with a reconnaissance, or exploration plan or a prospecting or mining
plan, as the case may be, prepared in the manner provided in this
clause, the State Government may after issuing a notice to show cause
and giving him an opportunity of being heard, by an order, forfeit all
or any part of the security deposit and may suspend, curtail or revoke
the licence or lease having regard to the circumstances of the case.
The Explanation of the said clause provides that the purposes of this
sub-clause the framework of mining operations in respect of minor
minerals not requiring a mining plan shall be deemed to be the mining
plan; (b) in every case where a part or all of the security deposit has
been forfeited, the licencee or the lessee, as the case may be, shall
furnish security to make up the deficiency before recommencing the
operations under the licence or lease, as the case may be; (c) without
prejudice to the provisions contained in clauses (a) and (b), the State
Government may also issue notice directing a person who fails to
conduct reconnaissance or high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration or prospecting or mining operations in accordance with
the reconnaissance plan or an exploration plan or a prospecting or a
mining plan, to show cause, and after giving him an opportunity of
being heard, by an order, declare him to be ineligible for consideration
for any mineral concession in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clause (3) of clause 20 or sub-clause (3) of clause 22, as the case may
be, for such period as it may specify, not exceeding five years, having
regard to the circumstances; (d) where at the expiry of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence, the licencee fails to comply with the
conditions of the licence, the State Government may, within a period
of six months from the date of expiry of the licence, or the time
given for fulfilment of the conditions, whichever is later , issue a notice
asking him to show cause, and after giving him an opportunity of
being heard, by an order, forfeit all or any part of the security deposit
and may declare him to be ineligible for consideration for any mineral
concession in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (3) of clause

418
20 or sub-clause (3) of clause 22, as the case may be, for such period
as it may specify, not exceeding five years, having regard to the
circumstances; (e) orders under this sub-clause shall be made by the
State Government,— (i) in respect of any major mineral where the
Indian Bureau of Mines has approved mining plan and mine closure
plans, after consultation with the Indian Bureau of Mines on technical
issues pertaining to such mining plan and mine closure plan, and, (ii)
in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals , in
consultation with the Central Government. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that in case the Indian Bureau of Mines or the
Central Government, as the case may be, does not express any opinion
within a period of three months, the State Government may presume
the concurrence of the Indian Bureau of Mines or the Central
Government, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that in respect of any mineral
concession relating to a land where the minerals vest with a private
person, and the operations are not conducted in accordance with the
reconnaissance, prospecting or mining plan, as the case may be, the
State Government may, in the interest of mineral conservation and
development, after giving such private person an opportunity of being
heard, issue a direction to him to suspend, curtail or revoke the
mineral concession and take any other action in accordance with the
terms and conditions thereof as may be specified in such direction.
Clause 13.—This clause relates to the Notification of certain areas
for grant of mineral concessions.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of any land
where the minerals vest in the Government, the State Government
shall, by notification, invite applications in the form of competitive
offers for any mineral except coal minerals for grant of a prospecting
licence over any area where reconnaissance has been conducted and
sufficient evidence of enhanced mineralisation of the specified minerals
has been established. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
no application for a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence is pending relating to such area. The proviso to the said sub-
clause further provides that no such notification shall be issued in
respect of an area in which reconnaissance or exploration or
prospecting operations was completed under a licence till lapse of the
period of six months after the expiry of the licence unless the area
has been relinquished. The proviso to the said sub-clause also provides
that in case where no application is received on an area notified
under sub-clause (1), State Government shall within a period of three
months either re-notify the area or notify it as being available for
grant of mineral concessions under clause 22.

419
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where an application
or applications for grant of prospecting licence has been filed on an
area and the State Government has not issued any notification, the
State Government may notify such area or areas within a period of
one month from the date of receipt of the first application by
amalgamating or expanding all or any of the applied areas, if required,
in the interest of scientific mining, and the State Government may
invite applications in the form of competitive offers for any mineral,
except coal and atomic minerals for grant of a prospecting licence.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the area so notified
shall not include any area for which there has been or is an application
pending for more than one month prior on the date of the notification.
The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that where the
State Government has notified an area, it shall provide an opportunity
to an applicant who filed an application prior to such notification
within a period of one month from the date of the provisional
determination of the best offer for the purposes of sub-clause (4) and
to submit a competitive offer in terms of the said notification after
being informed of the details of the best offer received by the State
Government subsequent to the said notification of the area, and the
State Government shall consider the applications in accordance with
the provisions of sub-clause (4) and grant the licence to the best
overall offer. The proviso to the said sub-clause also provides that
only those applicants who had applied suo moto  without any
notification of such area by the State Government shall be afforded
an opportunity to submit a competitive offer under the second proviso,
and any such offer shall be limited in respect of only the area notified
irrespective of the areas for which such applicant had applied earlier
and where the State Government fails to notify the area within the
specified period under this sub-clause, the applications for grant of
prospecting licence shall be considered in accordance with the
provisions of clause 22.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a notification issued
under sub-clause (1) may specify that any application received shall
be considered with reference to such criteria including all or any one
or more of the following as per weightages assigned, as may be
specified in the notification, namely,—(a) specific knowledge and
experience of prospecting possessed or accessed by the applicant;
(b) nature and quality of technical resources proposed to be employed;
(c) value addition such as mineral processing and beneficiation;
(d) end use including industries based on the mineral; (e) provision
of ore-linkage through long-term agreements with domestic industry;
(f) in the case of prospecting for iron ore, bauxite and limestone,

420
having finished products production capacity at the time of
commencement of this Act and captive ore resources which are likely
to be exhausted in the near future; (g) a financial bid quoted either
as a lump sum recoverable in instalments at the time of mining or a
percentage of royalty or a profit sharing of mineral production.
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that the financial
bid shall offer the State Government to recover a value for its efforts
in managing information relating to survey or regional exploration
work including computer databases and samples for minerals and for
the mineral on the basis of market consideration to be based on a
floor price set by the State Government on the available reconnaissance
data and the weightage shall be numerical in character and enable a
composite ranking based on numerical marks assigned for each of
the criteria listed in the notification in order to determine the best
offer.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the applications received
in accordance with the conditions specified in the notification issued
under sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall be considered in accordance
with such criteria and weightage as specified in the notification, and
the eligible applicant obtaining the best marks as per weightages,
shall be granted the prospecting licence in accordance with the rules
made under this Act. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
the licence may include special condition under which a mining lease
shall be granted on an application made under sub-clause (3) of clause
25 including, restrictions arising from value-additions or ore-linkage
or restrictions on sale of ore in the case of captive resources.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in such areas where
prospecting has been conducted and sufficient evidence of enhanced
mineralisation has been established through a prospecting report and
feasibility study, and where no application for a mining lease is
pending, the State Government shall by notification invite applications
in the form of competitive bids for any minerals excepting coal
minerals, for grant of mining lease, to the bidder who in accordance
with the provisions of sub-clause (6) quotes the best financial bid
including the bid for the prospecting report and feasibility study for
the area so notified. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
no such notification shall be issued in respect of an area in which
prospecting operations was completed under a licence till the period
of six months after expiry of the licence unless the area has been
relinquished. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that
before issuing the notification under this sub-clause in respect of any

421
forest or wildlife area, the State Government shall obtain,— (i) all
forest clearances under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and wildlife
clearance under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, or any other law
for the time being in force, so as to enable the commencement of
operations, and (ii) all necessary permissions from the owners of the
land and those having occupation rights.
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that for the
purposes of sub-clause (5) the financial bid shall offer the State
Government either as a lump sum, recoverable in instalments or a
percentage of royalty or a profit sharing, as may be specified in the
notification, and the purpose of the financial bid for the prospecting
report and feasibility study is to allow the State Governments to
recover a value for its efforts in acquiring and managing information
through detailed survey, exploration, feasibility studies, including
computer databases, and cores and samples, computer databases and
samples for minerals; and for the mineral on the basis of market
consideration to be based on a floor price set by the State Government
on the available prospecting data.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that a notification issued
under sub-clause (5) may specify that bids received shall be considered
with reference to such criteria including any of the following, as per
weightages assigned, as may be specified in such notification,
namely,—(a) special knowledge and appropriate experience in scientific
mining and mineral beneficiation; (b) bringing new and advanced
technologies; (c) investments in value addition such as mineral
processing and beneficiation; (d) having industrial capacity based on
the mineral or having set up industry based on the mineral and
achieved financial closure for such project; (e) providing ore-linkage
through long-term agreements with domestic industry; (f) constructing
transportation networks (road and rail) and other infrastructure
facilities in the mineral bearing area; (g) in the case of iron ore, bauxite
and limestone, having finished products production capacity at the
time of commencement of the Act and captive ore resources which
are likely to be exhausted in the near future; (h) financial bid for the
prospecting report and feasibility study for the area so notified.
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that for the purpose
of determination of best bid, the weightage shall be numerical in
character and enable a composite ranking based on bid price and
numerical marks assigned for each of criteria specified in the
notification.

422
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that the bids received under
sub-clause (5) shall be evaluated in the prescribed manner and the
best eligible bid shall be issued the letter of intent for awarding the
mining lease after obtaining all necessary statutory approvals and
clearances, on such conditions as may be specified having regard to
the criteria stated in the notification issued under sub-clause (5) and
the response thereto.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that in respect of atomic
minerals and beach sand minerals, notification inviting applications
and grant of the mineral concession shall be made with the prior
approval of the Central Government.
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that in respect of coal
minerals, notification for inviting and grant of mineral concessions
shall be made by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed by it.
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in this clause, notification of an area for inviting
applications in respect of public lands in areas covered by Fifth
Schedule or Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, shall be issued after
consultation with the Gram Sabhas or District Councils, as the case
may be, and in respect of non-scheduled areas, after consultation with
the District Panchayat.
Sub-clause (11) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall invite and entertain applications for grant of high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting licence in an
area relinquished by a holder of high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence only after such area is
notified by the State Government for inviting applications for grant
of high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a
prospecting licence under the provisions of sub-clause (1) of clause 13
or notified as being available for grant of concessions for the purpose
of clause 22. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that if the
State Government does not notify such relinquished area within three
months of relinquishment, any person interested may apply to the
State Government and in case it fails to notify the area within a
further period of three months, the applicant may apply to the
National Mining Tribunal in case of major minerals and State Mining
Tribunal in case of minor minerals for notification of that area and
the concerned Tribunal may direct the State Government to notify the
area within such period as it may specify.

423
Sub-clause (12) of this clause provides that the procedure for
notifying an area for inviting applications for major minerals and
grant of mineral concessions shall be such as may prescribed by the
Central Government.
Sub-clause (13) of this clause provides that in respect of minor
minerals, notwithstanding anything in this clause, the procedure for
notification and grant of mineral concessions shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that before granting mineral concession for minor
minerals in an area covered by the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution, the Gram Sabha or the District Council, as the
case may be, shall be consulted.
Clause 14.—This clause relates to the time limit for disposal of
applications for grant of mineral concessions.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of any lands
where the minerals vest in the Government, the State Government
shall dispose off the applications for grant of non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence within the following period reckoned
from the date of receipt of applications, namely,— (a) within a period
of three months in respect of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence;
(b) within a period of four months in respect of high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and prospecting licence.
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that where
applications for prospecting licence are received in response to a
notification under sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (2) or sub-clause (3) of
clause 13, the time period for disposal shall be reckoned from the last
date notified for receipt of applications.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall dispose off the applications for grant of mining lease in the
following manner and within the time limit specified hereunder,
namely,—(a) a letter of intent shall be issued within four months;
(i) from the opening of bids in respect of applications received under
clause 13; (ii) from date of application in respect of application received
under clause 25; and (b) the mining lease shall be executed within
three months of intimation by means of a written communication by
the applicant holding the letter of intent of his having obtained all
clearances and approvals specified in the letter of intent.

424
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in any matter requiring
the prior approval of the Central Government, the matter shall be
disposed off by the Central Government within a period of three
months, and the State Government shall issue a letter of intent in any
case, where issue of such letter of intent is contingent on prior
approval, within a period of one month from the date of such
approval.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that where any application
or written communication is deficient in information or documentation,
the State Government shall, by notice issued within sixty days of
receipt thereof, require the applicant to supply the omission within
such period as may be specified having regard to the nature of the
document or information, but not being a period of less than fifteen
days and not more than sixty days, and such period is excluded from
the time limits specified in sub-clauses (1) and (2).
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that where an applicant for
mineral concession fails to furnish documents and information as
required under sub-clause (4) for processing the application or written
communication, the State Government after issuing a notice to show
cause and giving him an opportunity of being heard, may by order
forfeit the earnest money and reject his application for grant of mineral
concession.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that where an application is
not disposed off within the limit specified in sub-clauses (1), (2) or
(3) subject to the provisions of sub-clause (4), the applicant may apply
to the National Mining Tribunal in the case of major minerals and
the State Mining Tribunal in case of minor minerals, for a direction
to the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be,
to dispose off the application within such reasonable period as may
be specified by the National Mining Tribunal or the State Mining
Tribunal, as the case may be.
Clause 15.—This clause relates to the rights of a holder of non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, prospecting licence or mining lease.
This clause provides that on issue of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence, prospecting licence or mining lease under this Act, it shall be
lawful for the holder of such licence or lease, his agents or his servants
or workmen to enter the lands over which such licence or lease had
been granted at all times during its currency and carry out all such
reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations as permitted. The

425
proviso to the said clause provides that no person shall enter into
any building or upon an enclosed court or garden attached to a
dwelling-house (except with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at least seven days notice in
writing of his intention to do so.
Clause 16.—This clause relates to the Act and rules to apply to all
extension of mineral concessions.
This clause provides that the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder shall apply in relation to the extension after the
commencement of this Act of any prospecting licence or mining lease
granted before such commencement as they apply in relation to the
extension of a prospecting licence or mining lease granted after such
commencement.
Clause 17.—This clause relates to the Transfer of non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence and prospecting licence.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence may, except in the case of
coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals, after the
expiry of a notice of not less than ninety days to the State Government
concerned, transfer his licence to any person eligible to hold such
licence in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
the holder of a prospecting licence, granted prior to the commencement
of this Act and valid under the provisions of this Act, may after
giving a notice of not less than ninety days to the State Government
concerned, transfer his prospecting licence only to a person holding
a prospecting licence or mining lease in the adjoining area, and any
transfer in contravention of this proviso shall be void. The proviso to
the said clause further provides that the original licensee shall intimate
to the State Government the consideration payable or paid by the
successor-in-interest for the transfer, including the consideration in
respect of the reconnaissance of prospecting operations already
undertaken and the reports and data generated during the operations.
The proviso to the said sub-clause also provides that no such transfer
shall take place if the State Government, within the period specified
in the notice for reasons to be communicated in writing, disapproves
the transfer on the grounds that the transferee is not eligible as per
the provisions of the Act.

426
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence or high technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence in respect of coal minerals,
atomic minerals and beach sand minerals shall be transferred with
the prior approval of the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on transfer of the licence,
all rights and liabilities of, and under, the licence shall be transferred
to the successor-in-interest.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of the sub-clause (1), the holder of a licence may transfer his rights
and liabilities within a period of six months after the expiry of the
mineral concession period to a person eligible under the Act to hold
a licence.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that on transfer of rights
and liabilities, the successor–in-interest shall be entitled to consideration
in terms of clause 22 or clause 25 as the case may be, as if he was
the original holder of the mineral concession.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the State Government
may charge such fees for transfer of the mineral concession as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that nothing contained in
this clause shall be deemed to enable a holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or a prospecting licence, in respect of land where the minerals
vest in a private person, to transfer such licence other than in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the mineral concession
agreement.
Clause 18.—This clause relates to the Transfer of a mining lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the holder of a mining
lease shall not, without the previous approval in writing of the State
Government, and in the case of coal minerals, atomic minerals and
beach sand minerals, the previous approval in writing of the Central
Government,— (a) assign, sublet, mortgage, or in any other manner,
transfer the mining lease, or any right, title or interest therein; or
(b) enter into or make any arrangement, contract, or understanding
whereby the lessee may be directly or indirectly financed to a
substantial extent by, or under which the lessee’s operations or
undertakings may be substantially controlled by any person or body

427
of persons other than the lessee. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that where the mortgagee is an institution or a bank or a
corporation notified for the purpose by the Central Government under
this Act, it shall not be necessary for the lessee to obtain any such
approval of the State Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where a holder a mining
lease has filed an application to the State Government for approval of
transfer of a mining lease, the State Government, if it is of the opinion,
having regard to the prospecting report if any, and approved Mining
Plan and mining schemes and other related documents filed by the
mining lease holder, that the amount of consideration between the
transferor and the transferee is not adequate may issue notification in
such manner as may be specified by the State Government, inviting
competitive financial bids within one month of filing of the application
for transfer, giving a last date, which shall not be more than thirty
days from the date of notification, to the interested persons eligible
under the Act to submit their financial bids for the mining lease
sought to be transferred.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in all cases where
notification has been issued by the State Government as per
sub-clause (2), it shall, complete the evaluation of bids within a period
of one month from the last date specific in the notification and,—
(a) permit the holder of mining lease who has applied for transfer of
mining lease to transfer the lease to the transferee at the amount of
consideration stated in application in case the bid amount of the
highest eligible bidder is not greater by twenty per cent. than the
amount of consideration stated by the holder of mining lease; or
(b) direct the holder of mining lease who has applied for transfer of
mining lease to transfer the lease to the highest eligible bidder in
case the bid is higher than the consideration amount by more than
twenty per cent. and the highest eligible bidder shall pay to such
holder of mining lease, a sum equal to the amount of consideration
stated in the application for transfer along with an additional amount
equal to twenty per cent. thereof, and the remaining amount of bid
shall be paid to the State Government in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that in all cases of applications for transfer of a
mining lease granted by the State Government prior to the
commencement of this Act by invoking the provisions of clause (5) of
section 11 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957, the State Government may collect an additional fee, as
may be prescribed by the Central Government, for the transfer. The

428
proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in case the State
Government is not able to complete the process in the time specified,
the holder of the mining lease may apply to the National Mining
Tribunal for directions in the matter. The Explanation to the sub-clause
provides that the highest eligible bidder shall be a person who gave
the highest bid and is eligible to be granted the mining lease on the
day of the determination of the bids.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
or the Central Government, as the case may be, shall not give its
approval to transfer of a mining lease unless the transferee has
accepted all the conditions and liabilities under any law for the time
being in force to which the transferor was subject to in respect of
such mining lease.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that no transfer of a mining
lease shall be made to a person not eligible under this Act to hold
the lease and no transfer be made by a person in contravention of
the condition of, and subject to which the lease was granted.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that an application for
transfer of mining lease shall,—(a) state the reason for the transfer;
(b) the consideration for the transfer; (c) have attached to it, an
agreement between the holder of mining lease who has applied for
transfer of mining lease and the transferee setting out the terms and
conditions of the offer and acceptance with a validity period of at
least six months from the date of application; (d) state whether the
mining lease had been granted prior to the commencement of this
Act by invoking the provisions of sub-clause (5) of clause 11 of the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1857; and
(e) give such other particulars as may prescribed by the Central
Government.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that no transfer of a mining
lease shall be permitted, if,—(a) it leads to fragmentation or unscientific
mining; (b) it is not in the interest of mineral development; (c) it is
against the national interest.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that where the mining lease
is in respect of land where the minerals vest in a private person, no
transfer shall be permitted except in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the mineral concession agreement in regard to the consent
of such person.
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that the State Government
may charge fees for the transfer of mining lease in case of major
minerals as may be prescribed by the Central Government and in
case of minor minerals as may be prescribed by the State Government.

429
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that the Central Government
and the State Government shall take into account the consideration
payable by the transferee to the transferor while prescribing the fee
under sub-clause (7).
Clause 19.—This clause relates to the conditions of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of every
non-exclusive reconnaissance licence granted for major and minor
minerals under this Act and the rules made thereunder, the licence
holder shall,—(a) progressively relinquish the area granted under the
licence as shall be specified in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder; (b) file a reconnaissance plan in
case of major minerals other than coal minerals with the Geological
Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines, and the State Directorate,
and in case of coal minerals with the Central Government, and in
case of minor minerals with the State Directorate concerned in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, which shall
include,—(i) the particulars of the area such as aerial extent, in terms
of latitude and longitude; (ii) the scale of the plan and the area of
geological mapping; the particulars of the machines and instruments
to be used, and the nature of the data proposed to be collected;
(iii) a quarterly plan of operations; and (iv) the quarterly detailed
projection of expenditure on the operations. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that in respect of minerals other than coal minerals,
atomic and beach sand minerals, with the prior approval of the State
Directorate and in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals, beach sand
minerals with the prior approval of Central Government, the licence
holder may modify the plan of operations or the State Directorate or
the Central Government, as the case may be, may direct the licensee
to modify his plan of operations, if it appears that ground operations
proposed may be in conflict with the ground operations of another
licensee who has already filed his plan. The Explanation to the
sub-clause provides that, the quarterly plan of operations shall be
prepared so as to exclude overlapping of ground operation of the
non-exclusive licence holders who have already filed the plan of
operations for the area; (c) make available all data including all the
aerial, photo-geological, geophysical, geochemical and such other data
collected by him to the Geological Survey of India, the State Directorate
and in case of coal minerals to the Central Government, in such
manner and within such intervals as may be prescribed by the Central
Government; (d) in case radiometric instruments are used, make
available all radiometric data available to the Atomic Minerals

430
Directorate; (e) maintain detailed and accurate accounts of all the
expenses incurred by him on the reconnaissance operations; (f) submit
reports to the Geological Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines,
the State Directorate and in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals,
beach sand minerals to the Central Government, in such manner and
within such intervals as may be prescribed by it and while submitting
reports, the licence holder may specify that the whole or any part of
the report or data submitted by him shall be kept confidential; and
the Geological Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines, the State
Directorate, and in case of coal minerals, the Central Government,
thereupon, keep the specified portions as confidential for a period of
six months from the expiry of the licence, or abandonment of
operations or termination of the licence, whichever is earlier; (g) allow
every officer authorised by the Central Government or the State
Government as the case may be, in case of major minerals and the
State Governments in case of minor minerals, so as to examine the
accounts maintained; (h) furnish to the Geological Survey of India,
Indian Bureau of Mines, and the State Directorate in case of major
minerals, in case of coal minerals, atomic minerals, beach sand minerals
to the Central Government, and in case of minor minerals to the
State Directorate concerned, such information and returns as may be
required in relation to the reconnaissance operations; (i) allow any
officer authorised by the Geological Survey of India or the State
Directorate in case of major minerals and the officers of State
Directorate in the case of minor minerals to inspect any reconnaissance
operations carried on by the licence holder; (j) pay to the State
Government in respect of land in which minerals vest in the
Government, and to the person in whom the minerals vests in other
cases, a licence fee as may be notified by the Central Government,
being an amount of not less than fifty rupees per square kilometre
per year and not more than five hundred rupees per square kilometre
per year or part thereof. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides
that the notification of the Central Government may specify a rate
that may be different for each of the successive years; (k) obtain
clearance from the Ministry of Defence in the Central Government, in
case any Defence establishments lies in the area proposed for
exploration; (l) comply with such other conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the non exclusive
reconnaissance licence may contain such other general conditions as
may be prescribed in the interest of public safety or national security

431
by the Central Government which, inter alia, may include the condition
that a representative of the Directorate General, the Civil Aviation or
the Ministry of Defence shall be present during the aerial surveys.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government in
case of coal minerals and the Indian Bureau of Mines in case of other
major minerals may issue direction to a non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence holder to ensure compliance with the conditions of the licence
and the licence holder shall be bound to comply with such directions.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the licence holder shall
before starting operations, deposit as security an amount equal to the
licence fee levied for the first year and in case of breach of any
condition imposed on a holder of a non-exclusive reconnaissance
licence by or under this Act, the State Government may by order in
writing, suspend, curtail or revoke the licence, and may forfeit in
whole or in part, the amount deposited by the licence holder as
security. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no such
order shall be made without issuing a notice to the licence holder to
show cause and giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in case of
land in which the minerals vest in a person other than the
Government, the State Government shall give such person an
opportunity of being heard and may issue directions to him to
suspend, curtail or revoke the mineral concession or forfeit the security
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the mineral concession
agreement.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in every case where a
part or all of the security deposit has been forfeited, the licensee,
shall furnish security deposit to make up the deficiency before
recommencing operations under the licence.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that any amount deposited
as security deposit in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (3)
shall unless forfeited, be returned to the licensee at the end of the six
months period following the expiry or termination of the licence. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in case the return of the
security or such part thereof as may be payable takes place more
than thirty days after the expiry of the six months period, a simple
interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum shall be payable for the
period beyond thirty days.
Clause 20.— This clause relates to the procedure for grant of non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence.

432
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that an application for grant
of a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence in respect of any land in
which the minerals vest in the Government shall be made to the
State Government concerned in such form and manner, along with
such application fee and the earnest money as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall acknowledge the receipt of the applications and cause them to
be registered in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in a register that shall be open to inspection by the
public.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall grant the non-exclusive reconnaissance licence to every applicant
who is eligible in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that in all cases where the
State Government refuses an application, it shall communicate the
reasons therefor. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no
application shall be refused,— (a) without communicating the grounds
and giving the applicant an opportunity to represent within a
reasonable period of not less than thirty days; and (b) on grounds of
incompleteness of material particulars without requiring the applicant
to supply the requisite documents or information.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that grant of every non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence shall be notified in the Official Gazette ,
and in the official website by the State Government.
Clause 21.—This clause relates to conditions of a high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and prospecting licence.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of every
high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence granted for
major minerals and prospecting licence granted for major minerals
and minor minerals under this Act and the rules made thereunder,
the licence holder shall,— (a) progressively relinquish the area granted
under the licence as shall be specified in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder, (b) prepare and
file an exploration plan in respect of a high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence or a prospecting plan in case of a prospecting
licence with the Geological Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of
Mines and the State Directorate in respect of major minerals (other

433
than coal minerals and in case of coal minerals) with the Central
Government, and the State Directorate in the case of minor minerals
including such particulars and, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, which shall include,—(i) the particulars
of the area being prospected; (ii) the scale of the plan and the area
of geological mapping; (iii) a six monthly plan of operations
including,—(a) the number of pits, trenches, and bore holes which he
proposes to put in the area; (b) the number of samples proposed to
be drawn and analysed; (c) the particulars of the machines to be
used; (d) the details of exploratory mining if any, proposed to be
undertaken; (e) the beneficiation studies proposed to be undertaken;
(iv) appropriate baseline information of prevailing environmental
conditions before the beginning of prospecting operations; (v) steps
proposed to be taken for protection of environment which shall include
prevention and control of air and water pollution, progressive
reclamation and rehabilitation of the land disturbed by the prospecting
operations, a scheme for the plantation of trees, restoration of local
flora and water regimes and such other measures, as may be directed
from time to time by the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State
Directorate as the case may be for minimizing the adverse effect of
prospecting operations on the environment; (vi) the details of the six
monthly expenditure to be incurred on the operations; (vii) any other
matter relevant for scientific prospecting, as directed by the Indian
Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate, as the case may be, from
time to time by a general or specific order. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that the exploration plan shall be filed with the
Geological Survey of India in respect of high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, in such manner as may be
notified by the Geological Survey of India from time to time;
(c) carry out the prospecting operations in accordance with the
exploration plan or a prospecting plan submitted by him, with such
modifications, if any, as directed by the Indian Bureau of Mines or
the State Directorate and in case of coal minerals the Central
Government, as the case may be. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that where the licensee proposes to conduct prospecting
operations in a manner at variance with the plan already submitted,
he shall prepare and file a revised or supplementary exploration or a
prospecting plan in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government; (d) make available all data collected by him during
prospecting operations to the Geological Survey of India, Indian Bureau
of Mines and the State Directorate, in case of coal minerals to the
Central Government, and in case of atomic minerals, to the Atomic
Minerals Directorate in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause further
provides that such data shall be made available to the Geological
Survey of India in respect of high-technology reconnaissance-cum-

434
exploration licence, to such an extent as may be notified by the
Geological Survey of India from time to time; (e) maintain complete
and correct accounts of all the expenses incurred by him during the
prospecting operations; (f) submit a report on progress of operations
under the exploration plan or prospecting plan to the Indian Bureau
of Mines and the State Directorate and in case of coal minerals to the
Central Government, in such manner and intervals as may be
prescribed by the Central Government; (g) pay to the State
Government in respect of any land in which the minerals vest with
it, and to the person in whom the minerals vest in other case such
prospecting fee, as may be notified by the Central Government, being
an amount not exceeding rupees fifty per hectare of land covered by
the licence for each year or part of a year of the period for which the
licence is granted or extended. The proviso to the said sub-clause
also provides that the notification of the Central Government may
specify a rate that may be different for each of the successive years;
(h) within three months after the determination of the licence or the
date of abandonment of the prospecting operations, whichever is
earlier, securely plug all bores and fill up or fence all excavations in
the land covered by the licence. The proviso to the said item provides
that if in any part of the area the licencee receives a letter of intent
for grant of mining lease within this period he may carry out such
amount of work as may be consistent with the mining operations
under such lease; (i) in case the minerals vest in the Government,
report to the State Directorate the discovery of any mineral not
specified in the licence within a period of sixty days from the date
of such discovery and consequent upon such reporting, such newly
discovered minerals (except coal minerals, atomic minerals and beach
sand mineral) are deemed to have been included in the high
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting
licence, as the case may be. The proviso to the said item provides
that in case of high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence,
only major minerals other than iron ore, bauxite, limestone, coal
minerals or other bulk minerals may be included in the licence;
(j) take immediate measures, in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government, to restore, as far as possible and at least to
the extent given in the exploration plan or prospecting plan, the areas
in which prospecting operations have been conducted, including
replacement of soil cover, removal of contaminants and pollutants
introduced during prospecting operations, restoration of local flora
and water regimes in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government; (k) pay to the person holding occupation rights of the
surface of the land such compensation as may be notified; (l) obtain
clearance from the Central Government in the Ministry of Defence, in
case the Defence establishments are situated in the area proposed for
exploration; and (m) comply with such other conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.

435
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting licence may
contain such other general conditions which are as follows, namely,—
(a) compensation for damage to land in respect of which the licence
has been granted; (b) indemnity to Government against the claims of
a third party for any damage, injury or disturbance caused to him by
the licensee; (c) restrictions regarding felling of trees on occupied and
unreserved Government land; (d) restrictions on prospecting operations
in any area prohibited by any competent authority; (e) operations in
a reserved or protected forest; (f) entry on occupied land; (g) facilities
to be given by the licensee for working other minerals in the licence
area or adjacent areas; and (h) filing of civil suits or petitions relating
to disputes arising out of the area under the high technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting licence to
ensure compliance with the conditions of the licence and the licence
holder shall comply with such directions.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government
in case of coal minerals and the Indian Bureau of Mines in case of
other major minerals or the State Directorate may issue directions to
a holder of a high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence
or a prospecting licence to ensure compliance with the conditions of
the licence and the licence holder shall comply with such conditions.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that before grant of a high-
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or prospecting
licence, the applicant shall deposit a sum equal to the licence fee as
security for the first year and in case of breach of any condition
imposed on any holder of a high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or a prospecting licence by or under this Act, the
State Government may, by order in writing, suspend, curtail or cancel
the licence and may forfeit, in whole or part, the amount deposited
by the licensee. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no
such order shall be made without issuing a notice to the licensee to
show cause and giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in case of
land in which the minerals vest in a private person, the State
Government shall afford such person an opportunity of being heard
and may issue directions to him to suspend, curtail or revoke the
mineral concession or forfeit the security in accordance with the terms
and conditions thereof.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in every case where a
part or all of the security deposit has been forfeited, the licensee shall
furnish security to make up the deficiency before recommencing
operations under the licence.

436
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that any amount deposited
as security, in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (4), shall
unless forfeited, be returned to the licensee at the end of six months
after the expiry or termination of the licence, as the case may be. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in case the return of the
security or such part thereof as may be payable takes place more
than thirty days after the expiry of the said period of six months, a
simple interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum shall be payable
by the State Government for the period beyond thirty days.
Clause 22.—This clause relates to the procedure for grant of high-
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and prospecting
licence.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that applications for grant
of a high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or
prospecting licence in respect of any land in which minerals vest in
the Government shall be made to the State Government concerned in
such form and manner, along with such fee and earnest money as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall acknowledge the receipt of the application and the same shall
be recorded in a register in such manner, as may be prescribed by
the Central Government, which shall be open to public for inspection
in such manner as may be specified by it.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall consider only such applications as are eligible in accordance
with the provisions under this Act and the rules made thereunder
and refuse all ineligible applications for reasons to be communicated
to the applicants. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the
applications received later to the first eligible application in respect of
an area shall not be considered till disposal of all applications received
earlier and communication to the applicants of the reasons for the
disposal. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in
case of grant of prospecting licence, such applications shall also be
subject to the provisions of sub-clause (7).
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that except in the case of
applications for prospecting licences received in response to a
notification under sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of this Act, the State
Government shall grant the high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence in respect of the land to the
first applicant eligible under this Act and the rules made thereunder

437
and all other applicants be deemed to have been refused to the extent
of the area granted to the first applicant. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that in case of prospecting licence, such applications
shall also be subject to the provisions of sub-clause (7).
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in all cases where the
State Government refuses an application and proceeds to consider a
subsequent application, it shall communicate the reasons therefor. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no application shall be
refused,— (a) without communicating the grounds and giving the
applicant an opportunity to represent within a reasonable period of
not less than thirty days; and (b) on grounds of incomplete material
particulars in the application, without requiring the applicant to supply
the requisite documents or information.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that in case of grant of
prospecting licence, the application shall not be refused on the ground
that other applications have been received for grant of non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence or high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence in the area applied.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that in case of grant of
prospecting licence, the application of a person eligible under this
Act, made within six months of completion of reconnaissance
operations under a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence held by him
or held by his predecessor-in-interest has the first right to the exclusion
of other applications notwithstanding anything in sub-clauses (3) and
(4) to the contrary and where there is more than one such application
for the same land, the application received later shall not be considered
till disposal of all applications received earlier and communication of
reasons for the disposal, and the State Government shall grant the
licence to the earliest applicant eligible for the licence. The explanation
to the said sub-clause provides that the person who intends to invest
in reconnaissance operations, directly or by acquiring the
reconnaissance data shall have the legitimate expectation that his
investment will enable him to acquire prospecting rights to the
exclusion of a person who makes no such investment.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that grant of every high-
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence or a prospecting
licence shall be notified in the Official Gazette and in the official
website of the State Government.
Clause 23.—This clause relates to the issue of notification where
prospecting operations are to be undertaken by the Geological Survey
of India, etc.

438
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where a reconnaissance
or prospecting operation in respect of lands in which minerals vest in
the Government is to be undertaken by the Geological Survey of
India, the Atomic Minerals Directorate, the State Directorate, the
Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited, the Singareni Collieries
Limited or the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited, the Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute Limited or such other agencies as may
be notified in this behalf, under clause 4, the State Government shall
issue a notification giving details of the area, and the period for which
the reconnaissance or the prospecting operations are to be undertaken.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that such period shall not
be for more than six years.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the agency undertaking
prospecting operation shall make a report for every six months of its
progress of reconnaissance or prospecting in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and submit the reconnaissance
or prospecting report and the geological study, pre-feasibility study
or feasibility study, as the case may be, to the State Government at
the end of the reconnaissance or prospecting operations in such
manner and such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government
may revoke a notification issued under sub-clause (1), if the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations have been completed before
the expiry of the period stated in the notification.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall not entertain any application for grant of any non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence or high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence or prospecting licence or mining lease to any person
for an area or part thereof in relation to which a notification has been
issued under sub-clause (1), for the period that the notification is in
operation, and such application is deemed never to have been made.
Clause 24.—This clause relates to the conditions of a mining lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every mining lease for
a major mineral or a minor mineral shall be subject to the fulfilment
of the following conditions, namely,— (a) all mining operations shall
be in accordance with a mining plan prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; (b) the lessee
shall report to the State Government, the discovery of any mineral in
the leased area not specified in the lease for which rights vest in the

439
Government, within a period of sixty days of such discovery; (c) if
any mineral not specified in the lease is discovered in the leased
area, the lessee shall not win and dispose of such mineral unless
such mineral is included in the lease or a separate lease is obtained
therefor; (d) the lessee shall pay to the State Government in case of
land in which minerals vest in the State Government and to the person
in whom the minerals vest in other cases, for every year or part
thereof, except the first year of the lease, yearly dead rent at the rate
specified in the Third Schedule of the Act subject to the provisions of
clause 42 of the Act. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
if the lease or licence relates to the working of more than one mineral
in the same area, the State Government or the person in whom the
minerals vest in other cases, as the case may be, shall not charge
separate dead rent in respect of each mineral. The proviso to the said
sub-clause further provides that the lessee shall be liable to pay the
dead rent or royalty in respect of each mineral whichever is higher
in amount but not both; (e) the lessee shall also pay, for the surface
area used by him for the purposes of mining operations, surface rent
and water rate at such rate, as may be prescribed by the
State Government; (f) the lessee shall furnish the following in such
manner and in such period as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, namely,— (i) all geological, geochemical and
geophysical and hydrological data relating to the leased area collected
by him during the course of operations to the Indian Bureau of Mines
and the State Directorate and in case of coal minerals to the Central
Government; (ii) all information pertaining to investigations of atomic
minerals collected by him during the course of mining operations to
the Atomic Minerals Directorate; (g) the lessee shall commence mining
operations within a period of two years from the date of execution of
the lease and thereafter conduct such operations in a scientific, skillful
and workman-like manner. The explanation to the said sub-clause
provides that mining operations shall include the erection of machinery,
laying of a tramway or construction of a road in connection with the
working of the mine; (h) the lessee shall,— (i) at his own expense,
erect and at all times maintain and repair boundary marks and pillars
necessary to indicate the demarcation shown in the plan annexed to
the lease; (ii) not carry on, or allow to be carried on, any mining
operations at any point within a distance of fifty metres from any
railway line, except under and in accordance with the written
permission of the railway administration concerned or under or
beneath any ropeway or ropeway trestle or station, except under and
in accordance with the written permission of the authority owning
the ropeway or from any reservoir, canal or other public works, or
buildings, except under and in accordance with the previous

440
permission of the State Government; (iii) strengthen and support, to
the satisfaction of the railway administration concerned or the
State Government, as the case may be, any part of the mine which in
its opinion requires such strengthening or support for the safety of
any railway, reservoir, canal, roads or any other public works or
buildings; (i) the lessee shall keep accurate and correct accounts
showing the quantity and other particulars of all minerals obtained
and dispatched from the mine, the number and nationality of the
persons employed therein, and complete plans of the mine, and allow
any officer authorised by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be in this behalf, by general or
special order, to examine at any time any accounts, plans and records
maintained by him and furnish the Central or the State Government,
as the case may be, with such information and returns as it or any
officer authorised by it in this behalf may require; (j) the lessee shall
keep in such manner and in respect of such matters as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, accurate records of all trenches,
pits and drillings made by him in the course of mining operations
carried on by him under the lease, and allow any officer authorised
by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be, in this behalf by general or special order to inspect the same;
(k) the lessee shall allow any officer authorised by the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in
this behalf by general or special order to enter upon any building,
excavation or land comprised in the lease for the purpose of inspecting
the same; (l) the lessee shall carry on his operations in accordance
with the approved mining plan and take immediate measures in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government to restore,
as far as possible and at least to the extent given in the mining plan,
the areas in which mining operations have been conducted, including
replacement of soil cover, removal of contaminants and pollutants
introduced during mining operations, restoration of local flora, and
water regimes in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government; (m) the lessee shall pay to the District Mineral
Foundation such amount as specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 43;
(n) the lessee shall deposit with the State Government in case of
major minerals that vest in the Government, an amount calculated at
the rate of rupees one lakh per hectare of the lease area payable in
equal instalments over the mining plan period as security for due
observance of the terms and conditions of the lease. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that the Central Government may from
time to time, by notification, vary the amount of the deposit in respect
of leases granted after such notification. The proviso to the said
sub-clause further provides that in case the mineral vests in a person

441
other than the Government, such person shall require to deposit such
sum not less than the rate specified in the first proviso. The proviso
to the said sub-clause also provides that in case of small deposits the
lessee shall be required to pay security deposit for the broken up
area, mineral storage and waste and over-burden area in the mining
lease as per the rate prescribed by the Central Government in this
sub-clause. The proviso to the said sub-clause also provides that in
the case of minor minerals the deposit shall be such as may be notified
by the State Government and the provisions of this clause apply
mutatis mutandis  to minor minerals; (o) the lessee shall set up a
grievance redressal mechanism in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, to address concerns of persons affected
by mining operations in accordance with the requirements of the
Sustainable Development Framework in terms of clause 46; (p) the
lessee shall comply with such other conditions as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Indian Bureau of
Mines or the State Directorate may issue directions to a lessee to
ensure compliance with the conditions of the lease and the lessee
shall comply with such directions.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that if the lessee does not
allow entry or inspection in respect of any matter covered under
sub-clause (1), or does not comply with directions issued under
sub-clause (2) where it relates to land in which minerals vest in the
Government, the State Government shall give notice in writing to the
lessee requiring him to show cause within such time as may be
specified in the notice, which is not less than two days and not more
than fifteen days, as to why the lease not be determined and his
security deposit forfeited, and if the lessee fails to show cause within
the aforesaid time to the satisfaction of the State Government, in
respect of land in which mineral vest in the Government, the State
Government may determine the lease and forfeit the whole or part of
the security deposit. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
in respect of any land in which the minerals vest in a person other
than the Government, the Government may, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to such person, direct him to determine
the lease and forfeit the whole or part of the security deposit.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that if the lessee makes any
default in the payment of royalty as required under clause 41 or
payment of dead rent as required under clause 42 or payment of
compensation to the District Mineral Foundation as required under

442
clause 43 or payment of cess as required under clause 45 or clause 46
or commits a breach of any of the conditions specified in sub-clause
(1), the State Government shall give a show cause notice to the lessee
requiring him to pay the royalty or dead rent or payment of
compensation to District Mineral Foundation or cess, as the case may
be, along with interest at the rate of fifteen per cent per annum or
remedy the breach, as the case may be, within a period of thirty days
from the date of the receipt of the notice and if the royalty or dead
rent or payment of compensation to District Mineral Foundation or
cess is not duly paid along with the interest or the breach is not
remedied within the said period, the State Government in case the
minerals vest in it, may without prejudice to any other proceedings
that may be taken against him, determine the lease and forfeit the
whole or part of the security deposit. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that in respect of land where the minerals vest in
a person other than the Government, the Government may, after giving
an opportunity of being heard to such person, direct him to determine
the lease and forfeit the whole or part of the security deposit.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in every case where
part or all of the security has been forfeited the lessee shall furnish
security to make up the deficiency before recommencing operations.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that any amount deposited
as security deposit in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (4)
shall, unless forfeited, be returned to the lessee at the end of the six
months period after the expiry or termination of the lease. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that in case the return of the security
deposit or such part thereof as may be payable takes place more than
thirty days after the expiry of the six months period, simple interest
at the rate of six per cent. per annum shall be payable for the period
beyond thirty days.
Clause 25.—This clause relates to the procedure for grant of mining
lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the mining lease in
respect of land in which minerals vest in the Government shall, except
in case where a mining lease is granted in accordance with the
provisions of sub-clause (5) of clause 13, be granted only on application
made by a person who has held a high-technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence or a prospecting licence for the area and no
other applications shall be entertained in this regard.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall acknowledge the receipt of the application and the same shall
be registered in a register in such manner, as may be prescribed by

443
the Central Government, which shall be open to public for inspection
in such manner as may be specified by it.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the application of a
person, eligible under this Act, made within six months of completion
of operations under a high-technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence held by him or held by his predecessor-
in-interest shall be approved for grant of mining lease subject to
eligibility and the fulfilment of general conditions as may be prescribed
by the Central Government, and such special conditions as specified
under sub-clause (3) of clause 13. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that in case such application for mining lease is rejected, no
other application shall be considered and the area shall be notified
for grant of mineral concession under sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (5)
of clause 13, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that in every case of an
approval for grant of mining lease under sub-clause (3), the State
Government shall issue a letter of intent to the applicant enabling
him to obtain the statutory approvals and clearances necessary for
the execution of the lease deed.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that grant of every lease
shall be notified in the Official Gazette and in the official website of
the State Government.
Clause 26.—This clause relates to the mining operations to be in
accordance with mining plan.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act and rules made thereunder, mining operations shall be
undertaken in accordance with a mining plan, prepared for the entire
leased area in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, which may include scientific methods of mining
within a Sustainable Development Framework, beneficiation and
economic utilisation and induction of technology to ensure extraction
and best utilisation of the run of the mine. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that a mining Plan shall not be required in respect
of such minor minerals as are notified for the purpose by the
State Government in consultation with the Indian Bureau of Mines.
The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in respect of
any minor mineral for which a mining plan is not required, the
State Government, in consultation with the Indian Bureau of Mines,
shall prescribe a framework with which mining operations be carried
out and the mining framework deemed to be in the nature of a

444
general directions issued under clause 46 of this Act. The proviso to
the said sub-clause also provides that for the purposes of clause 12,
and clause 24, the framework shall be deemed to be the mining plan.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that on acceptance of an
application for a mining lease, and before the execution of the lease,
the applicant shall cause to be prepared and approved a mining plan
for the entire area proposed to be granted for lease in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the generality of the provisions of the mining plan, there shall be
attached to the mining plan in respect of all major minerals, a
corporate social responsibility document, comprising of a scheme for
annual expenditure by the lessee on socio-economic activities in and
around the mine area for the benefit of the host population in the
Panchayats adjoining the lease area and for enabling and facilitating
self employment opportunities, for such population, and the lease
holder shall, at the end of each financial year, publish in his annual
report and display on the website, the activities undertaken during
the year and the expenditure incurred thereon.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that no mining plan shall
be approved, unless it is prepared by a qualified person or firm or
other association of persons empanelled in this behalf in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that no person shall be
empanelled for purposes of sub-clause (4) unless he,— (a) is qualified
as a mining engineer or geologist; (b) has fulfilled the requisite
experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government; and
(c) meets such other requirements as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in order to further the objective of scientific mining. The
provisos to the said sub-clause provides that the Central Government
may prescribe different eligibility conditions and other condition of
accreditation for different grades of persons or companies based on
the nature and quality of expertise .
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the mining plan for
major minerals shall, except in case of coal minerals and atomic
minerals, be approved by officers of the Indian Bureau of Mines,
authorised by general orders in this behalf by the Controller General,
and for minor minerals the plan shall be approved by officers of the
State Directorate authorised in this behalf, by the general order of the
State Government.

445
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the Central
Government may, on being satisfied that the State Directorate possesses
the necessary technical and management capability as may be
prescribed, empower the State Directorate to grant approvals for such
major minerals and in such circumstances as may be specified in the
notification. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that
in case the Central Government, at any time, is of the opinion that
the State Directorate does not possess the requisite technical and
management capability, it may suspend or revoke the power granted
and may direct it to be exercised by officers of the Indian Bureau of
Mines in accordance with the provisions of this sub-clause.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved
by the approval or refusal under sub-clause (6) in respect of a mining
plan for major minerals other than coal and atomic minerals, may
apply to the Controller General, the Indian Bureau of Mines, for
reversal or modification of such an order and the Controller General
may confirm, modify or set aside the order or direction in respect of
the mining plan.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved
by the order or direction under sub-clause (6) in respect of a mining
plan or a framework for minor minerals may apply to the Director of
the State Directorate for cancellation or modification of such an order
and the Director may confirm, modify or set aside the order or
direction in respect of the mining plan or framework, as the case
may be.
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that no person shall conduct
mining operations in any area except in accordance with a mining
plan as approved under this Act.
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that the Controller General
or authorised officer of the Indian Bureau of Mines or the officer
authorised in this behalf by the State Directorate, as the case may be,
may require the holder of a mining lease to make such modifications
in the mining plan or impose such conditions as may be considered
necessary by an order in writing if such modifications or imposition
of conditions are considered necessary,— (a) in the light of the
experience of operation of mining plan; and (b) in view of the change
in the technological environment.
Sub-clause (11) of this clause provides that in respect of coal
minerals and atomic minerals, the provisions of this clause shall be
applied mutatis mutandis  by the Central Government.

446
Clause 27.—This clause relates to the rights of a lessee.
This clause provides that subject to the provisions of this Act or
any law for the time being in force, the lessee with respect to the
land leased to him shall have the right for the purpose of mining
operations on that land, to — (a) work the mines; (b) sink pits and
shafts and construct buildings and roads; (c) erect plant and machinery;
(d) quarry and obtain building material and road materials and make
bricks; (e) use water and take timber; (f) use land for stacking purpose;
(g) install fuel pumps or stations for diesel or petrol for own use;
(h) construct magazine for explosives, and storage sheds for explosive
related substances with permission from the licensing authority
concerned; (i) store overburden material in areas identified for the
purpose; (j) divert public roads, overhead electric lines passing through
the lease area, to facilitate scientific mining, and; (k) do any other
thing as specified in the lease.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to the extension of mining lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that an application for the
extension of a mining lease shall be made in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government through such officer or authority
as it may specify in this behalf, or the person in whom the minerals
vest, as the case may be, at least twenty four months before the date
on which the lease is due to expire.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the extension of a lease
which was granted with the prior approval of the Central Government
shall be extended with the prior approval of the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that an application for
extension made under sub-clause (1) shall be disposed of by the
authority competent to grant a lease for the mineral within twelve
months from the date of receipt of the application and the provisions
of sub-clauses (4), (5) and (6) of clause 14 shall, mutatis mutandis ,
apply to applications for extension. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that before granting approval for a second or subsequent
extension of a mining lease, in respect of land in which minerals vest
in the Government, the State Government shall seek a report from
the Indian Bureau of Mines in respect of major minerals other than
coal and atomic minerals and the State Directorate in the case of
minor minerals, as to whether it is in the interest of mineral
development to grant the extension of the mining lease. The proviso
to the said sub-clause further provides that in case a report is not
received from the Indian Bureau of Mines within a period of three

447
months of receipt of the communication from the State Government,
it would be deemed that the Indian Bureau of Mines has no objection
to the grant of extension of the mining lease.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that if an application for the
extension of a mining lease made within the time referred to in sub-
clause (1) is not disposed off by the State Government before the
date of expiry of the lease, the period of the lease shall be deemed
to have been extended till the State Government passes an order
thereon or the person in whom the minerals vest communicates his
approval or rejection of the application, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by an order condone the delay in an application for extension
of mining lease made after the time limit specified in sub-clause (1)
if the application has been made before the expiry of the lease and
there are sufficient reasons, to be recorded in writing, to condone the
delay, and the provisions of sub-clause (4) shall be applicable in such
case.
Clause 29.—This clause relates to the lapsing of leases and revival.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this clause, in respect of land in which the minerals vest in the
Government, where mining operations are not commenced within a
period of two years from the date of execution of the lease, or
discontinued for a continuous period of two years after the
commencement of such operations, the State Government may after
issuing a notice to the lease holder to show cause and giving him an
opportunity of being heard, declare that the lease has lapsed and
without prejudice to the foregoing, the State Government on being
satisfied that the lessee did not show due diligence, may also declare
him to be in breach of the conditions of such lease and, therefore,
ineligible for consideration under sub-clause (3) of clause 20 or sub-
clause (3) of clause 22 or sub-clause (3) of clause 25, as the case may
be, for such period not exceeding five years as may be specified,
having regard to the nature of the breach.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a lessee who is unable
to commence the mining operations within a period of two years
from the date of execution of the mining lease, or discontinues mining
operations for a period exceeding two years for reasons beyond his
control, may, at least three months before the expiry of such period,
seek extension of period for commencing or recommencing mining
operations, as the case may be, and the State Government on being

448
satisfied the adequacy and genuineness of the reasons for non-
commencement of mining operations or discontinuance thereof, pass
an order condoning the period of delay in commencement or
recommencement of the mining operations, as the case may be. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that such an order shall be
passed by the State Government within a period of three months
from the date of receipt of the application.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a lessee who is unable
to commence the mining operations within a period of two years
from the date of execution of the mining lease, or discontinues mining
operations for a period of exceeding two years for reasons beyond
his control, may within a period of six months from the date of its
lapse, seek revival of the lease and the State Government on being
satisfied about the adequacy of the reasons for non-commencement of
mining operations or discontinuance, may pass an order reviving the
lease. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that such an order
shall be passed within a period of six months from the date of making
an application for revival. The proviso to the said sub-clause further
provides that the lease has not been revived earlier under this
sub-clause for more than twice during the entire period of the lease.
The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that in respect of
coal, atomic minerals and beach sand minerals, prior approval of the
Central Government shall be obtained before orders are issued under
this clause.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the manner, the
procedures for condonation of delay and the reasons for
commencement or recommencement in respect of matters specified in
sub-clauses (2) and (3) shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved
by an order, passed by the State Government under sub-clause (3) of
this clause provides that clauses (1), (2) or (3) or by failure of the
State Government to pass an order within the sub-clause (3) of this
clause provides that period specified therein, may apply to the
National Mining Tribunal or State Mining Tribunal, as the case may
be, and the Tribunal concerned may issue appropriate direction.
Clause 30.—This clause relates to the determination of lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a lessee shall not
determine the lease except after notice in writing of not less than
twelve calendar months to the State Government or to such officer, or

449
the authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf in
respect of land in which minerals vest with the Government and to
the person in whom the minerals vest in other cases, in accordance
with the terms and conditions of the mineral concession. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that where a lessee, holding a mining
lease for a mineral or for a group of minerals, applies for the surrender
of the lease or part area thereof or any mineral from the lease on the
ground that deposits of that mineral have since exhausted or depleted
to such an extent that it is no longer economical to work the mineral,
he shall give notice of not less than six months and the State
Government or the person in whom the minerals vest, as the case
may be, may permit the lessee to surrender that lease or part area
thereof or minerals, as the case may be, subject to conditions as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that in every case where a
lease is determined or surrendered under sub-clause (1) the lessee at
his own cost prepare and implement a Final Mine Closure Plan in
accordance with the provisions of clause 32 and shall close the mine
or part thereof in accordance with the provisions of clause 33.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in respect of any land
in which the minerals vest in the Government, in the event of breach
of any of the conditions of the lease, the State Government may by
an order, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the lessee,
determine the lease or forfeit in whole or in part, the amount deposited
as security by the lessee, and in case the lease is determined shall
direct the lessee to prepare and implement a Final Mine Closure Plan
in accordance with the provisions of the clauses 32 and 33, and in
the event of his failure to do so, may prepare and implement the
Plan at the cost of the lessee.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that where it appears to the
Central Government, upon any investigation conducted by a Central
Government agency under the National Investigation Agency Act, 2009
or any other law for the time being in force, that the mining activities
in any area under lease is related to or aiding or abetting organised
crime or anti-national activities of outlawed or insurrectionist
organisations or that such mining activities is prejudicial to the national
security, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct the State
Government to determine mining lease and the State Government
shall determine the lease forthwith, and shall issue a direction to the
person in whom the minerals vest in all other cases, to determine the
lease.

450
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in respect of any land
in which the minerals vests in a private person where the lease is
determined due to breach of any of the conditions of the lease, such
person shall prepare and implement the Final Mine Closure Plan at
his cost.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved
by an order, made under sub-clause (3) or sub-clause (4), may apply
to the National Mining Tribunal in respect of an order issued by the
Central Government or an order issued by the State Government, as
the case may be, in respect of major mineral, and to the State Mining
Tribunal in respect of minor mineral, and the National Mining Tribunal
or the State Mining Tribunal, as the case may be, may after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the party, confirm, modify or set aside
the order.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to the premature termination of
lease.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where the State
Government is of the opinion that it is in the public interest or in the
interest of public safety to do so, it may for reasons to be recorded
in writing make an order of premature termination of the mining
lease in case the minerals vest in the Government, and issue a direction
to this effect to the person in whom the minerals vest in other cases.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no premature
termination of a mining lease shall be made without giving the lessee
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that in every case of
premature termination of a lease, made under sub-clause (1), the State
Government shall, having regard to the nature of the loss caused to
the lessee, compensate the lessee in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a person aggrieved by
an order under sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (2) may apply to the
National Mining Tribunal in case of major minerals and the State
Mining Tribunal in case of minor minerals, for revision, modification
or cancellation of such order, and the National Mining Tribunal or
the State Mining Tribunal, as the case may be, may pass such order
as may be appropriate.
Clause 32.—This clause relates to the Mine Closure Plan.

451
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every mining lease shall
have a Mine Closure Plan prepared in terms of a Sustainable
Development Framework, which shall consist of:— (i) a progressive
mine closure plan for each mine; and (ii) a Final Mine Closure Plan.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every Mine Closure
Plan shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of the
authority competent to approve such a Plan, and also in the office of
the Panchayat having jurisdiction and such other places as may be
notified.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a Progressive Mine
Closure Plan shall be prepared for each mine for a period of five
years at a time commencing with the period of the lease, and for
every period of five years thereafter, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that the Progressive Mine Closure Plan shall include
details of closure, rehabilitation and restoration activities proposed to
be carried out in the five year period and the projected investments
in this respect, except in the case of the first Progressive Mine Closure
Plan, the details of activities actually carried out and the expenditure
incurred in each of the preceding Progressive Closure Plans.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the lessee shall submit
the Progressive Mine Closure Plan to the Indian Bureau of Mines and
the State Directorate in the case of major minerals other than coal
and atomic minerals, to the Coal Controller in case of coal minerals,
and to the Atomic Minerals Directorate in case of atomic minerals,
and to the State Directorate in the case of minor minerals and a copy
thereof shall be sent to the Panchayats of the area: The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that in respect of a mining lease for a minor
mineral for which a mining plan has been dispensed with under sub-
clause (1) of clause 26, the State Government in consultation with the
Indian Bureau of Mines may, having regard to the nature of the
mineral, exempt any such lease from preparing a Mine Closure Plan,
subject to suitable provision in the mining framework in respect of
that mineral in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and the mining framework shall be deemed to be the
Progressive Mine Closure Plan and the Final Mine Closure Plan for
the purposes of this Act.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the Indian Bureau of
Mines or the Coal Controller or the Atomic Mineral Directorate, or
the State Directorate as the case may be shall, after consulting the
concerned Panchayats convey its approval or disapproval to the

452
Progressive Mine Closure Plan within a period of ninety days from
its receipt. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in case
the approval or disapproval is not communicated within the said
period, the Progressive Mine Closure Plan shall be deemed to have
been approved on a provisional basis till such approval or disapproval
is conveyed.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that no mining operation
shall be carried out in a mine in respect of which a Progressive Mine
Closure Plan has not been approved, or in a manner contrary to the
approved Progressive Mine Closure Plan. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that the authority responsible for approving the
Progressive Mine Closure Plan may at any time inspect the mining
operations to satisfy itself in this regard, and may issue any direction
necessary to ensure compliance to the provisions of the Plan.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that a Final Mine Closure
Plan shall be prepared for lease area in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and approved by the authority
competent to approve the Progressive Mine Closure Plan in respect of
the mine.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the generality of this clause, the Final Mine Closure Plan shall be
based on the land use planned for the lease area after its closure, and
shall include measures to reduce hazards, improve productivity and
ensure that it supports the needs of the host population. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that the land use planned for the
mining lease area after the closure of mine shall be decided in
consultation with the Panchayats having jurisdiction, in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that the Final Mine Closure
Plan shall be revised for every five years having regard to the progress
of mining operations and be submitted along with every Progressive
Mine Closure Plan.
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that the Final Mine Closure
Plan for the last five year period of the lease shall be approved with
such modification as may be specified by the authority approving the
Progressive Mine Closure Plan after consultation with the Panchayat
concerned, within a period of one year. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that in the case where the lease is extended under
the provisions of sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Act, the lessee shall
submit a Progressive Mine Closure Plan for the next five years in

453
accordance with the provisions of this Act along with a Final Mine
Closure Plan in accordance with the provisions of this clause and the
last five years shall be reckoned with reference to the extended period.
Sub-clause (11) of this clause provides that the manner of
preparation and implementation of the Mine Closure Plan for coal
minerals and atomic minerals shall be such as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
Sub-clause (12) of this clause provides that every progressive and
Final Mine Closure Plan shall be prepared by an accredited person or
association of persons or a company in terms of a Sustainable
Development Framework notified by the Central Government.
Clause 33.—This clause relates to the closure of mines.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the lessee shall not
determine the lease or part thereof unless a Final Mine Closure Plan,
approved by the Indian Bureau of Mines in respect of major minerals
other than coal minerals and atomic minerals, or any authority as
may be designated by the Central Government in respect of coal
minerals or atomic minerals, or the State Directorate in respect of
minor minerals, as the case may be is duly implemented by the lessee.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that for the purposes of
sub-clause (1), the lessee shall be required to obtain a certificate from
the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the
authority as may be designated by the Central Government in respect
of coal minerals or the State Directorate in respect of minor minerals,
as the case may be, to the effect that protective, reclamation, restoration
and rehabilitation work in accordance with the approved Mine Closure
Plan or with such modifications as approved by the competent
authority have been carried out by the lessee.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that in every case where a
lessee has made default in implementing a progressive Mine Closure
Plan, the State Government may by an order suspend the mining
operation till the default is remedied and may demand additional
security so as to ensure deposit of security to the extent of the
maximum specified under sub-clause (1) of clause 24 for the remaining
period of the lease, and for any or all other leases of the lessee for
reasons to be specified in a show cause notice, and in case the lessee
fails to show adequate cause, or fails to furnish the additional security,
as the case may be, within a reasonable period not exceeding thirty
days, the State Government may determine the lease in respect of
which such security was not furnished.

454
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that if the lessee makes
default in implementing the Final Mine Closure Plan or abandons a
mine, without prejudice to any action under clause 53, the State
Government may after serving a notice to the lessee, cause the plan
to be implemented by such other authority as it may direct, at the
cost of the lessee, that the lease may be determined in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the lessee shall
be declared to be ineligible for the purpose of any mineral concessions
under this Act.
Clause 34.—This clause relates to the applications for mineral
concession in case minerals vest with private persons.
This clause provides that applications for mineral concessions in
respect of any mineral which vest exclusively in a person other than
the Government shall be made to such person and all mineral
concessions be granted subject to the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder.
Clause 35.— This clause relates to the mineral concessions to be in
the form of a registered deed:
This clause provides that a mineral concessions granted in
accordance with the provisions of clause 34 shall be in the form of a
registered deed executed by the parties on such terms and conditions
as may be agreed, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder, and an authenticated copy of the deed
shall be deposited by the person granted the mineral concession with
the State Government and the Indian Bureau of Mines before
commencing operations. The proviso to the said clause provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in such deed to the contrary, it
shall be lawful for the State Government to issue any direction to the
leaseholder or to the person in whom the minerals vest, in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
Clause 36.— This clause relates to the cases where minerals vest
partly with Government.
This clause provides that in respect of lands where minerals vest
partly in the Government and partly with a private person, the
provisions of this Act shall apply in the same manner as they apply
in respect of land where minerals vest exclusively with the
Government. The proviso to the said clause provides that the dead
rent and royalty payable in respect of minerals which vest partly in
Government and partly in private person shall be shared by the
Government and by that person in proportion to the share they have
in the minerals.

455
Clause 37.—This clause relates to the reservation of areas for
conservation of mineral resources.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
with the prior approval of the Central Government, or the Central
Government after consultation with the State Government, may reserve
for purposes of mineral conservation any area not already held under
a high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, a
prospecting licence or mining lease, and shall notify the reservation
specifying the reasons and the period of reservation shall be for a
period of not less than ten years. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that the period may be extended from time to time in the
public interest, for such period as may be notified by the Central
Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no application for
mineral concession shall be entertained in respect of an area reserved
under sub-clause (1), and any such application is deemed to have
never been made.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that an area reserved for
purposes of mineral conservation shall not be used for such purposes
during the period of the reservation that is contrary to the object of
such reservation.
Clause 38.— This clause relates to the saving of already reserved
areas.
This clause provides that subject to the provisions of clause 37,
all areas reserved under the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957, as it stood before its repeal, and the rules
made thereunder shall continue to be reserved under this Act for a
period of ten years from the date of commencement of this Act or up
to the date specified in such reservation order, whichever is earlier.
Clause 39.—This clause relates to the expiry and revocation of
reservation.
This clause provides that on the expiry of the period of reservation
under clause 37 or clause 38, or such earlier date as may be notified
by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be, an area reserved under clause 37 or clause 38, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be available for grant of the mineral concessions
after a lapse of thirty days or from such earlier date as may be
notified for the purpose.

456
Clause 40.—This clause relates to the conservation of mineral.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where the Central
Government is of the opinion that any mineral or a particular grade
of mineral needs to be conserved in view of its strategic value, it
may, by notification, ban the grant of mineral concession in respect of
that mineral or a particular grade of mineral or impose such
restrictions on grant of mineral concessions for operations of such
concession in the manner as may be specified in the said notification.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that such a ban or
restriction shall not apply in respect of applications for grant of mining
leases under sub-clause (3) of clause 25.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the notification referred
to in sub-clause (1) shall be for a period of not less than ten years.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may renew the notification as referred to in sub-clause (1) for a further
period not less than ten years.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to the Royalty payable in respect
of minerals.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that  t he holder of a mining
lease, whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act
shall, notwithstanding anything in the instrument of lease or in any
other law for the time being in force, pay royalty in respect of any
mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager,
employee or contractor from the leased area.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that  t he rate of royalty in
respect of major minerals shall be such as specified in the Second
Schedule to this Act. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
the concessional rates of royalty may be specified for such cases where
the lessee beneficiates the mineral at the ore stage.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, after taking into consideration the report and recommendations
of the National Mining Regulatory Authority, by notification, amend
the Second Schedule to enhance or reduce the rate specified therein
with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the Central
Government shall not enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any
major mineral more than once during any period of three years.

457
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by notification from time to time, declare the rate at which
royalty shall be payable in respect of minor minerals. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that the State Government shall not
enhance the rate of royalty in respect of a minor mineral more than
once during any period of three years.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, the provisions of sub-clause (1) shall
not apply to or in relation to mining leases granted before the
25th day of October, 1949, in respect of coal, but the
Central Government, if it is satisfied that it is expedient so to do,
may, by notification, direct that all or any of the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder apply to or in relation to such
leases subject to such exceptions and modifications, if any, as may be
specified in that notification.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to the dead rent payable by the
lessee.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the holder of a mining
lease, whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act,
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of lease
or in any other law for the time being in force, pay every year, dead
rent at such rate as may be specified, for all the areas included in the
instrument of lease.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where the holder of
such mining lease becomes liable under clause 41 to pay royalty for
any mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager,
employee or contractor from the leased area, he shall be liable to pay
either such royalty, or the dead rent in respect of that area, whichever
is higher.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the dead rent in respect
of mining leases for major minerals shall be as specified in the Third
Schedule and the Central Government may, after taking into
consideration the recommendations of the National Mining Regulatory
Authority, by notification, amend the Third Schedule so as to enhance
or reduce the rate at which the dead rent shall be payable in respect
of any area covered by a mining lease and such enhancement or
reduction take effect from such date as may be specified in the
notification. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the
Central Government shall not enhance the rate of the dead rent in
respect of any such area more than once during any period of three
years.

458
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
may by notification from time to time, declare the rate at which dead
rent shall be payable in respect of minor minerals. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that the State Government shall not enhance
the rate of the dead rent in respect of any such area more than once
during any period of three years. The proviso to the said sub-clause
further provides that in respect of such portion of a lease as is for
both major and minor minerals, dead rent if payable, shall be the
higher of the two dead rents.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that in order to encourage
mining of small deposits in cluster, dead rent for the area shall be
determined having regard to the actual area required for mining
purposes.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to the payment of compensation to
owner of surface, usufruct and traditional rights, damage, etc.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in respect of land in
which minerals vest in the Government, the holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration
licence or prospecting licence shall be liable to pay, to every person
holding occupation or usufruct or traditional rights of the surface of
the land over which the licence has been granted, such reasonable
annual compensation as may be mutually agreed between the holder
of such licence and such persons or in the absence of such agreement,
which may be determined by an officer appointed, by notification, by
the State Government in this behalf in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that such amount shall be determined before
commencement of operations and paid in advance each year, in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the holder of a mining
lease shall pay annually to the District Mineral Foundation, as referred
to in clause 56 — (a) in case of major minerals (except coal and
lignite) an amount equivalent to the royalty paid during the financial
year; (b) in case of coal and lignite, an amount equal to twenty-six
per cent. of the profit to be called as profit sharing percentage (after
deduction of tax paid) of the immediately preceding financial year
from mining related operations in respect of the lease; and (c) in case
of minor minerals, such amount as may be prescribed by the State
Government with the concurrence of the National Mining Regulatory
Authority referred to in clause 58, within such time and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government for the benefit
of persons or families affected by mining related operations.

459
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in respect of coal
minerals the Central Government may, after taking into consideration
the report and recommendations of the National Mining Regulatory
Authority, by notification, revise the profit sharing percentage, or
specify such other method as may be prescribed for calculation of
amount to be paid to the District Mineral Foundation. The proviso to
the said sub-clause further provides that in case where the holder of
a mining lease for major minerals has commenced mining related
operations but has not commenced production, the holder of a mining
lease shall pay into the District Mineral Foundation, an amount equal
to the royalty payable on the production estimated in the first twelve
months of the year as per the approved mining plan. It also provides
that in case the holder of a mining lease for major minerals (a) was
not in production for a part of a particular year, he shall be liable to
pay the amount in the second proviso on pro-rata basis for the period
during which he had not commenced any such operations;
(b) discontinues production for a part of a particular year, he shall be
liable to pay the amount equal to the royalty on actual production of
the corresponding period of the previous financial year.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything in sub-clause (2), and the Companies Act, 1956, or any other
law for the time being in force, where the holder of mining lease is
a company, it shall also allot at least one share at par for consideration
other than cash to each person of the family affected by mining related
operations of the company and such shares shall be non-transferable.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the articles of association
of the company referred to in sub-clause (3) shall contain provisions
enabling the company to allot shares in accordance with the provisions
of sub-clause (3).
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything in sub-clause (2) and sub-clause (3), the holder of a mining
lease shall, in respect of any person or family holding occupation or
usufruct or traditional rights of the surface of the land over which
the lease has been granted, be liable to provide employment or other
assistance in accordance with the rehabilitation and resettlement policy
of the State Government concerned.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the amount payable
under this clause shall be in addition to any other amount or
compensation payable to the person or family holding occupation or
usufruct or traditional rights of the surface of the land under any
other law for the time being in force.

460
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that after the termination of
a non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high technology reconnaissance-
cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence or a mining lease, the
State Government shall after giving the person or family holding
occupation or usufruct or traditional rights of the surface land an
opportunity of being heard, assess the damage, if any, done to the
land by the reconnaissance or prospecting or mining related operations
and determine the amount of compensation payable by the licensee
or the lessee, as the case may be, to the person or family holding
occupation rights of the surface land in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that in case the licensee or lessee and the person or
family holding occupation or usufruct or traditional rights mutually
agree on the compensation, and communicate the same to an officer
appointed by the State Government in this behalf, the State
Government may, accordingly , determine the compensation.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that in case,— (a) the licensee
fails to make payment to the persons holding occupation or usufruct
or traditional rights in terms of sub-clause (1), the State Government
may forfeit the security deposit and make payment therefrom, and
may recover any balance amount as provided in clause 118 of this
Act, and may also declare the licensee or lessee ineligible for the
purposes of any mineral concessions under this Act; (b) the lessee
fails to make payment to the District Mineral Foundation in terms of
sub-clause (2), the State Government may initiate necessary proceedings
to recover the arrears and may also take action against the lessee for
non-compliance of conditions of lease in accordance with the provisions
of sub-clause (4) of clause 24; (c) the lessee or the licensee, as the
case may be, fails to pay the compensation within three months of its
determination under clause 30, the State Government may on an
application made to it by the aggrieved person, either forfeit the
security deposit and make payment therefrom, or may recover the
amount as provided in clause 118 of this Act, and may also declare
the licensee or lessee ineligible for the purposes of any mineral
concessions under this Act.
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that where there is a dispute
as to whether a person or family holds occupation or usufruct or
traditional rights, the Collector of the District may after consulting
the Gram Sabha, or the Gram Panchayat or District Council, as the
case may be, make a determination which shall be final and binding
for the purposes of this Act.

461
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that (a) The State
Government shall cause identification of the person or families affected
by mining related operations before the commencement of such
operations, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government. (b) The amount of monetary benefit may be determined
by the State Government for each district where mining operations
are being undertaken having regard to the nature and extent to which
such person or family is affected by mining related operations and
for improving the quality of life of the affected person or family, but
shall be equal to an amount not less than the amount a family may
be entitled under the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that till the amount of monetary benefit shall be equal
to an amount that such as a family may be entitled under the
provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005. (c) The State Government shall ensure that
monetary benefits are distributed to the persons or families holding
occupational or usufruct or traditional rights in areas affected by
mining related operations through a mechanism prescribed by the
State Government. The proviso to the said item provides that in case
of a family which is not headed by a woman, the State Government
shall ensure that half the amount of monetary benefits distributed to
families in areas affected by mining operations shall accrue to the
eldest woman member of the family.
Sub-clause (11) of this clause provides that in case of mining leases
already granted on the date of commencement of this Act, the cut-off
date for identification of persons or families affected by mining related
operations shall be taken as first January nineteen hundred and ninety-
seven.
The explanation to the said sub-clause provides that (a) a “family”
shall comprise of mother, father and their children, including any
person wholly dependent on the head of the family, including any
lineal ascendant or descendant of the head of the family or the spouse;
and (b) a “family” may also be single member family.
Clause 44.—This clause relates to the levy and collection of cess
by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, by notification, specify, that there shall be levied and collected
a cess on major minerals for the purposes of this Act,— (a) as a duty
of customs, where the ore is exported; (b) as a duty of excise, where
the ore is sold or otherwise disposed to an end-user or to any other

462
person who in turn sells it to an end-user, or is used by the owner
of the mine in any end-use by himself, at such rate not exceeding ten
per cent. as may be specified in the notification by the Central
Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the
rate shall not be increased more than once during any period of five
years.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every cess leviable under
sub-clause (1) on major minerals shall be payable by the person by
whom such major minerals are produced, and in the case of export,
the cess shall be payable by the exporter.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the cess leviable under
sub-clause (1) on the major mineral shall be in addition to any cess
or duty leviable on those items under any other law for the time
being in force.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the provisions of the
Central Excise Act, 1944 and the rules made thereunder and the
provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules made thereunder,
as the case may be, including those relating to refunds and exemptions
from duties shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and
collection of cess leviable under this clause and for this purpose, the
provisions of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and of the Customs Act,
1962, as the case may be, shall have effect as if the aforesaid Acts
provided for the levy of cess on major minerals.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that every person or company
or firm or association of persons using or trading in or exporting or
stocking major minerals shall register himself or itself with the Indian
Bureau of Mines in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in case
of coal minerals, administration of registration shall be done by the
Central Government.
Clause 45.—This clause relates to the Levy and collection of cess
by the State Government.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by notification specify, that there shall be levied and collected a
cess on major minerals or minor minerals extracted at a rate not
exceeding ten per cent. of the royalty in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that the rate shall not be increased more than once
during any period of five years.

463
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the cess shall be paid
by the person holding the mining lease for major minerals or minor
minerals, as the case may be. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that where the minerals vest in a person other than the
Government, and the holder of the mining lease fails to pay the cess,
the person in whom the minerals vest shall, on demand, pay the
amount of the cess.
Clause 46.—This clause relates to the power of the Central
Government to issue directions in the interest of scientific mineral
exploration and mining and sustainable development.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall take all such steps as may be necessary for the conservation of
strategic mineral resources in the national interest and for the scientific
development and exploitation of all mineral resources.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Central Government
in order to facilitate the scientific development and exploration of
mineral resources and to ensure the protection of the environment
and prevention and control of pollution from prospecting and mining
related operations, shall cause to be developed a National Sustainable
Development Framework in consultation with the State Governments.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government
may with the previous approval of the Central Government frame a
State Sustainable Development Framework not inconsistent with the
National Sustainable Development Framework.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the National Sustainable
Development Framework shall contain guidelines enabling formulation
of project-level practices for sustainable mining, and include the
following, namely:— (i) specification of factors and parameters
influencing sustainable and scientific mining; (ii) broad criteria beyond
which mining may not be deemed sufficiently sustainable or
scientifically manageable; (iii) systemic measures needed to be taken
or built-in to increase sustainability of mining operations considering
its entire life cycle, inter alia — (a) ensuring minimal adverse impact
on quality of life of the local communities; (b) protecting interests of
affected persons including host population; (c) creating new
opportunities for socio-economic development including for sustainable
livelihood; (d) mineral conservation both in terms of mining
technologies or practices and mineral beneficiation; (e) reduction in
waste generation and related waste management practices and
promotion of recycling of materials; (f) minimising and mitigating

464
adverse environmental impacts particularly in respect of ground water
air, ambient noise and land; (g) ensuing minimal ecological disturbance,
in terms of bio-diversity, flora, fauna and habitat; (h) promoting
restoration and reclamation activities so as to make optimal use of
mined out land for the benefit of the local communities; (i) measurable
indicators of sustainable development; (j) consultative mechanisms with
stakeholder groups right from pre-mining stages through the life cycle
and up to post-closure stages to ensure that the stakeholder groups
involvement and participation in identifying and addressing the
sustainability issues; and (k) system of public disclosure of mining
related activities and environmental parameters including indicators
and mechanisms to facilitate formal and informal sustainability audits.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, from time to time notify guidelines for scientific mining and
mineral conservation with in a Sustainable Development Framework
and the State Directorate shall be responsible for implementation of
the Sustainable Development Framework in the State. The proviso to
this sub-clause provides that the State Government may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government confer all or any of the
functions of the State Directorate to any other specialised agency for
the purpose of better implementing of the Sustainable Development
Framework.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may issue general directions as may be required, consistent with the
provisions of this Act to the State Governments or the National Mining
Regulatory Authority referred to in clause 58 or to any authority
under the Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, for the conservation of strategic mineral resources or any
policy matter in the national interest and for the scientific and
sustainable development and exploration of mineral resources and
recycling of such resources to the extent practicable, and detection,
prevention and prosecution of cases of illegal mining, and to frame
rules for the purpose and all such directions shall be complied with
to the extent possible.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the provisions of this clause, the Central Government for the purpose
of scientific management and exploration of mineral resources,
prescribe a framework for disclosure of information related to mineral
resources and their exploration and exploitation, and recycling
including the development of websites and portals and databases;
and such framework shall specify the nature and extent of the

465
information required to be disclosed and the person or authority
responsible for such disclosure and any such person or authority shall
comply except where the information is of a nature that is exempted
under clause 8 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 in relation to a
public authority.
Clause 47.—This clause relates to the power of the State
Government to issue directions generally.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, in the interest of systematic development of mineral deposits,
conservation of minerals, scientific mining, sustainable development
and protection of the environment, issue directions to the owner, agent,
mining engineer, geologist or manager of a mine.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every direction issued
under sub-clause (1) shall be complied within such period as may be
specified, not being a period of less than one week. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that where there is difficulty in giving
effect to any direction, the owner, agent, mining engineer, geologist
or manager of the mine, as the case may be, may apply for
modification or rescinding of such direction and the State Government,
may either modify or rescind the direction or confirm it. The proviso
to the said sub-clause further provides that in case the State
Government does not pass any order modifying or rescinding such
direction within a period of thirty days from the date of application,
the direction shall be deemed to have been confirmed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that any direction issued
under sub-clauses (1) and (2) shall be issued in consultation with the
Indian Bureau of Mines in such classes of cases as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved
by a direction or order under this clause may apply to the National
Mining Tribunal in case of major minerals under clause 85 or the
State Mining Tribunal in case of minor minerals under clause 99, as
the case may be.
Clause 48.—This clause relates to the power to authorise Geological
Survey of India and Indian Bureau of Mines, Atomic Minerals
Directorate, etc., to investigate and report.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where the Central
Government is of the opinion that for the purpose of conservation of
strategic mineral resources or for the scientific management, exploration

466
and exploitation of mineral resources it is expedient to conduct a
technical or scientific investigation with regard to any mineral or any
land including lands in relation to which mineral concessions may
have been granted, the Central Government may authorise the
Geological Survey of India or the Indian Bureau of Mines or the
Atomic Minerals Directorate or such other authority as it may specify
in this behalf, to carry out such technical or scientific investigation as
may be necessary, and to submit a report within such period as may
be specified. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that no such
authorisation shall be made in the case of any land in which mineral
concession has been granted, except after consultation with the State
Government where minerals vest in the State Government and with
the person in whom the mineral vests in other cases.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that on issue of an
authorisation under sub-clause (1), it shall be lawful for the Geological
Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Atomic Mineral
Directorate or the specified authority or agency, and its employees,—
(a) to enter upon such land; (b) to dig or bore into the sub-soil,
conduct studies and take samples; (c) to do all other acts necessary
to determine the nature and extent of any mineral available in or
under such land; (d) to set out boundaries of the land in which any
mineral is expected to be found, and to mark such boundaries and
line by placing marks; and (e) where otherwise the survey cannot be
completed on the boundaries and line marked, to cut down and clear
away any part to any standing crop, fence or jungle with the approval
of the authority concerned. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides
that no such authority or agency, as the case may be, shall enter into
any building or upon any enclosed court or garden attached to a
dwelling-house without previously giving such occupier at least seven
days’ notice in writing of its intention to do so.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that whenever any action of
the nature specified in sub-clause (2) is to be taken, the Central
Government shall, before or at the time when such action is taken,
pay or tender payment for the damage which is likely to be caused,
and in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or
tendered or as to the person to whom it shall be paid or tendered,
the Central Government refer the dispute to the Collector of the
District in which the land is situated for determination.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the fact that there exists
any such dispute as is referred to in sub-clause (3) shall not be a bar
to the taking of any action under sub-clause (2).

467
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that after the completion of
the investigation, the Geological Survey of India, the Indian Bureau
of Mines, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the specified authority
or agency by which the investigation was made shall submit a report
to the Central Government indicating therein the nature and extent of
any mineral which lies deposited in or under the land and such
other information as may be necessary.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the costs of the
investigation made under this clause shall be borne by the Central
Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that any
portion of the cost may be paid out of the National Mineral Fund in
accordance with the provisions of clause 50.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, having regard to the utility of the report submitted under sub-
clause (5), and the public interest, make available the report to such
persons and at such cost and in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Clause 49.—This clause relates to the power of the Indian Bureau
of Mines, Coal Controller, Atomic Minerals Directorate and State
Directorate to issue certain directions and to seek information.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Indian Bureau of
Mines, the Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the
State Directorates or any officer authorised by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, may enter and inspect
a mine, and examine or direct the examination of any mineral deposit
in any area under prospecting licence or mining lease and take samples
therefrom at any time for the purposes of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that if any mine or part
thereof, which in the opinion of the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal
Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the State Directorate,
poses a grave and immediate threat to the conservation of mineral
resources or to the environment, it may, by an order in writing to the
owner, agent, mining engineer or manager, require him to take such
measures as may be specified in the order and may prohibit, until
the requirements as specified in the order are complied with to its
satisfaction, the deployment of any person other than those required
for compliance with the requirement of the order.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Indian Bureau of
Mines, the Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the
State Directorate, as the case may be, may by a general or specific

468
order require the cores or specimens of rocks and minerals obtained
from specified boreholes or shafts during prospecting or mining
operation conducted under this Act, to be preserved for any specific
period.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that every holder of a
prospecting licence or a mining lease shall provide all reasonable
facilities to persons authorised by the Indian Bureau of Mines, the
Coal Controller, the Atomic Minerals Directorate and the State
Directorate for the purpose of undertaking research or training in
matters relating to mining or geology.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the holder of a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, prospecting license or mining lease, or his agent
shall furnish such information regarding his reconnaissance or
prospecting or mining operations or regarding the mine or any matter
connected therewith as the Indian Bureau of Mines, the Coal Controller,
the Atomic Minerals Directorate or the authorised officer of the Central
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may require
by an order in writing and the information is furnished within such
time and such period as may be specified in the aforesaid order.
Clause 50.—This clause relates to the National Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall, by notification, establish a fund to be called the National Mineral
Fund for the purposes of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the proceeds of the
cess levied under sub-clause (1) of clause 44 shall first be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may,
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf,
credit by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central
Government may consider necessary to the National Mineral Fund
from time to time, after deducting the expenses of collection, for being
utilised exclusively for the purposes of sub-clause (3).
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the amount standing to
the credit of the National Mineral Fund shall be utilised for—
(a) making grants to the National Mining Regulatory Authority and
the National Mining Tribunal of such sums of money as are required
to pay salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the
members and the administrative expenses including the salaries,
allowances and pension payable to or in respect of officers and other

469
employees of the Authority and the Tribunal; (b) promoting scientific
management of mining activities and mine closures, including research
and development and training; (c) research and development in
sustainable mining and recycling of resources; (d) developing capacity
of the Indian Bureau of Mines or office of the coal controller, and any
other agency as may be determined by the Central Government to
enforce the provisions of the Act; (e) detecting and preventing illegal
mining including commissioning of surveys and studies, and
developing awareness amongst local communities and the mining
sector; (f) investigations for the conservation and scientific management
of mineral resources in accordance with the provisions of clause 48 of
the Act; (g) promotion of information technology applications in
support of the mining and minerals sector; (h) providing grants-in-
aid for promoting techno-economic studies for the mineral sector; and
(i) providing grants-in-aid for holding of and participation in national
or international minerals and mining workshops, conferences and
promotional events.
Clause 51.—This clause relates to the administration and
management of the National Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the National Mineral
Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government, and the
balance to the credit of the National Mineral Fund not lapse at the
end of the financial year.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall be responsible for the administration and management of the
National Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government
for the purpose of this Act may,— (a) formulate criteria for allocation
of funds for such projects which are required to be implemented;
(b) approve schemes and sanction grants and loans from the National
Mineral Fund to institutions and authorities as may be decided and
monitor their utilisation; and (c) implement directly or through the
Geological Survey of India or the Indian Bureau of Mines or Coal
Controller or any other agency as may be determined by the Central
Government, projects for the purposes of sub-clause (3) of clause 50
and for this purpose it may authorise the Director-General, Geological
Survey of India and the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines
to incur such expenditure from the National Mineral Fund as may be
necessary in this regard.

470
Clause 52.—This clause relates to the audit of the accounts of the
National Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare
an annual statement of accounts, including the profit and loss account
and the balance-sheet in respect of the National Mineral Fund in
such form, as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the accounts of the
National Mineral Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him.
Clause 53.—This clause relates to the State Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by notification, establish a fund to be called the State Mineral
Fund for the purposes of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the proceeds of the
cess levied under sub-clause (1) of clause 45 shall first be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of the State and the State Government may, if
the Legislature of the State by appropriation made by law in this
behalf so provide, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of
money as the State Government may consider necessary to the
State Mineral Fund from time to time, after deducting the expenses
of collection, for being utilised exclusively for the purposes of
sub-clause (4).
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Mineral Fund
shall be held and administered on behalf of the State Government in
such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed by the
State Government.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the amount standing to
the credit of the State Mineral Fund shall be utilised for:—
(a) developing capacity of the State Directorate to achieve the objects
of this Act; (b) promotion of information technology applications in
support of the mining and mineral sector; (c) setting up and operation
of Special Courts under clause 105 of the this Act; (d) setting up and
operation of the State Mining Regulatory Authority and the State
Mining Tribunal under clause 70 and clause 89 respectively;
(e) financial assistance to the District Mineral Foundations by way of

471
loan, capital grants or other payment; (f) compensating lessees whose
leases are prematurely terminated under clause 31 of this Act;
(g) prevention and detection of illegal mining, including expenditures
incidental to enforcement of the provisions of clause 114 of this Act
and to reward whistle-blowers on illegal mining. The explanation to
the said sub-clause provides that a whistle-blower is a person who
provides credible information of illegal mining; (h) such other public
purposes in relation to the objects of the Act including measures to
prevent and detect illegal mining, as may be deemed expedient by
the State Government from time to time.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing provisions, the State Government may
sanction grants out of the State Mineral Fund to an authority for
implementation of a Mine Closure Plan under sub-clause (4) of clause
33 and cause the recovery of the cost thereof from the lessee in
accordance with the provisions of clause 118 and deposit the same
into the State Mineral Fund.
Clause  54.—This clause relates to the administration and
management of the State Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Mineral Fund
shall be under the control of the State Government, and the balance
to the credit of the State Mineral Fund shall not lapse at the end of
the financial year.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall be responsible for the administration and management of the
State Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government
for the purposes of this Act may,-—(a) formulate criteria for allocation
of funds for such projects which are required to be implemented;
(b) implement directly or through the State Directorate by way of
grant-in-aid, projects for the purposes of sub-clause (4) of clause 53
and for this purpose, may authorise the Director of the State
Directorate to incur such expenditure from the State Mineral Fund as
may be necessary in this regard.
Clause 55.—This clause relates to the audit of the accounts of the
State Mineral Fund.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare
an annual statement of accounts, including the profit and loss account

472
and the balance-sheet in respect of the State Mineral Fund in such
manner, as may be prescribed by the State Government in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the accounts of the
State Mineral Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him.
Clause 56.—This clause relates to the establishment of District
Mineral Foundation.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall, by notification, establish a trust to be called the District Mineral
Foundation, a non-profit body, in each district in the State where a
mining lease has been granted or is in operation, in the manner as
may be prescribed by the State Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the object of the District
Mineral Foundation shall be to work for the interest and benefit of
persons or families affected by mining related operations in the district.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the District Mineral
Foundation shall be responsible for (a) distribution of monetary benefit
to persons or families affected by mining related operations in the
district, and (b) undertaking such other activities as are in furtherance
of the object of the Foundation, including creation, management and
maintenance of such local infrastructure for socio-economic purposes
in areas affected by mining related operations and facilitating the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Framework.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
may give financial assistance to any District Mineral Foundation by
way of loan, capital grants or other payments.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall maintain a register, which shall be open to the members of the
public for inspection at any reasonable time, containing the following
in relation to each District Mineral Foundation,— (a) a copy of the
current constitution, (b) a copy of the latest annual accounts and of
any report of the auditor of the accounts of the District Mineral
Foundation, and (c) a copy of the latest annual report of the District
Mineral Foundation.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the amount standing to
the credit of the District Mineral Foundation shall be utilised, in the
order of priority, for,— (a) payment of monetary benefits payable

473
monthly or quarterly to members of the family of the person holding
occupation or usufruct or traditional rights in areas affected by mining
related operations. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that
the State Government may make a scheme to systematically regulate
the amount of payment of monetary benefits to different categories
based on the nature and extent to which they are affected by the
mining related operation; (b) such other expenditure as may be
prescribed by the Central Government subservient to the objects of
the Foundation; (c) payment of administrative expenses necessary for
working of the District Mineral Foundation, not exceeding five per
cent. of the total annual payment received by it in a financial year.
Clause 57.—This clause relates to the Governing Council of District
Mineral Foundation.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the District Mineral
Foundation shall be managed by a Governing Council consisting of
(a) District Magistrate—Chairperson, (b) Chairperson of the District
Panchayat or the District Council, as the case may be— Member,
(c) All holders of mining lease in the district—Members, (d) Head of
local offices of Departments concerned of the State Government—
Members, (e) At least three representatives nominated by the District
Magistrate in consultation with the Chairperson of the District
Panchayat or District Council, as the case may be, from amongst the
affected persons or families in the areas affected by mining operations,
in the manner as may be prescribed by the State Government—
Members, (f) representative of the Indian Bureau of Mines—Member
and (g) District Mining Officer—Secretary. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that in the areas specified in Schedule V of the
Constitution in case there is no District Panchayat, the Chairperson of
each of the intermediate Panchayats, and in case there is no Panchayat
at intermediate level, the Chairperson of the Village Panchayats within
whose jurisdiction mining operations are undertaking shall be included
as a member.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Governing Council
for the District Mineral Foundation shall be responsible for : (a)
drawing-up the annual budget for utilisation of the fund available
with the Foundation, (b) approving the disbursal of the amounts to
the entitled persons or families affected by mining related operations;
and (c) approving such other expenditure, in furtherance of the objects
of the foundation, from the Fund available with the District Mineral
Foundation in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.

474
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the District Mineral
Foundation shall, at the end of each year, prepare an Annual Report
in respect of the activities undertaken under the fund available with
the District Mineral Foundation, and shall forward it to the
State Government, which shall forthwith cause the Report to be
published on the Government website.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the District Mineral
Foundation shall maintain a register giving details of,—(a) the list of
lease holders in the district and the annual payments made by them
to the District Mineral Foundation; (b) the disbursal of benefits to the
affected persons; and (c) annual audited accounts of the District
Mineral Foundation which shall be available on the website of the
Foundation and for inspection by public.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that for the purposes of the
Right to Information Act, 2005, the District Mineral Foundation is
deemed to be a public authority.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides the District Mineral
Foundation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the profit
and loss account and the balance-sheet in respect of the fund available
with the District Mineral Foundation in such manner, as may be
prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that the accounts of the
District Mineral Foundation shall be audited at such intervals and in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that the accounts of the
District Mineral Foundation, as certified by the District Magistrate,
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to
the State Government by the District Mineral Foundation and the
State Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of the State Legislature
where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the
State Legislature, before that House.
Clause 58.—This clause relates to the establishment of National
Mining Regulatory Authority.

475
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall, by notification, establish a National Authority to be known as
the National Mining Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this
Act in relation to major minerals (other than coal minerals).
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the National Authority
shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and
dispose of properties, both movable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the head office of the
National Authority shall be at New Delhi.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the National Authority
may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish its
offices at any other place in India.
Clause 59.—This clause relates to the composition of
National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the National Authority
shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than nine whole-time
Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of the
National Authority may, if considered necessary, invite any one or
more persons having specialised knowledge and experience in a
particular case to assist the National Authority.
Clause 60.—This clause relates to the qualification for appointment
as Chairperson or Member of National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the National Authority,
unless he,— (a) is of not less than fifty-eight years of age; (b) (i) has
a post-graduate degree in mining, engineering, technology, science,
commerce, humanities or law from a university recognised by the
University Grants Commission or a university or institute established
by law for the time being in force and special knowledge and
experience of not less than four years in matters relating to policy,
regulation and operations in extractive industry; or (ii) has held the
post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India
or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, having experience of not less
than one year in policy or law relating to mines and mineral
concessions.

476
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as a Member, unless he,— (a) is of not less
than fifty-eight years of age; (b) (i) has a post-graduate degree in
mining, engineering, technology, science, commerce, humanities or law
from a university recognised by the University Grants Commission or
a university or institute established by law for the time being in force
and special knowledge and experience of not less than three years in
matters relating to policy, regulation and operations in extractive
industry or has experience of not less than three years in the field of
mining sector at the national level; or (ii) has held the post of
Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be, having experience of not less than one year in policy or law
relating to mines and mineral concessions.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Chairperson and
the Members of the National Authority shall be appointed on the
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted under
sub-clause (1) of clause 61.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Chairperson or the
Members of the National Authority shall not hold any other office
during the period of holding his office as such.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall, within a period of one month from the date of occurrence of
any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Member, by reason of
death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a member and
six months before the superannuation or completion of the term of
office of the Chairperson or any member, make a reference to the
Selection Committee constituted under clause 61 for filling-up of such
vacancy.
Clause 61.— This clause relates to the Selection Committee for
selection of Chairperson and members of the National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall, for the purpose of selection of the Chairperson and members of
the National Authority constitute a Selection Committee, consisting of
the following, namely:— (a) Cabinet Secretary — Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in the Ministry of Mines — Member; (c) Secretary in the
Ministry of Law and Justice — Member.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Secretary in the
Ministry of Mines, Government of India, shall be the Convenor of the
meeting of the Selection Committee.

477
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Selection Committee
shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and members of the
National Authority within one month from the date on which the
reference is made to it under sub-clause (5) of clause 60.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Selection Committee
shall recommend a panel of two names in order of preference for
every vacancy referred to it and the Central Government shall make
appointment from such panel.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that before recommending
any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a member of the
National Authority, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that
such person does not have any financial or other interest, which is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or member,
as the case may be.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that no appointment of the
Chairperson or a member of the National Authority shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of sub-clauses (1) to (6), the Selection Committee may regulate its
own procedure.
Clause 62.—This clause relates to the term of office, salary and
allowances of Chairperson and member of the National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Chairperson and
member of the National Authority shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date on which they enter upon their office or up to
the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-clause (1), the Chairperson and every
Member shall hold office at the pleasure of the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the salary and other
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson and other members of, the National Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the salary and other
allowances or other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and other members of the National Authority shall not be varied to
their disadvantage after appointment.

478
Clause 63.—This clause relates to the resignation of the Chairperson
or a member of the National Authority.
This clause provides that the Chairperson or a member of the
National Authority may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed
to the Central Government, resign his office. The proviso to the said
sub-clause provides that a Chairperson or a member of the National
Authority shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of
three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person
duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the
expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
Clause 64.—This clause relates to the removal or suspension of
Chairperson or members of the National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson or any member of
the National Authority, if the Chairperson or such other Member, as
the case may be,— (a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or (b) has
been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or (c) has become
physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or (d) has
acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member; or (e) has so abused his
position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public
interest.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no Chairperson or any
other member of the National Authority shall be removed from the
office except by an order of the Central Government on the ground
of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Central Government,
has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure prescribed
in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion
that the Chairperson or member, as the case may be, ought on any
such ground to be removed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may suspend the Chairperson or a member of the National Authority,
as the case may be, in respect of whom an inquiry under sub-clause
(2) is being initiated or pending until the Central Government has
passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
Clause 65.—This clause relates to the Member of National Authority
to act as its Chairperson in certain cases.

479
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in the event of the
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of the
National Authority by reason of his death or resignation, the senior-
most member of the National Authority shall act as the Chairperson
until the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, to fill such vacancy, enters upon his
office.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that when the Chairperson
of the National Authority is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member, shall
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which
the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Clause  66.—This clause relates to the vacancies, etc., not to
invalidate proceedings of the National Authority.
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the National
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of— (a) any vacancy in,
or any defect in the constitution of, the National Authority; or (b)
any defect in the appointment of a person as the Chairperson or a
Member of the National Authority; or (c) any irregularity in the
procedure of the National Authority not affecting the merits of the
case.
Clause 67.—This clause relates to the officers and other employees
of the National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the National Authority
shall have under it such numbers and categories of officers and other
employees, as the Central Government may determine in consultation
with the Chairperson of the National Authority from time to time, to
assist the National Authority in the discharge of its functions.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the National Authority
may appoint its officers and other employees in such manner as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the officers and other
employees of the National Authority appointed under sub-clause (2)
shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of
the Chairperson.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the salaries and
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of, the officers and other employees of the National Authority shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

480
Clause 68.—This clause relates to the Powers and functions of the
National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act, the National Authority shall discharge and exercise the
following functions and powers in respect of major minerals, namely:—
(a) lay down the standards of quality of technical regulation to be
followed by the State Governments and the Indian Bureau of Mines;
(b) lay down the standards of quality of reports and information
provided in the public domain by the State Governments, Indian
Bureau of Mines and Geological Survey of India to the investors in
the mining sector; (c) mediate on the issue of jurisdiction in matters
of inspection of mining areas amongst the State Governments and the
Indian Bureau of Mines; (d) advise on mineral-wise conservation
strategies keeping in view of the national interest; (e) advise on matters
relating to framework for sustainable development of the mining sector,
including implementation and monitoring thereof. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act, the National Authority may, on the request of the Central
Government or any State Government, render advice on sustainable
development framework for minor minerals; (f) advise the Central
Government and any State Government, on a reference from them,
on issues pertaining to measures to increase transparency in the grant
of mineral concessions and efficiency in models for competitive bidding
of minerals; (g) review of the existing rates of royalty on minerals
(other than coal, lignite and sand for stowing) specified in the Second
Schedule for major minerals in terms of sub-clause (2) of clause 41
and the profit sharing percentage payable under sub-clause (2) of
clause 43 and recommend revision of rates of royalty and profit sharing
percentage to be paid by the mining lease holder from time to time;
(h) review of the existing rates of dead rent on minerals (other than
coal, lignite and sand for stowing) specified in the Third Schedule for
major minerals in terms of sub-clause (3) of clause 42 and recommend
revision of rates of royalty from time to time; (i) recommend suitable
mechanisms to moderate royalty to support investment in remote areas
or for induction of special technology or for promoting mineral
beneficiation or to produce downstream products of strategic value or
to create infrastructure. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides
that the recommendations of the National Authority under this sub-
clause shall be made in consultation with the State Governments and
the mining industry and shall be in the form of a report submitted
to the Central Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause further
provides that the National Authority shall not recommend increase in
royalty rates or profit sharing percentage for any mineral or fees or

481
other charges more than once in three years; (j) recommend strategies
and institutional mechanisms to the Central Government for attracting
long-term investments in the mining sector; (k) recommend
mechanisms to protect the interests of the end-use industries in the
country for assured long-term supply of minerals;
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the National Authority
shall have the power to regulate its own procedure thereof in all
matters arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the discharge
of its functions.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the National Authority
shall ensure transparency in exercising its powers and discharging its
functions.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the National Authority
or any of its officers authorised by it may call for records, material
evidence, or persons accused of contravening any of the provisions or
committing any of the offences under this Act.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that all proceedings before
the National Authority in discharge of its functions shall be deemed
to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219,
228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and
the National Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195 and chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in clause 85, the order of the National Authority
shall not be subject to revision by the National Tribunal.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that the recommendation or
advice of the National Authority under this clause shall be in the
form of a report to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall take a decision thereon within a period of three
months. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that where the
Government takes a decision at variance with the recommendation or
advice of the National Authority, it shall record the reasons therefor
and intimate the same to the National Authority.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that the National Authority
shall include in its annual report all the cases where its
recommendation or advice has not been accepted by the Central
Government along with reasons therefor.

482
Clause 69.—This clause relates to the search, seizure and
investigation of the National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, the National Authority may, on the basis of written complaint
alleging contravention of the provisions of this Act or alleging
commission of any offence punishable under this Act or the rules
made thereunder in respect of major minerals where such
contraventions or commission of offences have been committed on
large scale or on organised basis or takes place inter-state, investigate
or cause to be investigated any such complaint or institute the
prosecution against any person.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the generality of the provisions of sub-clause (1), the National
Authority may investigate or cause to be investigated or institute the
prosecution against any person where contraventions or commission
of offences have been committed on large scale or on organised basis
or have taken place inter-state, in respect of major minerals in the
following cases, namely:— (i) exploration and mining for any mineral
without licence or lease; (ii) undertaking of mining or exploration
activity outside the area granted under licence or lease; (iii) transactions
relating to or possession of mineral stock of unknown origin, or such
mineral which cannot be satisfactorily accounted for;
(iv) transportation, storage, trade or export of illegally raised mineral
without lawful authority.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the National Authority
may, if it finds that the contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or commission of any offence thereunder in respect of major
minerals is of a small scale or isolated nature, refer any complaint
referred to in sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (2) to the State Government
concerned for such action as it deems fit.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Central Government
or the State Government or the National Authority may , by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, possessing
such qualifications as may be prescribed, or such authority fulfilling
such criteria or appoint an Investigation Officer or Investigation
Authority or appoint legal practitioner for initiating prosecution or
defending its case before any court or Tribunal for such area as may
be specified in the notification, to investigate or initiate prosecution
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or commission
of any offence thereunder in respect of major minerals [including
cases falling under clauses (i) to (iv) of sub-clause (2)].

483
The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that “legal
practitioner” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High
Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the Investigation Officer
or the Investigating Authority referred to in sub-clause (4), if so
authorised by the Central Government, shall have power — (a) to
enter and search, at all reasonable times and with such assistance, if
any, as he considers necessary, any premises in which he has reason
to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder
has been or is being or is about to be committed; or for the purpose
of satisfying himself that the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder are being complied with; (b) to require the production of,
and to inspect, examine and make copies of, or take extracts from
registers, records or any other documents kept by a holder of a mining
lease or licence, as the case may be, in pursuance of the provisions
of this Act or the rules made thereunder and seize the same, if he
has reason to believe that all or any of them, may furnish evidence
of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the
rules made thereunder; (c) to make such examination and inquiry as
he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder are being complied with; (d) to exercise
such other powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply to
any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any search or
seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under
section 94 of the said Code.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that save as otherwise
provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, shall, so far as may be, apply to the process of investigation
and initiation of prosecution of the offences in respect of major
minerals under the provisions of this Act, as they apply to the
investigation or initiation of prosecution made under the provisions
of the said Code.
Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that the Investigating Officer
or Investigating Authority, as the case may be, shall complete the
process of investigation within a period of three months from the
date of authorisation for conducting such investigation and submit
the report of such investigation to the National Authority.

484
Sub-clause (9) of this clause provides that the Investigation Officer
or the Investigating Authority may take the assistance of police if so
becomes necessary for discharge of its functions under this Act.
Sub-clause (10) of this clause provides that the National Authority
either on its own motion (on the basis of material in its possession)
or on the basis of report referred to in sub-clause (8) or an
Investigation Officer or Investigating Authority or any of its officer, if
so authorised by the National Authority may file a complaint before
a competent court for the contravention of the provisions of this Act
or commission of any offence thereunder in respect of major minerals.
Clause 70.—This clause relates to the establishment of State Mining
Regulatory Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by notification, establish with effect from such date as may be
specified therein, a State Authority to be known as the State Mining
Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers and functions,
mutatis mutandis , in respect of minor minerals, as is exercisable under
clauses 68 and 69 by the National Authority.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the provisions of sub-clause (1), the State Government may confer on
the State Authority the functions relating to monitoring and regulating
the operation of the Sustainable Development Framework in respect
of minor minerals and for major minerals after approval of the Central
Government.
Clause 71.—This clause relates to the Composition and procedures
of the State Authority.
This clause provides that the composition and procedures of the
State Authority referred to in clause 70 shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government. The proviso to the said clause
provides that in respect of functions relating to the Sustainable
Development Framework the procedures shall be in accordance with
the provision, contained in clause 46.
Clause 72.—This clause relates to the powers and functions of the
State Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act, the State Authority shall have the powers to authorise
investigation and institute prosecution against any person for offences

485
under this Act in respect of minor minerals or major minerals in the
following cases, namely:— (a) exploration and mining operations for
any mineral without licence or lease; (b) undertaking of any mining
or exploration activity outside the area granted under licence or lease;
(c) transactions relating to possession of mineral stock of unknown
origin, or such mineral which cannot satisfactorily be accounted for;
(d) transportation, storage, trade or export, of illegally raised mineral
without lawful authority; (e) any other matter pertaining to illegal
mining referred to the State Authority by the State Government. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in any case where the
matter is under investigation or prosecution by the National Authority,
the State Authority shall not carry out any further investigation or
prosecution except with the approval of the National Authority.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in clause 85, the order of the State Authority shall
not be subject to revision by the National Tribunal.
Clause  73.—This clause relates to the Powers of the Central
Government to supersede National Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if, at any time, the
Central Government is of the opinion,— (a) that, on account of
circumstances beyond the control of the National Authority, it is unable
to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act; or (b) that the National Authority
has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by
the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial
position of the National Authority or the administration of the National
Authority has suffered; or (c) that circumstances exist which render it
necessary in the public interest so to do, the Central Government
may for reasons to be recorded, by notification, supersede the National
Authority for such period, not exceeding one year, as may be specified
in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the President
may direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that before issuing any
such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the National Authority to make representations against
the proposed supersession and shall consider the representations, if
any, of the National Authority.

486
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that upon the publication of
a notification under sub-clause (1) superseding the National
Authority,— (a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from
the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such; (b) all the powers,
functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this
Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the National
Authority shall, until the National Authority is reconstituted under
sub-clause (3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons
referred to in sub-clause ( 1); and (c) all properties owned or controlled
by the National Authority shall, until the National Authority is
reconstituted under sub-clause (3), vest in the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on or before the
expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-clause (1), the Central Government shall reconstitute
the National Authority by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and
other members and in such case any person who had vacated his
office under clause (a) of sub-clause (2) shall not be deemed to be
disqualified for reappointment.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-clause (1) and
a full report of any action taken under this clause and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of
Parliament at the earliest.
Clause 74.—This clause relates to the Power of State Government
to supersede State Authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if, at any time, the
State Government is of the opinion,— (a) that, on account of
circumstances beyond the control of the State Authority, it is unable
to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act; or (b) that the State Authority has
persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the
State Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act and as a result of such default the financial position of the
State Authority or the administration of the State Authority has
suffered; or (c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in
the public interest so to do, the Central Government may for reasons
to be recorded, by notification, supersede the State Authority for such
period, not exceeding one year, as may be specified in the notification
and appoint a person or persons as the Governor may direct to

487
exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that before issuing any such
notification, the State Government shall give a reasonable opportunity
to the State Authority to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any , of the State
Authority.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that upon the publication of
a notification under sub-clause (1) superseding the State Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such; (b) all the powers, functions
and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the State Authority shall,
until the State Authority is reconstituted under sub-clause (3), be
exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-
clause ( 1); and (c) all properties owned or controlled by the State
Authority shall, until the State Authority is reconstituted under sub-
clause (3), vest in the State Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on or before the
expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-clause (1), the State Government shall reconstitute
the State Authority by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and
other members and in such case any person who had vacated his
office under clause (a) of sub-clause (2) shall not be deemed to be
disqualified for reappointment.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-clause (1) and
a full report of any action taken under this clause and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of
the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Clause 75.—This clause relates to the Establishment of the National
Mining Tribunal and benches thereof.
This clause provides that the Central Government shall by
notification establish with effect from such date as may be specified
therein, a Tribunal to be known as the National Mining Tribunal, to
exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such Tribunal
by or under this Act.
Clause 76.—This clause relates to the Composition of the National
Mining Tribunal.

488
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the National Mining
Tribunal shall consist of a full time Chairperson and not more than
seven judicial Members and seven expert Members to be appointed,
by notification, by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of the
National Mining Tribunal may, if considered necessary, invite any one
or more persons having specialised knowledge and experience in a
particular case before the Tribunal to assist the Tribunal in that case.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that subject to the other
provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
National Mining Tribunal may be exercised by Benches thereof as
may be notified by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that subject to the other
provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of three Members with
Chairperson or an Expert Member and one Judicial Member and third
Member who may be either Expert Member or Judicial Member.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-clause (1), the Chairperson may transfer a
Member from one Bench to another Bench.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that subject to the other
provisions of this Act, the Benches of the National Mining Tribunal
shall ordinarily sit at Delhi (which shall be known as the Principal
Bench) and at such other places as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify.
Clause 77.—This clause relates to the Qualifications for appointment
as Chairperson or Member of the National Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the National Mining
Tribunal, unless he,—(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) has special knowledge and experience of not less than four years
in law relating to mines and exploration; and (c) has experience of
quasi-judicial functions. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides
that a person who is, or has been in the service of Government shall
not be appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the
post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India
or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, for a period of not less than three
years.

489
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as Judicial Member unless he,—(a) is of not
less than fifty-five years of age; (b) has held a judicial office in the
territory of India for at least ten years or who has been a member of
the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that
service or any equivalent post for at least three years, or who has
been an advocate for at least ten years with experience in dealing
with mining related matters.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as an Expert Members, unless he,—(a) is of
not less than fifty-five years of age; (b) has experience in the field of
mining sector at the national level, and has held the post of Joint
Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the
Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, for
at least five years.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy
by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a
Member and six months before the superannuation or end of tenure
of the Chairperson or any Member, make a reference to the Selection
Committee for filling up of the vacancy.
Clause 78.—This clause relates to the Selection Committee for
selection of Chairperson and Members.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall, for the purpose of selection of the Chairperson and Members of
the National Mining Tribunal constitute a Selection Committee,
consisting of the following, namely:— (a) Cabinet Secretary—
Chairperson; (b) Secretary in the Ministry of Mines—Member;
(c) Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice—Member; (d) one
expert to be nominated by the Ministry of Mines—Member.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Secretary in the
Ministry of Mines, Government of India shall be the Convenor of the
meeting of the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Selection Committee
shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and Members within
one month from the date on which the reference is made to it.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Selection Committee
shall recommend a panel of two names in order of preference for
every vacancy referred to it and the Government shall make
appointment from such panel.

490
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that before recommending
any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of the
National Tribunal, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such
person shall not have any financial or other interest, which is likely
to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or Member.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that no appointment of the
Chairperson or a Member of the National Mining Tribunal shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of sub-clauses (1) to (6), the Selection Committee may regulate its
own procedure.
Clause 79.—This clause relates to the Terms of office, salaries and
allowances of Chairperson and Members of the National Mining
Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of the
National Mining Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office or up to the age of
sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a Member of the
National Mining Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office or up to the age of
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the salary or honorarium
and other allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the chairperson and other members of the National Mining
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that neither
the salary or honorarium and other allowances nor the other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of
the National Mining Tribunal shall be varied to their disadvantage
after appointment.
Clause  80.—This clause relates to the Resignation of the
Chairperson or a Member of the National Mining Tribunal.
This clause provides that a Chairperson and a Member of the
National Mining Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Central Government, resign his office. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that a Chairperson and a Member of

491
the National Mining Tribunal shall, unless he is permitted by the
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of
such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is
the earliest.
Clause 81.—This clause relates to the Removal and suspension of
Chairperson or Members of National Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson or any Member
of the National Mining Tribunal, if the Chairperson or such other
Member, as the case may be, in its opinion —(a) has been adjudged
as insolvent; or (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member;
or (d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions as a member; or (e) has so abused
his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the
public interest; or (f) has engaged at any time during his term of
office in any other employment.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no Chairperson or any
other Member of the National Mining Tribunal shall be removed from
office except by an order of the Central Government on the ground
of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Central Government,
has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure prescribed
in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion
that the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, ought on any
such ground to be removed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may suspend Chairperson or a Member of the National Mining
Tribunal, as the case may be, in respect of whom an inquiry under
sub-clause (2) is being initiated or pending until the Central
Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.
Clause 82.—This clause relates to the Member of the National
Mining Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in certain cases.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in the event of the
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of the
National Mining Tribunal by reason of his death or resignation, the
senior-most expert Member of the National Mining Tribunal shall act

492
as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until the date on which a new
Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act
to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that when the Chairperson
of the National Mining Tribunal is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most expert
Member of the National Mining Tribunal, shall discharge the functions
of the Chairperson until date on which the Chairperson resumes his
duties.
Clause 83.—This clause relates to the Vacancies, etc., not to
invalidate proceedings of National Mining Tribunal.
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the National
Mining Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of—(a) any vacancy
in, or any defect in the constitution of, the National Mining Tribunal;
or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as the Chairperson
or a Member; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the National
Mining Tribunal not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 84.—This clause relates to the Staff of National Mining
Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall determine the nature and categories of the officers and other
employees required to assist the National Mining Tribunal in the
discharge of its functions.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the recruitment of the
officers and other employees of the National Mining Tribunal shall be
made by the Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the officers and other
employees of the National Mining Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson; and
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the salaries and
allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the National Mining Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Clause 85.—This clause relates to the powers and procedures of
the National Mining Tribunal.

493
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act, the National Mining Tribunal shall have the powers with
respect to major minerals— (a) to adjudicate on applications seeking
directions to the Central Government or the State Governments or an
Authority of the State Government to dispose of an application made
to it, including an application for grant or transfer of mineral
concession under the Act, with respect to any major mineral within
such time as the National Mining Tribunal may stipulate, in such
cases where the Central Government or State Government, as the
case may be, has failed to dispose off the application within the time
specified under this Act; (b) to hear applications from any affected
person in relation to orders and directions issued under this Act
relating to preparation, approval and implementation of Mining Plans
and Mine Closure Plans and Sustainable Development Framework;
(c) to hear applications made to it in the nature of revisions from the
affected persons and confirm or set aside any order passed by the
Central Government or the State Government or an Authority of the
State Government, as the case may be, under this Act or the rules
made thereunder as it may deem just and proper.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the National Mining
Tribunal shall have the power to regulate its own procedure and the
procedure of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the exercise
of its powers or of the discharge of its functions.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that subject to other
provisions of this Act, the National Mining Tribunal may call for the
records of the case and pass such order or direction in respect of the
matter specified in sub-clause (1), as it may deem fit. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that the National Mining Tribunal shall,
before passing any order or direction, under this sub-clause issue
notice to the Central Government or the State Government or an
Authority of the State Government, as the case may be, and give a
reasonable opportunity to the affected parties and if necessary any
other authority, as the case may be, of being heard. The proviso to
the said sub-clause further provides that the National Mining Tribunal
shall dispose of the case within a period of six months from the date
of filing of the application unless for reasons to be recorded, the
National Mining Tribunal extends the time period for such disposal.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the National Mining
Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under
this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the

494
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the
following matters, namely:—(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining him an oath; (b) requiring
the discovery and production of documents; (c) receiving evidence on
affidavits; (d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 requisition any public record or document
or copy of such record or document from any other; (e) issuing
commissions for the examination of witness or documents;
(f) reviewing its decision; (g) dismissing an application for default or
deciding its ex parte ; (h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any
application for default or any order passed by it ex parte ; (i) pass an
interim order (including granting an injunction or stay) after providing
the parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, on any applications
made or appeal filed under this Act; (j) any other matter which may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that all proceedings before
the National Mining Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228, and for
the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal code and the Tribunal
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of clause 195
and chapter XXVI of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that on the conclusion of
proceedings, the National Mining Tribunal, shall pass such orders as
it deems fit and provide such relief as may be desirable, including
the award of such punitive damages, as it deems fit, to the affected
party at issue.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that every order made by
the National Mining Tribunal under sub-clause (6) shall be signed by
the Chairperson or Member or Members who heard the case and
passed the order.
Clause 86.—This clause relates to the application to National Mining
Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any person aggrieved
by an order of the Central Government or the State Government or
an Authority of the State Government, as the case may be, may make
an application to the National Mining Tribunal, in such form and
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, within a period of ninety days from the date on which
a copy of such order is received by such aggrieved person. The proviso
to the said sub-clause provides that the National Mining Tribunal

495
may entertain an application after the expiry of the said period of
ninety days if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded that there was
sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. The proviso to the
said sub-clause further provides that an order of the State Government
or the Central Government, or an Authority of the State Government,
as the case may be, shall not be revised by the Tribunal except on
grounds substantially similar to those specified in section 115 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where an application
before the National Mining Tribunal is found to be frivolous or
vexatious, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dismiss the
application and make an order that the applicant shall pay to the
respondent such costs as may be specified in the order.
Clause 87.—This clause relates to the Transfer of revisions pending
before Central Government to National Tribunal.
This clause provides that all revision cases pending before the
Central Government under section 30 of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, as it stood before its repeal,
before the Central Government shall, on commencement of this Act,
stand transferred to the National Mining Tribunal on its establishment
and to be disposed of as an application under clause 66 of this Act.
Clause 88.—This clause relates to the Appeal to High Court.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in any
other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie against any
order, not being an interlocutory order, of the National Mining Tribunal
to the High Court on one or more grounds specified in clause 100 of
that Code.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no appeal shall lie
against any decision or order made by the National Mining Tribunal
with the consent of the parties.
Clause 89.—This clause relates to the Establishment of State Mining
Tribunal.
This clause provides that the State Government may, by
notification, establish with effect from such date as may be specified
therein, a Tribunal to be known as the State Mining Tribunal, to
exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such Tribunal
by or under this Act.

496
Clause 90.—This clause relates to the Composition of State Mining
Tribunal and benches thereof.
This clause provides that the State Mining Tribunal shall consist
of a full time Chairperson and two other Members of which one shall
be a judicial Member and other shall be an Expert Member, to be
appointed by the State Government.
Clause 91.—This clause relates to the Qualifications for appointment
as Chairperson or Member of State Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the State Mining Tribunal,
unless he,—(a) is of not less than fifty-five years of age; (b) has special
knowledge and experience of not less than four years in law relating
to mines and exploration; and (c) has experience of quasi-judicial
functions. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that a person
who is, or has been in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post of
Principal Secretary to the State Government or any equivalent post,
as the case may be, for a period of not less than three years.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as Judicial Member unless he,—(a) is of not
less than fifty-five years of age; (b) has held a judicial office in the
territory of India for at least seven years or who has been a member
of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade II of that
service or any equivalent post for at least three years, or who has
been an advocate for at least ten years with experience in dealing
with mining related matters.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as Expert Members, unless he,—(a) is of
not less than fifty-five years of age; (b) has experience in the field of
mining sector at the State level, and has held the post of Additional
Secretary in the State Government or any equivalent post for at least
five years.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy
by reason of death, resignation or removal of the chairperson or a
Member and six months before the superannuation or end of tenure
of the Chairperson or any Member, make a reference to the Selection
Committee for filling up of the vacancy.

497
Clause 92.—This clause relates to the Selection Committee for
selection of Chairperson and Members of State Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall, for the purpose of selection of the Chairperson and Members of
the State Mining Tribunal constitute a Selection Committee, consisting
of the Chief Secretary of the State as Chairperson, the Principal
Secretary in the Department of Mines, Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs and one expert to be nominated by the Chief Secretary as
Members of the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Principal Secretary
to the State Government dealing with mines shall be the Convenor of
the meetings of the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Selection Committee
shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and Members within
one month from the date on which the reference is made to it.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Selection Committee
shall recommend a panel of two names in order of preference for
every vacancy referred to it and the State Government shall make
appointment from such panel.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that before recommending
any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of the
State Mining Tribunal, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that
such person does not have any financial or other interest, which is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or Member.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that no appointment of the
Chairperson or a Member of the State Mining Tribunal shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of sub-clauses (1) to (6), the Selection Committee shall regulate its
own procedure.
Clause 93.— This clause relates to the Terms of office, salaries and
allowances of Chairperson and Members of State Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Chairperson of the
State Mining Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office or upto the age of sixty-
seven years, whichever is earlier.

498
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a Member of the State
Mining Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office or upto the age of sixty-five
years, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the salary or honorarium
and other allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the chairperson and other members of the State Mining
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that neither the salary or
honorarium and other allowances nor the other terms and conditions
of service of the chairperson and other members of the State Mining
Tribunal shall be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
Clause 94.—This clause relates to the Resignation of Chairperson
and a Member of the State Mining Tribunal.
This clause provides that a Chairperson and a Member of the
State Mining Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the State Government, resign his office. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that a Chairperson and a Member of the
State Mining Tribunal shall, unless he is permitted by the State
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office
until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such
notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon
his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the
earliest.
Clause 95.—This clause relates to the Removal and suspension of
Chairperson or Members of State Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson or any Member,
if the Chairperson or such other Member of the State Mining Tribunal,
as the case may be, in its opinion,— (a) has been adjudged as
insolvent; or (b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion
of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or (c) has become
physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or (d) has
acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a member; or (e) has so abused his
position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public
interest; or (f) has engaged at any time during his term of office in
any other employment.

499
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no Chairperson or any
other Member of the State Mining Tribunal shall be removed from
office except by an order of the State Government on the ground of
his proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the State Government,
has, on an inquiry, held in with the procedure prescribed in his behalf
by the State Government, come to the conclusion that the Chairperson
or Member, as the case may be, ought on any such ground to be
removed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Government
may suspend the Chairperson or any Member of the State Mining
Tribunal in respect of whom an inquiry under sub-clause (2) is being
initiated or pending until the State Government has passed an order
on receipt of the report of the inquiry .
Clause 96.—This clause relates to the Member of State Mining
Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in certain cases.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that in the event of the
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of the
State Mining Tribunal by reason of his death or resignation, the senior-
most expert Member of the State Mining Tribunal shall act as the
Chairperson of the Tribunal until the date on which a new
Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act
to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that when the Chairperson
of the State Mining Tribunal is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most expert Member
of the State Mining Tribunal, shall discharge the functions of the
Chairperson until date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Clause  97.—This clause relates to the Vacancies etc., not to
invalidate proceedings of State Mining Tribunal.
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the State Mining
Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of— (a) any vacancy in, or
any defect in the constitution of, the State Mining Tribunal; or (b)
any defect in the appointment of a person as the Chairperson or a
Member; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Mining
Tribunal not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause  98.— This clause relates to the Staff of State Mining
Tribunal.

500
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall determine the nature and categories of the officers and other
employees required to assist the State Mining Tribunal in the discharge
of its functions.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the recruitment of the
officers and other employees of the State Mining Tribunal shall be
made by the Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the officers and other
employees of the State Mining Tribunal shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson; and
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the salaries and
allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the State Mining Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
Clause 99.—This clause relates to the Powers and procedures of
the State Mining Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act, the State Mining Tribunal shall have the powers with
respect to minor minerals—(a) to adjudicate on applications seeking
direction to the State Government or an Authority of the State
Government, as the case may be, to dispose of an application made
to it, including an application for grant of mineral concession under
this Act, with respect to any minor mineral within such time as the
State Mining Tribunal may stipulate, in such cases where the State
Government has failed to dispose of the application within the time
specified in the Act; (b) to hear applications from any affected person
in relation to orders or directions issued under this Act relating to
preparation, approval and implementation of Mining Plans, mining
frameworks and Mine Closure Plans and Sustainable Development
Framework; (c) to hear applications made to it in the nature of
revisions from the affected persons and confirm or set aside any order
passed by the State Government or an Authority of the State
Government, as the case may be, under this Act or the rules made
thereunder as it may deem just and proper.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the State Mining Tribunal
shall have the power to regulate its own procedure and the procedure
in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the
discharge of its functions.

501
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that subject to other
provisions of this Act, the State Mining Tribunal may call for the
records of the case and pass such order or direction in respect of the
matter specified in sub-clause (1), as it may deems fit. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that the State Mining Tribunal shall, before
passing any order or direction, under this sub-clause issue notice to
the State Government or an Authority of the State Government, as
the case may be, and give a reasonable opportunity to the affected
persons and if necessary any other authority, as the case may be, of
being heard. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that
the State Mining Tribunal shall dispose of the case within a period of
six months from the date of filing of the application unless for reasons
to be recorded, the Tribunal extends the time period for such disposal.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the State Mining Tribunal
shall have, for the purposes of discharging its function under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following
matters, namely:— (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him an oath; (b) requiring the discovery
and production of documents; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of clauses 123 and 124 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 requisitioning any public record or document or
copy of such record or document from any other; (e) issuing
commissions for the examination of witness or documents;
(f) reviewing its decision; (g) dismissing an application for default or
deciding its ex parte ; (h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any
application for default or any order passed by it ex parte ; (i) pass an
interim order (including granting an injunction or stay) after providing
the parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, on any applications
made or appeal filed under this Act; (j) any other matter which may
be prescribed by the State Government.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that all proceedings before
the State Mining Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228, and for the purposes
of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that on the conclusion of
proceedings, the State Mining Tribunal, shall pass such orders as it
deems fit and provide such relief as may be desirable, including the
award of such punitive damages, as it deems fit, to the affected party
at issue.

502
Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides that every order made by
the State Mining Tribunal, under sub-clause (6) shall be signed by the
Chairperson or Member or Members who heard the case and passed
the order.
Clause 100.—This clause relates to the Application to State Mining
Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every application to the
State Mining Tribunal against an order of the State Government or an
Authority of the State Government, shall be filed within a period of
ninety days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the
State Government, is received by the aggrieved party, and it shall be
in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed
by the State Government. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides
that the State Mining Tribunal may entertain an application after the
expiry of the said period of ninety days if it is satisfied, for reasons
to be recorded that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that
a revision application shall not lie except on grounds substantially
similar to those specified in clause 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where an application
before the State Mining Tribunal is found to be frivolous or vexatious,
it shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dismiss the application
and make an order that the applicant has to pay to the respondent
such costs as may be specified in the order.
Clause 101.—This clause relates to the Appeal to High Court.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in any
other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie against any
order, not being an interlocutory order, of the State Mining Tribunal
to the High Court on one or more grounds specified in section 100
of that Code.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no appeal shall lie
against any decision or order made by the State Mining Tribunal
with the consent of the parties.
Clause 102.—This clause relates to the Central Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee.

503
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall, by notification, constitute a Central Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee consisting of representatives of the Central
Government and the State Governments to achieve the objects of the
Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the functions of the
Central Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee shall be such as may
be notified.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that without prejudice to
the provisions of the foregoing, the Central Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee may consider and make recommendations
regarding any of the following, namely:—(a) improvement in procedure
for grant of mineral concessions; (b) coordination among agencies
entrusted with according statutory clearance; (c) maintenance of
internet-based databases including a mining tenement registry;
(d) development, implementation and evaluation of sustainable
development framework; and (e) prevention and detection of illegal
mining.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Central Coordination-
cum-Empowered Committee shall meet at least once in three months.
Clause 103.—This clause relates to the State Coordination-cum-
Empowered Committee.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
shall by notification constitute a State Coordination-cum-Empowered
Committee with representatives of the concerned Departments of the
State Government and local representative of Central organisation such
as Railways, Highways, Ports and Customs, headed by Chief Secretary
or Additional Chief Secretary of the State Government.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the function of the
State Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee shall be:— (i) to
oversee clearance by various Departments of the State Government
necessary to ensure timely grant of mineral concessions; (ii) review of
activities in and around leased areas pursuant to the Corporate Social
Responsibility document; (iii) to monitor implementation of Sustainable
Development Framework and Final Mine Closure Plans;
(iv) coordination of operations for prevention, detection and
prosecution of cases of illegal mining; and (v) any other functions as
may be prescribed by the State Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the State Coordination-
cum-Empowered Committee shall meet at least once in two months.

504
Clause 104.—This clause relates to the National Repositories.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, by notification, establish a National Drill Core Repository for
preservation and archiving of drill cores generated during mineral
exploration and a National Geophysical Data Repository for holding,
authenticating and disseminating geophysical data for the purposes
of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Repositories shall
be managed or maintained in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the holder of any
mineral concession shall, at his own expense, cause to be deposited,—
(a) a representative portion of cores selected with the National Drill
Core Repository; and (b) all geophysical data collected by him during
or part of his reconnaissance, exploration and prospecting operation,
with the National Drill Core Repository and National Geophysical
Data Repository respectively, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the Central Government
shall prescribe the procedure for making available data from the
Repositories to interested persons on such charges as may be
prescribed by it. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the
Repositories, referred to in sub-clause (3) shall not disclose information
with respect to any drill core or any geophysical data received by it
under this clause till after lapse of six months from the date of
termination of the mineral concession, or relinquishment of the area
from which the drill core has been drawn or geophysical data has
been generated.
Clause 105.—This clause relates to the Constitution of Special
Courts.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, for the purposes of providing speedy trial of offences referred
to in clauses 110, 111, 112 and 113 by notification, constitute as many
Special Courts as may be necessary for such area or areas, as may be
specified in the notification.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a Special Court shall
consist of a single Judge who shall be appointed by the State
Government with the concurrence of the High Court.

505
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he
was, immediately before such appointment, of the rank of at least an
Additional District and Sessions Judge.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that where the office of the
Judge of a Special Court is vacant, or such Judge is absent from the
ordinary place of sitting of such Special Court, or he is incapacitated
by illness or otherwise in the performance of his duties, any urgent
business as the Special Court shall be disposed of in accordance with
the direction of District and Sessions Judge having jurisdiction over
the ordinary place of sitting of the Special Court, as notified under
sub- clause (1). The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the
High Court of the State may, in case it is necessary or expedient to
do so, direct that any business of the Special Court as may be specified
shall be disposed of by any other Special Court or person qualified
to be a judge of a Special Court.
Clause 106.—This clause relates to the Procedures and powers of
special courts.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every
offence punishable under clauses 110, 111, 112 and 113 of this Act
shall be triable only by the Special Court within whose jurisdiction
such offence has been committed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where it appears to
any court in the course of any inquiry or trial that an offence is
punishable under clauses 110, 111, 112 and 113 of this Act it shall
transfer such case to such Special Court having jurisdiction, and
thereupon the case shall be tried and disposed of by such Special
Court in accordance with the provisions of this Act. The proviso to
the said sub-clause provides that it shall be lawful for such Special
Court to act on the evidence, if any, recorded by any court in the
case of presence of the accused before the transfer of the case to any
Special Court. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides
that if such Special Court is of opinion that further examination, cross-
examination and re-examination of any of the witnesses whose
evidence has already been recorded, is required in the interest of
justice, it may re-summon any such witness and after such further
examination, cross-examination or re-examination, if any, as it may
permit, the witness shall be discharged.

506
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Special Court may,
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1) of section 260
or section 262 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, try the offence
referred to in clauses 110, 111, 112 and 113 of this Act in a summary
way in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the said Code
and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the said Code shall, so
far as may be, apply to such trial. The proviso to the said sub-clause
provides that where in the course of a summary trial under this
sub-clause, it appears to the Special Court that the nature of the case
is such that it is undesirable to try such case in summary, the Special
Court shall recall any witness who may have been examined and
proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided by the provisions
of the said Code for the trial of such offence. The proviso to the said
sub-clause further provides that in case of any conviction in a
summary trial under this clause, it shall be lawful for a Special Court
to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five
years.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that a Special Court may,
with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to
have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to, any offence
tender pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and
true disclosure of the circumstances within his knowledge relating to
the offence and to every other person concerned whether as principal
or abettor in the commission thereof, and any pardon so tendered
shall, for the purposes of section 308 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure,1973, be deemed to have been tendered under section 307
thereof.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the Special Court may
determine the civil liability against a person in terms of money for
raising, transporting or causing to be raised or transported without
any lawful authority any mineral from any land, which shall not be
less than an amount equivalent to two times of the value of mineral
and the amount of liability so determined shall be recovered as if it
were a decree of civil court.
Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that the civil liability so
determined finally by the Special Court shall be payable to the State
Government or to the person in whom the mineral vests, as the case
may be.
The explanation to the sub-clause provides that civil liability means
loss or damage incurred by the State Government or concerned
authorities, as the case may be, due to the commission of an offence,
under clauses 110, 111, 112 and 113.

507
Clause 107.—This clause relates to the Special court to have powers
of court of sessions.
This clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in so far as they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, shall apply to the
proceedings before the Special Court, and the Special Court shall be
deemed to be a Court of Session and shall have all powers of a
Court of Session and the person conducting a prosecution before the
Special Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.
Clause 108.—This clause relates to the Appeal and revision.
This clause provides that the High Court may exercise, so far as
may be applicable, all the powers conferred by Chapters XXIX and
XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as if the Special Court
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court is a District
Court, or as the case may be, the Court of Session, trying cases within
the local limits of jurisdiction of the High Court.
Clause 109.—This clause relates to the Review.
This clause provides that the Special Court may, on a petition or
otherwise and in order to prevent miscarriage of justice, review its
judgment or order passed under this clause, but no such review
petition shall be entertained except on the ground that it was such
order passed under a mistake of fact, ignorance of any material fact
or any error apparent on the face of the record. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that the Special Court shall not allow any
review petition and modify or set aside its previous order or judgment
without hearing the parties affected.
Clause 110.—This clause relates to the Punishment for
reconnaissance, prospecting and mining operations without licence or
lease.
This clause provides that whoever contravenes any of the
provisions of clause 4, shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to,—(i) in cases of exploration without licence,
two years, or with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees per hectare or part thereof subject to a maximum of fifteen
lakh rupees in case of prospecting, or with both; (ii) in cases of mining
without a lease, three years, or with fine which may extend to ten
times the value of the mineral mined, or with both.

508
Clause 111.—This clause relates to the penalty for non
implementation of final mine closure plan.
This clause provides that a lessee, who fails to implement a Final
Mine Closure Plan in accordance with the provisions of this Act, or,
abandons the mine or any portion of the mining lease area, which is
likely to be a danger to the health and safety of the inhabitants of
the area, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one thousand
rupees per day per hectare for the period of such default.
Clause 112.—This clause relates to the penalty for disobeying
direction of the State Government, etc.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that whoever disobeys any
direction given by the State Government or the Indian Bureau of
Mines or any other authority empowered in this behalf under this
Act or any other law for the time being in force shall be liable to a
penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees per day for the
period of such disobedience. Sub-clause (2) of this clause further
provides that any person, who fails to comply with the directions of
the State Government under sub-clause (4) of clause 30, shall be liable
to be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three
years.
Clause 113.—This clause relates to the penalty for contravention of
Act and rules. This clause provides that whoever contravenes any
provision of the proposed legislation or the rules made thereunder
shall, if no penalty is provided elsewhere be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and in the
case of continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees for every day during which such
contravention continues after conviction for the first such
contravention.
Clause 114.—This clause relates to the recovery, seizure, etc., of
minerals raised by any person without lawful authority.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that whenever any person
raises, without any lawful authority, any mineral from any land,
without prejudice to any other action under the law for the time
being in force, the State Government may recover from such person,
or from such other person to whom the mineral may have been
transferred, the mineral so raised, and the cost of its disposal or,
where such mineral has already been disposed of, the price of the

509
mineral so disposed of, and may also recover from such person, rent,
royalty, tax or cess, as the case may be, for the period during which
the land was occupied by such person without such lawful authority.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that whenever any person
raises, transports or causes to be raised or transported, without any
lawful authority, any mineral from any land, and, for that purpose,
uses any tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing, any officer
empowered by the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be, may by general or special order in this behalf seize
such mineral, tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing, and the
court having jurisdiction may order the confiscation and disposal of
any such mineral, tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing so seized.
Clause 115.—This clause relates to the offences by companies.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if the person committing
an offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder is a company,
every person who at the time the offence was committed was directly
in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of offence and be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly . The proviso to the said sub-clause provides
that nothing contained in this sub-clause shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-clause (1), where an offence under this Act
has been committed by the company and it is proved that the offence
has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly .
The explanation to the sub-clause provides that (a) “company”
means any body corporate and includes a firm or cooperative or
other association of individuals; and (b) “director” in relation to a
firm means a partner in the firm.
Clause 116.—This clause relates to the Cognizance of offences by
courts:

510
This clause provides that no court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Act or any rules made thereunder except
upon a complaint in writing made by a person authorised in this
behalf by general or special order of the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.
Clause 117.—This clause relates to the Compounding of offences.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any offence punishable
under this Act or any rule made thereunder which provides for
imprisonment may, either before or after the institution of the
prosecution, be compounded by the person authorised under
clause 116 to make a complaint to the court with respect to that
offence, on payment to that person, for credit to the Government, of
such sum as the compounding fee at such rate as may be prescribed
which shall not exceed five times the maximum rate of the fine for
the offence.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where an offence is
compounded under sub-clause (1), no proceeding or further
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in
respect of the offence so compounded, and the offender, if in custody,
shall be released forthwith.
Clause 118.—This clause relates to the recovery of certain sums as
arrears of land revenue.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any rent, royalty, tax,
cess, fee or other sum due to the Government either under this Act
or any rule made thereunder or under the terms and conditions of
any non-exclusive reconnaissance licence, high-technology
reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence, prospecting licence or mining
lease may, on a certificate of such officer as may be specified by the
State Government in this behalf by general or special order, be
recovered in the same manner as if it were an arrear of land revenue
and every such sum which becomes due to the Government on or
after the commencement of this Act, together with the interest due
thereon shall be a first charge on the assets of the holder of the non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence, high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licence, prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case
may be. The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in respect
of a mineral concession relating to a land in which the mineral vests
in a private person, such sum may also be recovered in the same
manner from such person.
Clause 119.—This clause relates to the ineligibility for grant of
mineral concession.

511
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, or any other person convicted
of an offence punishable under this Act, or a company or its director,
manager, secretary or any other person punishable with fine under
this Act, such company or its director, manager, secretary or other
officer or any other such person shall be ineligible for the purpose of
grant of any mineral concession under this Act for a period of five
years from the date of conviction, or imposition of fine, as the case
may be.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that if any person convicted
of an offence under clauses 110, 111, 112 and 113 of this Act holds a
mineral concession under this Act at the time of such conviction, the
State Government, having regard to the nature and gravity of the
offence, may cancel or determine any or all such mineral concessions.
The proviso to the said sub-clause provides that in respect of a mineral
concession relating to land the minerals of which vest in a private
person, the Government may direct such person to determine the
lease. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that no
such order shall be made without giving an opportunity of being
heard to the person holding the mineral concession and recording
reasons. The proviso to the said sub-clause also provides that
provisions of sub-clause (3) of clause 30 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply
to every such case under this clause.
Clause 120.—This clause relates to the punishment for vexatious
complaints.
This clause provides that whoever files any written complaint,
referred to in clause (g) of sub-clause (1) of clause 69, to the National
Authority which is found to be frivolous or vexatious, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
Clause 121.—This clause relates to the punishment for violation of
directions of National Authority.
This clause provides that whoever violates the directions of the
National Authority issued under sub-clause (4) of clause 68, shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
and in case of second or subsequent offence with a fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees and in the case of continuing
contravention with an additional fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.
Clause 122.—This clause relates to the punishment for obstructing
Investigation Officer or Investigating Authority.

512
This clause provides that whoever, obstructs an Investigation
Officer or the Investigating Authority exercising the power of the
Investigation Officer, in the exercise of his power or discharge of his
duties under this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine or with both.
Clause 123.—This clause relates to the power of entry and
inspections.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that for the purpose of
ascertaining the position of the working, actual or prospective, of any
mine or abandoned mine or for any other purpose connected with
this Act or the rules made thereunder, any person authorised by the
Indian Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate in this behalf by
general order, may,— (a) enter and inspect any mine; (b) survey and
take measurements in any such mine; (c) weigh, measure or take
measurements of the stocks of minerals lying at any mine; (d) examine
any document, book, register, or record in the possession or power of
any person having the control of, or connected with, any mine and
place marks of identification thereon, and take extracts from or make
copies of such document, book, register or record; (e) order the
production of any such document, book, register, record, referred to
in clause (d); and (f) examine any person having the control of, or
connected with, any mine.
The explanation to the said sub-clause provides that the expression
“record” includes any electronic record as referred to in clause (t) of
section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every person authorised
by the Indian Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate and in case of
coal minerals by the Central Government under sub-clause (1) shall
be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21
of the Indian Penal Code, and every person to whom an order or
summons is issued by virtue of the power conferred by clause (c) or
clause (f) of sub-clause (1) shall comply with such order or summons,
as the case may be.
Clause 124.—This clause relates to the power to search, enter and
inspect by any officer of the Central Government or a State
Government.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if any officer of the
Central Government or a State Government authorised by the Central
Government or a State Government, as the case may be, in this behalf

513
by general or special order has reason to believe that any mineral has
been raised in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder or any document or thing in relation to such mineral
is secreted in any place or vehicle, he may search for such mineral,
document or thing and the provisions of section 100 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to every such search.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that for the purpose of
ascertaining the position of the working, actual or prospective, of any
mine or abandoned mine or for any other purpose connected with
this Act or the rules made thereunder, any person authorised by the
Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, in
this behalf by general or special order, may,— (a) enter and inspect
any mine or mining operations or mineral bearing area; (b) survey
and take measurements in any such mine or area; (c) weigh, measure
or take measurements of the stocks of minerals lying at any mine;
(d) examine any document, book, register, or record in the possession
or power of any person having the control of, or connected with, any
mine or mining operations and place marks of identification thereon,
and take extracts from or make copies of such document, book, register
or record; (e) order the production of any such document, book,
register, record, as is referred to in clause (d); and (f) examine any
person having the control of, or connected with, any mine or mining
operations.
The explanation to the said sub-clause provides that the expression
‘Record’ includes electronic record as referred to in clause (t) of
clause 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that every person authorised
by the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may
be, under sub-clause (1) shall be deemed to be a public servant within
the meaning of clause 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and every person
to whom an order or summons is issued by virtue of the power
conferred by clause (c) or clause (f) of that sub-clause shall comply
with such order or summons, as the case may be.
The explanation to the said sub-clause provides that the expression
“Mining operations” includes any activity relating to the raising of
any mineral, whether licenced or not.
Clause 125.—This clause relates to the declaration of a mineral as
a major mineral.

514
This clause provides that the Central Government may, by
notification, declare any mineral, or any grade thereof as a major
mineral for all or any specified purpose or omit any mineral from the
list of major minerals, and upon doing so, the First Schedule to the
Act shall be deemed to have been amended.
Clause 126.—This clause relates to the accreditation of agencies.
This clause provides that the Central Government may prescribe
the qualifications and conditions of accreditation of agencies authorised
to prepare feasibility studies in accordance with the provisions of the
United Nations Framework Classification adopted and notified by the
Central Government for the purposes of this Act or any other notified
code of practice, including preparation of mining plans, mine closure
plans and plans under sustainable development framework, and the
Indian Bureau of Mines shall function as the accreditation grants
agency for the purpose.
Clause 127.—This clause relates to the Special provisions to deal
with certain contingencies.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that it shall be the duty of
the Indian Bureau of Mines or any authority of the Central
Government as may be designated in respect of coal and atomic
minerals, to render such assistances as may be required by the State
Government to ensure that mining activities are regulated in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that where the Indian Bureau
of Mines or authority designated under sub-clause (1), on the basis of
information available to it is of the opinion that the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder are not being complied with and
that illegal or unscientific mining is going on in any State, the Indian
Bureau of Mines or such authority shall make a report to this effect
to the Central Government, and the Central Government may issue
such direction as it may consider necessary to the State Government,
relating to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) investigation and prosecution of offences; (b) revocation of mineral
concessions; and (c) any measures to strengthen the administrative
machinery for better regulation of mining in accordance with the
provisions of Act.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that where it appears to the
Central Government that the directions referred to in sub-clause (2)
have not been complied with or where it appears that despite the

515
purported compliance of the directions further steps are necessary,
the Central Government may direct the authority referred to in sub-
clause (2), for:— (a) making written complaints under clause 61 for
the investigation and prosecution of offences; (b) revocation of mineral
concessions in accordance with the provisions of the Act; and (c) any
other measures as may be deemed fit in the circumstances.
Clause 128.—This clause relates to the approval of the Central
Government to the State Government.
This clause provides that where in any case previous approval of
the Central Government is required under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, the request for such approval shall be made to the Central
Government by the State Government along with the recommendations
of the State Government on the matters for which the prior approval
of the Central Government is sought, and all facts relevant to the
matter on which such approval is sought.
Clause 129.—This clause relates to the bar of jurisdiction.
This clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter which the
Special Court or the National Mining Tribunal and the State Mining
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect
of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
Clause 130.—This clause relates to the delegation of powers.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government
may, by notification, direct that any power exercisable by it under
this Act may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions,
if any, as may be specified in the notification, be also exercisable
by:— (a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central
Government; or (b) such State Government or such officer or authority
subordinate to a State Government; as may be specified in the
notification.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the State Government
may, by notification may, direct that any power exercisable by it under
this Act may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions,
if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercisable also by
such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as may
be specified in the notification.

516
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that any rule made by the
Central Government under this Act may confer powers and impose
duties or authorise the conferring of powers and imposition of duties
upon any State Government or any officer or authority subordinate
thereto.
Clause 131.—This clause relates to the power of the Central
Government to make rules.
This clause confers power upon the Central Government to make
rules in respect of the rules specified in the said rules.
Clause 132.—This clause relates to the power of the State
Government to make rules.
This clause confers power upon the State Government to make
rules in respect of the rules specified in the said rules.
Clause 133.—This clause relates to the laying of the rules.
This clause provides that the rules made by the Central
Government and notifications issued by it under sub-section (3) of
section 41, sub-section (3) of section 42 and section 125 shall be laid
before each House of Parliament. Similarly every rule made by the
State Government and notifications issued by it under sub-section (4)
of section 41 and sub-section (4) of section 42 shall be laid before the
State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such
legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Clause 134.—This clause relates to the Members and staff of
Tribunals to be public servants.
This clause provides that the Chairperson and other Members
and the officers and other employees of the National Mining
Regulatory Authority, National Mining Tribunal, State Mining
Regulatory Authority and State Mining Tribunal are deemed to be the
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
Clause 135.—This clause relates to the application of other law not
barred.
This clause provides that the provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other
laws for the time being in force.

517
Clause 136.—This clause relates to the protection of action taken
in good faith.
This clause provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against any person for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Clause 137.—This clause relates to the transitory provisions.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that all applications received
under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957:— (i) for grant of prospecting licence or a mining lease after
completing exploration under a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting
licence, as the case may be, or, (ii) for which prior approval of the
Central Government for grant of mineral concessions, has been given
or, (iii) where a letter of intent (by whatever name it is called) has
been issued by the State Government to grant reconnaissance permit
or prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, and was
pending grant of the concession under this Act for fulfilment of the
conditions of the letter of intent, and the application for grant of the
mineral concessions is pending with the State Government at the time
of commencement of this Act, shall be processed in accordance with
the provisions of this Act for grant of concession. The proviso to the
said sub-clause provides that the State Government may impose special
conditions relating to payment of application fees, licence fee, security,
at the time of grant of mineral concessions to holder of application
considered in terms of this sub-clause to comply with the provisions
of this Act.
The explanation to the said sub-clause clarifies that in case of an
application for reconnaissance permit considered under this Act, in
terms of this sub-clause, the State Government shall grant a non-
exclusive reconnaissance licence:
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that in case of such area
where applications for grant of prospecting licence or mining lease
received before the commencement of this Act have become ineligible
in terms of the provisions of the Act, the area applied for under such
applications shall be notified by the State Government for inviting
applications in accordance with the provisions of clause 13 for
prospecting or for mining, as may be appropriate, having regard to
the available evidence of mineralisation. The proviso to the said sub-
clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in clause 13,
the State Government may amalgamate areas or expand areas covered
by such applications in the interest of scientific mining and may invite

518
applications within a period of twelve months from the commencement
of this Act. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that
in case no notification is issued within the period specified in the
first proviso, the area shall be made available, subject to the provisions
of sub-clause (5) for grant of prospecting licence under the provisions
of clause 22.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that applications for renewal
of mineral concessions made under the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and pending on the date of
commencement of this Act shall be disposed off as applications for
extension in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that a person who holds a
reconnaissance permit prior to the commencement of this Act shall be
entitled to continue to hold the permit to the exclusion of all others
for a period of two years or till the validity of the permit whichever
is earlier, and during such period no other reconnaissance or high-
technology reconnaissance cum exploration licence applications shall
be entertained for the area covered by the reconnaissance permit, and
the permit holder shall be deemed to be the holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence for the purpose of sub-clause (6) of clause 22.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that no application for
prospecting licence shall be entertained by the State Government for
a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act in
respect of major minerals (except coal minerals and atomic minerals),
other than such applications made in accordance with the provisions
of sub-clause (7) of clause 22, unless the State Government, by
notification, invites applications for grant of prospecting licences. The
proviso to the said sub-clause provides that the State Government
may invite applications in different Districts of the State on different
dates. The proviso to the said sub-clause further provides that the
Central Government may extend the period specified in this sub-
clause for a period not exceeding one year by notification for reasons
of scientific mining or proper regulation of mineral development on
a request from the State Government.
Clause 138.—This clause relates to the repeal and saving.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 is hereby repealed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that all rules made under
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, shall be deemed to have

519
been made under this Act where such rules were made and shall
continue in force unless and until they are superseded or amended
by any rules made under this Act.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that all acts done,
proceedings taken or notifications or orders issued and sentences
passed under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957, shall be valid and operative as if they had been done,
taken, passed or issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act,
and no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued
against any person whatsoever, on the ground that any such acts,
proceedings or sentences were not done, taken or passed in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that notwithstanding such
repeal, any act done or order passed under that Act shall be deemed
to have been done or passed under this Act except to the extent that
such act or order is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the mention of particular
matters in sub-clause (4) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897,
with regard to the effect of repeal.
Clause 139.—This clause relates to the power to remove difficulties.
This clause empowers the Central Government to make, by order
published in the Official Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties
in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. Such
orders could be made only within two years from the commencement
of the proposed legislation.

520
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 58 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to establish a National Authority to be known as the
National Mining Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred
on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under the Bill in
relation to major minerals (other than coal minerals). Sub-clause (3)
of clause 62 provides that the salary and other allowances payable to
the Chairperson and other Members of the National Mining Regulatory
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. Sub-clause (4) of clause 67 of the Bill provides that the
salaries and allowances payable to the officers and other employees
of the National Mining Regulatory Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
2. Clause 75 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
establish a Tribunal to be known as the National Mining Tribunal to
exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such
Tribunal by or under the Bill. Sub-clause (1) of clause 76 of the Bill
provides that a National Mining Tribunal shall consist of a full-time
Chairperson and not more than seven judicial members and seven
expert members to be appointed by the Central Government. Sub-
clause (3) of clause 79 of the Bill provides that the salary and other
allowances payable to the Chairperson and other Members of the
National Mining Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government. Sub-clause (4) of clause 84 of the Bill provides
that the salaries and allowances payable to the officers and other
employees of the National Mining Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 50 of the Bill enables the Central
Government to establish a fund to be called the National Mineral
Fund for the purposes of the Bill. Sub-clause (1) of clause 44 of the
Bill empowers the Central Government to levy and collect cess on
major minerals. Sub-clause (2) of clause 50 of the Bill provides that
the proceeds of the cess levied under sub-clause (1) of clause 44 shall
first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central
Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of
money as the Central Government may consider necessary to the
National Mineral Fund from time to time, after deducting the expenses
of collection, for being utilised for the purposes of making grants to
the National Mining Regulatory Authority under the National Mining
Tribunal.

521
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 104 provides that the Central
Government may, by notification, establish a National Drill Core
Repository for preservation and archiving of drill cores generated
during mineral exploration and a National Geophysical Data
Repository for holding, authenticating and disseminating geophysical
data for the purposes of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of clause 104 provides
that these Repositories shall be managed and maintained in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
5. Keeping in view the manpower requirements and the total
financial implication in setting up the National Mineral Regulatory
Authority and the National Mining Tribunal on a representative basis
it is estimated that the recurring annual expenditure of the National
Mining Regulatory Authority and the National Mining Tribunal shall
be approximately in the range of Rs. 17.43 crore and the non-recurring
capital investment is estimated to be Rs. 1.50 crore for the
establishment of the National Mining Regulatory Authority and the
National Mining Tribunal, which would be borne by the Central
Government. It is estimated that the Central Government would obtain
through the levy of cess on major minerals revenue of Rs. 77 crore.
National Drill Core Repository and National Geophysical Data
Repository would be set up entirely out of the budget allocation for
the Geological Survey of India.

522
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 131 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make,
by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the
matter in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters
shall include,—(a) the form and manner of application to be made to
the State Governments along with application fee and earnest money
under sub-clause (5) of clause 4; (b) the manner of grant of mining
lease for atomic minerals by the State Government under sub-clause (9)
of clause 4; (c) the manner of publication of the report of the
reconnaissance or prospecting operations and the manner of intimation
of the same to the State Government under sub-clause (10) of
clause 4; (d) the manner in which a person is to be registered with
Indian Bureau of Mines or the State Directorate or any other agency
authorised by the Central Government under sub-clause (1) of
clause 5; (e) identification of mineral or group of associated minerals
for the purpose of granting of high-technology reconnaissance-cum-
exploration licences under sub-clause (1) of clause 6; (f) the manner
of surrender of area out of licence by the holder of a non-exclusive
reconnaissance licence, high-technology reconnaissance cum exploration
licence and prospecting licence under sub-clause (5) of clause 6;
(g) procedure and condition for grant of mining lease for small
deposits under sub-clause (6) of clause 6; (h) the manner of approval
of mining plan for extension of mining lease under sub-clause (6) of
clause 7; (i) the manner, terms and conditions in which competitive
bidding and auction for coal minerals to take place under sub-clause (6)
of clause 8; (j) the manner of making available the data relating to
the grant, extension, termination and plan of operations in the official
website under sub-section (8) of clause 8; (k) the manner of evaluation
of bids under sub-clause (7) of clause 13; (l) the manner of inviting
applications in grant of mineral concessions for coal minerals under
sub-clause (9) of clause 13; (m) the procedure for notifying an area
for inviting applications for major minerals and grant of mineral
concessions under sub-clause (12) of clause 13; (n) the amount of fee
to be charged by the State Governments for transfer of the minerals
concession under sub-clause (6) of clause 17; (o) the manner of
payment of remaining amount of bid to the State Government under
clause (a) of sub-clause (3) of section 18; (p) the additional fee to be
fixed by the Central Government under the proviso to clause (b) of
sub-clause (3) of clause 18; (q) the other particulars for transfer of
mining lease in clause (e) of sub-clause (4) of clause 18; (r) the fee to
be charged for transfer of mining lease in case of a major mineral
under sub-clause (9) of clause 18; (s) the manner of submission of
reconnaissance plan under clause (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 19;
(t) the manner of providing data by the licence holder within such

523
intervals under clause (c) of sub-clause (1) of clause 19; (u) the manner
of submitting reports by the licence holder within such intervals under
clause (f) of sub-clause (1) of clause 19; (v) the other conditions for
grant of non-exclusive reconnaissance licence under clause (1) of
sub-clause (1) of clause 19; (w) the general conditions relating to the
non-exclusive licence under sub-clause (2) of clause 19; (x) the form
and manner of application to be made to the State Governments along
with application fee and earnest money under sub-clause (1) of
clause 20; (y) the manner of acknowledging and registering of
applications under sub-clause (2) of clause 20; (z) conditions for high-
technology reconnaissance-cum-exploration licence and prospecting
licence to be fulfilled by the licence holder under sub-clause (1) of
clause 21; (za) the form and manner of application to be made to the
State Governments for grant of high-technology reconnaissance cum
exploration licence and prospecting licence along with application fee
and earnest money under sub-clause (1) of clause 22; (zb) the manner
of acknowledging and registering of applications under sub-clause (2)
of clause 22; (zc) the manner of submission of report relating to the
prospecting operations by the holder of high-technology reconnaissance
and exploration licence and a prospecting licence to the State
Government under sub-clause (2) of clause 23; (zd) the particulars to
be furnished by the lessee relating to mining lease under clause (f) of
sub-clause (1) of clause 24; (ze) the manner and period of submission
of report relating to the data relating to mining lease under
sub-clause (1) of clause 24; (zf) the manner of restoration of a mining
area under item (l) of sub-clause (1) of clause 24; (zg) the amount of
security deposits to be paid by the lessee under clause (n) of
sub-clause (1) of clause 24; (zh) the manner of setting up of a grievance
redressal mechanism by the lessee under clause (o) of sub-clause (1)
of clause 24; (zi) conditions for mining to be fulfilled by the lessee
under clause (p) of sub-clause (1) of clause 24; (zj) the manner of
acknowledging and registering of applications under sub-clause (2) of
clause 25; (zk) general conditions to be fulfilled for grant of mining
lease under sub-clause (3) of clause 25; (zl) the manner of preparation
of a mining plan under sub-clause (1) of clause 26; (zm) empanelment
and accreditation of qualified persons for preparation of mining plan
under sub-clauses (4) and (5) of clause 26; (zn) technical and
management capability of the State Directorate for grant of approval
for major minerals under sub-clause (6) of clause 26; (zo) the manner
of extension of mining lease under sub-clause (1) of clause 28;
(zp) the procedure for condoning delay and revival or commencement
or re-commencement of mining operations under sub-clause (4) of
clause 29; (zq) conditions for determination of mining lease under
sub-clause (1) of clause 30; (zr) the manner of providing compensation
to the lessee under sub-clause (2) of clause 31; (zs) manner of
preparation of progressive mine closure plan and final mine closure
plan under clause 32; (zt) the manner of determination of costs of
mine closure under sub-clause (4) of clause 33; (zu) the method of

524
calculation of for payment to be made by the lessee for coal minerals
under the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 43; (zv) the manner of
registration of person or company or firm or association using or
trading in or exporting or stocking mineral with the Indian Bureau of
Mines under sub-clause (5) of clause 44; (zw) sustainable development
framework under sub-clause (6) of clause 46; (zx) matters in which
State Government may issue directions under clause 47; (zy) the
manner and availability of reports to such persons and at such costs
under sub-clause (7) of clause 48; (zz) maintenance of accounts in
respect of National Mineral Fund under sub-clause (1) of clause 52;
(zza) the other expenditure utilised for the District Mineral Foundation
under sub-clause (6) of clause 56; (zzb) the manner of approving
such other expenditure available with the District Mineral Foundation
under clause (c) of sub-clause (2) of clause 57; (zzc) the salary and
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and Members of the National Authority under
sub-clause (3) of clause 62; (zzd) the procedure for conducting any
inquiry under sub-clause (2) of clause 64; (zze) the manner of
appointment of the officers and other employees of the National
Authority under sub-clause (2) of clause 67; (zzf) the salary and other
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of, the officers and other employees of the National Authority under
sub-clause (4) of clause 67; (zzg) qualifications for appointment of
Investigation Officer under sub-clause (4) of clause 69; (zzh) the salary
and other allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members of the National Mining
Tribunal under sub-clause (3) of clause 79; (zzi) the manner of removal
of Chairperson or any Member of the National Mining Tribunal under
sub-clause (2) of clause 81; (zzj) the manner of recruitment, salaries,
allowances and conditions of service of officers and other employees
of National Mining Tribunal under clause 84; (zzk) the other powers
of National Mining Tribunal under clause 85; (zzl) the form and
manner of application to National Mining Tribunal along with
application fee under clause 86; (zzm) the manner of managing the
National Repositories and the data under sub-clause (2) of clause 104;
(zzn) the rate of compounding fee for credit to the Government under
sub-clause (1) of clause 117; and (zzo) any other matter which is to
be, or may be prescribed under this Act.
2. Clause 132 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make,
by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the
matter in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters
shall include,—(a) the manner of publication of data that would be
available to the general public under the proviso to sub-clause (10) of
section 4; (b) the manner of making available the data on mineral
concessions to the public under sub-clause (8) of clause 8; (c) the
procedure for notification for grant of mineral concession of minor
mineral under sub-clause (13) of clause 13; (d) the manner in which

525
a notification may be issued for inviting competitive financial bids
under sub-clause (2) of clause 18; (e) the fee to be charged for the
transfer of the mining lease in case of a minor mineral under sub-
clause (7) of clause 18; (f) the rate and in the manner of levy of
surface rent and water rate under clause (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause
24; (g) the manner of payment of compensation to the owner of
surface, usufruct and traditional rights under sub-clause (1) of clause
43; (h) the amount to be paid by the holder of the District Mineral
Foundation in case of minor minerals under sub-clause (2) of clause
43; (i) the manner of identification of the persons or families affected
by mining related operations, determination of monetary benefit to
each person or family, and monitoring mechanism under sub-clause (10)
of clause 43; (j) the manner of administration of State Mineral Fund
under sub-clause (3) of clause 53; (k) the manner of audit of State
Mineral Fund under sub-clause (1) of clause 55; (l) the manner of
constitution of District Mineral Foundation under sub-clause (1) of
clause 56; (m) the manner of consultation with affected persons or
families under sub-clause (1) of clause 57; (n) the manner of
preparation of annual statement of accounts by District Mineral
Foundation and audit under sub-clause (6) of clause 57; (o) the manner
of composition and procedures of State Authority under clause 71;
(p) the terms of office, salaries and allowances of the Chairperson
and members of State Mining Tribunal under sub-clause (3) of clause
(93); (q) the manner of removal of Chairperson or any Member of the
State Mining Tribunal under sub-clause (2) of clause 95; (r) the manner
of recruitment, salaries, allowances and conditions of services of officers
and other employees of State Mining Tribunal under sub-clause (2) of
clause 98; (s) the other powers of the State Mining Tribunal under
clause 99; (t) the form and manner of application to State Mining
Tribunal along with application fee under clause 100; (u) the other
functions of State Co-ordination-cum-Empowered Committee under
clause 103; and (v) any other matter which is to be, or may be
prescribed under this Act.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and notifications
issued by it under sub-section (3) of section 41, sub-section (3) of
section 42 and section 125 under the proposed legislation shall be
required to be laid before the Parliament.
4. The rules made by the State Government and notification issued
by it under sub-section (4) of section 41 and sub-section (4) of section
42 under the proposed legislation shall be required to be laid before
the State Legislatures.
5. The matters in respect of which rules may be made and
notifications issued are matters of procedure and administrative detail
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

526
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the scientific
development and regulation of mines and minerals
under the control of the Union
————
(Shri Dinsha Patel, Minister for Mines )