 
 
41 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
"REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF COAL MINES PROVIDENT FUND 
ORGANISATION(CMPFO)"  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth  Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-FIRST  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2013/AGRAHAYANA, 1935(Saka) 
 


 
 
FORTY-FIRST  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
"REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF COAL MINES PROVIDENT FUND 
ORGANISATION (CMPFO)" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   17.12.2013 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2013/Agrahayana 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
CC&S No. 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v) 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
13 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
20 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
21 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
26 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Details of contract workers covered under CMPFO..................... 29 
II. Details of pending cases of PF refund and Pension claims.......... 30 
III. Details of Citizen’s Charter drafted for Coal Mines Provident fund 
Organisation....................................................................... 
32 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 10.12.2013…………………………………………... 
 
       37 
V. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
       39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
 
 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Vandana P. Guleria   - Sr. Comm. Assistant
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations /recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, 
"Review of Performance of Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO)"   
pertaining to the Ministry of Coal.  
 
2.  The Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd April, 2013. Replies of the 
Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 20th September, 2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on  10.12.2013.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-V.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I  
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
      16 December, 2013                                                                           Chairman 
      25 Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on "Review of Performa nce of Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Organisation (CMPFO)" relating to  the Ministry of Coal 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.04.2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 25.04.2013. 
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry  of 
Coal in respect of all the 15  Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 20th September, 201 3. These have been categorised as 
follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
Sl. Nos.3, 4,  10, 11, 12, 13 and 15 
         Total – 7 
                (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. No. 14 
Total – 01  
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos.  1, 2, 6 and 8 
Total – 04 
                         (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. No. 5, 7 and 9 
                       Total – 03 
     (Chapter V) 
 

 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given 
to implementation  of the Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for 
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
on some of their observations/recommendations made in the Thirtieth 
Report.  
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES  
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
5. The Committee note d that as per the provisions of the Coal Mines 
Provident and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1948, the employees engaged 
by public and private sector Coal Mining Companies are to be covered 
under the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme, 1948 and Coal Mines 
Pension Scheme, 1998 and Coal Mines Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme, 
1976 and Coal Mines Prov ident Fund Organisation(CMPFO) wa s 
responsible for administering these schemes through a tripartite  Board of 
Trustees consisting of Government representatives, employer s' 
representatives and employees representatives. The Provident Fund 
Inspectors of CMPFO working under the control of jurisdictional regional 
Commissioners inspect the colliery office regularly and submit their 
inspection report every month to Commissioner , Headquarter. The 
Committee were, however, constrained to observe that inspections by 
Provident Fund Inspectors were carried out only in Collieries of 
Subsidiaries companies of Coal India Ltd.  Moreover, the report on 
coverage of company-wise contract labourers (as on 31.03.2012) showed  
that only 34004 contract labourers of Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiary 

 
 
companies were covered by CMPFO.  In view o f the foregoing, the 
Committee we re inclined to observe that private/captive coal mine 
workers had not been  covered by CMPFO thus compromising the social 
security of such workers. The Committee would like the Ministry of 
Coal/CMPFO to ensure that all workers in private/ captive coal mines were 
covered under all the 3 schemes of social security by CMPFO, and the y 
would like to be apprised of the data available with all the Regional Offices 
of CMPFO where priva te/captive coal mine workers had  been covered by 
them and the reasons for not covering private mine workers.  
6. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"The CMPFO is making sincere efforts to ensure that the issue 
of coverage of private/captive coal mine workers is taken up 
with  the concerned Coal Companies.  
The Ministry of Coal has also been monitoring and r eviewing the 
progress in this regard by way of issuing instructions to  CMPFO. 
The number of contract workers covered under CMPFO is at 
Annexure-1.  The Regional Commissioners have been directed to 
follow up with the coal companies for enrolment of contrac tor’s 
workers including workers employed in captive coal blocks. The 
CMPF Inspectors have also been advised to inspect  the records of 
coal companies in this regard.            
In addition to the above progress  is being reviewed in meetings of 
Board of Tr ustees.  In the 158 th Meeting of the Board of Trustees, 
the Chairman has given the following directions : 
(a)        All Regional Commissioners should initiate special drive to 
cover eligible contractors’ workers under CMPFO especially in 
respect of the private coal blocks which have gone into production;   
(b)        A region -wise statement showing new members covered 
under CMPFO during the period should be placed in the next BOT 
meeting 
(c)        The Commissioner should review the progress on monthly 
basis and present the consolidated position in the next BOT .   
(d)        The Commissioner, CMPFO should use statutory powers to 
invoke the provisions of CMPF and Miscellaneous Provision Ac t, 
1948  
(e)        In addition with regard to membership of coal workers 
under EPFO, the BOT directed that to verify the claims of 
contractors regarding membership of EPFO, a joint survey with 
EPFO be carried out on units of SCCL at Godavarikhani, WCL at 
Nagpur, SECL at Bilaspur and CCL under the jurisdiction of CMPF 

 
 
Regional Office, Ranchi -III.  Joint Commissioner, CMPFO may coordinate 
with EPFO to submit the findings in the next BOT meeting. FA, EPFO may 
be contacted for any assistance in this regard. 
It will be the endeavour of the Ministry of Coal and CMPFO to maximize 
the coverage especially in respect of captive coal mines in the private 
sector."   
7. As regards covering  all the workers whether working in 
private or captive coal mines under CMPFO, the Committee had 
sought the data available with all regional offices of CMPFO 
regarding the n umber of private/captive coal mine workers 
covered by them alongwith the reasons for not covering private 
mine workers.  The Committee are, however,  disappointed to note 
that despite  passage of 3 months , the Ministry of Coal have not 
provided the  desired information of private/captive coal mine 
workers covered under CMPFO .  The Ministry  in their reply  have 
merely stated that it will be their endeavour to maximize coverage 
in respect of captive coal mines in private sector. The Committee 
are concerned to note the callous attitude of the  Ministry/CMPFO 
in covering the private/captive coal mine  workers and strongly 
feel that some serious efforts are needed on the part of  the 
Ministry/CMPFO instead of making false promises.  The Committee 
would also like the Ministry/CMPFO to make the concer ned 
officers responsible for their  failure to cover all the 
private/captive coal mines under CMPFO .  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  and desire that  
data from each Regional Office should be collated to find the exact 
number of contract  and captive mine workers covered by CMPFO 
and the same be provided to the Committee within 3 months.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of  the reasons for not 
covering private mine workers so far by CMPFO.   
 
COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
8. The Committee were given to understand that Members of 
Parliament were earlier nominated as the Member of Board  of Trustees of 
CMPFO and Ms. Mabel Rebello (now ex-MP) was nominated as the Member 
of the Board of Trustees on 22.2.2005 for a period of three years. The 

 
 
Committee were, however, surprised to note that no name of a ny MP had 
been included in the Board of Trustees of the organisation which was 
constituted on 13 th October, 2009. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for the non inclusion of any MP in the Board of 
Trustees. The Committee would also like the Ministry to include the name 
of MPs from the Coal producing States in  the Board of Trustees w hen it 
was constituted next time.  
9. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"Section 3 -A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund & Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1948 provides for constitution of a Board of Trustees 
consisting of the following persons: 
(a) A chairman appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) The Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner, ex-officio; 
(c) Three persons appointed by the Central Government; 
(d) Not more than six persons representing Governm ent of such 
States as the Central Government may specify [appointed by the 
Central Government] 
(e) Six persons representing employers, appointed by the 
Central Government after consultation with such organisations of 
employers as may be recognised by the Central Government in this 
behalf, and of whom at least one shall be a person who is not a 
member of any such organisation; 
(f) six persons representing employees, appointed by the 
Central Government after consultation with such organisations of 
employees as may be recognised by the Central Government in this 
behalf, and of whom at least one shall be an employee himself and 
at least one shall be a person who is not a member of any such 
organisation.   
All these aspects will be considered whilst re -constituting the Board 
of Trustees." 
 
10. The Committee while observing that a Member of Parliament 
was nominated on Board of Trustees of CMPFO on 22.02.2005 for 
a period of 3 ye ars and had desired to know the reasons for not 
including an M.P. in the Board of Trustees of CMPFO constituted on 
13th October 2009. The Committee have been apprised that 
besides the Chairman & ex -officio Coal Mines Provident Fund 
commissioner, others three persons can be appointed by Central 
government as Members of Board of Trustees.  The Committee feel 
that as Members of Parliament are people’s representatives and 
are generally the first to be approached by the general public 

 
 
whenever they have any grievances  and therefore can also help 
the Board of Trustees to arrive at  just and right decisions and 
frame polices which are people friendly. The Committee, therefore, 
again desire that the Ministry should consider them  to be made 
Members of Board of Trustees.  
 
 
INSPECTIONS BY PROVIDENT FUND INSPECTORS  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
11. The Committee noted that one of the major functions of the CMPFO 
was to ensure regular inspection of the mines for the purpose of upkeep of 
records, deposit of contribution and credit of interests thereon, coverage 
of newly opened mines and contract workers, recovery of damage in 
respect of defaulting coal companies etc.  The Committee were, however, 
dismayed to note that this major function of CMPFO ha d not been 
attended to by the organisation in letter and spirit. The Committee f ound 
that during the financial years 2010 -11, 2011 -12, 2012 -13 (upto 
November, 2012), only 71 inspections have been carried out by Provident 
Fund Inspectors out of a total of 901 coal mines and registered units 
covered by CMPFO. Although, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal during the 
course of evidence, was candid enough in admitting dissatisfaction over 
the inspections carried out by the inspecting officers, the Committee could 
not but deplore the way the CMPFO had failed to discharge its legal duties 
in not getting  all the mines inspected. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to furnish the precise reasons for this colossal failure of CMPFO in 
discharging its duties.  Taking note of important functions of the 
organisation like keeping credit interest, coverage of w orkers in newly 
opened mines which ensure the social security to mine workers and their 
hard earned money, the Committee were not satisfied with such a low 
number of inspections carried out by Provident Fund Inspectors.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the Ministry of 
Coal/CMPFO should ensure that PFIs visit all the 901 coal mines on a 
regular basis as required under section 10(2) of Coal Mines Provident 
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act by drawing up a time bound 

 
 
inspection schedule for inspection of mines  and they be apprised of the 
action taken by the Government in this regard.  
12. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"In order to ensure that inspection of coal mines is carried out more 
frequently, even with limited available Provident Fund Inspectors, 
the Ministry of Coal followed up the matter with CMPFO vigorously.  
A total of 251 inspections have been conducted in the last one and 
half years as compared to 71 inspections as ob served by the 
Committee in the report.  
The Regional Offices of the CMPFO have been advised to continue 
inspection of all the coal mines regularly.  In addition, the 
concerned Director in the Ministry looking after CMPFO has also 
been directed to do inspection of the field offices of CMPFO." 
13. Dissatisfied with the pace and status of inspection of 901 
coal mines, the Committee had desired that CMPFO should accord  
utmost priority for the same.   The Committee feel that only 251  
inspections carried out by CMPFO during last one and a half years 
is very less a s the large workforce is left unchecked by CMPFO.  
The Committee are of the opinion that it is during inspections that 
many shortcomings/deficiencies are detected in the working 
system and inspections also give the management a  
platform/opportunity to interact with the workforce and get 
acquainted with  their problems. While deprecating the present 
lower rate of in spection by CMPFO  in the 901 coal mines during 
the last 18 months, t he Committ ee strongly feel  that with 
appointment of more PF Inspectors , regular and time bound 
inspections will be carried out.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the necessary steps be taken by the Ministry in this regard 
and they be apprised of the same.  
 
INVESTMENT OF FUNDS  
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
14. The Committee noted that CMPFO has invested Rs. 29363.95 crore 
in ICICI Securitie s Primary Dealership Ltd. It had  also invested         

 
 
Rs.16522.5 crore  in the Special Deposit Scheme of the Ministry of  
Finance, which does not seem  appropriate.  The Committee had  failed to 
understand why these funds were not invested in public sector banks.  
The Committee were furth er dismayed to note that there wa s no 
monitoring mechanism in Ministry of Coal and Board o f Trustees(BOT) to 
protect the interest of Coal Mines workers and the then Commissioner, 
CMPFO had acted beyond his delegated powers by extending the tenure of 
Fund Managers without taking approval of BOT.  Thus, the Commissioner 
had neglected the most imp ortant duty assigned to him and the 
investment decisions were left to the wisdom of the portfolio manager.  
While deprecating the unusual powers exercised by the then 
Commissioner, the Committee fail to understand as to why these 
irregularities were not brought to the notic e of the Ministry by BOT which 
was headed by Secretary, Ministry of Coal and why  appropriate action 
was not taken against the Commissioner.  The Committee felt that besides 
taking strict departmental action against all those who were res ponsible 
for flouting rules and p rocedures, the matter should had  been referred to 
a Central Investigating Agency in the first instance.  At the same time, the 
Committee also desire d that in future, the Ministry of Coal should take 
adequate safeguards to s ecure the safety of certificates/instruments of 
investments which are vested with the Fund Managers.   
15. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"Departmental inquiry by CVC in the matter of irregular investment 
of funds against the ex -Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner is 
in progress. However, at present the funds are being invested as 
per norms set by the Government of India, Ministry of Finan ce and 
it is monitored by an Investment Sub -Committee of BOT on a 
quarterly basis.  The Sub -Committee monitors  the performance of 
Fund Managers quarterly as per the benchmark for minimum 
performance fixed by the Committee. 
State Bank of India, PM&CS, Mumbai is the portfolio manager for all 
the corpus/ funds of CMPFO.  The following steps/ checks are in 
place to ensure the safety of all the securities/ instruments vested 
with Fund Manager; 
(i)  All Central/ State Government securities are in DEMAT form and 
are held with RBI. 

 
 
(ii)  All Corporate Bonds are in DEMAT form and are in DEMAT 
account of CMPFO held with Depository Participant.  
(iii)  Investment Bank Fixed Deposits, in physical form are kept in 
fire proof safe.   
(iv)  All the above holdings are bein g audited and reconciled by the 
external auditor on monthly basis."   
16. Taking note of the  departmental enquiry by CVC in the 
matter of irregular investment of funds against the ex -Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Commissioner , the Committee in their earlier 
recommendation had also pointed  out as to why these 
irregularities which had been going on for some time were not 
brought to the notice of the Ministry by the Board of Trustees 
which is headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Coal.  The Committee 
find that the reply of the Ministry is silent about the role of Board 
of Trustees headed by Secretary, Ministry of Coal and feel that the 
then Secretary, Ministry of C oal cannot be absolved of all the 
blame as it is highly unlikely that he was unaware of all these 
irregularities being conducted by the then Commissioner.  The 
Committee are rather sceptical whether full justice would be done 
in this case unless besides the ex-Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Commissioner, all the Members and Chairman of Board of Trustees 
be also brought to book for negligence in the matter.  The 
Committee expect that suitable action should be  taken by the 
Ministry against all the then Board of Trustees and they be 
apprised accordingly. 
 
VACANCIES IN CMPFO 
Recommendation Serial No.8 
 
17. The Committee had  been given to understand that as on 
10.10.2012, out of total sanctioned posts of 1574 , the actual strength of 
CMPFO was only 926 which shows that 41.17% of the total posts were 
lying vacant in the organisation.  The Committee further observe d that 
34.79% posts were vacant in Group 'A' services and 70.14% in Group 'B'.  
Further, Provident Fund Inspe ctors, a Group 'B' service who we re 
responsible to inspect all the Coal Mines and Units,  against a sanctioned 
strength of 30 only 5 are in position .  The Committee were constrained to 
note that though UPSC and Department of Personnel and Training, 
Government of India (Staff Selection Commission) were approached to fill 

 
 
up the vacancies in Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation, the Ministry 
of Coal/C MPFO were informed by these departments/organizations in 
2008 and 2011 to take appropriate action to recruit staff as these were 
autonomous/statutory bodies, but no action had  been taken by them so 
far.  The Committee also t ook a serious note of the fact t hat an Enquiry 
Committee had pointed out that the Commissioner ha d not made serious 
efforts to fill up the vacant posts and thus failed as the head of the 
organisation. What wa s furth er surprising to the Committee wa s that 
though they were apprised of the same by the Ministry of Coal in June, 
2011, no steps were taken by them to strengthen manpower in the 
organisation for its smooth functioning.  The Ministry  of Coal ha d now 
apprised the Committee that an  amendment is required in the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions  Fund Act as suggested by 
the UPSC for recruitment of Group 'A' services. Further, Indian Institute of 
Banking Services is reported to have been approached to fill up vacancies 
in Group 'C' & 'D' services. In view of the foregoing, the Committee cannot 
but deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Government/CMPFO in 
making proper recruitments in the organisation and  strongly recommend 
that the Government should immediately bring the desired amendment on 
the lines of amend ment in Employee Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) 
Act as mentioned by the Secretary(Coal) during his deposition before the 
Committee on 26.11.2012 so as to safeguard the interests of 4.34 lakh 
coal mine workers benefitted from various schemes of CMPFO.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status of 
recruitment to Group 'C' & 'D' posts which was likely to be done through 
Indian Institute of Banking Services.  They desire d that the option of 
getting them recruited through the Staff S election Commission on a 
regular basis may also be explored.  
18. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"The process of recruitment of LDC’s and PFI’s is underway.  CMPFO 
has requested Institute of Banking Personnel Selection to hold 
examinations for selection to the posts of Provident Fund Inspector 
and Lower Division Clerk.    
The Board of Trustees in its 157 th Meeting has approved in principle 
the proposal for recruitment of Group A  officers through the Union 
Public Service Commission.  CMPFO has been directed to initiate the 
process for amendment of Recruitment Rules and the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act which is a 
mandatory requirement for this purpose."  
 
19. While taking a serious view of the fact that so many posts at 
various levels (34.79% vacancies in group A services  and 70.14% 
vacancies in group B ) are lying vacant in the organization , t he 
Committee had recomm ended that an amendment on the lines of 
amendment in the Employee Provident Fund Organization (EPFO) 
Act be brought in immediately and vacancies be filled to safeguard 

 
 
the interests of coal mine workers.  The Committee are surprised 
to note that even though the Board of Trustees has approved t he 
proposal for recruitment of group 'A' officers through UPSC ,  
CMPFO is yet to initiate the process for amendment of Recruitment 
Rules and the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act which is a mandatory requirement for this purpose.  
The Committee are unhappy with inordinate delay in the 
recruitment of posts at different level.  T he Committee are of the 
strong view that CMPFO will be handicapped in the absence of 
adequate staff for implementing various social security schemes 
meant for all the coal mine workers .  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the matter 
of recruitment should be taken up by Ministry of Coal/CMPFO on 
priority basis and necessary steps be taken in this regard including 
amendment to  Recruitment Rules and the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act . They may be apprised 
about the action taken in this regard.  
 
UNCLAIMED MONEY 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 
 
20. The Committee note d that the laboure rs/workers benefitted by 
CMPFO were mainly illiterate and many times were not aware of the rights 
and benefits entitled to them.  Hence, they were at a disadvantage due to 
these factors and the hard earned money due to them remains unclaimed. 
The reasons r eported to the Committee for unclaimed money lying with 
CMPFO were mainly absence of nominee, forfeiture from Member Account, 
non-refundable contribution from Rewa Kobra & Talcher, Bonus forfeited, 
Unclaimed Bonus,  Special Reserve Fund Account, Interest o n Reserve 
Account, Reserve Account Late Fee  and Miscellaneous Reserve. These 
amounts were received from coal companies before their nationalization.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee would like the Ministry of 
Coal/CMPFO to enquire as to how much of the money was lying unclaimed 
with all the Regional Offices and apprise them of the same.  The 
Committee recommend ed the CMPFO to identify the workers/families 
whose claims were pending and settle the same without any further delay.   
The Committee also r ecommended that the workers/pensioners of coal 
industry should be made aware of their rights and entitlements by 
conducting an awareness programme by holding regular camps, issuing 
circulars, putting advertisements in vernacular newspapers and through 
booklets in local dialects, etc.  by the colliery incharges.  The Committee 
also desired that the employees engaged in personnel departm ent of coal 

 
 
companies should hav e direct interaction with employees/labourers and 
they should be made responsible to ensure that labourers furnish the  
required documents and complete the required formalities beforehand to 
enable hassle free settlement of claims.  
21. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"As per the Annual Accounts of FY 2011 -12 approximately Rs. 
10811/- crores are lying in Suspense Account. A  Chartered 
Accountant Firm namely M/s Sarkar Gurumurthy and Associates, 
Kolkata has been engaged to identify the amount of Suspense 
Account lying wit h various Regional Offices of CMPFO.  The 
employer of a coal employee maintains the residential address of its 
employees and it has to forward the claims of the employees for 
payment of unclaimed amounts. As such the coal companies are 
being directed to launch a publicity campaign to collect claims of all 
those employees or from the family members of the deceased 
employees who have yet not preferred their claim for payment of 
their unclaimed Provident Fund accumulations. The jurisdictional 
Regional Offices of the CMPFO are also being informed to keep their 
non-effective ledger accounts ready for prompt disposal of claims 
on receipt from the coal companies." 
22. The Comm ittee have  been r epeatedly conveying their 
concern about the unclaimed money lying with CMPFO as it is felt 
that no worker should be deprived of his hard earned money.  
Keeping that in mind , the Committee  had desired to know how 
much money is lying unclaimed with the Regional Offices  of 
CMPFO.  The Committee are, however, dismayed to note tha t as 
per annual accounts of financial year 2011 -12 approximately Rs. 
10811/- crore are lying in Suspense Account 'A'.  The Committee 
have also been informed that a Chartered Account Firm namely 
M/s Sarkar Gurumurthy and Associates, Kolkata has been engaged 
to identify the amount of suspense account lying with various 
regional offices of CMPFO.  The Committee  would like to be 
apprised of time by when th is firm will complete the assigned  
task.  While emphasising that the Ministry/CMPFO should ensure 
prompt di sposal of refund claims, t he Committee also like that 
continuous and sustained campaign should be conducted by the 
Ministry/CMPFO so that the unclaimed money lying with them 
finds its rightful takers.  
 

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
INSPECTIONS BY PROVIDENT FUND INSPECTORS 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
The Committee note that one of the major functions of the CMPFO 
is to ensure regular inspection of the mines for the purpose of upkeep of 
records, deposit of contribution and credit of interests thereon, coverage 
of newly opened mines and contract workers,  recovery of damage in 
respect of defaulting coal companies etc.  The Committee are, however, 
dismayed to note that this major function of CMPFO has not been 
attended to by the organisation in letter and spirit. The Committee find 
that during the financial  years 2010 -11, 2011 -12, 2012 -13 (upto 
November, 2012), only 71 inspections have been carried out by Provident 
Fund Inspectors out of a total of 901 coal mines and registered units 
covered by CMPFO. Although, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal during the 
course of evidence, was candid enough in admitting dissatisfaction over 
the inspections carried out by the inspecting officers, the Committee 
cannot but deplore the way the CMPFO has failed to discharge its legal 
duties in not getting all the mines inspected. The Committee would like 
the Ministry to furnish the precise reasons for this colossal failure of 
CMPFO in discharging its duties.  Taking note of important functions of the 
organisation like keeping credit interest, coverage of workers in newly 
opened mines which ensure the social security to mine workers and their 
hard earned money, the Committee are not satisfied with such a low 
number of inspections carried out by Provident Fund Inspectors.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry  of 
Coal/CMPFO should ensure that PFIs visit all the 901 coal mines on a 
regular basis as required under section 10(2) of Coal Mines Provident 
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act by drawing up a time bound 
inspection schedule for inspection of mines  and  they be apprised of the 
action taken by the Government in this regard.  
Action Taken 
In order to ensure that inspection of coal mines is carried out more 
frequently, even with limited available Provident Fund Inspectors, the 
Ministry of Coal followed up t he matter with CMPFO vigorously.  A total of 
251 inspections have been conducted in the last one and half years as 
compared to 71 inspections as observed by the Committee in the report.  
The Regional Offices of the CMPFO have been advised to continue 
inspection of all the coal mines regularly.  In addition, the concerned 
Director in the Ministry looking after CMPFO has also been directed to do 
inspection of the field offices of CMPFO.  
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated          
20th September,2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
COAL MINES DEPOSITS LINKED INSURANCE SCHEME 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
 The Committee find that as per the Coal Mines Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme, in the event of death of an employee in harness who 
was a member of Coal Mines Provident Fund, his nominee is entitled to 
receive in addition to the Provident Fund an amount equ al to the average 
balance in the account of the deceased during the preceding 3 years 
subject to a maximum of Rs. 10,000/ -.  The Committee have been given 
to understand that this amount was fixed during the year 1976 when the 
scheme was initiated.  The Com mittee are surprised to note that the 
Ministry of Coal/CMPFO did not feel the need to revise and raise the limit 
fixed 37 years back although the cost of living has increased manifolds. 
The Committee have been informed that an Actuary has already been 
appointed to review the present sealing of Rs. 10,000/ - for Coal Mines  
Deposits Linked Insurance Scheme and some mechanism is being 
developed to suitably enhance the existing corpus fund to increase the 
benefit to the insured. The Committee are of the view th at this is one of 
the area, among others, neglected by CMPFO. The Committee observe 
that the paltry sum of Rs 10,000/ - is hardly sufficient enough to support 
the deceased worker's family to meet the ever growing cost of living and 
therefore, strongly recom mend that an early decision be taken in the 
matter and the benefit to mine workers should suitably be enhanced 
under the scheme.  
Action Taken 
The workers of Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries were 
exempted from the operation of this Scheme with effect from 1.1.1979. 
The executive cadre employees of Coal India Limited were also exempted 
from operation of the said Scheme with effect from 24.3.2009 as they 
have their own beneficial life cover Scheme. As such there is no 
contribution from CIL and its  subsidiaries at present. However, in view of 
the observations of the Standing Committee, the matter is being revisited. 
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
SETTLEMENT OF PENDING CASES  
Recommendation Serial No. 10 
 
 The Ministry have informed the Committee that 1959 cases of 
provident fund, 2560 cases of provident fund advance  and 2366 cases of 
Coal Mines Pension Scheme are pending for settlement in different 
Regional Offices as on September, 201 2.  These pending cases are 
invariably high particularly in Regional Offices at Dhanbad (I)(II)(III), 
Godawary Khani, Kolkata, Singrauli, Jabalpur, etc. The number of pending 
cases of Coal Mines Pension Scheme are also high in Kothagudem, 
Nagpur, Ranchi, e tc.  The Committee are concerned to note that though 
there is a provision for holding Coordination Committee meetings by 
Regional Commissioners of CMPFO and colliery management regularly to 
settle pending cases, there were a total of 6885 cases pending reg arding 

 
 
settlement of provident fund, advances and pension cases.  The 
Committee are also dismayed to note that there is no proper monitoring 
mechanism put in place in the Ministry of Coal to ensure settlement of 
these cases in a time bound manner though th e Board of Trustees is also 
represented by the Ministry of Coal.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Coal should take necessary steps and 
come out with a 'Citizen's Charter' to ensure settlement of all claims of 
Coal Mines workers by CMPFO within a given time frame.  
Action Taken 
The Secretary Ministry of Coal/ Chairman, Board of Trustees CMPF 
has specific direction on settlement of pending claims in the CMPFO within 
a given timeline.  The pendency position in respect of PF refund Pension 
claims etc. is also being reviewed by Board  of Trustees in its meetings.  
CMPFO has been advised to analyse the reasons of pendency and take 
appropriate action to reduce the pendency of various claims.  In addition 
to this, Director, Ministry of Coal had visited six regional offices where the 
pendency was high, to review the status and issued necessary directions 
for implementing corrective measures.   
 
As a result of aforementioned efforts, the number of pending cases 
of PF refund and Pension claims has come down which is evident from 
data given in Annexure – II alongwith a comparative histogram showing a 
decreasing trend in the last three quarters.   
 
In 158 th Meeting of BOT held on 18.7.2013 CMPFO has been 
directed to streamline the functioning of regional offices.  It has also been 
directed to ex amine that the Joint Commissioner, CMPFO should inspect 
all regional offices as per the schedule laid down to monitor the progress 
in respect of all issues and a comprehensive report of all such inspection 
should be submitted to the BOT.   
 
Apart from the mission Biswas wherein CMPFO is required to settle 
all pension and PF cases within one month of retirement of the employee, 
a Citizen’s Charter has been drafted for Coal Mines Provident fund 
Organisation (Copy enclosed in Annexure III). 
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                   
20th September, 2013] 
REDRESSAL OF GRIEVANCES  
Recommendation Serial No. 11 
 
 The Committee note that redressal  of grievances is one of the 
major areas of concern to be addressed by CMPFO.  It has been informed 
to the Committee that grievances are examined by regional 
commissioners and communicated to petitioners by mail.  The Committee 
note that though grievance r edressal counters are reported to be 
functional at  all regional centres, their performance is hardly upto mark 
as  during the year 2010 -11 against 713 number of grievance cases 
related to provident fund received, 507 cases were resolved leaving the 
balance of 206.  Again, with regard to pension disbursement, out of 699 

 
 
cases, only 254 cases were resolved leaving a balance of 445 cases 
unresolved. The Committee note that during the year 2012 -13 (upto 
September, 2012) 96 provident fund related grievances were received and 
though action has been initiated in all cases(upto November, 2012), only 
15 grievances were reported to have been redressed.  Further, out of 224 
number of pension related grievances received during the year 2012 -13, 
only 99 number of cases have been resolved.  The Committee also 
observe that disbursement of pension is being done through 14 
nationalized banks and they have to collect life certificate  once every 
November.  The Committee feel that due to non adherence of this rule by 
some banks and due to non introduction of Core Banking Solutions (CBS), 
pensioners in far flung areas are suffering delay in receipt of pension.  
Although this aspect is being resolved by the banks, the Committee desire 
that the  Organization could also play a proa ctive role in the matter by 
acting as a facilitator.  The Committee further note that CMPFO have 
implemented the Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System (CPGRAMS) of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances from January , 2011.  During the period between 01.04.2012 
to 30.09.2012, out of 41 grievance cases received, 33 were resolved.  The 
Committee feel that the system is at an early stage and less number of 
cases received may be due to lack of awareness among the workers 
regarding the facility.  As the mechanism is at nascent stage, the 
Committee recommend that it needs to be publicized more so that more 
people become aware of this and avail of the facility.   
Action Taken 
The redressal of grievances has been one of the ke y priorities.  
There are only 26 grievance cases relating to settlement of pension and 
43 PF grievances as compared to earlier figures of 206 and 445 
respectively.   
 As desired by the Committee, necessary action is being taken to 
publicize the CPGRAMS (Ce ntralised Public Grievance Redress and 
Monitoring System) launched by the Department of Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances through newspaper advertisements, 
notices on the Notice Boards of Regional Offices of CMPFO and colliery/ 
units of Coal Companies etc. so that employees and their family members 
use the system for redressal of their grievances. 
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
COMPUTERIZATION PROGRAMME IN CMPFO 
Recommendation Serial No. 12 
 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that every Commissioner of 
CMPFO had tried to install new computer programme in the organisation 
and imposed the same on the Field Offices for its implementation, instead 
of streamlining the established ex isting system by incurring heavy 
expenditure at different periods.  The Committee observe that CMPFO's 

 
 
computerization programme is now in a mess and there is no monitoring 
system and therefore on -line claim settlement has been developed.   As 
regards, flo ating tenders for computerization work is concerned, the 
Committee are perturbed to note that while selecting M/s SAP India 
Private Limited in 2005, limited tender inquiries have been floated which 
were against the prescribed norms and no tenders were floa ted in 2007, 
while selecting M/s Soft Info, Dhanbad.  What has surprised the 
Committee more is that the Commissioner, CMPFO has taken these 
decisions on his own without the approval of Board of Trustees (BOT).  
While strongly disapproving the functioning o f the Commissioner, the 
Committee are of the view that Ministry of Coal cannot absolve itself of 
the responsibility to check all the wrong done in the organisation and 
recommend that the Report of the Enquiry Committee be examined by the 
Ministry and respo nsibility fixed on serving/retired officials for the mess 
created and the Committee be apprised of the action taken by the 
Government within three months.  
Action Taken 
At present OSS system is operational for online settlement of PF, 
Advances, Pension cla ims etc. CMPFO has its own website 
www.cmpfo.gov.in wherein the members can log in and see their ledger 
card, pending cases etc. Due to shortage of computer trained personnel, 
uploading of members particulars has not b een completed.  This will be 
taken by CMPFO in due course. 
             Again as per decision taken in the 157 th meeting of the BOT, 
CMPF held on 22.02.2013 at Kolkata, a committee has been constituted 
comprising GM (systems, CIL), Joint Commissioner, CMPF O and a 
representative from NIC, Ministry of Coal. The Committee headed by 
Director, PRIW-III, Ministry of Coal has been examining this issue and is 
trying to zero down on viable options.   
The Ministry of Coal has already handed over all the documents 
including the Inquiry Report to the Cadre Controlling Authority of 
(Department of Economic Affairs) of the concerned officer.  Daily hearing 
have been held and the Inquiry Officer is expected to submit his findings/ 
report to the cadre controlling authority soon.   
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                   
20th September, 2013] 
UNCLAIMED MONEY 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
 The Committee note that the labourers/workers benefitted by 
CMPFO are mainly illiterate and many times are not aware of the rights 
and benefits entitled to them.  Hence, they are at a disadvantage due to 
these factors and the hard earned money due to them remains unclaimed. 
The reasons reported to the Committee for unclaimed money lying with 
CMPFO are mainly  absence of nominee, forfeiture from Member Account, 

 
 
non-refundable contribution from Rewa Kobra & Talcher, Bonus forfeited, 
Unclaimed Bonus,  Special Reserve Fund Account, Interest on Reserve 
Account, Reserve Account Late Fee  and Miscellaneous Reserve. Thes e 
amounts were received from coal companies before their nationalization.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee would like the Ministry of 
Coal/CMPFO to enquire as to how much of the money is lying unclaimed 
with all the Regional Offices and apprise them  of the same.  The 
Committee recommend the CMPFO to identify the workers/families whose 
claims are pending and settle the same without any further delay.   The 
Committee also recommend that the workers/pensioners of coal industry 
should be made aware of th eir rights and entitlements by conducting an 
awareness programme by holding regular camps, issuing circulars, putting 
advertisements in vernacular newspapers and through booklets in local 
dialects, etc.  by the colliery incharges.  The Committee also desir e that 
the employees engaged in personnel department of coal companies should 
have direct interaction with employees/labourers and they should be 
made responsible to ensure that labourers furnish the  required 
documents and complete the required formalitie s beforehand to enable 
hassle free settlement of claims.  
Action Taken 
As per the Annual Accounts of FY 2011 -12 approximately Rs. 
10811/- crores are lying in Suspense Account. A  Chartered Accountant 
Firm namely M/s Sarkar Gurumurthy and Associates, Kolkat a has been 
engaged to identify the amount of Suspense Account lying with various 
Regional Offices of CMPFO.  The employer of a coal employee maintains 
the residential address of its employees and it has to forward the claims of 
the employees for payment of  unclaimed amounts. As such the coal 
companies are being directed to launch a publicity campaign to collect 
claims of all those employees or from the family members of the deceased 
employees who have yet not preferred their claim for payment of their 
unclaimed Provident Fund accumulations. The jurisdictional Regional 
Offices of the CMPFO are also being informed to keep their non -effective 
ledger accounts ready for prompt disposal of claims on receipt from the 
coal companies. 
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
GENERAL 
Recommendation Serial No. 15 
 The Committee find that functioning of the office of CMPFO is not 
satisfactory at all.  In every stage, their callous approach is established.  
For every delayed payment of workers under the Act, severe steps should 
be taken against the erring officer and interest should be paid to the 
workers.  In every State, where the coal mines are operating, a tribunal 
should be constituted for redressing the grievances of  workers and such 
tribunal should be established nearer to coal mines.  For that reason, 

 
 
necessary amendment should be made in the Act.  It is unfortunate that 
the Ministry had not applied their mind in respect of the failure of the 
office of CMPFO to discharge their duty until the Standing Committee has 
taken up this matter.  In future, the Ministry must take assessment of 
work of the office of CMPFO in regular interval and depute one officer to 
oversee the inspection report of the Inspecting Team.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should refer the cases immediately to  
vigilance department i n respect of financial irregularity, as pointed out 
earlier.  
Action Taken 
Grievances are redressed by the concerned Regional Commissioner 
as he is the nominated Grievance Officer for his respective region.  A 
Grievance Cell has been set up in the Headquarters of CMPFO to attend to 
all such grievances which have not been redressed in the regional offices.              
Pursuant to decision taken in the 156 th meeting, Director(PRIW), 
Ministry of Coal, visited Regional offices I, II and III Ranchi and Regional  
I, II and III, Dhanbad to review the pendency in respect of PF and Pension 
claim settlement. Besides review of pendency, updating of all statutory 
records, functioning of their offices, coverage of contractors’ workers, and 
inspection of collieries by Reg ional offices was also discussed.  The 
concerned Regional Commissioners were instructed to (a) reconcile and 
follow up with coal companies to cover all the eligible workers in CMPFO 
Schemes including contractors’ worker, private coal companies and 
captive coal blocks, (b) monitor the functioning of their offices in an 
objective and effective manner on regular basis, (c) ask coal companies to 
forward the claims along with a check list confirming that all the 
particulars and the information provided for the c laims is correct, (d) 
update all statutory records like individual ledger cards, pension ledger 
folio, passbooks  etc within 2 -3 months and (e) Ensure compliance of 
CMPF Schemes through regular/ physical monitoring by Regional 
Commissioners/ Assistant Commissioners.   
 
In the 158 th Meeting of BOT held on 18.7.2013 the Chairman 
directed that in order to streamline the functioning of regional offices, 
Joint commissioner should inspect all the regional offices as per laid down 
schedule to monitor the progress in respect of all issues a nd a 
comprehensive report of such inspections should be submitted to BOT.   
 
Ministry of Coal through the Board of Trustees will continue to take 
further action to streamline the functioning of the CMPFO as desired by 
the Committee.   
 
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                   
20th September, 2013] 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
SHIFTING OF REGIONAL OFFICE AT JABALPUR 
Recommendation Serial No. 14 
 
 The Committee note that at present 24 Regional Offices of the CMPFO, a 
social security organisation,  are situated in coal producing States in the country.  
The Committee have been given to understand that some of these Regio nal 
Offices including the one situated at Jabalpur are  far from the mining areas 
namely  Hasdeo, Bisrampur, Baikunthpur, Sohagpur, Johila, Chirimiri, Jamuna – 
Kotma and Bhatgaon of South Eastern Coalfields ltd. located in the districts of 
Anuppur, Korea, Chirimiri, Sohagpur, Shahdol, Narsinghpur, Umaria and Surguja 
in the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and thus resulting in hardship 
to the coal mine workers seeking advances for education, marriage, home 
building, etc.  The Committee feel that th e very purpose of establishing these 
Regional Offices was to create social security measures accessible to the workers 
near the mining areas and to build a high level of confidence among the workers 
of coal mines.  The Committee have been informed that the  Board of Trustees of 
CMPFO in their 157th meeting of BOT held on 22 nd February, 2013 have decided 
to shift some areas from Regional Office, Jabalpur to Bilaspur.  The areas which 
will be shifted to Bilaspur will be decided by CMPF Commissioner in consulta tion 
with the Director (Personnel), SECL and one of the union representatives(BOT 
Member)."  In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that CMPFO 
should consider the re-organisation of all the Regional Offices to cover the mining 
areas.  They also desire that branch Offices should be established to cover 2 -3 
mining areas to cater to the workers employed in mines located in areas far away 
from the present Regional Offices. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry in the matter.  
Action Taken 
The issue of organisation of coal mining areas within the jurisdiction of 
Jabalpur and Bilaspur Regional Office of CMPFO was discussed in the 156 th 
meeting of the BOT, CMPF held on 20.07.2012 and it was decided that the CMPF 
Commissioner, D(P), SECL and the Union Representative of the Area in BOT, 
would examine the matter. Accordingly a meeting was fixed on 21.06.2013 at 
Coal Controller's Office, Kolkata to deliberate on the matter.  Three areas namely 
Chirimiri, Jamuna & Kotma an d Baikunthpur have been agreed for shifting from 
Jabbalpur to Bilaspur area and the necessary Office Order has been issued on 
22.06.13.   
              As far as opening of branch offices for every two -three coal mining 
areas is concerned, the same is not feasible due to  shortage of manpower and 
funds and other technical aspects that go into creation of a sub-Regional Office.  
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated 20th September, 2013] 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES  
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
 The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Coal Mines 
Provident and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1948, the employees engaged 
by public and private sector Coal Mining Companies are to be covered 
under the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme, 1948 and  Coal Mines 
Pension Scheme, 1998 and Coal Mines Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme, 
1976 and Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation(CMPFO) is responsible 
for administering these schemes through a tripartite  Board of Trustees 
consisting of Government representatives, employers' representatives and 
employees representatives. The Provident Fund Inspectors of CMPFO 
working under the control of jurisdictional regional Commissioners inspect 
the colliery office regularly and submit their inspection report every month 
to Commissioner, Headquarter. The Committee are, however, constrained 
to observe that inspections by Provident Fund Inspectors were carried out 
only in Collieries of Subsidiaries companies of Coal India Ltd.  Moreover, 
the report on coverage of company -wise contract labourers (as on 
31.03.2012) shows that only 34004 contract labourers of Coal India Ltd. 
and its subsidiary companies were covered by CMPFO.  In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee are inclined to observe that private/captive coal 
mine workers have not been covered by CMPFO thus compromising the 
social security of such workers. The Committee would like the Ministry of 
Coal/CMPFO to ensure that all workers in private/ captive coal mines are 
covered under all the 3 schemes of social security by CMPFO, and they 
would like to be apprised of the data available with all the Regional Offices 
of CMPFO where private/captive coal mine workers have been covered by 
them and the reasons for not covering private mine workers.  
Action Taken 
 The CMPFO is maki ng sincere efforts to ensure that the issue 
of coverage of private/captive coal mine workers is taken up with   the 
concerned Coal Companies.  
  The Ministry of Coal has also been monitoring and reviewing the 
progress in this regard by way of issuing instru ctions to  CMPFO. The 
number of contract workers covered under CMPFO is at Annexure -1.  The 
Regional Commissioners have been directed to follow up with the coal 
companies for enrolment of contractor’s workers including workers 
employed in captive coal bloc ks. The CMPF Inspectors have also been 
advised to inspect  the records of coal companies in this regard.            

 
 
  In addition to the above progress  is being reviewed in meetings of 
Board of Trustees.  In the 158 th Meeting of the Board of Trustees, the  
Chairman has given the following directions : 
(a)        All Regional Commissioners should initiate special drive to cover 
eligible contractors’ workers under CMPFO especially in respect of the 
private coal blocks which have gone into production;   
(b)        A region -wise statement showing new members covered under 
CMPFO during the period should be placed in the next BOT meeting 
(c)        The Commissioner should review the progress on monthly basis 
and present the consolidated position in the next BOT .   
(d)        The Commissioner, CMPFO should use statutory powers to invoke 
the provisions of CMPF and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1948  
(e)        In addition with regard to membership of coal workers under 
EPFO, the BOT directed that to verify the claims  of contractors regarding 
membership of EPFO, a joint survey with EPFO be carried out on units of 
SCCL at Godavarikhani, WCL at Nagpur, SECL at Bilaspur and CCL under 
the jurisdiction of CMPF Regional Office, Ranchi -III.  Joint Commissioner, 
CMPFO may coordinate with EPFO to submit the findings in the next BOT 
meeting. FA, EPFO may be contacted for any assistance in this regard. 
 It will be the endeavour of the Ministry of Coal and CMPFO to 
maximize the coverage especially in respect of captive coal mines i n the 
private sector.   
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 The Committee were given to understand that Members of 
Parliament were earlier nominated as the Member of Board  of Trustees of 
CMPFO and Ms. Mabel Rebello (now ex-MP) was nominated as the Member 
of the Board of Trustees on 22.2.2005 for a period of three years. The 
Committee are, however, surprised to note that no name of any MP has 
been included in the Board of Trustees of the organisation which was 
constituted on 13th October, 2009. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for the non inclu sion of any MP in the Board of 
Trustees. The Committee would also like the Ministry to include the name 
of MPs from the Coal producing States in the Board of Trustees when it is 
constituted next time.  
Action Taken 
Section 3-A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1948 provides for constitution of a Board of Trustees consisting of the 
following persons: 

 
 
 (a) A chairman appointed by the Central Government; 
 (b) The Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner, ex-officio; 
 (c) Three persons appointed by the Central Government; 
(d) Not more than six persons representing Government of such States 
as the Central Government may specify [appointed by the Central 
Government] 
(e) Six persons representing employers, appointed by the Central 
Government after consultation with such organisations of employers as 
may be recognised by the Central Government in this behalf, and of whom 
at least one shall be a person who is not a member of any such 
organisation; 
(f) six persons representing employees, a ppointed by the Central 
Government after consultation with such organisations of employees as 
may be recognised by the Central Government in this behalf, and of whom 
at least one shall be an employee himself and at least one shall be a 
person who is not a member of any such organisation.   
All these aspects will be considered whilst re -constituting the Board 
of Trustees.  
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
INVESTMENT OF FUNDS 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
 The Committee note that CMPFO has invested Rs. 29363.95 crore in 
ICICI Securities Primary Dealership Ltd. It has also invested         
Rs.16522.5 crore  in  the Special Deposit Scheme of the Ministry of 
Finance, which does not seem appropriate.  The Committee have failed to 
understand why these funds were not invested in public sector banks.  
The Committee are further dismayed to note that there is no monitor ing 
mechanism in Ministry of Coal and Board of Trustees(BOT) to protect the 
interest of Coal Mines workers and the then Commissioner, CMPFO had 
acted beyond his delegated powers by extending the tenure of Fund 
Managers without taking approval of BOT.  Thus , the Commissioner has 
neglected the most important duty assigned to him and the investment 
decisions are left to the wisdom of the portfolio manager.  While 
deprecating the unusual powers exercised by the then Commissioner, the 
Committee fail to understan d as to why these irregularities were not 
brought to the notice of the Ministry by BOT which is headed by Secretary, 
Ministry of Coal and why  appropriate action was not taken against the 
Commissioner.  The Committee feel that besides taking strict 

 
 
departmental action against all those who were responsible for flouting 
rules and procedures, the matter should have been referred to a Central 
Investigating Agency in the first instance.  At the same time, the 
Committee also desire that in future, the Ministry o f Coal should take 
adequate safeguards to secure the safety of certificates/instruments of 
investments which are vested with the Fund Managers.   
Action Taken 
Departmental inquiry by CVC in the matter of irregular investment 
of funds against the ex -Coal Mi nes Provident Fund Commissioner is in 
progress. However, at present the funds are being invested as per norms 
set by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance and it is monitored by 
an Investment Sub -Committee of BOT on a quarterly basis.  The Sub -
Committee monitors  the performance of Fund Managers quarterly as per 
the benchmark for minimum performance fixed by the Committee. 
State Bank of India, PM&CS, Mumbai is the portfolio manager for all 
the corpus/ funds of CMPFO.  The following steps/ checks are in place to 
ensure the safety of all the securities/ instruments vested with Fund 
Manager; 
(i)  All  Central/ State Government securities are in DEMAT 
form and are held with RBI. 
(ii)  All Corporate Bonds are in DEMAT form and are in DEMAT 
account of CMPFO held with Depository Participant.  
(iii)  Investment Bank Fixed Deposits, in physical form are kept in 
fire proof safe.   
(iv)  All the above holdings are being audited and recon ciled by the 
external auditor on monthly basis.   
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
VACANCIES IN CMPFO 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that as on 
10.10.2012, out of total sanctioned posts of 1574, the actual strength of 
CMPFO is only 926 which shows that 41.17% of the total posts are lying 
vacant in the organisation.  The Committ ee further observe that 34.79% 
posts are vacant in Group 'A' services and 70.14% in Group 'B'.  Further, 
Provident Fund Inspectors, a Group 'B' service who are responsible to 
inspect all the Coal Mines and Units,  against a sanctioned strength of 30 
only 5 are in position.  The Committee are constrained to note that though 
UPSC and Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India 
(Staff Selection Commission) were approached to fill up the vacancies in 

 
 
Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation, the Min istry of Coal/CMPFO were 
informed by these departments/organizations in 2008 and 2011 to take 
appropriate action to recruit staff as these are autonomous/statutory 
bodies, but no action has been taken by them so far.  The Committee also 
take a serious note of the fact that an Enquiry Committee has pointed out 
that the Commissioner has not made serious efforts to fill up the vacant 
posts and thus failed as the head of the organisation. What is further 
surprising to the Committee is that though they were appr ised of the 
same by the Ministry of Coal in June, 2011, no steps were taken by them 
to strengthen manpower in the organisation for its smooth functioning.  
The Ministry  of Coal has now apprised the Committee that an  
amendment is required in the Coal Mine s Provident Fund and 
Miscellaneous Provisions  Fund Act as suggested by the UPSC for 
recruitment of Group 'A' services. Further, Indian Institute of Banking 
Services is reported to have been approached to fill up vacancies in Group 
'C' & 'D' services. In v iew of the foregoing, the Committee cannot but 
deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Government/CMPFO in making 
proper recruitments in the organisation and  strongly recommend that the 
Government should immediately bring the desired amendment on the 
lines of amendment in Employee Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) Act 
as mentioned by the Secretary(Coal) during his deposition before the 
Committee on 26.11.2012 so as to safeguard the interests of 4.34 lakh 
coal mine workers benefitted from various schemes  of CMPFO.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status of 
recruitment to Group 'C' & 'D' posts which was likely to be done through 
Indian Institute of Banking Services.  They desire that the option of 
getting them recruited through the Staff Selection Commission on a 
regular basis may also be explored.  
Action Taken 
 The process of recruitment of LDC’s and PFI’s is underway.  CMPFO 
has requested Institute of Banking Personnel Selection to hold 
examinations for selection to the posts of Provident Fund Inspector and 
Lower Division Clerk.    
 The Board of Trustees in its 157 th Meeting has approved in principle 
the proposal for recruitment of Group A officers through the Union Public 
Service Commission.  CMPFO has been directed to initiat e the process for 
amendment of Recruitment Rules and the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act which is a mandatory requirement for this 
purpose.   
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                   
20th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
COAL MINES PENSION SCHEME, 1998 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
 
 The Committee note that according to the Coal Mines Pension 
Rules, 1998, there is a provision for valuation and review of pension fund 
for which CMPFO shall be responsible. The valuation of the pension fund 
should take place every third year by an Actuary and the report of the 
Actuary  has to be placed by Commissioner before the CMPFO Board for 
enhancement and review of family pension.  The Committee are, however, 
surprised to observe that since introduction of Coal Mines Pension Scheme 
in 1998,  the pensio n amount has not been revised even once since its 
introduction though the same is reported to have been reviewed at least 
about 5 times during the period without any result.  The Committee note 
with regret that although it is a contributory pension scheme based on 
investments and returns thereto to be extended as 3rd benefit to the 
employees working in coal mines, the Government have not taken any 
action in spite of salary structure of workers having undergone several 
revisions during this period.  As the m atter  is long pending and has not 
received due attention during all these years, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry of Coal/CMPFO should accord top priority to 
review the scheme and necessary steps be taken to enhance the pension 
of coal mines workers.  
Action Taken 
Pension under this Scheme is a return on contributions by the employees, 
employers' share thereupon and contribution from the Central 
Government. Actual calculations done by this Organisation as mentioned 
in its in -house report placed before the 151 st meeting of the Board of 
Trustees show that the return by way of pension to the members of this 
Scheme exceeds the contributions made by these members. Moreover, 
the actuarial reports show huge deficits to the Pension Fund, which do not 
allow any enhancement of pension under the Scheme. Under the 
prevailing circumstances, augmenting the Pension Fund would require 
stepping up the contributions to augment the pension fund and even to 
sustain the existing outflow.   
 The draft report of the actuary was submitted  to the  Board of 
Trustees, CMPF. An  Expert Committee was constituted by the Board to 
examine the report.The committee has also discussed it with CIL actuary 
and the details are  reproduced below: 

 
 
 i) Remodeling/Structuring of CM PS '98 Scheme through an 
Actuary. 
 ii) To request CIL to send the proposal to Technical Committee 
of JBCCI for  framing of a model to fund the liability of estimated Rs. 
18,416 cr. 
iii) Following exercise is required for sovereign guarantee to 
pensioners of CMPS '98: 
       a)      To remodel/restructure CMPS '98 in totality. 
b) To examine terms of reference and long term and short term 
reworking of contribution 
c) An expert in the field of actuarial evaluation is to be engaged 
for the assessment annually. 
d) Upper ceiling/ lower ceiling of monthly pension may be fixed as 
per provisions of EPF Scheme.  
               Accordingly proposal submitted by CIL actuary was 
submitted to the 157th BOT. Director(P&IR) ,CIL informed that 
further studies by its actuary is going on and in due course will 
be discussed in the JBCCI meeting. 
In the 158th Meeting of Board of Trustees held on 18th July, 2013, the 
Chairman said that decision  with regard to the revision could only be 
taken after sound actuarial evaluation and r equested Dir (P & IR) to have 
the necessary consultation completed before the next BOT for its 
consideration.  
Chairman also directed that, in the interim period a group of officers 
with JS(FA), Ministry of Coal and FA/EPFO, EA/Ministry of Coal, Jt. 
Commissioner CMPFO could separately examine the report of the actuary 
and offer its recommendations within the next three months. This would 
be an independent input for formulating the views as early as possible. 
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated 20th 
September, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
 The Committee would also like to be apprised of the deficit of Rs. 
1946.67 crore in the Pension Fund Corpus as on 31.03.2005 as pointed by 
the Actuary appointed for valuation of the Pension Fund, impact of outflow 
on the health of the Fund & Scheme, suggestions for improvement of 
Pension Scheme and the overall health of the Fund, as the database for 
the actuarial research is reportedly being collected from the related coal 
companies i.e. from both the private and public sector for undertaking the 
said valuation work. 

 
 
Action Taken 
Data for actuarial evaluation were collected from Coal Companies and 
made available to the Actuary, Shri Liyaquat  Khan, who submitted his 
draft actuarial report in 2012 which was placed before the Board of 
Trustees, Coal Mines Provident Fund, in its 156 th meeting on 20.07.2012. 
An expert committee was formed to examine the report. The Committee 
after deliberations on the issue submitted its recommendations which are 
given in reply to observations/ recommendations at Observation No. 5 
above.  
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
 
 The Committee also note that there exists vacancy even at the 
highest level i.e. at the level of the Commissioner and the organization 
has been managing with an officiating Commissioner for a long time.  
While observing that the vacancy at the highest level for a long time can 
cause bottlenecks in smooth functioning of the organization besides 
lowering the morale of the workers of the organisation, the Committee 
desire that the process to fill vacancy be completed without any further 
delay.  
Action Taken 
A Search-cum-Selection Committee has been formed for filling up 
the post of Commissioner, CMPFO at the earliest. A Commissioner, CMPFO 
will be appointed as soon as a suitable candidate is identified by the 
Committee.   
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20/530/6/2013-PRIW-III dated                  
20th September, 2013] 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                              KALYAN BANERJEE 
__ December, 2013                                                           Chairman           
__ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 10 DECEMBER, 2013 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘E’,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
    LOK SABHA  
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar  
5.    Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri  
6.    Shri  Pakauri Lal  
7.    Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
8.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
9.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
10.  Shri T. Rathinavel 
11.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following 
Draft Action Taken Reports:- 
(i)         **    **   **   ** 
 
(ii)        **    **   **   ** 
 

 
 
(iii)    **    **   **   ** 
 
(iv)      **    **   **   **
  
 
(v)       **    **   **   ** 
 
 (vi)    Draft Action Taken Report on “Review of Performance of Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Organization (CMPFO)” relating to the Ministry of 
Coal 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee then authorized  the Chairman to 
finalise the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned 
Ministry  and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 

 
 
 ANNEXURE- V 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTIETH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made       15   
            
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3, 4,  10, 11, 12, 13 and 15)            07
       
Percentage of total           46.66%
           
         
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 14) 01 
Percentage of total                06.66% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,6 and 8)    04
         
Percentage of total                            26.66%
                
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 5, 7 and 9)           03
           
 Percentage of total              20%
       
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 