 
 
 
27 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2012-2013) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934(Saka) 
 


 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.12.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   17.12.2012 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2012/Agrahayana 1934 (Saka) 


 
 
CC&S No. 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
                     
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………………………………………………………….  
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………...…………………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
28 
   
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
 
48 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
51 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
 
64 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. 
 
Status of Pre-Implementation Activity Chart for rehabilitation 
projects of BCCL………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
68 
II. 
 
Status of Illegal Mining of Coal Subsidiary wise and State wise.. 71 
III. Status of FIR Lodged in Illegal Mining Cases…………………………… 72 

 
 
 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2012-13) held on 12.12.2012………………………………………….. 
 
       74 
V. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………............................... 
 
 
       76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2012-13) 
 
    
  Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
6. Shri Sabbam Hari 
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
8. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
9. Shri Pakauri Lal 
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
12. Shri Rajaram Pal 
13. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
15. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
16. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri O  
21.      
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27. Shri  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30.  
31.  
 
 
 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Vandana P. Guleria   - Sr. Comm. Assistant
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendati ons contained in the         
Twenty-Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2012-13)” of the Ministry of Coal.  
 
2.  The Twenty -Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on  Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 th April, 2012. 
Replies of the Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 6th September, 2012.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on  12.12.2012.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Twenty -Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given at Annexure-V.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I  
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
      14 December, 2012                                                                           Chairman 
      23 Agrahayana, 1934(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the  Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  on Demands for Grants (2012-13) 
of the Ministry of  Coal whic h was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.04.2012 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.04.2012. 
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry of 
Coal in respect of all the 25 Observations/Recommendati ons contained in 
the Report on 6 th September, 2012. These have been categorised as 
follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
Sl. Nos.1, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17,20, 21 and 25 
         Total – 13 
                (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. Nos. 15 
Total – 01  
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos.  2,3,4,6, 8, 18,19, 22 and 23 
Total – 09 
                         (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 7 and 24 
                       Total – 02 
     (Chapter V) 
 

 
 
3. Although the Reports of Standing Committee have persuasive 
value and treated as considered advice given by them (Rule 331 N of the 
Rules of the Procedure), the Committee feel that the recommendations / 
observations of this Committee are not considered and accorded due 
attention which it otherwise deserves.  For instance, on issues like 
shortage of railway rakes for movement of coal (Sl. No. 13), latest 
technology for extraction of coal (Sl. No. 18), constitution of cadre for  
implementation of Corporate Social Responsibilities (CSR) and 
association of people’s representatives for execution of CSR ( Para No. 
24) are some of the few instances, where the Government have, not 
reacted to the suggestions / observations of the Committee at all, for the 
reasons best known to them.  The list is illustrative and not 
comprehensive.  The Committee feel that failure to react to the advice of 
Committee, inaction or indifferent approach towards recommendations / 
observations of the Committee a mounts to compromising their dignity 
and belittling the authority of the Committee and is a serious matter.  
The Committee would like to uphold their dignity and authority, without 
any exception.  The Committee urges upon the Government that they 
should examine the recommendations / observations of the Committee 
carefully with all the seriousness it warrants and submit their reaction 
and action taken note on each and every issue / suggestion made by 
them.  The Committee desire that Govt. should take note of  the 
reservations expressed by them and take corrective actions in future.   
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given 
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case, where it is not possible f or 
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  

 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
on some of their observations /recommendations made in the Twenty 
Fourth Report.  
 
PLAN OUTLAYS OF MINISTRY OF COAL AND PSUS 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
6. The Committee observed that the total Plan Outlays  of the Ministry 
of Coal and PSUs under their administrative c ontrol for the year 2012-13 
had been increased to Rs. 15,132.78 crore as compared to Rs. 9302.85 
crore at BE 2011-12, which were further reduced to Rs. 7367.46 crore at 
RE stage. The Committee were, however, concerned to note that the 
actual expenditure during 2011 -12 fr om the Plan Outlays of Coal PSUs 
was reported to be Rs. 4886.87 crore (prov.) only. Significantly, against 
the provision of Rs. 6000 crore (BE stage 2011 -12), no amount was 
utilized on acquisition of assets abroad during the year, though the Plan 
Outlay was reduced to Rs. 1000 crore at RE stage.  The Committee c ould 
only conclude that  the Ministry/coal companies had  not made any 
headway in acquisition of coal resources  abroad while huge Plan Outlay 
was allocated at BE which has ultimately resulted in downgr ading the 
outlay.  The Committee firmly believe d that early acquisition of coal 
resource abroad would tide over the shortage of coal in the country. The 
Committee found that for development and acquisition of coal re sources 
abroad Rs. 5500 crores wa s repor ted to have been kept as an ad hoc 
provision during the year 2012-13. The Committee would like the Ministry 
of Coal/CIL to accord highest priority to this proposal and pursue the 
same vigorously.  In view of the gross underutilization of plan 
investments, the Committee also recommend ed that the Ministry/Coal 
PSUs should take advance and better planning to fix realistic budget 
outlays in order to avoid drastic reduction in the plan funds at RE Stage 
and to ensure that the allocations e armarked for different schemes were 
fully utilized.     
 
7. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"Total Plan Outlay of Ministry of Coal & PSUs under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Coal during the year 2012 -
13 is R s. 15226.78 crore as against 9302.85 crore for the year 
2011-12 (BE). The actual expenditure during 2011 -12 was Rs. 
6332.82 crores. While the CIL achieved 86.14%, NLC achieved 91% 
and SCCL 68.41% of the revised plan outlay during 2011 -12. The 
main reason for significant shortfall in achieving the target by SCCL 
was delay in implementing certain important activities pertaining to 
thermal power plants & procurement of longwall equipment for 
Adriyala Longowal Project. 

 
 
As far as the issue of importing of coal &  acquisition of coal 
resources abroad is concerned, it may be stated that only CIL is 
concerned with these issues. CIL had initiated the process for 
acquisition of coal assets abroad through Global Expression of 
Interest (EoI) route. Due to lack of clear  guideline  on acquisition 
of coal assets abroad this EoI process did not yield the desired 
result. An ad -hoc provision of Rs 5500 crore has been kept in the 
BE for 2012-13 for this purpose. 
CIL Board in its 251 st meeting on 9.9.2009, approved the proposal 
to import coal for power companies during 2009-10, subject to: 
i). Obtaining of firm commitment from consumers and 
ii) Consumers agreeing to procure imported coal on a cost plus 
basis. 
CIL, has so far not received any long term commitment from any 
coal consumers in India mainly because of the price differential of 
imported coal vis-à-vis domestic coal.  
As of now Coal India Limited, has been successful in obtaining the 
exploration license for 2 coal blocks in Tete Province in Mozambique 
through  competitive bidding.CIL has already for med a wholly 
owned subsidiary “ Coal India Africana Limit ed (CIAL)” in 
Mozambique and has posted 4 executives in Tete, Mozambique. CIL 
plans to invest Rs. 122 crores (approx) for explor ation of these 2 
licensed coal blocks during 2012-13 period.  
Apart from that CIL is also exploring the possibility of acquisition of 
coal assets in South Africa by forming a joint venture company with 
the provincial government of Limpopo in South Africa.  
Though CIL has been actively pursuing the process of acquisition of 
coal assets abroad but the completion of this process within a 
definite time frame is difficult to estimate as the success of CIL’s 
initiative is dependent on the long term commitment of the major 
consumers of coal in India for off take of imported coal. 
As far as SCCL is concerned it does not have plans to acquire assets 
abroad." 
8. The Committee observe that  CIL Board in its 251 st Meeting 
held on 9 th September, 2009 had approved the pro posal to import 
coal for power companies during 2009 -10 subject to obtaining a 
firm commitment from consumers and consumers agreeing to 
procure imported coal on cost plus basis.  However, CIL has so far 

 
 
reported to be not received any long term commitment from any 
coal consumers in India because of the price differential of 
imported coal vis -a-vis  a domestic coal.  The Committee are 
constraint to note that on one hand CIL and its subsidiaries have 
failed to meet coal requirement of power companies and on t he 
other, unable to take pro -active steps for import of coal for power 
sector although the New Coal Distribution Policy(IVCDP) 
envisages import of coal to bridge the demand supply gap.   As 
power companies are predominately dependent upon CIL for their 
feed stock, the current scenario point towards policy paralysis on 
the part of CIL as it is neither able to meet requirement of coal 
indigenously nor in position to import coal for them. The Committee 
feel that there is a need for preparation of detailed road map 
which would specify about development and acquisition of coal 
fields in overseas in forthcoming years. 
 
9. The Committee are unhappy to note that due to lack of clear 
guidelines on acquisition of coal assets abroad, process of 
acquisition of coal assets  through Global Expression of Interest 
route did not yield the desired results.  While appreciating the 
successful obtaining of exploration licences for two coal blocks in 
Tete Provin ce in Mozambique  and CIL plans to invest Rs. 122 
crore for exploration during 2012 -13,  the Committee are 
apprehensive of utilization of Rs. 5500 crore by CIL that have 
been kept as an adhoc provision for development and acquisition 
of coal resources during the year 2012-13.  The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Government/CIL for utilization of Rs. 5500 crore for acquisition 
and development of coal blocks aboard and to have long term 
commitment of major consumers o f coal in India for off -take of 
imported coal.  
NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
10. The Committee were unhappy to note that against budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 26.60 crore during 2011 -12 for development of North 

 
 
Eastern Region (NER),  the actual expenditure was nil. While 
recommending the Government to come up with concrete schemes, the 
Committee expected that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 25 crore 
earmarked for NER during 2012-13 would be gainfully utilised. 
 
11. The Ministry of Coa l in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
"The Ministry have noted the recommendation of the honorable 
Committee for taking appropriate action." 
 
12. While showing their displeasure over non-utilization of 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 26.60 crore during 2011 -12 for 
development of North Eastern Region, the Committee had 
recommended that the Government should come up with concrete 
schemes for North Eastern Region during 2012 -13 so that the 
amount of Rs. 25 crore sho uld be gainfully utilized.  The 
Committee view the reply of the Government too casual and are 
not inclined to accept it.  What the Committee would be interested 
to know is the measure that have been taken to identify the 
schemes proposed to be implemented by the Ministry during 2012-
13 to ensure full utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore, 
again would like to impress upon the Ministry of Coal to sincerely 
come up with appropriate measures and schemes to ensure that 
funds ear marked for North Eastern Region are gainfully utilized.  
  
UTILIZATION OF APPROVED OUTLAYS DURING XITH PLAN PERIOD  
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
13. The Committee observe d that against the XIth Plan approved 
outlays of Rs. 37100.38 crore for the Ministry of Coal, the actual 
utilization during the Plan Period was reported to be Rs. 32033.89 crore 
(provisional figures of NLC).  The Committee we re dismayed to note that 
not onl y the coal PSUs were unable to utilize their plan outlays as 
targeted but  the funds allocated and as revised during mid -term 
appraisal of XIth Plan Period for Central Sponsored Schemes like Research 
& Development, Regional Exploration, Environment and Sub sidence 
Control Measures, Development of Transportation Infrastructure  in 
Coalfields Areas etc. had also been much below the provisions  made for 
them.  The Committee were unhappy to note the huge mismatch between 
the financial outlays which points towards systematic flaws in the planning 
and implementation of projects/Schemes by the Ministry/coal companies 
and other autonomous bodies.  Since speedy implementation of 

 
 
projects/schemes had  a direct bearing on the financial outlays, the 
Committee would like th e Ministry to make an in -depth analysis of the 
constraints resulting in non -fulfilment of both financial and physical 
targets envisaged for the XIth Plan.  The Committee also desire d that 
advance action might  be initiated at the beginning of XIIth Plan so that 
the targets set for the coal and lignite sectors were achieved.  
 
14. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
 
"The Planning Commission had approved capital outlay of Rs 
43476.37 Crs. for Ministry of Coal for XI Plan period. During the Mid 
Term Appraisal of XI Plan the outlay for MoC for the plan period 
was revised to Rs 32831.11 Crs.   
Actual utilization against the revised plan outlay during XI plan has 
been Rs. 26203.70 crore with CIL achieving 83.66%, SCCL 85.55% 
and NLC 51% respectively. The main reason for significant shortfall 
in case of NLC was  due to delayed formulation of new mining 
projects and delay in commissioning / stabilization of Mine -II 
Expansion &Barsingsar Mine. 
 
As far as Central Sector Schemes are concerned the sector -wise 
plan outlay alongwith actual utilization during XI plan is as under:- 
 
Name of the Scheme XI Plan Outlay (Rs.Crore) 
 Initial MTA Actual 
Expenditure 
% 
Achievement 
w.r.t Initial 
Outlay 
R&D 75.35 75.35 54.48 72.30 
Regional/Promotional 
Exploration 
164.02 305.82 227.38 138.62 
Detailed drilling - Non 
CIL blocks 
472.94 523.08 334.17 70.65 
EMSC (including the 
outlay for Jharia and 
Raniganj Master Plan) 
155.34 - 57.89 37.26 
Conservation & Safety 
in coal mines 
170.67 690.75 683.91 400.72 
Dev. of transport 
infrastructure in 
coalfields 
277.63 930.92 67.58 24.34 
Total 1315.95 2525.92 1425.41 108.32 
 

 
 
The Annual Plan / Annual Action Plan targets are reviewed 
continuously at various levels in the PSUs as  well as Ministry of 
Coal. All out efforts are made to ensure that earmarked funds are 
utilized optimally. During the XII plan intensive efforts will be made 
to minimize the gap between budget estimates & actual utilization." 
 
15. The Committee note that the actual utilization during XIth 
Plan Period for R&D Schemes was Rs. 54.48 crore against the Mid 
Term Plan Outlay of Rs. 75.35 crore.  For Regional/Promotional 
Exploration, the  actual utilization was Rs. 227.38 crore against 
the Plan Outlay (Mid Term Appraisal) of Rs. 305.82 crore which 
constitute 74.35% of Mid -term Appraisal figures.  Similarly, for 
Detailed Drilling -non CIL blocks, the actual expenditure during 
XIth Plan Period was Rs. 334.17 crore against the outlays at Mid 
Term Appraisal stage of Rs. 523.08 crore.  The Committee also 
observe that for another important Central Sponsored Scheme  for 
Development of Transport Infrastructure in coal fields, against the 
Mid Term Appraisal  outlay of Rs. 930.92 crore, actual expendit ure 
during XIth Plan at Rs. 67.58 crore was merely 7.25% of the 
revised estimates.  The Committee are perturbed to note that 
though the Ministry of Coal were asked to make indepth analysis 
of constraints realized in non -fulfilment of financial and physical  
targets envisaged for these Central Sponsored Schemes during the 
XIth Plan and to take advance action to ensure that the XII Plan 
targets are achieved, the Ministry of Coal have merely stated that    
the Annual Plan/Annual Action Plan targets are reviewed  
continuously at various levels in the PSUs as well as Ministry of 
Coal and all out efforts are made to ensure that earmarked funds 
are utilized optimally.  As the regular reviews of plan targets have 
not yielded the desired result and the Government have not 
intimated about the flaws identified in planning and 
implementation of these important schemes, the Committee 
cannot but deplore the lackadaisical and indifferent approach and  
inaction  on the part of the Ministry of Coal/coal companies.   At 
the same  time, the Committee  strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire to know the reasons for under 

 
 
utilization of approved outlays (Mid Term Stage  Appraisal) for 
these schemes.   The Committee would also  like to be apprised of 
the efforts via ble by the Government/coal companies to ensure 
full utilization of funds earmarked for all the Central Sponsored  
Schemes during 2012 and the XIIth Plan Period. The Committee 
view seriously the under utilisation of allocated funds in various 
schemes of the  Ministry of Coal which in recent times have 
become perennial.  The Committee recommend that Ministry of 
Coal should review the project planning and execution mechanism, 
so as to ensure that scarce funds are utilised optimally over the 
years.   
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
16. The Committee noted that the Central Mine Planning and Design 
Institute Ltd. (CMPDI) was the nodal agency for coordination and 
monitoring of coal S&T projects funded by the Ministry of Coal.  The 
Committee also noted that 11th plan approved outlays for R&D schemes 
were Rs. 75.35 crore whereas the actual utilization by the terminal year of 
the 11th plan period was only Rs. 55.62 crore. The Committee had been 
informed that for BE 2012-13,  Rs. 11.40 crore had been allocated for the 
scheme against the projected demand of Rs. 14.40 crore and an amount 
of Rs. 10.62 crore was kept at BE/RE stage 2011-12 against the projected 
demand of Rs. 28.82 crore. The Committee further noted that there were 
15 projects which ha d spilled over from the 11th Five Year Plan to 12th 
Five Year Plan and 6 new projects had been sanctioned for the year 2012-
13. The Committee felt that since the demand of coal from different 
sectors was increasing rapidly, it becomes imperative that major  thrust 
should be given to R&D projects to support coal industry for safe and 
optimum exploitation of coal reserves including availability of clean coal to 
meet the demand challenges.  The Committee, therefore, recommended 
that the Ministry should make all  out efforts for timely completion of 
various on -going and new R&D projects.  They also desired that the 
Ministry should draw necessary lessons from the underutilization of 
approved outlays for R&D scheme during 11th plan period and take 
appropriate steps to ensure full utilisation of the funds earmarked for R&D 
during 2012-13 and also the entire 12th plan period to derive the benefits 
from such projects in the coal sector. The Committee would like coal PSUs 
to earmark sufficient funds to augment the R&D ac tivities in developing 
new and clean technologies for exploitation of coal reserves.  The 
Committee also recommended that the Centre Mine Planning & Design 
Institute should be fully equipped to monitor and coordinate the ongoing 
technology upgradation works. 
 

 
 
17. The Ministry of Coal in their written replies have stated as under:- 
"Expenditure: The expenditure on R&D activities during last three 
five years plans (IX, X & XI) and the projected expenditure for XII 
Plan period are given below:  
 
 
Plan Expenditure (Rs.in crore) 
IX 24.97 
X 52.61 
XI 54.86  (Un-audited) 
XII 80.0 (Projected)  
 
The above Table indicates that the expenditure on R&  D has 
increased substantially. Expected utilisation of the budget during 
2012-13 has been mentioned in the Action Taken Note for Point No. 
1 (The Observations of the Committee have been taken note of and 
every effort would be made to utilized the allocate d funds to the 
optimum level by taking corrective measures.) under Research and 
Development.  
Efforts for enhancing the quantum of research work and for wider 
involvement of research agencies including private organizations, 
has been mentioned in the Action  Taken Note for Point No.4  (The 
Annual Plan / Annual Action Plan targets are reviewed continuously 
at various levels in the PSUs as well as Ministry of Coal. All out 
efforts are made to ensure that earmarked funds are utilized 
optimally. During the XII pla n intensive efforts will be made to 
minimize the gap between budget estimates & actual utilization.)  
under Research and Development. 
(ii) Mechanism for monitoring:  
  
To obviate the delay and for full utilization of funds, the progress of 
S&T projects is m onitored by CMPDI and reviewed by Technical 
Sub-Committee of Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC)  
and SSRC under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal).  Progress of 
the projects is being monitored by periodic visits to the 
implementing institutes by CMPDI officials to provide required help 
to complete the projects in time.  
 
Quarterly progress reports of the projects are being received from 
the implementing agencies and the status of these projects is being 
placed before SSRC Sub -committee and also  SSRC meetings 
periodically." 
 
18. While recommending that major thrust should be given to 
R&D projects to support coal industry for safe and optimum 

 
 
exploitation of coal reserves, the Committee had also desired that 
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute should be fully 
equipped to monitor and coordinate the ongoing technology 
upgradation works including making the Central Mine Planning 
and Design Institute Limited(CMPDI) fully equipped.   The 
Committee are, however,  disappointed to observe that  reply of 
the Ministry is silent about the detailed efforts made for enhancing 
the quantum of research work with wider involvement of research 
agencies including private organizations and making CMPDI fully 
equipped.  While lamenting the casual approach of  the Ministry in 
this regard, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire that Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
(CMPDI) being the nodal agency for coordinating and monitoring 
of Coal S&T projects should be given utmost priorit y for 
technological upgradation which would ultimately help in 
augmentation of exploitation of coal reserves  and reduce 
production cost.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Gove rnment to fully equip the CMPDI  with 
technology upgradation works and desire that  outside agencies 
and experts should be associated for this work to get an effective 
output of development plans. 
19. The Committee  at the same time, unable to understand the 
rationale of Government in not responding to their suggestion of  
earmarking funds by Coal PSUs for R&D activities in the field of 
developing new and clear  technologies. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of  follow up action taken in this regard by the 
Government. 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF EMSC 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
20. The Committee noted that Environmental and Subsidence Control 
Scheme was aimed at addressing environmental issues in the coal field at 
the erstwhile mines in Raniganj and Jharia arising out of unscientific 
mining carried out by the owners. The Committee had been informed that 
all the EMSC schemes had been merged in the Master Plan dealing with 

 
 
fire, subsidence, rehabilitation and diversion of surface infrastructure in 
Jharia and Raniganj coalfields within the leasehold areas of BCCL and ECL 
which was sanctioned by the Government in August, 2009 at an 
investment of Rs. 9773.84 crores to be implemented in ten years. This 
was being funded partly by the internal resources of CIL and partly from 
the Budget from collection of stowi ng Excise Duty under the CM(C&M) 
Act, 1974. The Committee were totally dismayed to note that the scheme 
was in the 3rd and 4th years of implementation and funds to the tune of 
Rs. 594.24 crore and Rs. 669.61 crore were to be contributed by CCDAC.  
Though budgetary support of Rs. 50.58 crore was provided at BE 2011 -
12, the same was withdrawn at RE stage.  Now a token provision of Rs. 
9.00 crore had been made for 2012-13 for implementing this scheme. The 
Committee deprecate such a failure on the part of the Ministry which even 
have failed to pursue CIL to utilize its share of Rs. 350 crore. In effect the 
provision has reduced the scheme to mockery. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry of Coal should play a pro -active role and 
issue necessary direction to  CIL for regularly expending its share of funds 
for the scheme. Such steps should be taken without wasting a single 
moment. Given the present state of affairs, the Committee are doubtful of 
the sincerity of the implementing agencies for the scheme . The 
Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Government to evolve a suitable 
mechanism for implementation of the scheme in a time bound manner.  
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the perspective plan of 
the Ministry/CIL for investment of Rs.  9773.84 crore upto 2019 as 
envisaged in the Master Plan for implementation of the scheme. 
 
21. The Ministry of Coal in their written replies have stated as follows:- 
  
"While fully sharing the concerns expressed by the Standing 
Committee, the Ministry submits that the progress of 
implementation is mainly dependent on the implementing agencies 
viz. JRDA and ADDA.   These agencies are yet to complete the 
demographic surveys and expedite land acquisition process.  Once 
these activities are completed, construction of dwelling units and 
shifting of people will follow.  However, the High Powered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary(Coal) is regularly 
monitoring the pro cess and releasing the amounts demanded by 
these agencies for implementation of Master Plan.  Despite the 
sincere efforts by the Ministry, the speed of the implementation of 
the Master Plan mainly depends upon the progress made by the 
ADDA and JRDA.   Keep ing  in view the involvement of human 
aspects, the implementation of such programmes is a long drawn 
out process.   However, Ministry assures Committee that it will 
make all out efforts to ensure expeditious implementation of the 
Master Plan.  
 
The pert charts indicating the time frame for completion of various 
activities as originally approved by cabinet is enclosed (Annexure I) 
for the information as desired by the Committee. 
 

 
 
Latest position of the  implementation of Master Plan for 
rehabilitation of Jharia Raniganj coal fields is as hereunder: 
  
The approved outlay of the Master Plan is Rs. 9773.84 crores 
((Raniganj Coalfields – Rs. 2661.73 crore; Jharia Coalfields – Rs. 
7112.11 crore). This outlay is proposed to be funded through 
Internal Resources of C oal India Limited to the extent of Rs. 350 
crore per annum and the remaining from the collections of stowing 
excise duty under Coal Mines (Conservation & Development) Act, 
1974.  
 
Till date an amount of Rs. 160.64 crore has been released to ADDA 
and Rs. 111 crore has been released to JRDA. 
 
In Jharia Coal field 86.44 acres of vacant land in Bhuli township and 
849.68 acres of land in and around Belgoria township belonging to 
BCCL have been identified for developing new township by JRDA in 
addition to other a reas. Further, two sites namely Bonjemari and 
Gourandi have been identified for setting up of new townships for 
rehabilitation and resettlement in Raniganj Coal fields. The total 
area required for the same is 2214 acres (896 Ha). ADDA had 
accorded Cabinet approval from Government of West Bengal for 
acquisition of land for this purpose.  
 
Ministry of coal has taken up with the state Government of 
Jharkhand and Government of West Bengal for expediting land 
acquisition for rehabilitation. Ministry of Coal has also taken up the 
issue of diverting the Railway lines from the endangered areas with 
Ministry of Railways." 
 
22. Taking note of the fact the slow pace of implementation of 
Master Plan for Environmental and Subsidence Control (EMSC) in 
Raniganj and Jharia  Coalfields approved by the Government in 
2009, the Committee had urged the Government to evolve a 
suitable mechanism for implementation of the scheme in a time 
bound manner. The Committee are, however, constrained to  note 
that Asansol  Durgapur Developmen t Authority(ADDA) and Jharia 
Rehabilitation and Development Authority(JRDA) are yet to  
complete demographic surveys and expedite the land acquisition 
process although the demograph Survey and valuation for both 
the  phases were required to be completed wi thin two years.  As 
such the progress of implementation of project is rather slow as it 
is mainly dependent on the implementing agencies.   The 
Committee view seriously the slow pace of demographic survey 

 
 
and land acquisition process and desire that the ma tter be taken 
up with the Chief Secretaries of the State Government s, so as to 
expedite this  process.  Similarly, Railway Board be  approached to 
expedite diversion of Railways for endangered areas.   The 
Committee further  find  that till date an amount of Rs. 160.64 
crore has been released to ADDA and another Rs. 111 crore   to 
JRDA. As the Master Plan is to be implemented with 10 years, the 
Committee fear that  with this pace of development, the 
subsidence and rehabilitation etc. in Raniganj and Jhark hand 
would remain a distant dream.  The Committee though  reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and desire that the Ministry/CIL 
should formulate  a perspective plan in coordination with State 
Governments of Jharkhand and West Bengal to implement the 
Master Plan within the stipulated time.  The Committee would also 
to be apprised of the utilization of funds released to ADDA and 
JRDA so far.   
DEVELOPMENT OF TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE IN COALFIELDS 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
23. The Committee noted that the allocation of Rs. 277.63 crore during 
the 11th Plan Period for the scheme Development of Transport 
Infrastructure in Coalfields(DTIC) was increased to Rs. 930.92 crore at 
Mid-term appraisal of the Plan.  The Committee were, how ever, surprised 
to note that the actual utilization of funds during the 11th Plan Period was 
only Rs. 67.58 crore. Further, an amount of Rs. 50.00 crore has been 
allocated during 2012 -13 against Rs. 22.00 crore at BE/RE stage for 
2011-12.  An analysis of t he figures of allocations and utilisations 
revealed that though funds had been increased manifold for investment in 
the scheme for Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfields, the 
actual utilisation was less than 25% of approved outlays.  The Com mittee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for this poor planning by the 
Government where the funds were increased by more than 300% at Mid 
Term appraisal of the scheme.  Further, the Committee were dismayed to 
point out that PSUs only consider propos als relating to pucca roads under 
the scheme and repairing of roads was not being considered although the 
condition of roads in most of the coalfields areas were stated to be 
seriously damaged as a result of excessive use of roads by heavy vehicles 
loaded with coal.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that coal 
companies should also include repairing of roads under this scheme and 
also earmarked sufficient funds for upkeep of the roads in proper working 
conditions in their command areas.  
 

 
 
24. The Committee also recommended that coal companies must make 
the provisions for construction of all roads  and their repairs/maintenance 
situated in and around coal field areas whether roads belongs to State 
Governments/Gram Panchyats/JilaParishad or coal companies.  The coal 
companies should also keep clean all such roads by providing appropriate 
mechanism. Apart from this, coal companies should ensure that no 
unauthorized or illegal liquor and undesirable activities are being carried 
on by the side on such roads and  if it comes to the knowledge of coal 
companies they must inform the concerned police administration so that 
such illegal business are prevented. 
 
25. The Ministry of Coal in their replies have stated as follows:- 
 
"Suggestion of the Committee is noted.  S ome of the important 
road projects that have been completed in 2011 -12 are : Korbi to 
Rani Atari in Chirimiri Area of SECL; ChaalGarghora Road at 
Raigarh field; Sundergarh To Duduka Road -Mor; HimgirByepass in 
Basundhara Area of MCL etc.  Similarly Umrer Ra ilway siding in 
WCL,  Basantimata -NL OCP Railway siding via Dahibari in BCCL 
was also completed.  In addition the critical rail links in potential 
coalfields viz. North Karanpura in Jharkhand, Mandraigarh in 
Chhattisgarh, Ib&Talcher coalfields in Orissa, Godavari Coalfields in 
Andhra Pradesh have been taken up with Ministry of Railways for 
expediting implementation of the same.  Recently a detailed 
meeting was held on 26.06.2012 at Chairman, Railway Board level 
where thorough reviews of each of these proje cts were held and 
the concerned agencies were directed for expediting the 
implementation." 
 
26. While observing that the condition of roads in most of the 
coal field areas are damaged as a result of excessive use of roads 
by heavy vehicles loaded with coal , the Committee had 
recommended that coal companies should also include repairing of 
roads under this scheme and also earmark sufficient funds for 
upkeep of roads in their command areas.  The Committee had also 
recommended that these roads should be kept c lean by providing 
appropriate mechanism and the coal companies should ensure 
that no unauthorized or illegal liquor and undesirable activities be 
carried on the side of such roads.  The Committee are, however,  
concerned to note that the reply of the Minis try of Coal is silent on 
the recommendation of the Committee to include the repairing of 
roads under Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfields 
(DTIC) scheme and also earmark sufficient funds for upkeep of the 
roads in their command areas. The C ommittee would like to be 

 
 
apprised of the action taken by the Ministry to implement their 
recommendation.    
UTILIZATION OF PLAN OUTLAYS BY COAL PSUS 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
 
27. The Committee were unhappy to note that against the Plan Outlays 
of Rs. 4220.00 crore for CIL for the year 2011 -12, the actual expenditure 
upto February, 2012 was only Rs. 2759.12 crore which comes to 65.38%.  
The Ministry had informed the Committee that shortfalls in utili sation of 
funds were mainly in ECL, WCL, NLC and MECL due to delay in 
procurement of Heavy Earth Moving Machine (HEMM). The Committee 
were constrained to note that despite the rising demand from various 
utility sectors and especially the new power projects , the actual 
production of coal by CIL is reported to be 427.80 MT (upto 27th March, 
2012) against the target of 447 MT during 2011-12.  The Committee were 
not satisfied with the reasons adduced by the Ministry for not achieving 
the production targets by  CIL such as deficient supply of explosives, 
problem of coal evacuation, poor performance of new equipment supplied 
by Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML) for Northern Coalfields Ltd. (NCL) and 
South East Coalfields Ltd. (SECL) etc. The Committee felt that thes e 
administrative/technical delays should had been resolved by taking timely 
appropriate steps  by the Ministry of Coal/CIL to address them in the right 
perspective.  What was disturbing the Committee was that the 
procurement of HEMM had been a perennial pr oblem that CIL had been 
experiencing since long and it had utterly failed to tackle  this particular 
issue with more seriousness. The Committee, therefore, recommended 
that the Ministry/CIL should take necessary steps to resolve the 
bottlenecks affecting t he production of coal so that the physical targets 
set for CIL commensurate with planned investment.  The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the reasons for the poor performance of 
the newly supplied equipment by BEML and the remedial action taken  by 
the CIL for optimal utilisation of the equipment.  
 
28. The Ministry of Coal in their replies have stated as under:- 
 
"Against annual capital outlay of Rs 4220.00 Crore, capital 
investment in CIL during 2011 - 12 was of the order of Rs 3570.39 
Crore with an achievement of about 84.61 %. In general,   land 
acquisition problems and non finalization of HEMM contracts due to 
various complications are the main causes for the variation from 
the budget provision.  Expenditure in BCCL & SECL was more than 
the target where as expenditure MCL, WCL, NCL and under the 
head of “CIL & others” is slightly less than the target.  
 
The detailed break-up, subsidiary wise is tabulated below:- 
  

 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Company 
 
2011-12 
BE Actual 
ECL 400.00 332.96 
BCCL 400.00 410.72 
CCL 350.00 320.99 
NCL 800.00 702.11 
WCL 350.00 275.72 
SECL 600.00 937.65 
MCL 700.00 497.95 
Others * 620.00 92.29 
Total CIL 4220.00 3570.39 
 
*CIL/NEC/DCC/IICM/CMPDIL/Exploration through outsourcing/R&D 
Subsidiary wise major reasons of less capital expenditures 
compared to Budget provision during the year 2011-12 is as under: 
 
ECL: 
Signing of final contract with M/S CODCO (China) for PSLW of 
Jhanjra UG got delayed. Regarding Chitra (East) acquisition of land 
& forestry clearance could not be obtained. 
 
NCL: 
Compensation for land could not be disbursed (only Rs 59.00 Cre 
against Rs 341.00 Crs) due to delay in finalization of rates. 
Gyratory crushers for CHP were not supplied by M/S HEC in time. 
Railway siding work at Dudhichua&Khadia awarded to RITES which 
got delayed. 
WCL: 
Against the Budgeted capital of Rs 350.00 Cre actual expenditu re    
stands at Rs 223.69 Crs. (Prov) i.e. % utilization being Rs 63.91 
cre only. 
Acquisition of tenancy land could not be done because of very high 
demand for compensation & employment from the villagers beyond 
the norms of CIL. In addition clearances of Forest land could not be 
materialized due to undue delay on the part of Forests department 
in spite of vigorous follow up. The expenditure on these accounts 
could not meet the projected target. 
In the absence of physical possession of land the mine 
development activities could not be taken up and hence there was 
less expenditure. 
 
MCL: 
Delayed tender finalization, cancellation of tenders on technical 
grounds and long supply schedule are the main reasons for less 
expenditure on account of HEMM procurement. 
All mine development activities could not be taken up due to land 
dispute. 
Coal Videsh: 

 
 
In addition to the above, the additional provisions of Rs 6000.00 Cr 
were kept for acquisition of assets abroad, but no deals were 
finalized during 2011-12. 
 
CIL has released about Rs 30.00 Cre for implementation of Master 
Plan of Jharia&Raniganj Fire Projects against the allotted Budget 
provision of Rs 350.00 Crs on Master Plan during the year 2011-12.  
Acquisition of land in non coal bearing area is the major constraint  
for lesser expenditure.  
 
As per the information obtained from subsidiaries the budget 
allocated for procurement of HEMM during 2011 -12 has been fully 
utilized by CIL as a whole.  
 
However, necessary actions has been taken for further streamlining 
the pro curement procedures of HEMM in terms of preparation of 
Standard NITs which are reviewed / upgraded based upon the 
experience and different guidelines issued from time to time from 
different Govt. departments / agencies as an ongoing process 
towards improvement. 
 
The supplies of Bulk Loading explosives were not as per CIL’s 
requirement due to inadequate availability of ammonium nitrate 
indigenously and apparent delay in import of the same by the 
vendors. This issue has since been resolved by continuous 
pursuance by  CIL with the vendors to increase import of 
ammonium nitrate to meet the requirement of explosives. For 
further streamlining the supplies of ammonium nitrate and thereby 
bulk loading explosives,  CIL proposes to enter into a joint venture 
with RCF (Rashtriya Chemical & Fertiliser Ltd.) and IOCL (Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd.) – IBP Division for manufacture of explosives.  
 
The problems in the newly supplied equipments by M/s BEML are 
generally of the nature  of repetitive failures of some of the 
systems / sub- systems due to in -adequate quality assurance, 
teething problems in some of the new equipment, poor response 
time from M/s BEML to provide service support etc. Regular follow -
ups with M/s. BEML, at different levels, are being done by 
CIL/subsidiary com panies to resolve the issues affecting the 
performance. However, considering the large fleet of BEML 
equipment at CIL, there is much more required to be done by BEML 
to ensure trouble free operation of the equipment being supplied by 
them." 
 
29. During exa mination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13), the 
Ministry had informed the Committee that the reasons for not 
achieving the production targets by Coal India Ltd. were deficient 
supply of explosives, problem of coal evacuation, poor 
performance of new equipmen ts supplied by Bharat Earth Movers 
Ltd. (BEML).  The Committee had, therefore, desired that they may 

 
 
be apprised of the reasons for poor performance of newly supplied 
equipment by BEML and remedial action taken by Coal India Ltd. 
for optional utilization o f the equipment.  Though the Ministry 
have replied that regular follow ups with M/s BEML at different 
levels are being done by CIL/subsidiary companies to resolve the 
issues affecting the performance, the Committee  are not at all 
satisfied as there are no apparent visible results forthcoming since 
the Ministry have admitted that there is much more required to be 
done by BEML to ensure trouble free operation of the equipment 
being supplied by them.  Considering the large fleet of BEML 
equipment used by CIL and taking note of the perennial nature of 
the problem, the Committee would like the Ministry /CIL to 
resolve this issue by taking it at the appropriate level on fast track 
basis.  
ALLOTMENT OF COAL BLOCK 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 18 & 19 
30. The Committee had been given to understand that so far 218 coal 
blocks with geological reserve s of about 50 billion tonnes had  been 
allocated to eligible public and private companies under the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973. Out of that, 25 coal blocks have been de -
allocated. Out of the de -allocated coal blocks, two coal blocks were re -
allocated to eligible companies unde r the said Act.  Now the net allocated 
blocks are 195. Further, the review committee had again met on 11th and 
12th January, 2012 to review the development of coal blocks and 
recommended to issue show c ause notices in 58 cases who had  failed to 
develop the  allotted coal blocks within a prescribed period.  The 
Committee were extremely anguished at the dismal performance of the 
allocated captive coal allocattees as out of the total 195 coal blocks only 
22  blocks had  commenced production. The Committee were o f the 
opinion that non -development of captive coal blocks resulting in non -
commencement of coal therefrom was one of major contributory factors 
for low coal production in th e country. Though the Ministry we re reported 
to have initiated some punitive measur es to make captive allocattees 
accountable for the delay in developing coal blocks, there was no 
perceptible improvement in the development of such coal blocks as most 
of the captive coal blocks ha d not been able to commence production 
within the stipulate d time frame. Hence, the scarce coal resources which 
had been diverted for captive mining, continue to remain unutilized.  What 
was most surprising was the fact that during the las t three years, no coal 

 
 
block had  been identified and earmarked for captive a llocation under 
government dispensation route. The Committee therefore, recommend ed 
that the Ministry should evolve some effective mechanism so as to check 
the non-seriousness on the part of captive coal allocates who had failed to 
develop the coal block a llotted to them within the stipulated time. The 
Committee also desire that various bottlenecks coming in the way of 
operationalisation of captive coal blocks should be suitably addressed by 
the Ministry in a time bound period. The Committee also urge upon the 
Ministry  to consider the request of some of the State Governments for 
allotment of coal blocks to them. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
take stock of the situation by holding periodical review meetings with the 
captive coal block allottees to  address this problem halting the 
development of such coal blocks.  As coal mining needs latest 
technologies to exploit the maximum reserves with due adherence to 
safety aspects, the Committee expect the Government to accord due 
priority in this area as well.   
31. Though the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2010 for introduction of system of auction by competitive 
bidding of coal blocks had  been notified in 2010, the Committee had 
observed that no coal blocks  were allotted so far. It wa s a sad 
commentary on the part of the Ministry for taking unduly long time in the 
allotment of coal blocks by bidding system as the early allotment of blocks 
would have set motion for their development and start production.  The 
Committee had, th erefore, desired that the Ministry to immediately 
implement the above Act in letter and spirit.    
32. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under: 
"As per the guidelines, coal production from captive coal blocks 
should commence within 36 months (42 months in case the area 
falls in forest land) in case of open cast mines and in 48 months 
(54months in case the area falls in forest land) in case of 
underground mine, from the date of allocation.  If the coal block is 
not explored, additional two years are allowed for detailed 
exploration and three months for preparation of geological report.  
The allocates of coal blocks, who have not started production of  
geological report.  The allocates of coal blocks, who have not 
started production so far, are in various stages of obtaining 
statutory clearances and mining lease, preparing mining plan, 
acquisition of land, procuring machinery and equipment etc. for 
both mining as well as end-use project.  
Major constraints being faced by the allocattees at present are as 
follows: 
 Delay in setting up of end-sue projects 

 
 
 Time taken for obtaining various clearances for mining land 
acquisition. 
 Possible speculation by allocattees anticipating opening up of the 
sector for commercial mining.  
 Development of coal blocks involve a gestation of 3 to 5 years for 
reaching production stage and another two years for reaching 
optimal production capacity.  
 
Major part of delay rel ate to forest and environment clearance and 
land acquisition on the part of allocattee.  Forest and environment 
clearances fall under the realms of the Ministry of Environment & 
Forest, whereas the concerned State Government is to facilitate 
acquisition of land.  
The following mechanism is in place to monitor the development of 
coal blocks as per the milestone chart devised and given with the 
allocation letters: 
 Monitoring of progress of allocated coal blocks is done through a 
Committee under the Chairmansh ip of Additional 
Secretary(Coal). The review is undertaken periodically with all 
the coal block allocates to assess the development / progress 
achieved by them. Action is taken against the companies where 
delay is found on their part by issuing necessary a dvisory and 
show cause notices.  In case of willful delays on the part of 
allocattees, appropriate action is initiated for de-allocation of the 
block & deduction of BG.   
 The Coal Controller Organisation also closely monitors the 
development of coal blocks . For this purpose, he obtains a 
quarterly report from the block allocates. Based on which a 
comprehensive status report is prepared.   
With a view to bringing in more transparency, the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010 
has been notified in Gazette of India(Extraordinary) on 9 th 
September, 2010 to provide for grant of reconnaissance permit, 
prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of an area 
containing coal and lignite through auction by competitive 
bidding, on such t erms and conditions as may be prescribed.  
This, would however, not be applicable in the following cases:- 
 Where such area is considered for allocation to a Government 
company or corporation for mining or such other specified end 
use; 
 Where such area is co nsidered for allocation to a company or 
corporation that has been awarded a power project on the basis 
of competitive bids for tariff(including Ultra Mega Power 
Projects) 
 
 The Government has notified the Auction by Competitive Bidding of 
Coal Mines Rules, 2012 on 2nd February, 2012. Further, the notification 
on the commencement of the said Amendment Act, 2010 has also 
been notified by the Ministry of Mines on 13th February, 2012. 

 
 
 CMPDIL, after calling bids and has selected M/s CRISIL for the above 
work, CRISIL has been given 3 months time for completion of : 
i) Methodology for calculation of floor price/reserve price tag, for 
the captive coal blocks; 
ii) Preparation of Model Tender Document for selection of successful 
coal block allocattee; 
iii) Preparation of model agreement between MoC and the 
successful coal block allocattee. 
 
 The Government has identified 54 coal blocks for allocation and they 
have been sectorally earmarked.  It has been decided to allocate the 
blocks after detailed exploratio n only through auction and to power 
sector for tariff based bidding. Out of the above 54 blocks, 16 are 
earmarked for power sector, 16 for Government companies and 22 for 
allocation through auction.  The status of the identified blocks was 
reviewed with CI L & CMPDIL. The CMPDIL has informed that detailed 
drilling in 12 blocks is completed and the GR is available.  The 
remaining 42 blocks are not explored.  The exploration of the above 
bocks would required 16 lakh meters of drilling. CMPDIL has been 
asked to prepare a plan for exploration of the blocks on priority basis." 
 
 33. In view of the unduly long time being taken by the Ministry 
in the allotment of coal blocks by bidding system despite the 
Mines and Minerals(Development & Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2010 passed by Parliament for introduction of system of auction 
by competitive bidding of coal blocks, the Committee had desired 
that the Ministry to immediately implement the Act with letter and 
spirit.   The Ministry have informed the Committee that the 
Government has notified the auction by Competitive Bidding of 
Coal Mines Rules, 2012 on 2 nd February, 2012 and Central Mine 
Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) after calling bids 
has selected M/s CRISIL to look into the whole process of 
competitive bidding.   The Ministry have further informed that 54 
coal blocks have been identified for allocation, out of which 16 are 
earmarked for power sector, 16 for government companies and 22 
for allocation through auction.  The detailed drilling in respect of  
12 blocks is completed and the geological reserve is available.  
However,    for the remaining 42 blocks CMPDIL has been asked to 
prepare a plan for exploration.   The Committee are constrained to 
observe that no progress has been made for the development  of 
identified coal blocks for allocation through bidding system. The 
early development of identified coal blocks is imperative to boost 
coal production in the country, the Committee strongly feel.  The 

 
 
Committee would like the Ministry to go in for alloca tion of coal 
blocks through bidding system without any loss of time and they 
may be apprised accordingly.   
SETTING UP OF NEW COAL WASHERIES 
Recommendation Serial No. 22 
 
34. The Committee noted that for increasing the output of washed 
coking and non-coking coal, Coal India Limited had envisaged setting up 
of  20 new coal washeries with the capacity of 111.10 MT  with an 
investment of about Rs. 2500 crore.  These included seven  coking coal 
washeries and 13 non -coking coal washeries.  The Committee further 
observed that out of these 20 proposed to be set up washeries by the end 
of XIth Five Year Plan, 2 washeries were proposed to set up on 'turnkey 
basis'.  The Committee regrette d to observe that not even a single 
washery had been set up during the entire XIth Plan period which ended 
on 31 March, 2012 despite  the directive of the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests restricting the use of coal containing more than 34% ash content 
in power stations located 1000 km away from pit heads.  While 
deprecating the Ministry/CIL for their utter failure in setting up of coal 
washeries during the XI Plan Period as targeted which was a serious lapse 
on their part. The Committee therefore, reitera ted their earlier 
recommendation (4th Report on Demands for Grants, 2010 -11) and 
desire that the Ministry/CIL should prepare an action plan to expedite the 
work of commissioning coal washeries.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Government/CIL in this regard.   
 
35. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under: 
"In order to supply improved quality and sized coal to the 
consumers, CIL has taken necessary action to set up 20 coal 
washeries (18 washeries under Build -Operate-Maintain i.e. BOM 
and 2 washeries under turn -key-scheme) with a total capacity of 
111.1 Mty.  
Global tender for 7 washeries under BOM scheme was floated from 
time to time in the 1 st phase since January, 2009 with the following 
outcome : 
-Letter of Award (LoA) has been issued to the selected bidders to 
set up 3 washeries i.e. Madhubandwashery , 5 Mty. & 
Patherdihwashery, 5 Mty. And Asoli(10 Mty) after receiving  
Environmental clearances from MoEF which was due over a long 
period. 
- Tender for Dugdawashery, 2.5 Mty has been finalized & awaiting  
approval from CIL Board  
- Tender for Dahibariwashery, 1.6  Mty. is under final stage of 
evaluation. 

 
 
- Tender for other two washeries (Basundhara, 10.0 Mty and 
Jagannath, 10.0 Mty has been cancelled by MCL Board during its 
approval for awarding the work and  retendered (a major setback in 
implementing the programme ). 
 
Thereafter, global tender for 11 washeries under BOM scheme was 
floated to pre -qualify/ shortlist the bidders and the pre -qualified 
bidders are being issued for the techno -commercial & price bid 
(RFP) documents for the respective washeries." 
36. In view of delay in setting up of 20 new coal washeries by 
Coal India Limited during XIth Plan period, the Committee had 
desired that CIL to prepare an action plan to expedite the work of 
commissioning coal washeries.  From the reply of the Ministry, it is 
revealed that not a single washery has been commissioned so far 
as most of them are under various stages of tendering process.  
Needless to say that early commissioning of the proposed coal 
washery is necessary to derive benefits by Coal India Limited to 
supply clean coal to the consumers.  The Committee, therefore, 
would like Coal India Limited to work on war footing for early 
commissioning of coal wa sheries and they would like to be 
apprised in this regard.     
 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (CSR) 
Recommendation Serial No.  24 
37. The Committee noted that CIL had formulated a new CSR Policy for 
implementation from 2010-11 onwards. As per this new CSR Policy, funds 
had been allocated to each company based on 5% of the retained earning 
of previous yea r subject to a minimum of Rs. 5/ - per tonne of coal 
production in previous year for implementation of CSR activities in and 
around mining areas within the radius of 15 kms for the benefit of the 
villagers and community at large including Scheduled Castes ( SC) and 
Scheduled Tribes (ST). The work include d, development of community 
infrastructure like school buildings, community hall, village roads, wells, 
tube wells, school furniture, Mahila Mandal Activities, Sports and Cultural 
activities, Medical Camps etc . CMD of s ubsidiary companies of CIL had  
been authorized to consider CSR activities depending on the need 
accessed for the people. During 2010 -11 an amount of Rs. 262.28 crores 
had been allocated for undertaking CSR activities by the coal companies.  
The C ommittee were, however, dismayed to note d that the funds 
earmarked for CSR activities had not been gainfully utilized by coal PSUs.  
Though CIL ha d claimed that due to the change in CSR Policy, Sizeable 
funds have been generated to implement CSR activities, the Comm ittee 
could not but deplore the lackadaisical approach of CIL Board for delaying 

 
 
the approval of necessary guidelines  to implement the pr ojects. It wa s 
highly deplorable that CIL had  delayed finalization of a comprehensive 
CSR guidelines despite recommendations to this effect made by the 
Committee in this regard, while presenting their 4th Report (Demands for 
Grants (2010 -11) of Ministry of  Coal) to Parliament.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommended that CIL should make sincere  efforts to 
implement their new CSR policy so as to bring about socio -economic 
development of the coalfield areas. It wa s unfortunate that coal 
companies hav e not spent a substantial amount allocated for CSR 
activities. The Committee recommended that coal companies must create 
a discipline and cadre consisting officers and employees for looking after 
the implementation of the scheme and to ensure that mone y allocated for 
CSR activities wa s fully utilised. The CSR activities must not be delayed 
further on account of absence of proper planning or pending huge projects 
coming forward as claimed and expected by the CIL Board. The 
Committee also desire d that  the pe ople's representatives,  local 
population and  authorities must also be associated in identifying and 
execution of CSR activities.    
38. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the 
Committee as under: 
"CSR Policy of CIL and its subs idiary companies  is being implemented 
from the year 2010 -11 only which is based on the guidelines issued by 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).  DPE has specified specific 
procedures for undertaking CSR activities, major of which are as under: 
(i) Participation of voluntary organisations, specialist organisations 
and community based organisations. 
(ii) Base line surveys 
(iii) Documentation of the experience 
(iv) Setting up a CSR Hub with participation of Dept. Of PE, SCOPE and 
CP Sector Enterprises 
(v) Monitoring and evaluation. 
 
In order to undertake the CSR activities as per the above guidelines, it is 
necessary to engage an implementing agency for CIL and its subsidiaries.   
CIL has approached Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai to 
become an agency for CIL and its subsidiaries in order to undertake the 
procedural job for CSR activities.   The discussion is underway and it is 
expected that a MOU may be reached shortly.  Thus in the concerned field 
the targets could not be achieved. 
 
However, in the absenc e of the proper implementing agency CIL and its 
subsidiaries have been undertaking CSR activities w.e.f. 2010 -11 through 
various implementing agencies as per CSR Policy of CIL.  It is also  to be 
mentioned that whatever amount could not be spent  would be carried 
forward during subsequent years. 
 
As per CSR  Policy of CIL, CSR fund is created by way of keeping 5% of 
the retained earnings of previous year subject to minimum of Rs.5/ - per 
tonne of coal production of previous year.  The exercise for calculatio n of 
retained earnings for the year ending March,  2012 is not yet completed.  
After finalization of accounts during 2011 -12, budget estimate for 2012 -
13 shall be finalized. 
 

 
 
The following major activities towards CSR have been undertaken during 
2011-12 by CIL and its subsidiaries which is beneficiary to the villagers 
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes livin g within the radius 
of 15 Kms. of the project sites. 
 
 Construction of Public utility road 
 Construction of Road over bridges 
 Integrated Wate r supply scheme for supply of drinking water to 
villages of adjoining coal mines. 
 Repairs/installation of hand pumps 
 Repairs/construction of wells including deep bore wells. 
 Construction/repairs of school buildings. 
 Providing educational facilities e.g. furniture, laboratory instruments 
etc. 
 Providing financial assistance/grant-in-aid to educational institution 
operation in coalfield areas. 
 Organizing health camps including camps for eye operation 
 Providing medical facilities through Mobile Medical vans. 
 Construction/repair of community center. 
 Street lighting  and solar lighting system to villagers belonging to 
BPL. 
 Environment  development /protection work like tree plantation, 
organizing sensitizing programme and pollution control etc. 
 Construction of p laying grounds/stadia and organizing sports for 
villagers. 
 Providing financial assistance/donation/sponsorship  to NGOs which 
are specifically engaged in different developmental works of the 
Nation. 
 Promotion of sports and cultural activities supporting ev ents at 
State and National level. 
 Relief to victims of natural calamities like earthquake, cyclone, 
draught and flood situation in any part of the country. 
 Wellness clinic. 
 HIV/AIDs awareness programme. 
 Other activities being undertaken from time to time." 
 
39. The Committee are not satisfied with the casual and evasive 
reply of the Government in regard to Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR).  It is the considered view of the Committee 
that CSR is a mechanism through which an organisation serves the 
interest of the society by taking responsibility for the impact of 
their activities on customers, employees, shareholders 
Communities and the environment aspects of the operations.  The 
Committee have taken note of Guidelines issued by Department of 
Public Ente rprises for undertaking CSR.  The suggestions of the 
Committee for creating a dedicated disciplined cadre of officials 
and employees for implementation of CSR and also associating 

 
 
people representatives in the scheme are in fact a direction to 
further improve the guidelines enunciated by Department of Public 
Enterprises (DoPE).  In no way the suggestions by the Committee 
are in variance with guidelines issued by DoPE.  Reiterating their 
earlier recommendation, the Committee desire that not only a 
dedicated cadre in the CIL be evolved but also people 
representatives, local population and authorities be actively 
associated in identification and exec ution of CSR.  At the same 
time, the Committee desire that proactive action should be taken 
to ensure that allocated funds under CSR are utilised prudently by 
the Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries .  The Committee  also 
desire that they may be apprised of status of physical progress 
and detail of expenditure incurred against the targets/allocated 
amount by the Coal/Lignite Companies on different activities 
taken up by them under CSR during the last three  years.  The 
major activities towards CSR that have been undertaken by CIL 
and its subsidiaries benefiting the villagers including Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes living within the radius of 15 Kms 
should be extended upto 40 kms as large area of social 
development is associated directly as well as indirectly from the 
coal fields. 
40. The Committee also find that a t no stage,  Ministry of Coal  
disclosed any expenditure  incurred  on CSR activities by the 
private companies who were allocated  coal blocks by Central 
Government and or  where  production  has been started.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that importance of CSR activities 
has not be en properly understood  by the Government.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
immediately  take up the necessary steps  to ensure  that CSR 
activities by private companies to whom coa l blocks have been 
awarded, production/ excavation started of coal/lignite  are 
undertaken without fail.   

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
The Committee observe that the total Budgetary Support to the Ministry 
of Coal for the year 2012 -13 is Rs. 498.35 crore (Plan Rs. 450.00 crore 
and Non-Plan Rs. 48.35 crore) against Rs. 468.72 crore (Plan Rs. 420.00 
crore and Non -Plan Rs. 48.72 crore) for 2 011-12 at BE stage and Rs. 
412.20 crore (Plan Rs. 365.00 crore and non -Plan Rs. 47.20 crore) at RE 
stage.  The Committee have been given to understand that six centrally 
sponsored schemes viz. Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines (met out 
of cess collecti ons), Development of Transportation Infrastructure in 
coalfields areas (met out of cess collections), Research and Development 
Programme, Regional Exploration, Detailed Drilling and Environmental 
Measures and Subsidence Control, are being implemented for c oal and 
lignite sector with the help of Gross Budgetary Support.  The Committee's 
examination, however, revealed that the Ministry could utilise only Rs. 
327.57(prov.) as against Rs. 420.00 crore BE and Rs. 365.00 crore RE 
during 2011-12 for the implementa tion of these central sector schemes.  
The Committee would consider underutilization of budgetary allocations in 
these important areas as unfortunate and desire that the Ministry should 
take necessary corrective measures to ensure proper implementation of 
these schemes so that the scarce funds made available are fully utilised to 
derive benefits therefrom.    
Action Taken 
The Observations of the Committee have been taken note of and every 
effort would be made to utilized the allocated funds to the optimum level 
by taking corrective measures.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
The Committee note that the Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
Ltd. (CMPDI) is the nodal agency for coordination and monitoring of coal 
S&T projects funded by the Ministry of Coal.  The Committee also note 
that 11th plan approved outlays for  R&D schemes were Rs. 75.35 crore 
whereas the actual utilization by the terminal year of the 11th plan period 
was only Rs. 55.62 crore. The Committee have been informed that for BE 
2012-13,  Rs. 11.40 crore has been allocated for the scheme against the 
projected demand of Rs. 14.40 crore and an amount of Rs. 10.62 crore 
was kept at BE/RE stage 2011 -12 against the projected demand of Rs. 
28.82 crore. The Committee further note that there are 15 projects which 
have spilled over from the 11th Five Year Plan to  12th Five Year Plan and 

 
 
6 new projects have been sanctioned for the year 2012 -13. The 
Committee feel that since the demand of coal from different sectors is 
increasing rapidly, it becomes imperative that major thrust should be 
given to R&D projects to sup port coal industry for safe and optimum 
exploitation of coal reserves including availability of clean coal to meet the 
demand challenges.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should make all out efforts for timely completion of various on -
going and new R&D projects.  They also desire that the Ministry should 
draw necessary lessons from the underutilization of approved outlays for 
R&D scheme during 11th plan period and take appropriate steps to ensure 
full utilisation of the funds earmarked  for R&D during 2012 -13 and also 
the entire 12th plan period to derive the benefits from such projects in 
the coal sector. The Committee would like coal PSUs to earmark sufficient 
funds to augment the R&D activities in developing new and clean 
technologies for exploitation of coal reserves.  The Committee also 
recommends that the Centre Mine Planning & Design Institute should be 
fully equipped to monitor and coordinate the ongoing technology 
upgradation works. 
 
Action Taken 
Expenditure: The expenditure on R &D activities during last three five 
years plans (IX, X & XI) and the projected expenditure for XII Plan period 
are given below:  
Plan Expenditure (Rs.in crore) 
IX 24.97 
X 52.61 
XI 54.86  (Un-audited) 
XII 80.0 (Projected)  
 
The above Table, indicates that the expenditure on R& D has increased 
substantially. Expected utilisation of the budget during 2012 -13 has been 
mentioned in the Action Taken Note for Point No. 1 under Research and 
Development.  
Efforts for enhancing the quantum of research work and for wider 
involvement of research agencies including private organizations, has 
been mentioned in the Action Taken Note for Point No.4 under Research 
and Development. 
 
 

 
 
(ii) Mechanism for monitoring:  
To obviate the delay and f or full utilization of funds, the progress of S&T 
projects is monitored by CMPDI and reviewed by Technical Sub -
Committee of Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC)  and SSRC 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal).  Progress of the projects is 
being monitored by periodic visits to the implementing institutes by 
CMPDI officials to provide required help to complete the projects in time.  
Quarterly progress reports of the projects are being received from the 
implementing agencies and the status of the se projects is being placed 
before SSRC Sub-committee and also SSRC meetings periodically. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 & 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
UTILIZATION OF PLAN OUTLAYS BY COAL PSUS 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
Coal India Limited 
The Committee are unhappy to note that against the Plan Outlays of Rs. 
4220.00 crore for CIL for the year 2011 -12, the actual expenditure upto 
February, 2012 was only Rs. 2759.12 crore whi ch comes to 65.38%.  The 
Ministry have informed the Committee that shortfalls in utilisation of funds 
were mainly in ECL, WCL, NLC and MECL due to delay in procurement of 
Heavy Earth Moving Machine (HEMM). The Committee are constrained to 
note that despite  the rising demand from various utility sectors and 
especially the new power projects, the actual production of coal by CIL is 
reported to be 427.80 MT (upto 27 th March, 2012) against the target of 
447 MT during 2011 -12.  The Committee are not satisfied wi th the 
reasons adduced by the Ministry for not achieving the production targets 
by  CIL such as deficient supply of explosives, problem of coal evacuation, 
poor performance of new equipment supplied by Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. 
(BEML) for Northern Coalfield s Ltd. (NCL) and South East Coalfields Ltd. 
(SECL) etc. The Committee feel that these administrative/technical delays 
should have been resolved by taking timely appropriate steps  by the 
Ministry of Coal/CIL to address them in the right perspective.  What is 
disturbing the Committee is that the procurement of HEMM has been a 
perennial problem that CIL has been experiencing since long and it has 
utterly failed to tackle  this particular issue with more seriousness. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that th e Ministry/CIL should take 
necessary steps to resolve the bottlenecks affecting the production of coal 
so that the physical targets set for CIL commensurate with planned 
investment.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the reasons 

 
 
for the poor performance of the newly supplied equipment by BEML and 
the remedial action taken by the CIL for optimal utilisation of the 
equipment.  
Action Taken 
Against annual capital outlay of Rs 4220.00 Crore, capital investment in 
CIL during 2011 - 12 was of the ord er of Rs 3570.39 Crore with an 
achievement of about 84.61 %. In general,   land acquisition problems 
and non finalization of HEMM contracts due to various complications are 
the main causes for the variation from the budget provision.  Expenditure 
in BCCL &  SECL was more than the target where as expenditure MCL, 
WCL, NCL and under the head of “CIL & others” is slightly less than the 
target.  
The detailed break-up, subsidiary wise is tabulated below: 
         (Rs. in Crore) 
Company 
 
2011-12 
BE Actual 
ECL 400.00 332.96 
BCCL 400.00 410.72 
CCL 350.00 320.99 
NCL 800.00 702.11 
WCL 350.00 275.72 
SECL 600.00 937.65 
MCL 700.00 497.95 
Others * 620.00 92.29 
Total CIL 4220.00 3570.39 
*CIL/NEC/DCC/IICM/CMPDIL/Exploration through outsourcing/R&D 
Subsidiary wise major reasons of less capital expenditures compared to 
Budget provision during the year 2011-12 is as under : 
ECL: 
Signing of final contract with M/S CODCO (China) for PSLW of Jhanjra UG 
got delayed. Regarding Chitra  (East) acquisition of land & forestry 
clearance could not be obtained. 
 
NCL: 
Compensation for land could not be disbursed (only Rs 59.00 Cre against 
Rs 341.00 Crs) due to delay in finalization of rates. 
Gyratory crushers for CHP were not supplied by M/S H EC in time. Railway 
siding work at Dudhichua&Khadia awarded to RITES which got delayed. 
 
WCL: 
Against the Budgeted capital of Rs 350.00 Cre actual expenditure stands 
at Rs 223.69 Crs. (Prov) i.e. % utilization being Rs 63.91 cre only. 
Acquisition of tenanc y land could not be done because of very high 
demand for compensation & employment from the villagers beyond the 
norms of CIL. In addition clearances of Forest land could not be 

 
 
materialized due to undue delay on the part of Forests department in spite 
of vigorous follow up. The expenditure on these accounts could not meet 
the projected target. 
In the absence of physical possession of land the mine development 
activities could not be taken up and hence there was less expenditure. 
 
MCL: 
Delayed tender finali zation, cancellation of tenders on technical grounds 
and long supply schedule are the main reasons for less expenditure on 
account of HEMM procurement. 
All mine development activities could not be taken up due to land dispute. 
Coal Videsh: 
In addition to t he above, the additional provisions of Rs 6000.00 Cr were 
kept for acquisition of assets abroad, but n o deals were finalized during 
2011-12. 
 
CIL has released about Rs 30.00 Cre for implementation of Master Plan of 
Jharia&Raniganj Fire Projects against the  allotted Budget provision of Rs 
350.00 Crs on Master Plan during the year 2011-12.  Acquisition of land in 
non coal bearing area is the major constraint for lesser expenditure.  
As per the information obtained from subsidiaries the budget allocated for 
procurement of HEMM during 2011 -12 has been fully utilized by CIL as a 
whole.  
However, necessary actions has been taken for further streamlining the 
procurement procedures of HEMM in terms of preparation of Standard 
NITs which are reviewed / upgraded based upon the experience and 
different guidelines issued from time to time from different Govt. 
departments / agencies as an ongoing process towards improvement. 
The supplies of Bulk Loading explosives were not as per CIL’s requirement 
due to inadequate availab ility of ammonium nitrate indigenously and 
apparent delay in import of the same by the vendors. This issue has since 
been resolved by continuous pursuance by CIL with the vendors to 
increase import of ammonium nitrate to meet the requirement of 
explosives. For further streamlining the supplies of ammonium nitrate and 
thereby bulk loading explosives,  CIL proposes to enter into a joint 
venture with RCF (Rashtriya Chemical &Fertiliser Ltd.) and IOCL (Indian 
Oil Corporation Ltd.) – IBP Division for manufacture of explosives.  
The problems in the newly supplied equipments by M/s BEML are 
generally of the nature  of repetitive failures of some of the systems / 
sub- systems due to in -adequate quality assurance, teething problems in 
some of the new equipment, poor response time from M/s BEML to 
provide service support etc. Regular follow -ups with M/s. BEML, at 
different levels, are being done by CIL/subsidiary companies to resolve 

 
 
the issues affecting the performance. However, considering the large fleet 
of BEML equ ipment at CIL, there is much more required to be done by 
BEML to ensure trouble free operation of the equipment being supplied by 
them.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.  10 
The Committee note that the Plan Outlay (mine) of Rs. 104.58 crore of 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC)  at BE stage was enhanced to Rs. 
118.90 crore during 2011-12 and a provision of Rs. 131.70 crore has been 
made during 2012 -13.  The Plan Outlay of NLC in power sector was 
however drastically reduced from Rs. 1753.97 crore at BE stage to Rs. 
1298.95 crore during 2011-12 and the actual expenditure upto Jan, 2012 
has been Rs. 1321.05 crore.   The  plan investment by NLC for power 
sector during 2012-13 is budgeted at Rs. 1555.75 crore.  The Committee 
have been given to understand that delay in supply and erection of 
equipment by the main plant contractor (BHEL) in TPSII Expansion, 
Barsingsar Power P roject and coal based  power plant at Tuticorin were 
the main contributors for the decrease in outlay in power sector.  The 
Committee also note that out of total outlay of Rs. 1687.45 crore for BE 
2012-13, six projects viz., Mine II Expansion, TPSII, Barsi ngsar Mines, 
Barsingsar TPS, Tutticorin TPS and NNTPS at a total outlay of Rs. 1506.40 
are under implementation.  The Committee would like NLC to put in place 
an effective monitoring mechanism for speedy implementation of these 
projects during 2012-13 to avoid time and cost overruns.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the progress of these projects.   
Action Taken 
As stated in the observation of the committee, the following six projects 
were allocated a total outlay of Rs.1506.40 Crore out of Rs .1687.45 Crore 
allocated in BE 2012-13.  
Projects  Rs. Crore Commissioned on  
Anticipated 
Commersial 
Operation 
Date(COD) 
Mine-II Expansion  
(4.5 mtpa)  
45.00  12.3.2010  -  
Barsingsar Mine        (2.1 
mtpa)  11.40  31.1.2010  -  

 
 
Barsingsar TPS  
(250 MW)  65.00  
U-I  -20.01.2012  
U-II- 29.12.2011  
-  
TPS-II Expansion     (500 
MW)  185.00  -  
U-I  - Oct2012  
U-II- Mar 2013  
Tuticorin JV Power Project 
(1000 MW)  950.00  -  
U-I  - Dec 2013  
U-II-  Mar 2014  
Neyveli New TPS     (1000 
MW)  250.00  -  
U-I  - June 2015  
U-II-  Dec 2015  
Total  1506.40      
  
The allocation of funds for two commissioned mines is for meeting the spill 
over payments of the project. An allocation of Rs.65 Crore to Barsingsar  
TPS, is primarily considered for making terminal payments. It’s outgo 
depends on successful completion of Long Term Performance Test (LTPT) 
of commissioned units.  
 
For TPS -II Expansion, the allocated amount Rs.185 Crore will be spent 
fully during this year, in which the COD is anticipated.  
The implementation of JV project under construction at Tuticorin, is at an 
advanced stage  and at the current pace of progress, the expected flow of 
funds to project during this year is likely to exceed  the targeted amount.  
In Neyveli New TPS, the tendering activities are at an advanced stage. On 
finalisation and award of LOA for Main packages, the time for release 
initial advance payment matures and hence, the sum of Rs.250 Crore is 
allocated to meet such initial cash outflow for the project. The company is 
well prepared and is likely to achieve the envisaged physical / financial 
targets as planned during Current Financial year 2012-13.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11 
Though NLC has exceeded the lignite production target during  2008 -09 
and 2009 -10, it has achieved 95.87% production target during 2010 -11.  
The Committee are, however, surprised to note that the lignite production 
target has been reduced fr om 239.50(LT) to 194.90 (LT) and the actual 
production has been 197.04 (LT) during 2011 -12.  The production target 
by NLC in power sector has never exceeded the target except in the year 
2009-10 which has been 106.36% achievement.  Now the physical targets 
set for 2012-13 are 248.00 lignite(LT) and 18600.00 (mw) power.  A coal 

 
 
based TPS (1000 mw) under construction in Tuticorin with allocation of 
Rs. 915.00 crore is scheduled for commissioning during 2012 -13.   The 
NLC is reported to be actively pursuing to  get early sanction from 
competent authorities for preliminary activities like FR preparation, 
EIA/EMP study.  Keeping in view  the unduly long time taken for obtaining 
multiple  statutory clearances from different agencies, the Committee 
would like NLC to  act fast and pursue vigorously with the authorities 
concerned for obtaining the required approvals.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should analyse the precise reasons for the 
delay of the projects which could not be completed during 2011 -12 and 
take effective remedial measures to ensure timely completion of the on 
going projects.  
Action Taken 
As stated in the observation of committee, the following six projects were 
allocated a total outlay of Rs.1506.40 Crore out of Rs.1687.45 Crore 
allocated in BE 2012-13.  
Projects  Rs. Crore Commissioned 
on  
Anticipated Commersial 
Operation Date(COD) 
Mine-II 
Expansion  
(4.5 mtpa)  
45.00  12.3.2010  -  
Barsingsar 
Mine  (2.1 mtpa)  11.40  31.1.2010  -  
Barsingsar 
TPS  
(250 MW)  
65.00  
U-I  -
20.01.2012  
U-II- 
29.12.2011  
-  
TPS-II Expansion     
(500 MW)  185.00  -  
U-I  - Oct 2012 
U-II- Mar 2013  
Tuticorin JV 
Power Project 
(1000 MW)  
950.00  -  
U-I  - Dec 2013  
U-II-  Mar 2014  
Neyveli New TPS  
(1000 MW)  250.00  -  
U-I  - June 2015  
U-II-  Dec 2015  
Total  1506.40      
     
The allocation of funds for two commissioned mines is for meeting the spill 
over payments of the project. An allocation of Rs.65 Crore to Barsingsar  
TPS, is primarily considered for making terminal payments. It’s outgo 
depends on successful completion of Long Term Performance Test (LTPT) 
of commissioned units.  

 
 
For TPS -II Expansion, the allocated amount Rs.185 Crore will be spent 
fully during this year, in which the COD is anticipated.  
 
The implementation of JV project under construction at Tuticorin, is at an 
advanced stage and at the current pace of progress, the expected flow of 
funds to project during this year is likely to exceed the targeted amount.  
In Neyveli New TPS, the tendering activities are at an advanced stage. On 
finalization and award of LOA for Main packages, the time for release 
initial advance payment matures and hence, the sum of Rs.250 Crore is 
allocated to meet such initial cash outflow for the project. The company is 
well prepared and is likely to achieve the envisaged physical / financial 
targets as planned during Current Financial year 2012 -13. All the major 
ongoing projects costing Rs. 500 Crore and above are being strictly 
monitored in the quarterly project review meetings under the 
Chairmanship of Secy (Coal) and corrective measures are taken 
accordingly. Further issues relating to project implementation are also 
being discussed in the review meetings taken by Hon’ble Ministe r of Coal 
periodically.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Recommendation Serial  No. 12 
SCCL 
The Committee are dismayed to note that only Rs. 643.81 crore were 
expended by SCCL against Rs. 1334.93 crore approved at BE stage during 
2010-11 which has been 45% only. Again, during 2011 -12, the plan 
outlays of Rs. 2804.30 crore at BE stage were reduced  to Rs. 1389.67 
crore at RE stage and the provisional expenditure upto Feb., 2012 is 
reported to be Rs. 740.65 crore which account for only 53.20% of the RE. 
The plan outlays of SCCL for the year 2012 -13 is now pegged at Rs. 
3220.33 crore.  The main reason s for less expenditure during 2011 -12 
adduced by Ministry of Coal include delay in finalisation  of Boiler Tribunal 
Generator  order placed on M/s BHEL and against a provision of Rs.1050 
crore, only Rs.347.12 crore has been paid  to BHEL. In case of 
AdriyalaLongwall Project, an amount of Rs. 556.66 crores was provided in 
BE 2011 -12 for Plan & Machinery, considering that Longwall equipment 
will be received in the year 2011-12.  The Committee would like to remind 
the Ministry that during the course of examina tion of Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry for 2011 -12, the Committee were informed that Adriyala 
project and longwall equipment could not be taken during 2010 -11 and 
therefore the same were to be taken up even during 2011 -12.  But to the 
dismay of the Com mittees these projects could not be taken up even 
during 2011-12 resulting thereby downrising the outlay year after year.  
At this speed the Committee are doubtful whether these projects would be 

 
 
completed even during 2012 -13.  The Committee deprecate this  
lackadaisical attitude of SCCL and would like the Ministry to review the 
working of the company with a view to bringing about perceptive 
improvements.  The Committee would like to be informed  on the action 
taken in this regard.    
Action Taken 
Details of SCCL’s plan outlay and actuals during 2010 -11, 2011-12 and 
2012-13 are as under : 
(Rs.in  Crores) 
SCCL 2010-11 
BE 
2010-11 
RE 
2010-11 
Actual 
2011-12 
BE 
2011-12  
RE 
2011-12 
Provisional 
2012-13 
BE 
Capital 
Outlay 
1334.93 1124.57 643.81 2804.30 1389.61 950.70 3220.33 
 
The total plan outlay of SCCL for the year 2010 -11 at BE stage was 
Rs.1334.93 Crs.  At RE stage it was reduced to Rs.1124.57 Crs.  The 
Capital expenditure incurred for the year 2010-11 is Rs.643.81 Crs.   
Investment for BE 2011 -12 is planned at Rs. 2804.30 Crs.  However, at 
RE stage Outlay has been reduced to Rs.1389.61 Crs.  The provisional 
capital expenditure incurred by SCCL during the year 2011 -12 is Rs. 
950.70 Crs.   
Main Reasons for less expenditure i n the above Plan periods (2010 -11 & 
2011-12) are as furnished below; 
i) 2X600 MW Power Project: 
The final order for BTG (Boiler, Turbine and Generator) for 2X600 MW 
Power Project was placed on M/s BHEL.  
SCCL had sent an enquiry on nomination basis along with  bidding 
documents on 13.08.2010 to M/s BHEL for submission of their offer for 
BTG.  After receiving the bids from M/s BHEL, they were forwarded to 
SCCL’s technical consultant M/s NTPC on 13.11.2010.  
M/s NTPC submitted their technical evaluation report on  30.08.2011.  
NTPC has taken considerable time i.e., 9 ½ months to submit their final 
evaluation report.  
Meanwhile, the activities of negotiations on Techno -commercial aspects, 
price negotiations and tender committee proceedings were completed. 
Subsequent to the perusal by the Board of Directors on 12.09.2011, 
finalized notification of awards was issued on 11.11.2011 i.e., Zero date of 

 
 
the project. Thus the entire time taken for the above was around 13 
months. In view of this the projected expenditure for Power Project could 
not be made during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12.  
However, Mobilization advance of Rs.348.22 Crs. was paid to M/s BHEL 
during the year 2011-12 against Rs.1050.00 Crs. projected in BE 2011-12 
for BTG.   The total outlay projected for Po wer Project in BE 2011-12 was 
Rs.1500.00 Crs. and the total expenditure incurred is Rs.350.50 Crs. 
(provisional).  
The first unit of the project is scheduled to be commenced by February 
2015 and the second unit is expected to be commissioned during May 
2015. SCCL is confident of spending the total projected outlay fully in the 
coming years. 
ii) AdriyalaLongwall Project 
An amount of Rs.556.66 Crs is provided for AdriyalaLongwall 
Project (ALP) in 2011 -12, against which, Rs.101.90 Crs (provisional) 
expenditure is incurred.    
Longwall equipment was originally planned to be received in the year 
2011-12.   However, procurement of Longwall equipment was delayed due 
to failure of first Proto type Powered Roof Supports during testing.   Now, 
the consignment is expected to be received during the financial year 
2012-13. 
iii) Others 
The expenditure incurred on others is Rs.193.24 Crs against Rs.377.72 
Crs projected in BE 2011-12.  Because of court cases, a number of HEMM 
i.e. Dumpers, Drills, Motor Graders etc., could not be procured resulting in 
less expenditure than planned. 
Further, SCCL is hopeful of total utilization of funds earmarked and is 
committed to complete the construction of Projects within the stipulated 
time frame. 
Reasons for increase in plan outlay at BE stage for 2012-13- 
The capital outlay proposed for BE 2012-13 is Rs.3220.33 Crores. Out of 
Rs.3220.33 Crores, major portion i.e., Rs.1840.00 Crores has been 
proposed for 2X600MW STPP towards BTG and other works.An amount of 
Rs.700.00 Crores has been proposed for Longwall Equipment and other 
works of AdriyalaLongwall Project.Rs.60.00 Crores have been proposed for 
20 MW Power Project.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
 

 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 
Production of Coal 
The Committee are constrained to point out the production of both coking 
and non-coking coal registered a negative growth of -2.6% in 2011-12 as 
compared to the growth rate of 8 percent in 2009 -10.  Consequently, the 
Indian energy sector has been exposed to import fluctuati ons. The 
Ministry have adduced the often repeated problems of land acquisition, 
rehabilitation and resettlement issues, constraints in obtaining 
environmental and forestry clearances, non -availability of railway rakes 
and delay in infrastructure facilities , law and order problems in some of 
the coalfields. It has also been stated that as per the Working Group 
Report total coal production in the country is expected to a level of 795 
MT by the end of the 12th Five Year Plan. The contribution of CIL and SCCL 
out of this is expected to be 615 MT and 57 MTs respectively. Though, CIL 
has taken some corrective measures to increase coal production by 
improving capacity utilization, timely completion of ongoing projects, 
better coordination with State and Central Dep artments for obtaining 
statutory clearances etc,  yet these steps appears to have not yielded the 
desired results so far. The progress in the completion of various ongoing 
projects has been tardy since the above problems have remained 
unresolved since long . The Committee are constrained to point out that 
the issues have not been addressed despite their earlier recommendations 
wherein the Ministry were urged to accord top priority to hammer out the 
above-mentioned perennial problems ultimately resulting not only in non 
achievement of coal production target but also causing cascading effect on 
the country's economy. In the opinion of the Committee, the reasons cited 
are mainly administrative in nature and these could have been resolved 
by proper planning, anti cipation and discharge of responsibility by the 
management of the coal PSUs. The Committee would, therefore like the 
Ministry to facilitate the coal PSUs in removing the bottlenecks by taking 
appropriate steps. The issue of shortage of railway rakes should  also be 
vigorously taken up at the appropriate levels with the Ministry of Railways.  
As regards law and order problems in some of the coalfields, the 
Committee feel that either there is lack of proper coordination with the 
State and local authorities or there is a lack of seriousness on the part of 
management/vigilance departments of PSUs. The Committee, therefore 
desire the Ministry to make all out efforts to address the problem of law 
and order in close coordination with State Departments concerned. 
Action Taken 
In order to overcome  the problems of land acquisition, rehabilitation & 
resettlement issues, constraints in obtaining environmental & forestry 
clearances, law & order issues and to expedite implementation   of 
projects various steps have been taken. 

 
 
A comprehensive R&R policy (R&R policy of CIL, 2012), consonant with 
existing laws & Acts, is now in place and under implementation for 
overcoming the land acquisition & associated R&R problems. Efforts are 
being made at all levels by CIL & its subsid iary companies to expedite 
statutory clearances through meetings with State officials & affected 
parties. Steps have also been initiated by MOC &MoEF for expediting 
approval of pending environmental & forestry clearances. Meetings have 
been held between Mo C, Coal Companies & State Governments for 
overcoming problems related to land acquisition, forestry clearances & law 
and order.   
As far as SCCL is concerned the company has been solving problems to 
the best of its capacity and wherever government help / i ntervention are 
required, SCCL is bringing it to the notice of the agency concerned.   
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
 
Coal Dispatches and Supply 
Recommendation Serial No. 14 
The Committee are concerned to note the dismal grow th of coal 
dispatches by CIL (0.06%) and SCCL ( -0.3%) during 2011-12 despite the 
fact that a large number of infrastructure projects in Power, Steel, Cement 
and Fertilizer schemes are coming up in the country. The Committee 
further regret to observe that s ector-wise dispatch by CIL indicate a 
negative growth for coal supply to various sectors. Similarly, SCCL has 
registered a negative growth for coal supply to steel ( -38%), cement ( -
25.4%). Keeping in view the unsatisfactory performance of supply and 
dispatch by CIL and SCCL during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry/coal companies to take necessary corrective 
measures to ensure the targeted supply and dispatch to all the consuming 
sectors during 2012-13 and the 12th Plan. 
Action Taken 
COAL INDIA LIMITED 
In spite of achieving off-take growth of more than 5% till July 2011, there 
had been nil growth in despatch at the end of December’11. This was due 
to unprecedented monsoon during the period August to November 2011. 
On the onset of dry s eason steps were taken to augment despatch and 
more than 7% growth in off -take was achieved in the last quarter of the 
year. This has helped CIL to ultimately register a 2% growth in dispatch of 
coal & coal products in 2011 -12. The sector -wise growth in di spatch of 
coal & coal products from CIL sources during 2011-12 is given in the table 
below: 

 
 
Figs. in Million Tonnes 
Sector 2011-12 2010-11 % Growth 
Power 312.20 304.14 2.7 
Steel 3.79 3.57 6.2 
Cement 10.12 10.00 1.2 
Fertilizer 2.71 2.78 (-) 2.5 
Others 103.07 102.95 0.1 
Total 431.89 423.44 2.0 
In order to achieve targets for dispatch of coal in 2012 -13, CIL has taken 
following steps:  
a) Arrangement has been made for transportation of sufficient 
quantity of coal from pithead to railway sidings to ensure that rakes 
indented from Railways are loaded within the stipulated free loading 
time. 
b) Close liaison is being maintained with pithead consumers so that 
the targeted quantity of coal moves through the captive 
transportation system. 
c) Month-wise, field-wise wagon loading programme is formulated by 
the Zonal Railways and subsidiary coal companies under the 
tutelage of Railway Board and CIL in the annual Rail-Coal Interface, 
2012. 
d) Rail-Coal monitoring systems are put in place a t different levels of 
operations – Company headquarters- Railway Zone/Division; Coal 
Area – Railway Division/Area and Colliery-Railway yards. 
e) Special drives are afoot in the coal companies to upkeep roads, 
sidings etc. to minimize impediments in dispatch during monsoon  
 
SINGARENI COLLIERIES COMPANY LIMITED (SCCL) 
Coal supply to Cement, Captive Power and Sponge Iron were less during 
2011-12 as compared to 2010-11 due to – 
(i) 35 days long strike in SCCL for separate Telengana which affected 
production and dispatch of coal.  
(ii) Only 19.39 rakes / day were moved by Railways during 2011 -12 
against requirement of 22 rakes / day.  

 
 
Despite this, SCCL has dispatched a total of 51.389 MT of coal during 
2011-12, registering 2.68% growth over the previous year (50.046 MT). 
The sector-wise coal supplied during 2011-12 & 2010-11 are as below: 
Sector        Coal dispatched in MT Growth over 2010-11 
2011-12 2010-11 
Power 36.840 32.738 12.53 % 
Cement  5.125 6.660 - 23.05 % 
Captive Power  2.687 3.308 - 18.77 % 
Sponge Iron  1.073 1.561 - 31.26 % 
Other Industries  5.664 5.779 - 1.99 % 
Total 51.389 50.046 2.68 % 
  
SCCL is taking every measure to improve the coal dispatch to various 
sectors during 2012-13 and the 12th Plan. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Land Acquisition 
Recommendation Serial No. 16 
The Committee note that the issue of land acquisition is affecting 
completion of various coal and lignite projects. Although CIL has 
formulated its own R& R policy and later on revised the same in 
consonance with National R&R policy 2007, it could not satisfy the 
aspirations of land losers.  The  Ministry of Coal have informed that a 
committee consisting of Chief Secretaries of Coal Bearing States, 
Secretaries of the Ministry of Rural Development, Department of Land 
Revenue, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest, CMDs of all subsidiaries of CIL and Director(P&IR), CIL was 
constituted to examine further liberalization of CIL’s R&R Policy and to 
redress aspirations of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) and to evolve a 
“PAP FRIENDLY  R&R POLICY”. After incorporating the deliberations of the 
Inter Ministerial meetings, CMDs meet and comments from the Subsidiary 
Companies, CIL R&R Poli cy, 2012 has been re -drafted by incorporating 
better provisions of the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Policy(NRRP), 2007 and the Land Acquisition, Resettlement & 
Rehabilitation Bill, 2011,  in order to come out with one of the best R&R 
Policies of India having multiple options for the Project Affected Persons 
and flexibility to the Subsidiary Companies in order to resolve the peculiar 
problems in their leasehold areas. The revised new Rehabilitation and 

 
 
Resettlement Policy, 2012 was placed before the CIL Board meeting held 
on 12 th& 13 th March, 2012 and accorded its approval with minor 
modifications. The revised policy is now reported to be in the final stage 
for approval of the Competent Authority for circulation to all concerned for 
its implementa tion from the date of the approval of the Board. The 
Committee feel that the main hurdle in land acquisition is mostly due to 
the inadequate compensation or ignoring long term interests of the 
Project Affected Persons. The Committee are of the firm view th at the 
issue of land acquisition needs to be solved through substantial increase in 
compensation on the basis of market rates and unless this perennial 
problem is solved, new coal projects cannot be taken up for 
implementation and the physical and financia l targets of coal production 
are bound to suffer.  The coal companies should adopt a policy by making 
provisions to extend the benefits of R&R package and employment to the 
affected families forthwith. Delay in implementing beneficial measures will 
frustrate the wills of the people to handover their land. In other words, 
the whole scheme and implementation thereof should be made in a 
manner that affected persons are attracted to give their land to the coal 
companies. The Committee, therefore, desire that th e new R&R Policy 
should be expeditiously got approved and sincerely implemented by 
safeguarding the interests of the project affected persons  by offering 
them attractive rehabilitation package and generation of long term 
employment opportunities.  Once th ese measures are put in place, the 
problem of land acquisition for various coal and lignite projects would be 
resolved to a large extent.   
Action Taken 
Coal India Limited has introduced a new Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
Policy, 2012 with effect from 1 3.3.2012. The policy envisages that l and 
compensation to land oustees is paid as per the provisions of the 
concerned Act or State Government notification.  Solatium and Escalation 
are paid to land oustees as per provisions of the concerned Act or as 
imposed by the concerned State Govt. Employment is provided to land 
oustees against every two acres of land.  All the land losers who are not 
eligible for employment as above, are entitled to receive monetary 
compensation in lieu of employment at the rate of Rs. 5,00,000/- (Five 
Lakhs) for each acre of land on pro -rata basis. They have also option to 
accept annuity in lieu of monetary compensation.   
 
One time lump sum payment of Rs.3,00,000/ -(three lakhs), is paid in lieu 
of alternate House site, assistance in de signing  &shifting allowance, 
compensation for construction of cattle shed, monetary compensation for 
construction of work shed etc.  are provided.  Each affected displaced 
family gets a subsistence allowance at the rate of 25 days (Minimum 
Agricultural Wage) per month for one year.   

 
 
 
The coal companies assist the Project Affected People (PAPs) to establish 
non-farm self-employment through the provision of infrastructure, petty 
contracts or formation of cooperatives and encourage provisions of Jobs 
with contractors.  Contractors are persuaded to give jobs to eligible PAPs 
on preferential basis. As far as possible, Coal companies shift the tribal 
community as a unit and provide facilities to meet the specific needs of 
the tribal community that allow them to maintain their unique cultural 
identity.  Tribal affected families are given one time financial assistance of 
500 days for loss of customary right or usages of forest produce loss.  
Tribal affected families resettled out of the district shall be given 25% 
higher rehabilitation and resettlement benefit.   
 
The coal companies will provide at the resettlement site, a school, road 
with street light, pucca drain, pond dugwell and/or tube well for drinking 
water supply, community center, place of worship, dispens ary, grazing 
land for cattle and play ground.  Similar infrastructural facility, if 
necessary, is extended to the host locality.  The community facilities and 
services are available to all residents of the resettlement colonies, 
including PAPs and the host  population.  The approach for operation of 
community facilities is flexible and all efforts are made to involve the 
State and local self -Government/ Panchayat for operating the facilities.  
The planning of the community facilities and their construction i s 
undertaken in consultation with the affected community. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Environmental Clearance 
Recommendation Serial No. 17 
 
The Committee are anguished to observe that despite their repeated 
recommendations the Ministry have not been able to resolve the issue of 
obtaining environment and forestry clearances for coal and lignite 
projects.   As of now, 125 proposals are awaiting stage -I clearances and 
53 proposals are pending for stage -II clearance. Hence, most  of the 
proposals are awaiting environmental and forestry clearances at various 
levels.  The Ministry have informed that Committee that the issue of 
environmental and forestry clearances has been discussed at various 
higher levels between Ministry of Coal and Ministry of Environment and 
Forests.  In the meeting of Group of Ministers [GoM] held on 20.09.2011, 
it has been decided to do away with the concept of ‘Go and ‘No -go’ areas 
based on the recommendation of Chaturvedi Committee but this decision 
is yet t o be referred to the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure.  
Strangely, the decision of the GOM has not been referred to the Cabinet 
Committee on Infrastructure so far and the precious time of more than 6 
months has been lost without any tangible result.   T he Committee feel 
that the Ministry ought to be more pro -active in pursuing the matter with 

 
 
concerned authority in the Government giving it top -most priority.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the further action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard. 
 
Action Taken 
“MOC had already requested MOEF to convey the decision of GOM in 
regard to Go/NO Go forest area to the  State Forest Departments. 
.Further, Group pf Ministers(GOM) had reiterated their  decision in regard 
to Go/No Go concept and directed MOEF to act accordingly in their 7 th 
meeting held on 30.05.2012.” 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Allotment of Captive Coal Blocks 
Recommendation Serial No. 20 
The Committee in their 1st Report on Demands for Grants(2009-10) of the 
Ministry of Coal had recommended that 138 coal blocks which were 
identified by Coal India Ltd. might be allotted to it for extraction of coal.  
The Committee strongly feel that allotment of these coal blocks to CIL will 
boost its coal production so that it can fulfill its mandate for being the sole 
coal supplier to various consumers in the country.  Reiterating their earlier 
recommendation,  the Committee wo uld like to know the precise action 
taken by the Government in this regard.  
Action Taken 
CIL has been assigned 116 coal blocks on 23 rd May, 2012 and they have 
been asked to give a detailed plan for exploitation of these blocks.  
Further, 3 more blocks out  of the de -allocated blocks have also been 
assigned to CIL on 21st June, 2012. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Illegal Mining 
Recommendation Serial No. 21 
The Standing Committee in their earlier report on the subject 'Prevention 
of Illegal Coal Mining and Theft' had observed that the officers of 
personnel and legal department of coal companies should make all 
endeavours to ensure that the criminal trial pend ing for illegal and un -
authorised coal mining are ended with conviction. Unfortunately, the coal 
companies could not produce any facts and data establishing the 
appropriate steps taken in this regard. The Committee deprecate such a 
lackadaisical attitude of coal companies. It is unfortunate that in cases of 
such huge illegal coal mining there is not a single conviction made by 
appropriate court by reason of non persuasion of such case either by the 
appropriate Government or by the coal companies. The respon sibility in 

 
 
this regard should be immediately fixed on personnel and legal officers of 
the companies for their reluctance to pursue the criminal cases in 
appropriate criminal court. The Committee would like coal companies to 
take stringent action against t he officers of the coal companies for 
dereliction of their duties.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Illegal mining is mainly reported from the States of West Bengal, 
Jharkhand falling under the jurisdiction of Eastern Coalfields Ltd (ECL) and 
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCCL) As per raids conducted by security 
personnel as well as joint raids with the law and order authorities of the 
concerned State Government, the number of FIRS lodged in connection 
with illegal mining of coal along with its outcome in different subsidiaries 
of CIL, during 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 are given  at Annexure II 
and III.   The quantity recovered during the raids has declined from 
2008-09 to 2011-12.  
 
It may be stated that illegal mining is taking place mostly, where the 
surface rights do not belong to CIL. Hence, coal companies do not have 
any legal right in such cases. In case any illegal mining is noticed within 
the area in which CIL has the surface right, action is taken by dozing and 
filling the area, with the help of CISF, departmental se curity personnel 
and state police. As recommended by the Standing Committee on the 
subject ‘prevention of illegal mining and theft’, the CMDs of all coal 
companies have been asked to take necessary action to appoint a Nodal 
Officer at subsidiary and Head Q uarter level.  State Governments have 
also been requested to take measures for prevention of illegal mining 
setting up of Inter State Joint intelligence and action force to combat the 
problem of illegal mining and for having better co -ordination, setup of 
Task Force under the supervision of the Deputy Commissioner and 
Superintendent of Police of the concerned area, preparation of action plan, 
State wise, for the socio economic development of coal bearing areas in 
general and tribal inhabited areas in particular, etc. 
 
Further t he CMD of Coal India Ltd. (CIL) and CMD’s of subsidiary 
companies have been directed to take corrective measures to streamline 
the intelligence and legal departments of coal companies.  The CMDs have 
also been requested to take discipl inary action against the officials who 
fail to discharge their duties, while handling activities of illegal coal 
mining. 
The number of FIRS lodged in connection with illegal mining of coal in 
different subsidiaries of CIL during 2008 -09, 2009 -10 & 2010 -11 along 
with the outcome and current status, subsidiary wise and State wise, is 

 
 
given as Annexure II.  In brief it may be stated that during 2008 -09 to 
2009-10, a total number of 32 & 5 charge sheets were filed in ECL & BCCL 
respectively.  
To sensitise the is sue the subject, the subject of ‘pilferage/ theft of coal 
and steps to be taken to prevent it’ has been taken as the agenda for the 
meetings of the Consultative Committee (Coal) on 5.7.2011 and 6.9.2011.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Implementation status of Recommendations contained in 16th 
Report 
Recommendation Serial No.  25 
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of the Committee were not furnished by the Government 
within the stipulated three months i.e. by 29 th November, 2011 and were 
only furnished on 19 March, 2012. Similarly, the Statement by the 
Minister under direction 73A of 'Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha' 
which is to be made within 6 months period has not been done so far. The 
Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to be more careful in future and 
take appropriate and timely action in furnishing action taken notes and 
making of Statement in the House. 
Action Taken 
The Observations of the Committee have been taken note of for further 
compliance.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) by Coal Companies: 
Recommendation Serial No. 15 
The Committee observe that the New Coal Distribution Policy has 
introduced the concept of “Letter of Assurance” (LoA), which provides for 
assured supply of coal to developers, provided they meet the stipulated 
milestones. Once the milestones as stipulated in the LoA are met by the 
developers, LoA holders are entitled to enter into Fuel Supply Agreements 
(FSAs) with the coal companies for long -term supply of coal. The quantity 
of coal to be supplied along with other commercial terms and conditions 
are covered in the FSA itself.  During examination of the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry (2009 -10), the Committee had recommended 
issuance of Letters of  Assurance (LoA) to the consumers of Power sector.  
The Committee have been informed that FSAs were signed with only those 
power plants that had been established till March, 2009.  The Committee 
are astonished to find that no Standing Linkage Committee (SL C) (L -T) 
meeting took place for issuance of LoA and no FSA has been signed with 
power plants that have come up after March, 2009.  The Committee feel 
that the Indian Power Sector is going to be seriously affected if the LoAs 
and FSAs are not urgently concl uded by the coal companies.  The 
Committee also note that the Working Group on Coal and Lignite for the 
XII Plan Period have projected coal production of 615.00 MT by CIL.   
Going  by the projected targets,  the coal companies are expected to have 
sufficient coal stocks to meet the requirements of the Power Plants. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the issues regarding 
signing of Fuel Supply Agreements with power utilities must be resolved at 
the earliest so as to avoid impending energy crisis in the country.  If 
milestones are achieved by the LoA holders, the coal company should 
immediately enter into Fuel Supply Agreements and they should not delay 
the process only by raising trivial issues. It is the responsibility of coal 
companies th at when holders of LoA achieved the milestone, the coal 
companies should enter into FSAs and act on the basis of such agreement 
immediately. The policy of the Central Government to distribute the coal 
to the holders of LoAs should not be frustrated by coal  companies unless 
there is substantial failure on the part of  LoA holders to achieve the 
milestone. The Committee also feel that there is an imperative need to 
provide linkages to the upcoming power projects in different parts of the 
country. 

 
 
Action Taken 
COAL INDIA LIMITED 
The Standing Linkage Committee (Long Term) (SLC(LT)) for Power, an 
inter-Ministerial Committee, headed by Additional Secretary (Coal) and 
comprising representatives of Ministry of Power, CEA, Railways and coal 
companies consider the app lications seeking Long Term Coal 
Linkage/Letter of Assurance for setting up power projects in the country.  
The Committee makes recommendations based on the recommendations 
of Ministry of Power and other relevant factors.  Based on the 
recommendations of S LC (LT) for Power as approved by the competent 
authority, the coal companies  have issued 172 LoAs for a total capacity of 
1,08,878 MW.   This capacity excludes the power utilities already linked to 
CIL/SCCL, which were commissioned as on 31.3.2009, for wh ich CEA /CIL 
has agreed for the Annual Contracted Quantity of 304.84 Million Tonnes 
per annum.  
2. CEA intimated that about 26,000 MW LoA based power projects 
have been commissioned by 31.3.2012 ( in the  11 th Plan)  and the 
balance capacity of about 80,000 MW is likely to come up during 12 th Plan 
period and beyond.    
3. Keeping in view their production and FSA / LOA commitments on 
subsidiary companies, CIL proposed that in respect of power plants which 
have b een commissioned after 1.4.2009, they would be able to commit 
only 50% of FSA quantity through indigenous sources and balance 50% 
through imports, if feasible.  However, as CIL was not able to import coal 
due to lack of firm commitments from power utilities and other issues, they 
were committing only 50% coal supplies in the FSA. Accordingly, efforts 
were made to freeze the capacity of power projects for which coal supply 
could be assured during 12 th Plan period and to identify such projects.  In 
the meetings held in the Cabinet Secretariat and finally in a meeting taken 
by the Principal Secretary to PM  on 1.2.2012, it was decided that CIL will 
sign FSAs with the power plants that have already been commissioned and 
were likely to be commissioned by 31.3.201 5 with the total capacity of 
60,000 MW as per list provided by CEA.  In cases of power plants that had 
been commissioned till 31.12.2011, it was decided that FSAs would be 
signed by 31.03.2012. FSAs are however to be signed only with those 
power plants whi ch have long term Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) 
with DISCOMs. 
4. In accordance with the decisions taken in the meeting held on 
1.2.2012, a letter was sent to CIL on 17.2.2012 to sign FSAs with the 
identified power utilities. A Presidential Directive dat ed 4.4.2012 was also 
issued by this Ministry to CIL  to implement the instructions of Ministry of 
Coal issued on 17.2.2012 and to sign FSAs in respect of plants already 

 
 
commissioned upto 31.12.2011.   The subsidiaries of CIL have so far 
signed 27 such FSAs  as per the instructions   issued by the Ministry of 
Coal.  
5. Ministry of Power, however, objected to certain clauses of the FSA 
and  suggested that the conditions of FSAs to be signed by CIL with power 
projects could remain the same, as those laid down i n the FSA in respect 
of plants commissioned till 31.3.2009, except for the provisions relating to 
trigger level, import and GCV which require modification. These issues 
were discussed in the Government.  In the interest of the growth of the 
economy and to increase the power generation, it has been felt that 
efforts are needed to make adequate coal available and CIL being the 
main producer of coal in the country has to take the initiative to tide over 
the current situation.  However, keeping in view the prod uction 
constraints mentioned by CIL , it is felt that it may not be able to go 
beyond the targets fixed by the Planning Commission.  One alternative 
available to CIL as per the provisions of New Coal Distribution Policy 
(NCDP) appears to be the import of c oal from time to time to meet the 
shortfall. A feasible/ acceptable model for this is being considered by CEA, 
CIL, Ministry of Power and Ministry of Coal. Considering the constraints in 
ramping up production and arranging import in the first 2 years of th e 
12th Plan, CIL has to decide the penalties for supplies  to be suitably 
relaxed  and in a graded and reasonable manner as compared to the 
penalty levels envisaged in the FSA document applicable to plants 
commissioned before 31.3.2009. CIL has accordingly  been advised on 
23.7.2012 to take appropriate decisions for revision of clauses of FSA to 
be signed in respect of the plants having long term PPAs with DISCOMS 
and commissioned/to be commissioned during 1.4.2009 to 31.3.2015.  
SINGARENI COLLIERIES COMPANY LIMITED (SCCL) 
SCCL has issued LOAs to all the customers recommended by Ministry of 
Coal. After achieving the stipulated milestones, FSAs were concluded with 
the customers. In case of major power plants, SCCL has signed FSAs with 
all the power plants link ed to SCCL and renewal of FSA with APGENCO is 
under negotiation. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated  06.09.2012] 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
The Committee also observe that the total Plan Outlays  of the Ministry of 
Coal and PSUs under their administrative control for the year 2012 -13 
have been increased to Rs. 15,132.78 crore as compared to Rs. 9302.85 
crore at BE 2011 -12, which were further r educed to Rs. 7367.46 crore at 
RE stage. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that the actual 
expenditure during 2011 -12 from the Plan Outlays of Coal PSUs is 
reported to be Rs. 4886.87 crore (prov.) only. Significantly, against the 
provision of R s. 6000 crore (BE stage 2011 -12), no amount was utilized 
on acquisition of assets abroad during the year, though the Plan Outlay 
was reduced to Rs. 1000 crore at RE stage.  The Committee can only 
conclude that the Ministry/coal companies have not made any headway in 
acquisition of coal resources abroad while huge Plan Outlay is allocated at 
BE which has ultimately resulted in downgrading the outlay.  The 
Committee firmly believe that early acquisition of coal resource abroad will 
tide over the shortage of c oal in the country. The Committee find that for 
development and acquisition of coal resources abroad Rs. 5500 crores is 
reported to have been kept as an ad hoc provision during the year 2012 -
13. The Committee would like the Ministry of Coal/CIL to accord h ighest 
priority to this proposal and pursue the same vigorously.  In view of the 
gross underutilization of plan investments, the Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry/Coal PSUs should take advance and better 
planning to fix realistic budget outlays in  order to avoid drastic reduction 
in the plan funds at RE Stage and to ensure that the allocations 
earmarked for different schemes are fully utilized.     
Action Taken 
 
Total Plan Outlay of Ministry of Coal & PSUs under the administrative 
control of the Mi nistry of Coal during the year 2012 -13 is Rs. 15226.78 
crore as against 9302.85 crore for the year 2011 -12 (BE). The actual 
expenditure during 2011 -12 was Rs. 6332.82 crores. While the CIL 
achieved 86.14%, NLC achieved 91% and SCCL 68.41% of the revised 
plan outlay during 2011 -12. The main reason for significant shortfall in 
achieving the target by SCCL was delay in implementing certain important 
activities pertaining to thermal power plants & procurement of longwall 
equipment for AdriyalaLongowal Project. 
As far as the issue of importing of coal & acquisition of coal resources 
abroad is concerned, it may be stated that only CIL is concerned with 

 
 
these issues. CIL had initiated the process for acquisition of coal assets 
abroad through Global Expression of In terest (EoI) route. Due to lack of 
clear  guideline  on acquisition of coal assets abroad this EoI process did 
not yield the desired result. An ad -hoc provision of Rs 5500 crore has 
been kept in the BE for 2012-13 for this purpose. 
CIL Board in its 251 st meeting on 9.9.2009, approved the proposal to 
import coal for power companies during 2009-10, subject to: 
i). Obtaining of firm commitment from consumers and 
ii) Consumers agreeing to procure imported coal on a cost plus basis. 
CIL, has so far not received any long term commitment from any coal 
consumers in India mainly because of the price differential of imported 
coal vis-à-vis domestic coal.  
As of now Coal India Limited, has been successful in obtaining the 
exploration license for 2 coal blocks in Tete P rovince in Mozambique 
through  competitive bidding.CIL has already formed a wholly owned 
subsidiary “ Coal India Africana Limitada (CIAL)” in Mozambique and has 
posted 4 executives in Tete, Mozambique. CIL plans to invest Rs. 122 
crores (approx) for explor ation of these 2 licensed coal blocks during 
2012-13 period.  
Apart from that CIL is also exploring the possibility of acquisition of coal 
assets in South Africa by forming a joint venture company with the 
provincial government of Limpopo in South Africa.  
Though CIL has been actively pursuing the process of acquisition of coal 
assets abroad but the completion of this process within a definite time 
frame is difficult to estimate as the success of CIL’s initiative is dependent 
on the long term commitment of the major consumers of coal in India for 
off take of imported coal. 
As far as SCCL is concerned it does not have plans to acquire assets 
abroad. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 & 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
North Eastern Region (NER) 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
The Committee are unhappy to note that against budgetary allocation of 
Rs. 26.60 crore during 2011 -12 for development of North Eastern Region 

 
 
(NER), the actual expenditure  was nil. While recommending the 
Government to come up with concrete schemes, the Committee expects 
that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 25 crore earmarked for NER during 
2012-13 will be gainfully utilised. 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has noted the recommendation of the honorable Committee 
for taking appropriate action. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Utilization of Approved Outlays during XI th Plan Period  
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
The Committee observe that against the XI th Plan approved outlays of Rs. 
37100.38 crore for the Ministry of Coal, the actual utilization during the 
Plan Period was reported to be Rs. 32033.89 crore (provisional figures of 
NLC).  The Committee are dismayed to note that not only the coal PSUs 
were un able to utilize their plan outlays as targeted but  the funds 
allocated and as revised during mid -term appraisal of XI th Plan Period for 
Central Sponsored Schemes like Research & Development, Regional 
Exploration, Environment and Subsidence Control Measures, Development 
of Transportation Infrastructure  in Coalfields Areas etc. had also been 
much below the provisions made for them.  The Committee are unhappy 
to note the huge mismatch between the financial outlays which points 
towards systematic flaws in the  planning and implementation of 
projects/Schemes by the Ministry/coal companies and other autonomous 
bodies.  Since speedy implementation of projects/schemes has a direct 
bearing on the financial outlays, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
make an in-depth analysis of the constraints resulting in non-fulfillment of 
both financial and physical targets envisaged for the XIth Plan.  The 
Committee also desire that advance action may be initiated at the 
beginning of XII th Plan so that the targets set for t he coal and lignite 
sectors are achieved.  
Action Taken 
The Planning Commission had approved capital outlay of Rs 43476.37 Crs 
for Ministry of Coal for XI Plan period. During the Mid Term Appraisal of XI 
Plan the outlay for MoC  for the plan period was revised to Rs 32831.11 
Crs.   
 

 
 
Actual utilization against the revised plan outlay during XI plan has been 
Rs. 26203.70 crore with CIL achieving 83.66%, SCCL 85.55% and NLC 
51% respectively. The main reason for significant shortfall  in case of NLC 
was  due to delayed formulation of new mining projects and delay in 
commissioning / stabilization of Mine-II Expansion &Barsingsar Mine. 
As far as Central Sector Schemes are concerned the sector-wise plan 
outlay alongwith actual utilization during XI plan is as under:- 
Name of the Scheme XI Plan Outlay (Rs.Crore) 
 Initial MTA Actual 
Expenditure 
% 
Achievement 
w.r.t Initial 
Outlay 
R&D 75.35 75.35 54.48 72.30 
Regional/Promotional 
Exploration 
164.02 305.82 227.38 138.62 
Detailed drilling - 
Non CIL blocks 
472.94 523.08 334.17 70.65 
EMSC (including the 
outlay for Jharia and 
Raniganj Master 
Plan) 
155.34 - 57.89 37.26 
Conservation & 
Safety in coal mines 
170.67 690.75 683.91 400.72 
Dev. of transport 
infrastructure in 
coalfields 
277.63 930.92 67.58 24.34 
Total 1315.95 2525.92 1425.41 108.32 
 
The Annual Plan / Annual Action Plan targets are reviewed continuously at 
various levels in the PSUs as well as Ministry of Coal. All out efforts are 
made to ensure that earmarked funds are utilized optimally. During the 
XII plan intensive efforts will be made to minimize the gap between 
budget estimates & actual utilization. 
[Ministry of Coal,  F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF EMSC 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
The Committee note that Environmental and Subsidence Control Scheme 
is aimed at addressing environmental issues in the coal field at the 
erstwhile mines in Raniganj and Jharia arising out of unscientific mining 
carried out by the owners. The Committee have been informed that all the 
EMSC schemes have been merged in the Master Plan dealing with fire, 
subsidence, rehabilitation and diversion of surface infrastructure in Jha ria 
and Raniganj coalfields within the leasehold areas of BCCL and ECL which 
was sanctioned by the Government in August, 2009 at an investment of 
Rs. 9773.84 crores to be implemented in ten years. This is being funded 
partly by the internal resources of CI L and partly from the Budget from 
collection of stowing Excise Duty under the CM(C&M) Act, 1974. The 
Committee are totally dismayed to note that the scheme is in the 3 rd and 
4th years of implementation and funds to the tune of Rs. 594.24 crore and 
Rs. 669.61 crore were to be contributed by CCDAC.  Though budgetary 
support of Rs. 50.58 crore was provided at BE 2011 -12, the same was 
withdrawn at RE stage.  Now a token provision of Rs. 9.00 crore has been 
made for 2012 -13 for implementing this  scheme. The Com mittee 
deprecate such a failure on the part of the Ministry which even have failed 
to pursue CIL to utilize its share of Rs. 350 crore. In effect the provision 
has reduced the scheme to mockery. The Committee strongly recommend 
that the Ministry of Coal should play a pro-active role and issue necessary 
direction to  CIL for regularly expending its share of funds for the scheme. 
Such steps should be taken without wasting a single moment. Given the 
present state of affairs, the Committee are doubtful of the s incerity of the 
implementing agencies for the scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly urge the Government to evolve a suitable mechanism for 
implementation of the scheme in a time bound manner.  The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the perspe ctive plan of the Ministry/CIL 
for investment of Rs. 9773.84 croreupto 2019 as envisaged in the Master 
Plan for implementation of the scheme. 
 
Action Taken 
  
While fully sharing the concerns expressed by the Standing Committee, 
the Ministry submits that th e progress of implementation is mainly 
dependent on the implementing agencies viz. JRDA and ADDA.   These 
agencies are yet to complete the demographic surveys and expedite land 
acquisition process.  Once these activities are completed, construction of 
dwelling units and shifting of people will follow.  However, the High 
Powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary(Coal) is 
regularly monitoring the process and releasing the amounts demanded by 
these agencies for implementation of Master Plan.  Despi te the sincere 
efforts by the Ministry, the speed of the implementation of the Master 

 
 
Plan mainly depends upon the progress made by the ADDA and JRDA.   
Keeping  in view the involvement of human aspects, the implementation 
of such programmes is a long draw n out process.   However, Ministry 
assures Committee that it will make all out efforts to ensure expeditious 
implementation of the Master Plan.  
  
The pert charts indicating the time frame for completion of various 
activities as originally approved by cabi net is enclosed (Annexure I) for 
the information as desired by the Committee. 
 
Latest position of the  implementation of Master Plan for rehabilitation of 
Jharia Raniganj coal fields is as hereunder: 
(I) The approved outlay of the Master Plan is Rs. 9773.84 cr ores 
((Raniganj Coalfields – Rs. 2661.73 crore; Jharia Coalfields – Rs. 
7112.11 crore). This outlay is proposed to be funded through 
Internal Resources of Coal India Limited to the extent of Rs. 350 
crore per annum and the remaining from the collections of  
stowing excise duty under Coal Mines (Conservation & 
Development) Act, 1974.  
(II) Till date an amount of Rs. 160.64 crore has been released to 
ADDA and Rs. 111 crore has been released to JRDA. 
(III) In Jharia Coal field 86.44 acres of vacant land in Bhuli township 
and 849.68 acres of land in and around Belgoria township 
belonging to BCCL have been identified for developing new 
township by JRDA in addition to other areas. Further, two sites 
namely Bonjemari and Gourandi have been identified for setting 
up of new town ships for rehabilitation and resettlement in 
Raniganj Coal fields. The total area required for the same is 
2214 acres (896 Ha). ADDA had accorded Cabinet approval from 
Government of West Bengal for acquisition of land for this 
purpose.  
(IV) Ministry of coal has taken up with the state Government of 
Jharkhand and Government of West Bengal for expediting land 
acquisition for rehabilitation. Ministry of Coal has also taken up 
the issue of diverting the Railway lines from the endangered 
areas with Ministry of Railways. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IFD dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfields 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
The Committee note that the allocation of Rs. 277.63 crore during the 
11th Plan Period for the scheme Development of Transport Infrastructure 
in Coalfields(DTIC) was increased to Rs. 930.92 crore at Mid -term 
appraisal of the Plan.  The Committee were, howe ver, surprised to note 
that the actual utilization of funds during the 11th Plan Period was only 
Rs. 67.58 crore. Further, an amount of Rs. 50.00 crore has been allocated 

 
 
during 2012-13 against Rs. 22.00 crore at BE/RE stage for 2011 -12.  An 
analysis of th e figures of allocations and utilisations reveals that though 
funds have been increased manifold for investment in the scheme for 
Development of Transport Infrastructure in Coalfields, the actual 
utilisation was less than 25% of approved outlays.  The Comm ittee would 
like to be apprised of the reasons for this poor planning by the 
Government where the funds were increased by more than 300% at Mid 
Term appraisal of the scheme.  Further, the Committee are dismayed to 
point out that PSUs only consider proposal s relating to pucca roads under 
the scheme and repairing of roads is not being considered although the 
condition of roads in most of the coalfields areas are stated to be seriously 
damaged as a result of excessive use of roads by heavy vehicles loaded 
with coal.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that coal companies 
should also include repairing of roads under this scheme and also earmark 
sufficient funds for upkeep of the roads in proper working conditions in 
their command areas.  
The Committee also reco mmend that coal companies must make the 
provisions for construction of all roads  and their repairs/maintain situated 
in an around coal field areas whether roads belongs to State 
Governments/Gram Panchyats/JilaParishad or coal companies. The coal 
companies should also keep clean all such roads by providing appropriate 
mechanism. Apart from this, coal companies should ensure that no 
unauthorized or illegal liquor and undesirable activities are being carried 
on by the side on such roads and if it comes to the  knowledge of coal 
companies they must inform the concerned police administration so that 
such illegal business are prevented. 
Action Taken 
 
Suggestion of the Committee is noted.  Some of the important road 
projects that have been completed in 2011 -12 are : Korbi to Rani Atari in 
Chirimiri Area of SECL; ChaalGarghora Road at Raigarh field; Sundergarh 
To Duduka Road -Mor; HimgirByepass in Basundh ara Area of MCL etc.  
Similarly Umrer Railway siding in WCL,  Basantimata -NL OCP Railway 
siding via Dahibari in BCCL was also completed.  In addition the critical 
rail links in potential coalfields viz. North Karanpura in Jharkhand, 
Mandraigarh in Chhatti sgarh, Ib&Talcher coalfields in Orissa, Godavari 
Coalfields in Andhra Pradesh have been taken up with Ministry of Railways 
for expediting implementation of the same.  Recently a detailed meeting 
was held on 26.06.2012 at Chairman, Railway Board level where thorough 
reviews of each of these projects were held and the concerned agencies 
were directed for expediting the implementation. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 18 & 19 
The Committee have been given to understand that so far 218 coal blocks 
with geological reserves of about 50 billion tonnes have been allocated to 
eligible public and private companies under the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973. Out of that, 25 coal blocks have been de -
allocated. Out of the de -allocated coal blocks, two coal blocks were re -
allocated to eligible companies under the said Act.  Now the net allocated 
blocks are 195. Further, the review committee had again met on 11th and 
12th January, 201 2 to review the development of coal blocks and 
recommended to issue show cause notices in 58 cases who have failed to 
develop the allotted coal blocks within a prescribed period.  The 
Committee are extremely anguished at the dismal performance of the 
allocated captive coal allocattees as out of the total 195 coal blocks only 
22  blocks have commenced production. The Committee are of the opinion 
that non -development of captive coal blocks resulting in non -
commencement of coal therefrom is one of major contri butory factors for 
low coal production in the country. Though the Ministry are reported to 
have initiated some punitive measures to make captive allocattees 
accountable for the delay in developing coal blocks, there is no perceptible 
improvement in the dev elopment of such coal blocks as most of the 
captive coal blocks have not been able to commence production within the 
stipulated time frame. Hence, the scarce coal resources which have been 
diverted for captive mining, continue to remain unutilized.  What i s most 
surprising is the fact that during the last three years, no coal block has 
been identified and earmarked for captive allocation under government 
dispensation route. The Committee therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should evolve some effective me chanism so as to check the non -
seriousness on the part of captive coal allocates who have failed to 
develop the coal block allotted to them within the stipulated time. The 
Committee also desire that various bottlenecks coming in the way of 
operatinalisation of captive coal blocks should be suitably addressed by 
the Ministry in a time bound period. The Committee also urge upon the 
Ministry  to consider the request of some of the State Governments for 
allotment of coal blocks to them. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
take stock of the situation by holding periodical review meetings with the 
captive coal block allottees to address this problem halting the 
development of such coal blocks.  As coal mining needs latest 
technologies to exploit the maximum r eserves with due adherence to 
safety aspects, the Committee expect the Government to accord due 
priority in this area as well.   
Though the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2010 for introduction of system of auction by competitive 
bidding of coal blocks has been notified in 2010, the Committee find that 
no coal blocks have been allotted so far.  It is a sad commentary on the 

 
 
part of the Ministry for taking unduly long time in the allotment of coal 
blocks by bidding system as th e early allotment of  blocks will set motion 
for their development and start production.  The Committee, therefore, 
like the Ministry to immediately implement the above A ct in letter and 
spirit.   
Action Taken  
(on recommendation Nos. 18 and 19) 
As per the  guidelines, coal production from  captive coal block should 
commence within 36 months (42 months in case the area falls in forest 
land) in case of open cast mines and in 48 months (54 months in case the 
area falls in forest land) in case of under ground m ine, from the date of 
allocation.  If the coal block is not explored, additional two years are 
allowed for detailed exploration and three months for preparation of 
geological report. The allocatees of coal blocks, who have not started 
production so far, ar e in various stages of obtaining statutory clearances 
and mining lease, preparing mining plan, acquisition of land, procuring 
machinery and equipment etc. for both mining as well as end-use project. 
 
Major constraints being faced by the allocattees at present are as follows: 
 Delay in setting up of end-use projects. 
 Time taken for obtaining various clearances for mining and land 
acquisition. 
 Possible speculation by allocattees anticipating opening up of the 
sector for commercial mining. 
 Development of coal b locks involve a gestation of 3 to 5 years for 
reaching production stage and another two years for reaching 
optimal production capacity. 
 
Major part of delay relate to forest and environment clearance and land 
acquisition on the part of allocattee.  Forest and environment clearances 
fall under the realms of the Ministry of Environment & Forest, whereas the 
concerned State Government is to facilitate acquisition of land.   
 
The following mechanism is in place to monitor the development of coal 
blocks as per t he milestone chart devised and given with the allocation 
letters: 
 
 Monitoring of progress of allocated coal blocks is done through a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Coal). The 
review is undertaken periodically with all the coal block allocatees to 
assess the development/progress achieved by them.   Action is taken 
again the companies where delay is found on their part by issuing 
necessary advisory and show cause notices.  In case of willful delays 

 
 
on the part of allocattees, appropriate action is initiated for de -
allocation of the block & deduction of BG.  
 
 The Coal Controller Organisation also closely monitors the 
development of coal blocks. For this purpose, he obtains a quarterly 
report from the block allocatees. Based on which a comprehensive 
status report is prepared.  
 
With a view to bringing in more transparency, the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010 has been notified in 
Gazette of India (Extraordinary) on 9th September, 2010 to provide for 
grant of reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in  
respect of an area containing coal and lignite through auction by 
competitive bidding, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.  
This, would however, not be applicable in the following cases:- 
 where such area is considered for allocation to a Go vernment 
company or corporation for mining or such other specified end 
use;  
 where such area is considered for allocation to a company or 
corporation that has been awarded a power project on the basis of 
competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power Projects). 
  The Government has notified the Auction by Competitive Bidding of 
Coal Mines Rules, 2012 on 2 nd February, 2012.  Further, the 
notification on the commencement of the said Amendment Act, 2010 
has also been notified by the Ministry of Mines on 13th February, 2012. 
 CMPDIL, after calling bids and has selected M/s CRISIL for the above 
work.  CRISIL has been given 3 months time for completion of : 
i) Methodology for calculation of floor price/reserve price tag 
for the captive coal blocks; 
ii) Preparation of Model Tender Document for selection of 
successful coal block allocattee; 
iii) Preparation of model agreement between MoC and the 
successful coal block allocattee. 
 The Government has identified 54 coal blocks for allocation and they 
have been sectorally earm arked. It has been decided to allocate the 
blocks after detailed exploration only through auction and to power 
sector for tariff based bidding.  Out of the above 54 blocks, 16 are 
earmarked for power sector, 16 for Government companies and 22 for 
allocation through auction.  The status of the identified blocks was 
reviewed with CIL & CMPDIL.  The CMPDIL has informed that detailed 
drilling in 12 blocks is completed and the GR is available.  The 
remaining 42 blocks are not explored.  The exploration of the ab ove 
blocks would require 16 lakh meters of drilling. CMPDIL has been 
asked to prepare a plan for exploration of the blocks on priority basis.   

 
 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Setting up of New coal Washeries 
Recommendation Serial No. 22 
 The Committee note that for increasing the output of washed 
coking and non -coking coal, Coal India Limited has envisaged setting up 
of  20 new coal washeries with the capacity of 111.10 MT  with an 
investment of about Rs. 2500 crore.  These include seven c oking coal 
washeries and 13 non -coking coal washeries.  The Committee further 
observe that out of these 20 proposed to be set up washeries by the end 
of XIth Five Year Plan, 2 washeries were proposed to set up on 'turnkey 
basis'.  The Committee regret to o bserve that not even a single washery 
has been set up during the entire XIth Plan period which ended on 31 
March, 2012 despite  the directive of the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests restricting the use of coal containing more than 34% ash content 
in power  stations located 1000 km away from pit heads.  While 
deprecating the Ministry/CIL for their utter failure in setting up of coal 
washeries during the XI Plan Period as targeted which is a serious lapse 
on their part. The Committee therefore, reiterate thei r earlier 
recommendation (4th Report on Demands for Grants, 2010 -11) and 
desire that the Ministry/CIL should prepare an action plan to expedite the 
work of commissioning coal washeries.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Government/CIL in this regard.   
 
Action Taken 
In order to supply improved quality and sized coal to the consumers, CIL 
has taken necessary action to set up 20 coal washeries (18 washeries 
under Build-Operate-Maintain i.e. BOM and 2 washeries under turn -key-
scheme) with a total capacity of 111.1 Mty.  
Global tender for 7 washeries under BOM scheme was floated from time to 
time in the 1st phase since January, 2009 with the following outcome : 
- Letter of Award (LoA) has been issued to the selected bidders to set up 
3 washeries i.e. Madhubandwashery , 5 Mty. &Patherdihwashery, 5 
Mty. And Asoli(10 Mty) after receiving  Environmental clearances from 
MoEF which was due over a long period. 
- Tender for Dugdawashery, 2.5 Mty has been finalized &awating  
approval from CIL Board  
- Tender for Dahibariwashery, 1.6 Mty. is under final stage of evaluation. 
- Tender for other two washeries (Basundhara, 10.0 Mty and Jagannath, 
10.0 Mty has been cancelled by MCL Board during its approval for 

 
 
awarding the work and  retendered (a major  setback in implementing 
the programme ). 
 
Thereafter, global tender for 11 washeries under BOM scheme was floated 
to pre-qualify/ shortlist the bidders and the pre-qualified bidders are being 
issued for the techno -commercial & price bid (RFP) documents fo r the 
respective washeries.  
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
E-Auction of Coal 
Recommendation Serial No. 23 
From the data furnished by the Ministry of Coal regarding performance of 
E-Auction of Coal after implementation of the New Coal Distribution Policy 
(NCDP),  the Committee find that 465.57 lakh tonne of coal was sold by 
CIL during    2010 -11 by Spot E-Auction whereunder any intending buyer 
can parti cipate in auction and the Bid price of the coal at Rs. 9335.31 
crore was 74.10 percent more than the notified price of Rs. 5360.88 crore 
of total allocated quantity of coal.  Thus, CIL earned a profit of about Rs. 
4000/- crore by sale of coal by Spot E -auction where any intended buyer 
can bid.  However, in case of Forward E -auction where only end -
users/actual consumers are eligible to have assured coal supply over a 
long period of one year,  the allocated quantity was only 56.07 lakh tonne 
and against the n otified price of Rs. 522.43 crore during 2010 -11 of this 
allocated quantity, the bid price was Rs. 1035.19 crore resulting  in 98.15 
percent increase in price of coal that was sold at notified price.  The 
Committee are dismayed to observe that while in cas e of Spot E -auction 
coal is presently offered at 30% above the notified price as minimum 
reserve price, in case of Forward E -auction reserve price is fixed at the 
notified price of all grades of coal plus 60% of the notified price of coal 
irrespective of w hether the mine is running in profit or not.  The 
Committee disapprove the present system adopted by the Government 
where the end -users  have been allowed to participate in bid under 
forward e-auction at a price higher than 60 percent of notified price of 
coal whereas under Spot E -Auction  anyone who intend to participate in 
bid, it is only 30 percent. The Committee feel that the present system is 
disadvantageous to end -users of coal  as the unscrupulous traders may 
create artificial scarcity to make profit  by hoarding coal.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should review the present 
policy to protect the interest of coal users particularly small scale 
consumers and instead of promoting trading in coal supply, more and 
more coal be E-auctioned to end users  under forward E -Auction Scheme.  

 
 
The coal companies must laid down a policy to the extent that unless a 
person is not involved directly or indirectly in using of coal he should not 
be allowed to participate even in E -auction. The Com mittee would like to 
be apprised of the action initiated by the Government in this regard.  
Action Taken 
COAL INDIA LIMITED (CIL) 
The disparity in reserve  price of Spot e -action and Forward e-auction has 
been removed after introduction of the GCV based pricing. At present,  the 
reserve  price for e -auction (both Spot as well as  Forward) is fixed as 
under: 
(a) When the GCV exceeds  5500 Kcal/kg , the reserve price is the notified 
price for sectors other than Power Utilities(including IPPs) , Fertiliser 
and Defence.  
 
(b) When the GCV does not exceed 5500 Kcal/kg, the reserve price is the 
notified price plus 20% for sectors other than Power Utilities(including 
IPPs), Fertiliser and Defence. 
 
 In the year 2011-12, 24.48 lakh tonnes of coal was offered in Forward e-
auction compared to 18.60 lakh tonnes in 2010-11.  
 
As regards barring of traders to participate in Spot e -auction, this is to 
state that E –auction provides equal opportunity to all intending buyers to 
purchase coal. .  Even if the traders buy coal under e -auction, they will 
ultimately sell the same to some actual users, obviously at a higher price. 
If the actual users are interested in buying coal from the coal company 
directly, they are at liberty to participate and procure coal themselves, 
which will automatically result in ouster of traders.  
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) 
Consequent to the introduction of New Coal Distribution Policy 
(NCDP),SCCL has been conducting spot e -auctions from December 2007 
onwards. As per existing guidelines, in case of spot e -auctions, coal is 
offered at 30% ove r and above the notified price as minimum reserve 
price and any intending Buyer is eligible to participate in spot e-auctions.  
SCCL has so far not conducted forward e-auction. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Regional and Detailed drilling 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
The  Committee note that detailed drilling in non CIL  blocks during 2012-
13 has been proposed to 1,74,900 meters and plan outlays of Rs.150 
crores have been provided at BE 2012 -13 as against Rs. 99.22 crore 
provided at BE/RE 2011 -12. Similarly, Regional exploration in coal and 
lignite has been proposed for 1,47,000 meters with a plan outlay of Rs. 
62 crore during 2012 -13 for this scheme. It has been stated that 
achievement of targets in respect of these centrally sponsored schemes 
depends upon availability of entry permission to explore in forest areas, 
improvement in law and order conditions in some c oal field areas etc. As 
per the working group on coal and lignite 15 to 20 boreholes per sq. 
kilometer are required for projectisation purpose, whereas the existing 
guideline issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forests permits 
drilling upto 1.5 to 2. 0 borehole per sq. kilometer only in forest areas. It 
has necessitated amendment in the said guidelines and in the absence of 
the required  amendment, lot of areas could not be included for detailed 
drilling. It has also been stated that Ministry of Coal and CMPDI have sent 
joint reports in respect of Chira North coal block and Baita East coal block 
and interim report in respect of Bijul coal block to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and on analysis of impact of such projects on 
flora and fauna, the Ministry of Environment and Forests may take a view 
on revision of norms for exploratory work in forest areas. Since the 
achievement in detailed drilling largely depends on the environment and 
forest clearance and improved law and order conditions, it is i mperative 
that the Ministry should resolve these issues with the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and the state administrations concerned so as to 
permit more areas for detailed drilling.  The Committee desire that the 
funds earmarked for this year should  be optimally utilised to achieve 
1,74,900 lakh meter of detailed drilling. 
 
Action Taken 
The actual achievement of drilling programme under Regional/Promotional 
exploration and Detailed Drilling in non-CIL blocks is furnished below: 
(Drilling in lakh metres) 
Schemes 
2010-11 2011-12 
BE RE Actual BE RE Actual 

 
 
Promotional 
Exploration in Coal 
& Lignite 
1.55 1.55 1.03 1.34 1.34 0.94 
Detailed Drilling in 
Non-CIL blocks 
1.85 1.91 2.48 1.96 1.72 2.22 
 
In regard to the enhancement of borehole density for detailed exploration 
in forest areas without the need for prior forest clearances final reports 
have been submitted for all the three pitot projects.  This issue was also 
addressed in the meetings of GoM  constituted for addressing 
environmental and developmental issues and they directed MoEF to 
quickly review the status based on the final reports and take a 
view/modify guidelines. 
However it needs to be mentioned that permission to enter forest area for 
exploration with enhanced borehole density without the need f or prior 
clearances from Forest ry and Environmental point of view. would 
significantly expedite fulfilling the targets and utilization of funds. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
Recommendation Serial No.  24 
The Committee note that  CIL has formulated a new CSR Policy for 
implementation from 2010-11 onwards. As per this new CSR Policy, funds 
have been allocated to each company based on 5% of the retained 
earning of previous year subject to a minimum of Rs. 5/- per tonne of coal 
production in previous year for implementation of CSR activities in and 
around mining areas within the radius of 15 kms for the benefit of the 
villagers and community at large including Scheduled Castes (SC) and 
Scheduled Tribes (ST). The work include, developme nt of community 
infrastructure like school buildings, community hall, village roads, wells, 
tube wells, school furniture, Mahila Mandal Activities, Sports and Cultural 
activities, Medical Camps etc. CMD of subsidiary companies of CIL have 
been authorized t o consider CSR activities depending on the need 
accessed for the people. During 2010 -11 an amount of Rs. 262.28 crores 
has been allocated for undertaking CSR activities by the coal companies.  
The Committee are, however, dismayed to note that the funds ear marked 
for CSR activities have not been gainfully utilized by coal PSUs.  Though 
CIL has claimed that due to the change in CSR Policy, Sizeable funds have 
been generated to implement CSR activities, the Committee cannot but 
deplore the lackadaisical approa ch of CIL Board for delaying the approval 
of necessary guidelines to implement the projects. It is highly deplorable 
that CIL have delayed finalization of a comprehensive CSR guidelines 
despite recommendations to this effect made by the Committee in this 
regard, while presenting their 4 th Report (Demands for Grants (2010 -11) 

 
 
of Ministry of Coal) to Parliament.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that CIL should make sincere  efforts to implement their new 
CSR policy so as to bring about socio -economic development of the 
coalfield areas. It is unfortunate that coal companies have not spent a 
substantial amount allocated for CSR activities. The Committee 
recommend that coal companies must create a discipline and cadre 
consisting officers and employee s for looking after the implementation of 
the scheme and to ensure that money allocated for CSR activities is fully 
utilised. The CSR activities must not be delayed further on account of 
absence of proper planning or pending huge projects coming forward as  
claimed and expected by the CIL Board. The Committee also desire that  
the people's representatives,  local population and  authorities must also 
be associated in identifying and execution of CSR activities.    
Action Taken 
CSR Policy of CIL and its subsidiary companies  is being implemented from 
the year 2010 -11 only which is based on the guidelines issued by 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).  DPE has specified specific 
procedures for undertaking CSR activities, major of which are as under: 
(i) Participation of voluntary organisations, specialist organisations 
and community based organisations. 
(ii) Base line surveys 
(iii) Documentation of the experience 
(iv) Setting up a CSR Hub with participation of Deptt. Of PE, SCOPE and 
CP Sector Enterprises 
(v) Monitoring and evaluation. 
 
In order to undertake the CSR activities as per the above guidelines, it is 
necessary to engage an implementing agency for CIL and its subsidiaries.   
CIL has approached Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai t o 
become an agency for CIL and its subsidiaries in order to undertake the 
procedural job for CSR activities.   The discussion is underway and it is 
expected that a MOU may be reached shortly.  Thus in the concerned field 
the targets could not be achieved. 
 
However, in the absence of the proper implementing agency CIL and its 
subsidiaries have been undertaking CSR activities w.e.f. 2010 -11 through 
various implementing agencies as per CSR Policy of CIL.  It is also  to be 
mentioned that whatever amount could not be spent  would be carried 
forward during subsequent years. 
 
As per CSR  Policy of CIL, CSR fund is created by way of keeping 5% of 
the retained earnings of previous year subject to minimum of Rs.5/ - per 
tonne of coal production of previous year.  The exercise for calculation of 
retained earnings for the year ending March,  2012 is not yet completed.  

 
 
After finalization of accounts during 2011 -12, budget estimate for 2012 -
13 shall be finalized. 
 
The following major activities towards CSR have been under taken during 
2011-12 by CIL and its subsidiaries which is beneficiary to the villagers 
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes living within the radius 
of 15 Kms. Of the project sites. 
 
 Construction of Public utility road 
 Construction of Road over bridges 
 Integrated Water supply scheme for supply of drinking water to 
villages of adjoining coal mines. 
 Repairs/installation of hand pumps 
 Repairs/construction of wells including deep bore wells. 
 Construction/repairs of school buildings. 
 Providing educati onal facilities e.g. furniture, laboratory instruments 
etc. 
 Providing financial assistance/grant -in-aid to educational institution 
operation in coalfield areas. 
 Organizing health camps including camps for eye operation 
 Providing medical facilities through Mobile Medical vans. 
 Construction/repair of community center. 
 Street lighting  and solar lighting system to villagers belonging to BPL. 
 Environment  development /protection work like tree plantation, 
organizing sensitizing programme and pollution control etc. 
 Construction of playing grounds/stadia and organizing sports for 
villagers. 
 Providing financial assistance/donation/sponsorship  to NGOs which are 
specifically engaged in different developmental works of the Nation. 
 Promotion of sports and cultural act ivities supporting events at State 
and National level. 
 Relief to victims of natural calamities like earthquake, cyclone, draught 
and flood situation in any part of the country. 
 Wellness clinic. 
 HIV/AIDs awareness programme. 
 Other activities being undertaken from time to time. 
[Ministry of Coal, F.No. 20011/10/2012-IF, dated 06.09.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                              KALYAN BANERJEE 
14 December, 2012                                                           Chairman           
23 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

 
 
ANNEXURE- IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2012-13) HELD ON 12.12.2012 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM C, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1030hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee- Chairman 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
4. Shri Pakauri Lal 
5. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
6. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
7. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
8. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
9. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
   
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following 
Draft Reports:- 
(i)  Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government  on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the  24th Report of the Committee on 

 
 
Demands for Grants(2012-13) of the Ministry of Coal; 
(ii) **  **  **  **  ** 
 (iii) **  **  **  **  ** 
4. The Committee adopted the above Reports relating to the Ministry 
of Mines and Steel without any modificati ons. The draft Report relating to 
the Ministry of Coal was also adopted with minor modification.  The 
Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report s and 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
5. **  **  **  **  ** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 

 
 
 ANNEXURE- V 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made       25   
            
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos.1, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12,13,14,16,17, 
         20, 21 and 25)                                                                                  13
        
Percentage of total               52%
           
         
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 15) 01 
Percentage of total                    04% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2,3,4,6, 8, 18,19, 22 and 23)  09
         
Percentage of total               36%
                
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 7 and 24)           02
            
 Percentage of total              08%
       
 