 
 
53 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"REVIEW OF EXPORT OF IRON ORE POLICY" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935(Saka) 
 


 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"REVIEW OF EXPORT OF IRON ORE POLICY " 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  18.02.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   18.02.2014 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935(Saka) 


 
 
CC&S No. 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v) 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
 
20 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
 
24 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
25 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
 
38 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Request for Intervention for immediate withdrawal of Export 
Duty on Pellets by CMD, KIOCL Ltd……………………………………………… 
 
 
39 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 10.12.2013…………………………………………... 
 
       41 
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
     43 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
20.  Shri O  
21.  vacant 
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   -  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Committee Officer  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fifty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations  contained in the Thirty -eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Review of 
Export of Iron Ore Policy" pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Thirty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Comm ittee 
on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2013. Replies of 
the Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 27.11.2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 17.02.2014.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Thirty -eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given at Annexure-III.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I  
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
       17 February, 2014                                                                           Chairman 
        28 Magha, 1935(Saka)                    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on "Review of Expo rt of Iron Ore 
Policy" relating to the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 29.08.2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.08.2013. 
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry  of 
Steel in respect of all the 10 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 27th November, 201 3. These h ave been categorised as 
follows:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
Sl. Nos.1 and  5  
         Total – 2 
                (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. Nos. Nil  
Total – 00  
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7,8, 9 and 10 
Total – 07 
                         (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. No. 6 
                       Total – 01 
     (Chapter V) 
 
 

 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given 
to implementation  of the Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for 
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
on some of their observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-
Eighth Report.  
 Recommendation Serial No.2 and 3  
      
5. The Committee observe that against the 28.526 billion tonnes 
(17.84 billion tonnes Haematite, 10.64 billion tonnes Magnetite) of iron 
ore resources in the country, most of the magnetite resources (about 
37%) of the total iron reserves are not available for  mining due to 
prohibition imposed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Western Ghats and 
similar other sensitive environmental zones. The Committee have been 
further given to understand that only about 18 billion tonnes i.e. less than 
half of the proved reserves a re economically exploitable. The Committee 
find that at present the production of steel in the country more or less 
commensurate with the demand, but at the same time, the Working 
Group on steel industry for the 12th Plan has projected the requirement of 
206.2 million tonnes by the year 2016 -17, against the total iron ore 
requirement from 135.7 million tonnes in 2012-13. Taking note of the fact 
that millions of tonnes of iron ore is still being exported and the iron ore in 
the country will not last more tha n 25 years and keeping in view the 
production, demand projections, compounded with annual growth rate of 
7.8%, the Committee strongly recommend that there is an immediate 
need for reduction of export of iron ore for the purpose of serving of our 
steel Industries for future.  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 2) 
 
6. The Committee are anguished to note that although the Planning 
Commission have observed that the present proven reserves of iron ore in 
the country may not be sufficient to meet the requirement of iron  ore for 
the domestic iron and steel industry beyond next 25 years, 486.91 million 
tonnes of iron ore worth Rs. 1,85,139.91 crore were exported from the 
country during the 11th Plan Period. The Committee are further unhappy 
to note that the export of iron ore from the country was 117.37 million 

 
 
tonnes and 97.66 million tonnes during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 against 
78.14 million tonnes during 2004 -05. Although, the Committee find a 
declining trend in respect of export of iron ore which was reduced to 61.74 
million tonnes during 2011 -12 and during the first half of 2011 -12, the 
export of iron ore was just 30.75 million tonnes. What still perturbs the 
Committee is the fact that more than one third (36.9%) of iron ore 
produced in the country was exported during 2011 -12. The Committee 
further note that though the export duty has been hiked to 30% ad -
valorem from 30.12.2011 on export of iron ore excluding pellets, 14.4 
million tonnes out of a total 71.75 million tonnes iron ore produced in the 
country (20 percent of th e production) were exported during April to 
September, 2012 -13. In view of the huge export of iron ore from the 
country, the Committee disapprove the present iron ore export policy of 
the Government where it was decided that although conservation of iron 
ore resources is of the paramount importance, the same may not be 
achieved by banning or capping the export of iron ore but by taking 
recourse to appropriate fiscal measures. Although, the Government have 
claimed that imposition of higher rate of export dut y on iron ore has 
resulted in an effective measure to discourage iron ore export from the 
country, the Committee feel that this will not help for long term 
conservation of iron ore as required by steel industries in the country. The 
Committee therefore, st rongly recommend that the Government should 
take appropriate measures either by further increasing the export duty 
beyond 30% or gradually reducing the export of iron ore to ensure that 
this scarcely available national asset is reserved for the growth of t he 
country. If possible, the Committee recommend total banning of export of 
iron ore for the purpose of saving steel industries in future.  
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 3) 
 
7. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply to the above two 
recommendations have informed the Committee as follows:- 
"Ministry of Steel is not in favour of banning export of iron ore.  
However, custom duty on export of iron ore has been increased to 
30% to discourage export of iron ore and encourage domestic value 
addition and improve its availability to the domestic steel industry". 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
As informed by Department of Commerce requirement of iron ore 
for the domestic steel industry is a priority and should be met first. Only 
the surplus, if any, may be exported. 
Further as informed by Department of Commerce increase in export 
duty needs to be seen in a macro context. The present export duty at 
30% ad valorem is already a high rate. Any further increase affecting 
exports will also have adverse impact on the current account deficit. 
Further, the use of „ban‟ as an instrument of trade  policy is not WTO 
compatible. Article XI of GATT states that no prohibition or restriction 
other than duties, taxes or other charges shall be instituted or maintained 
in relation to the exportation of goods." 

 
 
 
8. The Committee do not conc ur with the view of the Ministry 
of Steel for not total ly banning the export of iron ore. Though, the 
Ministry of Steel in the action taken reply have submitted that 
custom duty on export of iron ore has been increased to 30% to 
discourage export of iron and encourage dome stic value addition, 
the Committee are dismayed to note the reply of the Ministry of 
Commerce that only the surplus, if any , is being exported.  The 
Committee are of the firm view that the endeavour of the Ministry 
should be for utilizing the surplus iron  ore, if any, for fu ture 
instead of exporting it. The Committee, therefore,  desire that the 
Ministry of Steel should take adequate steps to  get the additional 
capacity installed for finished steel in the next 3 years so that 
surplus iron ore available is consumed by the domestic industries. 
The Government cannot ignore future demand of domestic 
industries.   
     
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
9. The Ministry of Steel have apprised the Committee that Haematite 
and Magnetite were the two main varieties of iron ore. As per Indian 
Bureau of Mines (IBM), major resources of Haematite are located in the 
States of Odisha, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Goa. The 
balance resources of Haematite we re spread in Andhra Pradesh, Assa m, 
Bihar, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh. India‟s 97% Magnetite resources are located in four States, 
namely, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. The 
Committee fel t that exploration of ore with modern t echnology would  
further improve the qualitative availability of iron ore in the country. The 
Committee therefore, recommended that Ministry of Steel should prepare 
a time bound action plan for detailed exploration of untapped potential 
sources of iron ore for mining to enhance production. The encouragement 
for introducing state -of-art technology and scientific approach in the 
existing iron ore mine s for enhancing the production wa s essentially 
required and therefore, the Committee strongly fel t that funds m ay be 

 
 
allocated towards expansion and exploration of new iron ore mines in this 
regard.  
 
10. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnished as 
follows:- 
”Haematite and magnetite are the two important iron ores from 
which iron is extracted. Of these, haematite is considered to be 
superior owing to its high grade. Commercial deposits of hematite 
are mostly of bedded type confined to banded iron formation. 
Magnetite the other iron ore mineral is confined to metamorphosed 
sedimentary rock (banded iron formation) although magnetite 
occurs in igneous rocks also.  
Total resources potentiality of hematite – magnetite iron ore is yet 
to be known in the country. Previ ously the resource and reserves 
were calculated based on 55% Fe as cut - off to produce mineable 
ore. After lowering of threshold value of iron ore by Indian Bureau 
of Mines (IBM), in lease free, non forest areas assessment of low 
grade iron ore (+45%Fe) is  being undertaken by GSI to augment 
the iron ore resources. Evaluation of future exploration programmes 
on low grade iron ore in free hold areas for both fresh as well as 
reassessment has been initiated after assessing the data from the 
available mineral i nvestigation reports and other relevant 
documents. 
In the leasehold area, the job must rest with the lessee. IBM has to 
monitor and take active role in the leasehold area for proper 
inventory of iron ore. The areas where exploration was carried out 
earlier and the deposits are kept for stand alone or captive mining, 
exploration data have to be examined by the State Government. 
Once the leases are granted for those areas the lessee must do 
total assessment of the property considering Fe cut off both at 45% 
and 55%. If there is future plan of auctioning those deposits, the 
state Governments may consider for carrying out exploration in 
totality for proper valuation of the property. 
 Status of exploration within identified potential domains 
 The assessment of potential area for iron ore exploration indicates 
that the total potential area for iron ore in different geological 
domains so far evaluated in the country is around 7000 sq km. Out 
of the potential areas of 7000sq km, the area explored  is around 
5900 sq. km. As per the available information so far received the 
lease hold areas within the explored area is around 890 sq km. 
Therefore the explored free hold areas is around 5000 sq km and 

 
 
the total unexplored areas is around 1100 sq km. The refore the 
potential explored area warranting reassessment is around 4000 sq 
km. 
 
New prospective areas for iron ore exploration 
Although economically viable deposits exist in different geological 
setups, bulk of the country‟s ore supplies are from deposit s of BIF 
derivation (BHQ/BHJ/BMQ). GSI has initiated a new look in the 
green field areas to identify new potential areas for iron ore 
occurrence both in BIF derived ores and also in other non BIF 
hosted setup. An area of around 5000 sq km has been tentativ ely 
identified for reconnaissance stage investigation (G -4 stage) to 
narrow down the target areas for future intensified mineral search 
through progressive higher stages of investigation.  
Strategy for iron ore exploration 
Iron ore exploration in Greenfiel d area within already 
identified potential domain. 
On the basis of evaluation of time schedule vis -à-vis field 
components in mineral investigations carried out by GSI under 
different stages of investigation, a tentative time frame can be 
outlined for futur e exploration in the unexplored area within the 
already identified potential areas. The evaluation of exploration 
data indicates that roughly 2-3% of the potential area comes out to 
be the actual mineralized zone.  
Iron ore exploration in new identified Greenfield areas 
Reconnaissance stage investigation (G-4 stage investigation) for an 
area of 5000 sq km is being planned in newly identified Greenfield 
areas in designated belts. The aim of this reconnaissance 
investigation is to identify and narrow down the  target areas for 
future intensified mineral search through delineating favourable 
segments of areas for iron ore mineralization within the Greenfield 
areas. 
The fixation of quantum of work will be guided by geological set up 
of the particular areas and ex posure conditions.  A rough estimate 
of the Greenfield areas identified for reconnaissance investigation 
indicates that nearly 4000 sq km lies in peninsular portion and 
roughly 1000 sq km is within extra peninsular region. With the 
available resources this  identified area covering around 5000 Sq. 
K.M would be covered through Central Government level 
investigation within the span of the 13th Plan. 

 
 
 
 
Re-assessment in the Explored areas in peninsular India 
GSI is formulating scheme of reassessment of iron ore,  due to the 
lowering of threshold values to 45% Fe, in the explored areas 
through fresh resource estimation of the entire spectrum of 
mineralized zones including low grade portions at lower cut off 
which normally occurs within the profile of the mineralize d zone in 
the following modes: 
(i) Low grade partings within the high grade ore (Shaly Ore). 
(ii) In hanging wall and footwall side of the ore zone or as 
separate bands. 
(iii) On top of lateritic profile( Lateritic and limonitic ore) 
(iv) As bottom of established ore within z one of enrichment 
above proto ore. 
 
GSI has tentatively identified the group of hematite deposits in 
different iron ore belts of the country where reassessment of 
resource potential at lower cut off is required.  
Tentative time frame for accomplishment of work  
A preliminary assessment of the requirement of drilling in explored 
areas indicates that it will tentatively involve a drilling of 65,000 
meters with average of 120 meters per borehole. Therefore, 540 
nos. of boreholes are tentatively to be drilled in the explored areas. 
It is estimated that with the available resources the reconnaissance 
survey for iron ore may be completed by the 13th Plan. 
The Working Group on Steel Industry for the 12 th Five Year Plan, in 
addition to the on going R&D Scheme 'Prom otion of Research & 
Development in Iron & Steel Sector', had recommended the interest 
subsidy scheme 'Promotion of Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low 
grade iron ore & ore fines' with an estimated budget of Rs. 2417 
crore for the 12th Five Year Plan perio d. However, Planning 
Commission allocated only Rs. 200 crore to Ministry of Steel for 
the 12th Five Year Plan. Due to the insufficient allocation, the 
aforesaid interest subsidy scheme could not be taken up. It is 
also pertinent to state that the interest subsidy scheme was not 
on R&D but for promoting capacity building for Beneficiation & 
Agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines.  
However, the recommendation/ observation of the Committee have 
been taken up with the planning Commission with a request to 

 
 
allocate sufficient funds to run the aforesaid interest subsidy 
scheme.  
It is however, informed that Government has been pursuing R&D on 
Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines 
under the on -going scheme of 'Promotion of Research & 
Development in Iron & Steel Sector'.  In fact, the main emphasis on 
R&D under the aforesai d scheme in the 11 th Five Year plan was 
Beneficiation & Agglomeration & lnd the Scheme has been 
continued in the 12th Five Year Plan Period. 
The following R&D projects are being pursued under the aforesaid 
scheme:- 
 Improvement in sinter productivity throug h deep beneficiation 
and agglomeration technologies for rational utilization of low 
grade iron ores and fines by National Metallurgical Laboratory 
(CSIR-NML) Jamshedpur. 
 Alternate complementary Route of Iron/Steel making with 
reference to Indian raw material viz. low grade iron ore and non 
coking coal (adopting beneficiation of low grade ore) by National 
Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIRNML) Jamshedpur. 
 Beneficiation of Iron Ore slimes from Barsua and other mines in 
India by Research & Development Centre for Iron & Steel 
(RDCIS), SAIL, Ranchi.  
 Development of pilot scale pelletization technology for Indian 
Goethitic/ hematite ore with varying degree of fineness by 
Research & Development Centre for Iron & Steel (RDCIS), SAIL, 
Ranchi.  
In addition to the above o ne more R&D project viz. 'Quality 
Improvement of Low Grade Iron Ore' is being pursued by RDCIS, 
SAIL, Ranchi, with financial assistance from Steel Development 
Fund. 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
About 97% magnetite resources are located in four states of Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Tamilnadu. Out of which, major 
magnetite resources are in the Western Ghat area that could not be 
exploited due to environmental concern. Considering the 
importance of natural resources as well as of enviro nment 
preservation together, feasibility of underground mining may be 
explored at Western Ghat area. However processing of mined out 
iron ore from Western Ghat may be carried out outside the forest 
area. 
In the year 2012 -13, SAIL mines have produced about 21.48 
million tonnes of iron ore for its steel plants. To meet the enhanced 
requirement of iron ore for ongoing capacity expansion, the 
production capacity of existing mines at Gua, Bolani, Kiriburu, 

 
 
Meghahatuburu are being expanded to their maximum potential. As 
a result, iron ore production capacity of SAIL mines will be 
enhanced to about 40 Mtpa in the next 2 years time which will take 
care of the iron ore requirement for ongoing hot metal capacity 
expansion to 23.46 Mtpa. Further new mines are planned t o be 
developed at Rowghat, Chiria and Taldih.  
SAIL is now ramping up hot metal capacity to approx 24 million 
tonnes per annum (Mtpa), & plans to embark on the next phase of 
expansion to raise it further to about 50 Mtpa by 2025. In order to 
meet enhanced requirement of iron ore of about 83 Mtpa by 2025 
and beyond, new iron ore mines have to be developed as the 
reserve in  existing operating iron ore mines may get depleted in 
due course of time. For this, SAIL has submitted PL/ML applications 
to the State G ovt. of Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, 
Karnataka, Tamilnadu, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra. The matter 
is being constantly pursued with the respective State Governments.  
In order to further enhance resources of iron ore in the area where 
forest clearances were available, the drilling of about 30,000 meters 
in last 5 years has been carried out in SAIL mines. During 2013-14, 
there is further plan of exploratory drilling of about 12,000 meters 
by Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) in SAIL iron ore 
mines.  
Most of SAIL iron mines are in the area of reserves forest where 
presently forest clearances are not available and exploratory drilling 
for resource enhancement could not be taken up. Therefore attempt 
is being taken up to explore the se areas through 
Geomagnetic/Geophysical surveys.       
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
With respect to NMDC, the Company has already planned expansion 
of its iron ore mining capacity from the existing 32 million Tonne 
per year to 46.5 MT per year by end of twelfth five year plan (2016-
17) and 52.5. MT by the year 2010-21. 
 
Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited 
 Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd is a public sector undertaking 
functioning under Ministry of Mines. MECL, with its well developed 
infrastructure and expertise, is committed to execute cost and time 
effective comprehensive programme(s) from reconnaissance survey 
to detailed exploration of minerals and developmental mining 
projects on a turn key basis. 
 

 
 
At present, Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited is carrying out 
detailed exploration work for iron ore as per the details given 
below:  
    
(i)  MECL has entered into MoU with M/s. Steel Authority of India 
Ltd (SAIL), to carry out detailed exploration of n ew iron ore 
deposits as well as in existing mines including geological 
services and preparation of geological report.  The exploratory 
drilling activities includes core drilling and RC drilling in different 
mine areas of SAIL (Bhilai Steel Plant & Raw Mate rial Division).  
The period of MoU is upto February 2015.  
(ii)  MECL has also entered into MoU recently with Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Ltd (RINL) for a period of 5 years, to carry out detailed 
exploration for iron ore, limestone and other minerals.  Under 
this MoU , MECL proposes to take up exploration work for 
various iron ore prospects allocated to RINL in different parts of 
the country.  
 
MECL is further enhancing its capacity in iron ore exploration by 
procuring one RC drilling rig and accordingly MECL fully equipped to 
take up detailed exploration for new iron ore prospects in the 
country in addition to above, depending on the availability of work." 
 
11. The Committee had earlier recommended that the 
encouragement for introducing state -of-art technology and 
scientific approach in the existing iron ore mines for enhancing the 
production was essentially required and therefore, the funds may 
be allocated towards expansion and exploration of new iron ore 
mines in this regard. Although, the Ministry of Steel in their action 
taken reply have submitted details about status of exploration 
within identified potential domains, new prospective areas for iron 
ore exploration, strategy for iron ore exploration including 
exploration in Greenfield area within already identified potential 
domain, iron ore exploration in new identified Greenland areas, re-
assessment in the explored areas in peninsular India and the 
tentative time frame for accomplishment of work, the reply of the 
Ministry is silent on details of funds allocated tow ards  research 
and development work for expansion  and exploration of iron ore 
mines. The Committee therefore , would like the Ministry of Steel 
to furnish the details of various  schemes taken up for the 

 
 
development and exploration  of iron ore mines  for enhancing 
iron ore production with details of funds allocated /spent under 
these heads during the last five years . The Committee also desire 
that an action plan be prepared for the next five years for research 
and development activities  in this regard and they be apprised of 
the same.    
Recommendation Serial No. 7 and 8  
Recommendation  Serial No. 7    
12. The Committee note that a large quantity of iron ore, mainly fines, 
are being exported from the country on the plea that the country does not 
have adequate facilities for use of fines and therefore, these fines have to 
be exported for economic and environmental reasons. The Committee find 
that to encourage optimum utilization of iron ore resources of the country 
and to improve domestic utilization of low grade iron ore and fines 
through beneficiation and pelletization, import duty on plants and 
equipments u sed for initial setting up and substantial expansion of 
beneficiation and pelletization plants has been reduced from 7.5% to 
2.5% in the General Budget for year 2012 -13. Besides, export duty on 
pellets has been reduced to zero. Though, appreciating the Min istry of 
Steel for this prudent measure of reducing import duty on plants and 
equipments used for initial setting up and substantial expansion of 
beneficiation and pelletization plants, the committee do not concur with 
the decision of the Government to red uce export duty on pellets to zero. 
The Committee are of the opinion that imposition of higher export duty on 
iron ore fines and non -exemption from export duty to pellets will give an 
impetus to setting up of pelletization plants in the country by the stan d 
alone miners. Setting up of more pelletization plants will also generate 
employment opportunities and will also generate more revenue in terms 
of value added products. The Committee have been informed that 
Pelletization capacity increased from about 18 M T in 2006 to about 48 MT 
in 2012 and Sintering Capacity increased from about 30 MT in 2006 to 
about 57 MT in 2012. Also, Pelletization and Sintering capacities are 
expected to go up to 84 Mt and 86 MT respectively by 2015. In the 
context of pelletisation c apacity, the Committee desire that a 

 
 
comprehensive study on the impact of the free export of pellets should be 
carried out by the Ministry of Steel, and the Committee would also like to 
be apprised of the facts and progress in this regard. At the same time , 
taking note of the present pelletisation capacity in the country which is 
highly inadequate, the Committee would like the Ministry to take 
immediate steps to create sophisticated iron ore beneficiation facility 
followed by pelletisation so that lower qua lity of iron ore produced in the 
country is fully utilized by domestic steel plants.  
 
 
 Recommendation Serial No.  8  
      
13. Till recent past, the domestic steel industry was mainly using higher 
grades of iron ore due to their easy availability. As per a study done by 
Economic Research Unit under Ministry of Steel during 2007 on 'Iron ore 
fines utilization in India', there will be rapid demand of iron ore fines by 
domestic steel industry as the technology matrix of the various capacity 
expansion plans and new steel plants is heavily biased towards 
technologies using agglomerated fines. The Committee has taken note 
that as per thi s study, the share of fines in steel making in country is 
further likely to increase from 52.2% during 2005 -06 to an estimated 
about 72% by 2019 -20. Taking note of the rapid depletion of high grade 
iron ore reserves in the country, the Committee feel that steel industry 
should come up with an investment plan in beneficiation and 
agglomeration (sintering and pelletization) facilities for utilizing low grade 
iron ore fines also. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Government should come with a policy measure to ensure that all the 
upcoming new steel plants and expansion of existing steel plants should 
be based on technologies, which can utilize iron ore fines and desire that 
100% utilization of iron ore fines be achieved by the end of 12th plan 
period.  
 
14. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply  to the above two 
recommendations  have informed the Committee as follows:- 
The iron ore beneficiation / pelletisation capacity is increasing as 
per the demand of the steel sector and cost competitiveness associated 
with it.  Steel is a deregulated sector and decisions regarding setting up 

 
 
new facilities for pelletisation / ore be neficiation are taken by the project 
proponents.  Government has already incentivized these activities by 
taking appropriate fiscal measures like rebate in import duty on plant / 
machinery.  
In the case of a deregulated sector like steel, the Government pl ays the 
role of a facilitator and commercial decisions regarding use of a particular 
technology etc. are taken by the industry and the entrepreneurs concerned.  
However, to facilitate setting up of pell etisation plants in the country, the 
Government has re duced the Basic Custom Duty on capital goods equipment 
required for initially setting up or substantial expansion of iron ore pellet plants 
and iron ore beneficiation plants, from 7.5% to 2.5% since 2012 -13.  There are 
technological limitations also and de velopment of suitable technology may not be 
given a time limit.  However, Government, recognizing the importance of the 
issue, would facilitate development of such technologies as a matter of policy.  
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
From mineral c onservation point of view it is essential to plan for 
utilization of total resource including the low grade ore by blending, beneficiation 
and agglomeration techniques.  While SAIL has extensive facilities for blending 
and agglomerations (sintering) at its  plants, efforts are being made for mineral 
conservation by utilizing iron ore slimes (generated after washing/processing and 
lying in tailing ponds) and low grade fines through large scale beneficiation and 
pelletisation at various locations. Process has already been initiated for 
installation of 4 MTPA capacity pellet plant at Gua, 2 MTPA at Rourkela Steel Plant 
(RSP) and 1 MTPA at Dalli mine. This would also improve the quality of burden to 
blast furnaces.   
After ongoing capacity expansion programme, the sinter capacity in 
the SAIL Steel plants would increase from present level of about 17 Mtpa 
to 30 Mtpa by 2015 -16. Under this expansion, new sinter plants of 3.80 
Mtpa capacity each at RSP and ISP are already commissioned. 
  In SAIL for steel making, BF/BOF route is in place which utilizes iron 
ore in form of lump and agglomerated fines in form of sinter which 
constitutes 70 % of BF burden. With installation of large size Blast 
Furnaces (4060m3 commissioned at RSP & another coming soon at ISP) 
with the state of the facilities in future the need for agglomerated burden 
(sinter + pellet) will further increase up to the level of 80%. With these 
SAIL is aiming for utilization of 100 % fines. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
RINL has been using Sintering Technology which can utilize iron ore 
fines, since inception. RINL - had installed two Sinter Machines under 
3Mtpa Plant to produce about 5.3 Mt of sinter using iron ore fines.  RINL -
VSP has been utilizing nearly 70% of iron or e fines in its charge sinter 
since inception.  

 
 
New Sinter Plant (SP#3) with capacity of 3.61Mt has been 
commissioned under 6.3 Mtpa expansion programme. This will further 
enhance the usage of iron ore fines. 
As a further step in this direction, RINL along with NMDC has 
undertaken to set up a Pelletisation plant of capacity of around 6 Mtpa in 
Visakhapatnam.  The input material would be iron ore concentrate 
prepared by NMDC using iron ore fines at their mine -head in Bailadilla. It 
is also planned, as part of  JV, to lay a pipe line of capacity 13 Mtpa to 
carry iron ore slurry from Nagarnar to Visakhapatnam.  
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
With respect to NMDC, the Company is setting up  two pellet plants 
and  both  are  being set up by using  Pellet Plant Feed (PPF) pro duced 
from low grade iron ore by beneficiating them at respective beneficiation 
plants also being set-up by NMDC. 
 
Subsequently in a note (Annexure-I) furnished to the Committee, 
CMD, KIOCL Ltd. has opposed the recent hike in Export Duty on pellets by 
the Government. 
 
15. Taking note of the rapid depletion of high grade iron ore 
reserves in the  country, the Committee had earlier recommended 
that the Go vernment should come up with a policy measure to 
ensure that all the upcoming new steel plants and expansion of 
the existing steel plants should  be based on technologies aiming 
at creating sophisticated iron ore beneficiation facilities followed 
by pelletisation so that the lower quality iron ore produced in the 
country is fully utilized by domestic steel industry. The Ministry in 
their action taken reply have stated that from mineral 
conservation point of view, Steel Authority of India, Rashtriya 
Ispat Ni gam Limited and National Mineral Development 
Corporation have extensive facilities for utilization of lower grade 
ore by blending, beneficiation, agglomeration, and pelletisation  
technique.  The  Ministry have further stated that steel being a 
deregulated sector, decisions regarding setting up new facilities 
for pelletisation/ore beneficiation are taken by the project 
proponents. However, Government recognizing the importance of 
the issue would facilitate development of such technologies as a 
matter of pol icy. The Committee strongly feel that such 

 
 
technologies for using lower grade iron ore should not only be 
used by the steel PSUs, the private steel makers should also use 
the technology as a matter of policy in order to increase mineral 
inventory in the country.   The Committee recommend the Ministry 
to discuss this important issue with private sector producers and 
come out with a policy in this regard.  
 
16. The Committee note that although they had appreciated   
the Government who have taken steps to  improve domestic 
utilization of low grade iron ore and fines through 
beneficiation and pelletization, reducing import duty on 
plants and equipments used for initial setting up and 
substantial expansion of beneficiation and pelletization 
plants from 7.5% to  2.5% in the General Budget for year 
2012-13  and reducing the export duty on pellets to zero, the 
Government vide their notification No. 3/2014 dated 
27.01.2014 have levied 5% export duty on iron ore pellets. 
The Committee are  thus perturbed to note that though the 
Ministry of Steel in their Action Take Reply f urnished to the 
Committee on 27 th November, 2013 has informed that they 
have reduced the Basic Custom Duty on capital goods 
equipment required for initially setting up or substantial 
expansion of iron ore pellet plants and iron ore beneficiation 
plants, from 7.5% to 2.5% since 2012 -13 and export duty 
for pellets has been reduced to zero,  the same has now been 
reported to be increased to 5% by the Government. Since 
the Action Taken Reply of the Governm ent in silent on any 
proposed increase in export duty, t he Committee are unable 
to understand the rationale behind increasing the same after 
submitting Action Taken reply to them . In view of a 
memorandum dated 05 February, 2014, received by the 
Committee from KIOCL Ltd., a Government of India 
Enterprise, the Committee feel that the decision may 

 
 
adversely affect the pellet industry  particularly KOICL Ltd., a 
Steel Ministry PSU exclus ively dealing with export of pellet s 
by using low grade iron ore  and already  facing serious 
challenges from increased railway freight, high royalty  rates 
and  lack of domestic demand for pellets , etc. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and  desire the Ministry to take immediate steps to create 
sophisticated iron ore beneficiation facility followed by 
pelletisation so that lower quality of iron ore produced in the 
country is fully utilized by domestic steel plants. The 
Committee would also like the Government that till 
technological up-gradation are made in domestic steel plants 
so that they could fully consume the domestically produced 
pellets, the Government should continue with the earlier 
policy of zero percent export duty on  pellets so that huge 
investment made in the pellet industry do not become non -
productive assets and thousands of people do not lose their 
livehood due to gradually close down of the pellet industry  
with additional financial burden of increased export duty . It 
is always desirable that Government should proceed on the basis of 
their promise since in view of such promise large number of 
industries has made huge investments and the Government should 
not back out from their promise.  The Committee , therefore,   
recommend that Ministry of Steel should immediately take up 
the matter with Ministry of Finance at the appropriate level 
and apprise them of the action taken in the matter.  
Recommendation Serial No.9 and 10 
 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
17. The Committee have been informed that iron ore export of NMDC‟s 
was being done through MMTC as per decision taken by the Union Cabinet 
from time to time and last such long term contract was signed in 2012 -13 
for a period of 3 years i.e. till 2014 -15. Thoug h Ministry of Steel have 

 
 
apprised the Committee that NMDC exports a very small percentage of the 
total exports of the count ry and the quantum of export had  decreased 
from 3.78 MT in 2007-08 to 0.39 MT during 2011-12, the Committee were 
not in agreement wit h the views of the Ministry and desire that NMDC's 
iron export contract be reviewed immediately so as to make the 
availability of iron ore for the domestic industry in required quantity.  
 
18. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnishe d as 
follows:- 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
"With respect to NMDC, the Company has entered into long -term 
agreement with Japanese Steel Mills (JSMs) & POSCO, South Korea 
during 2012-13 for a validity period of 3 years (i.e. upto 2014 -15) 
in accordance with the decision of Union Cabinet." 
Recommendation Serial No. 10     
 
19. The Committee note that iron ore, a non-renewable and critical raw 
material for steel industry is poised for huge capacity expansion and 
according to the Ministry of Steel, policy measures are needed to conserve 
this resource for long term requirement of d omestic steel industry. The 
Committee are however, concerned to note that as per the present foreign 
trade policy regarding export of iron ore, iron ore upto 64% Fe content is 
freely allowed. Further, export of iron ore of Goa origin is freely allowed to 
China, Europe, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan (irrespective of Fe 
content) and export of iron ore from Redi region to all markets 
(irrespective of Fe content) is also freely allowed. As regards export of 
iron ore with Fe content above 64%, the Committee find  that these 
exports were canalized through MMTC and high grade iron ore not 
exceeding 1.8 million tonnes(lumps) and 2.7 million tonnes (fines) from 
Bailadila, Chhattisgarh is allowed to be exported. In view of the free trade 
of iron ore upto 64% Fe content  and even export of higher grade of iron 
ore, the Committee recommend that the Government should take 
immediate necessary policy measures not only to ban the export of iron 
ore reserves of higher grade but also those upto 64% Fe content which 
are presently  freely allowed. In view of the limited beneficiation 
agglomeration facilities in the country, the Committee feel that the high 

 
 
grade iron ore with Fe content more than 64% from Bailadila, 
Chhattisgarh which can be used by the existing steel plants should not be 
permitted for export and be made available to meet the requirement of 
domestic steel industry.  
 
20. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnished as 
follows:- 
Export of high grade ore is permitted only for export by MMTC / 
NMDC to Japan and South Korea under Long Term Agreements (LTAs) 
which have been in existence since 1970.  Presently, the LTAs have been 
renewed for the period from 01-04-2012 to 31-03-2015 with the approval 
of the Cabinet in view of our long -term strategic rela tionship with these 
countries. 
Total ban over export of iron ore is not considered to be the only 
way to discourage export of iron ore and to improve availability of iron ore 
for domestic consumers.  Government has been, on the recommendations 
of Ministry of Steel, increasing export duty on iron ore and at present it is 
at 30%. 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
As informed by Department of Commerce Export of high grade ore 
is permitted only for export by MMTC/NMDC to Japan and South Korea 
under Long Term Agreements (LTA s) which have been in existence since 
1970.  Presently, the LTAs have been renewed for the period from 
1.4.2012 to 31.3.2015 with the approval of the Cabinet in view of our 
long-term strategic relationship with these countries. 
 
21. The Committee had earli er recommended that NMDC’s iron  
ore export contract  needed to be reviewed immediately so as to 
make the availability of iron ore for the domestic industry. The 
reply of the Ministry of Steel submitted to the Committee is 
unsatisfactory and ambiguous as no  mention  has been made 
about the review of NMDC's export  contract by the Government . 
The Committee while reiterati ng their earlier recommendation  
desire that the matter need to be placed before the Cabinet and no 
further extension for export of iron ore from the Country be given.   
 

 
 
22.  As regards the export of high grade of iron ore being 
permitted to export by MMTC/NMDC to Japan and South Korea 
under Long Term  Agreements (LTAS) which have be en in 
existence since 1970 and  free trade of iron ore upto 64% Fe 
content, the Committee had recommended that the Government 
should review the same as the iron ore reserves in the country  
have depleted and may l ast only for the  next 25 years. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that capacity addition for finished 
steel goods be generated and only finished steel goods should be 
exported as it would hel p in generating more employment in the 
country.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No.1. 
 
The existence of strong steel industry is crucial to the development 
of any modern economy. The growth of steel industry largely depends on 
the availability of critical raw materials in required quantity and quality. 
Therefore, as managers of raw materials, it is the responsibility of the 
Ministry of Steel to ensure the availability of inputs in required quantity as 
well as quality at least for a period of fifty years. The aim of steel policy 
should, therefore, be directed towards production of iron ore not only from 
the existing mines with innovative mining technologies but also 
exploration from untapped sources.  
 Action Taken  
The New National P olicy is in draft stage and the policy would 
recommend for exploring the use of new technologies for mining and 
beneficiating low quality iron ore.  As far as new prospective areas for iron 
ore exploration is concerned, it may be stated that although econo mically 
viable deposits exist in different geological setups, bulk of the country‟s 
ore supplies are from deposits of BIF derivation (BHQ/BHJ/BMQ). 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has initiated a new look in the green field 
areas to identify new potential  areas for iron ore occurrence both in BIF 
derived ores and also in other non BIF hosted set up. An area of around 
5000 sq km has been tentatively identified for reconnaissance stage 
investigation (G -4 stage) to narrow down the target areas for future 
intensified mineral search through progressive higher stages of 
investigation.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
    Recommendation Serial No.5.   
    
The Committee note that the Scheme 'Promotion of Research &  
Development in Iron and Steel Sector' has been continued in 12th Plan 
with an allocation of Rs. 200 crore by the Planning Commission. The 
Committee also note that the scheme on 'Promotion of beneficiation & 
agglomeration of low grade iron ore and ore fine s' is proposed to be 
implemented during 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee are, however, 
dismayed to note that during 2013 -14 (BE), the fund allocation for 
Scheme for Promotion of Research and Development in Iron and Steel 
sector on on-going R&D projects was Rs. 12 Crore and for Development of 
innovative iron/steel making process/technology, it is Rs. 2 crores only. 

 
 
What further perturbed the Committee is that for Scheme for promotion of 
beneficiation and agglomeration of low grade iron ore and ore fines, t he 
allocation was nil. The Committee are not only surprised but also unable 
to comprehend the rationale behind not pursuing these much needed R&D 
schemes which will help in utilization of lower grade iron ore available in 
the country. As the funds so earma rked for such schemes forms only a 
minuscule of the huge overall budget of PSUs under administrative control 
of Ministry of Steel, the Committee are deeply anguished by the neglect of 
these important R&D projects by the Ministry and allocation of negligibl e 
funds for the innovative schemes. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that Ministry of Steel should take necessary steps to ensure 
allocation of sufficient funds towards research and development, 
innovation, technological advancement and promoti on of pelletisation 
technology in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
measures taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
Action Taken  
For allocation of sufficient funds towards research and 
development, innovation, technological advanc ement and promotion of 
pelletisation technology in the country are given under reply to point No. 
4.  
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
1. For low grade iron ores/rejects utilisation, RDCIS, SAIL is pursuing 
one project titled “Beneficiation of iron ore slimes from Barsua mines”, 
partly funded by Government Budgetary Support (GBS) of Ministry of 
Steel. The project aims to recover valuable iron minerals from the 
slimes/rejects of processing plant and reject slime with <45%Fe as per 
IBM guidelines. The capital cost envisaged in this project was Rs. 20.32 
crores out of total project cost of Rs. 27.694 crores. After intense 
beneficiation test work carried out at national laboratories and at RDCIS, 
the process route is frozen. The capital cost for implement ation of the 
scheme comes to around Rs. 55.57 crores. Additional fund is requested 
for achieving final objectives of the project.   
2. For agglomeration of the iron ore fines concentrate, obtained by 
beneficiating the low grade iron ore, another project is  being pursued by 
RDCIS, NML, IMMT & IIT, KGP through different approach. The project 
titled “Development of pilot scale pelletisation technology for Indian 
Goethitic / hematite ore with varying degree of fineness” aims to develop 
a process / optimise the variable parameters for producing heat hardened 
quality pellet for effective use in iron making. This project is also partly 
supported by Ministry of Steel through Government Budgetary Support 
(GBS) scheme. The total project cost envisaged is Rs. 41.8877 crores, out 
of which the capital cost is Rs.29.99 crore.   

 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
RINL has given thrust on R&D and spent 53% higher during 2012 -
13 over 2011-12. Expenditure by RINL on R&D is shown below:- 
 
 2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-14 
(Plan) 
Expenditure(in 
Crores) 20.29 31.13 50 
 
RINL has finalized plan for major Research & Development with 
significantly higher spends during the next 4 years. 
RINL does not have captive iron ore mines, but has been using the 
technology of Sinter Making, which is an agglomeration process to utilize 
iron ore fines, fluxes and metallurgical waste, at its integrated steel 
making facility at Visakhapatnam since inception.  
RINL is also investing more in R&D by taking up projects in 
collaboration with different research institutes for better utilization of raw 
materials available within the country as given below:- 
o Preparation of metallised nuggets using Iron ore fines  & 
metallurgical wastes  - Jadavpur University-Kolkata 
o Briquetting of Solid Metallurgical Wastes of RINL  - IMMT, 
Bhubaneswar 
o Development of value added ceramic products utilising solid 
wastes generated - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute – 
Kolkata 
o Sintering with high micro fines content in iron ore - IMMT, 
Bhubaneswar 
o Utilization of  BF slag as a partial replacement for foundry 
silica sand - Andhra University – Visakhapatnam 
 
RINL has also taken up several R& D projects in the area of 
Development of Innovative Iron / Steel making process / Technology in 
collaboration with different research institutes of National repute like;  
Lance tip design for optimal performance of BOF  - Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kan pur. Indigenous Development of Cold 
Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets - Participation along with 
MoS, National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR- NML), Jamshedpur and Tata 
Steel, Jamshedpur (estimated project cost would be Rs. 500 Cr).  Planning 
commission has since accorded the in -principle approval, now 

 
 
memorandum for the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) is being 
formulated for Government approval. 
Additionally, RINL is working with IMMT, Bhubaneswar on 
“Development of Futuristic Technology for ca rbon free production using 
alternate reductants like hydrogen with minimum or no CO 2 emission”  
funded by Ministry.  
Memorandum of Understanding has been signed by RINL with 
McMaster University‟s Faculty of Engineering, Canada concerning the 
development of International Research and Development linkages.  
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
With respect to NMDC, the Company has already decided to set up 
2 pellet plants one in the state of Karnataka (1.2 MT/Annum) and another 
in the state of Chhattisgarh (2MT/annum). 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
    
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
Recommendation Serial No.2.  
      
The Committee observe that against the 28.526 billion tonnes 
(17.84 billion tonnes Haematite, 10.64 billion tonnes Magnetite) of iron 
ore resources in the country, most of the magnetite resources (about 
37%) of the total iron reserves are not available for mining due to 
prohibition imposed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Western Ghats and 
similar other sensitive environmental zones. The Committe e have been 
further given to understand that only about 18 billion tonnes i.e. less than 
half of the proved reserves are economically exploitable. The Committee 
find that at present the production of steel in the country more or less 
commensurate with the demand, but at the same time, the Working 
Group on steel industry for the 12th Plan has projected the requirement of 
206.2 million tonnes by the year 2016 -17, against the total iron ore 
requirement from 135.7 million tonnes in 2012-13. Taking note of the fact 
that millions of tonnes of iron ore is still being exported and the iron ore in 
the country will not last more than 25 years and keeping in view the 
production, demand projections, compounded with annual growth rate of 
7.8%, the Committee strongly reco mmend that there is an immediate 
need for reduction of export of iron ore for the purpose of serving of our 
steel Industries for future.  
Recommendation Serial No.3.   
    
The Committee are anguished to note that although the Planning 
Commission have observed that the present proven reserves of iron ore in 
the country may not be sufficient to meet the requirement of iron ore for 
the domestic iron and steel industry beyond next 25 years, 486.91 million 
tonnes of iron ore worth Rs. 1,85,139.91 crore were expo rted from the 
country during the 11th Plan Period. The Committee are further unhappy 
to note that the export of iron ore from the country was 117.37 million 
tonnes and 97.66 million tonnes during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 against 
78.14 million tonnes during 2004 -05. Although, the Committee find a 
declining trend in respect of export of iron ore which was reduced to 61.74 
million tonnes during 2011 -12 and during the first half of 2011 -12, the 
export of iron ore was just 30.75 million tonnes. What still perturbs th e 
Committee is the fact that more than one third (36.9%) of iron ore 
produced in the country was exported during 2011 -12. The Committee 
further note that though the export duty has been hiked to 30% ad -
valorem from 30.12.2011 on export of iron ore excludin g pellets, 14.4 

 
 
million tonnes out of a total 71.75 million tonnes iron ore produced in the 
country (20 percent of the production) were exported during April to 
September, 2012 -13. In view of the huge export of iron ore from the 
country, the Committee disa pprove the present iron ore export policy of 
the Government where it was decided that although conservation of iron 
ore resources is of the paramount importance, the same may not be 
achieved by banning or capping the export of iron ore but by taking 
recourse to appropriate fiscal measures. Although, the Government have 
claimed that imposition of higher rate of export duty on iron ore has 
resulted in an effective measure to discourage iron ore export from the 
country, the Committee feel that this will not he lp for long term 
conservation of iron ore as required by steel industries in the country. The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should 
take appropriate measures either by further increasing the export duty 
beyond 30% or gradually reducing the export of iron ore to ensure that 
this scarcely available national asset is reserved for the growth of the 
country. If possible, the Committee recommend total banning of export of 
iron ore for the purpose of saving steel industries in future.  
Action Taken 
 
Ministry of Steel is not in favour of banning export of iron ore.  
However, custom duty on export of iron ore has been increased to 30% to 
discourage export of iron ore and encourage domestic value addition and 
improve its availability to the domestic steel industry 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
As informed by Department of Commerce requirement of iron ore 
for the domestic steel industry is a priority and should be met first. Only 
the surplus, if any, may be exported. 
Further as informed by Department of Commerce increase in export 
duty needs to be seen in a macro context. The present export duty at 
30% ad valorem is already a high rate. Any further increase affecting 
exports will also have adverse impact on the current account deficit. 
Further, the use of „ban‟ as an instrument of trade policy is not WTO 
compatible. Article XI of GATT states that no prohibition or restriction 
other than duties, taxes or other charges shall be instituted or maintained 
in relation to the exportation of goods. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
 
Recommendation Serial No.4.  
     
The Ministry of Steel have apprised the Committee that Haematite 
and Magnetite are the two main varieties of iron ore. As per Indian Bureau 
of Mines (IBM), major resources of Haematite are located in the States of 
Odisha, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka  and Goa. The balance 
resources of Haematite are spread in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. 
India‟s 97% Magnetite resources are located in four States, namely, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Raj asthan and Tamil Nadu. The Committee 
feel that exploration of ore with modern technology will further improve 
the qualitative availability of iron ore in the country. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Steel should prepare a time bound 
action plan for detailed exploration of untapped potential sources of iron 
ore for mining to enhance production. The encouragement for introducing 
state-of-art technology and scientific approach in the existing iron ore 
mines for enhancing the production is e ssentially required and therefore, 
the Committee strongly feel that funds may be allocated towards 
expansion and exploration of new iron ore mines in this regard.  
Action Taken 
 
Haematite and magnetite are the two important iron ores from 
which iron is extracted. Of these, haematite is considered to be superior 
owing to its high grade. Commercial deposits of hematite are mostly of 
bedded type confined to banded iron formation. Mag netite the other iron 
ore mineral is confined to metamorphosed sedimentary rock (banded iron 
formation) although magnetite occurs in igneous rocks also.  
Total resources potentiality of hematite – magnetite iron ore is yet 
to be known in the country. Previ ously the resource and reserves were 
calculated based on 55% Fe as cut - off to produce mineable ore. After 
lowering of threshold value of iron ore by Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), in 
lease free, non forest areas assessment of low grade iron ore (+45%Fe) is 
being undertaken by GSI to augment the iron ore resources. Evaluation of 
future exploration programmes on low grade iron ore in free hold areas 
for both fresh as well as reassessment has been initiated after assessing 
the data from the available mineral i nvestigation reports and other 
relevant documents. 
In the leasehold area, the job must rest with the lessee. IBM has to 
monitor and take active role in the leasehold area for proper inventory of 
iron ore. The areas where exploration was carried out earlier  and the 
deposits are kept for stand alone or captive mining, exploration data have 
to be examined by the State Government. Once the leases are granted for 
those areas the lessee must do total assessment of the property 
considering Fe cut off both at 45% a nd 55%. If there is future plan of 

 
 
auctioning those deposits, the state Governments may consider for 
carrying out exploration in totality for proper valuation of the property. 
Status of exploration within identified potential domains 
The assessment of pote ntial area for iron ore exploration indicates 
that the total potential area for iron ore in different geological domains so 
far evaluated in the country is around 7000 sq km. Out of the potential 
areas of 7000sq km, the area explored is around 5900 sq. km.  As per the 
available information so far received the lease hold areas within the 
explored area is around 890 sq km. Therefore the explored free hold areas 
is around 5000 sq km and the total unexplored areas is around 1100 sq 
km. Therefore the potential ex plored area warranting reassessment is 
around 4000 sq km. 
New prospective areas for iron ore exploration 
Although economically viable deposits exist in different geological 
setups, bulk of the country‟s ore supplies are from deposits of BIF 
derivation (BHQ/BHJ/BMQ). GSI has initiated a new look in the green field 
areas to identify new potential areas for iron ore occurrence both in BIF 
derived ores and also in other non BIF hosted setup. An area of around 
5000 sq km has been tentatively identified for recon naissance stage 
investigation (G -4 stage) to narrow down the target areas for future 
intensified mineral search through progressive higher stages of 
investigation.  
Strategy for iron ore exploration 
Iron ore exploration in Greenfield area within already id entified 
potential domain. 
On the basis of evaluation of time schedule vis -à-vis field 
components in mineral investigations carried out by GSI under different 
stages of investigation, a tentative time frame can be outlined for future 
exploration in the une xplored area within the already identified potential 
areas. The evaluation of exploration data indicates that roughly 2 -3% of 
the potential area comes out to be the actual mineralized zone.  
Iron ore exploration in new identified Greenfield areas 
Reconnaissance stage investigation (G-4 stage investigation) for an 
area of 5000 sq km is being planned in newly identified Greenfield areas 
in designated belts. The aim of this reconnaissance investigation is to 
identify and narrow down the target areas f or future intensified mineral 
search through delineating favourable segments of areas for iron ore 
mineralization within the Greenfield areas. 

 
 
The fixation of quantum of work will be guided by geological set up 
of the particular areas and exposure conditio ns.  A rough estimate of the 
Greenfield areas identified for reconnaissance investigation indicates that 
nearly 4000 sq km lies in peninsular portion and roughly 1000 sq km is 
within extra peninsular region. With the available resources this identified 
area covering around 5000 Sq. K.M would be covered through Central 
Government level investigation within the span of the 13th Plan. 
Re-assessment in the Explored areas in peninsular India 
GSI is formulating scheme of reassessment of iron ore, due to the 
lowering of threshold values to 45% Fe, in the explored areas through 
fresh resource estimation of the entire spectrum of mineralized zones 
including low grade portions at lower cut off which normally occurs within 
the profile of the mineralized zone in the following modes: 
(v) Low grade partings within the high grade ore (Shaly Ore). 
(vi) In hanging wall and footwall side of the ore zone or as separate 
bands. 
(vii) On top of lateritic profile( Lateritic and limonitic ore) 
(viii) As bottom of established ore within zone of enrichment above proto 
ore. 
GSI has tentatively identified the group of hematite deposits in 
different iron ore belts of the country where reassessment of resource 
potential at lower cut off is required.  
Tentative time frame for accomplishment of work  
A preliminary assessment of the requirement of drilling in explored 
areas indicates that it will tentatively involve a drilling of 65,000 meters 
with average of 120 meters per borehole. Therefore, 540 nos. of 
boreholes are tentatively to be drilled in the explored are as. It is 
estimated that with the available resources the reconnaissance survey for 
iron ore may be completed by the 13th Plan. 
 
The Working Group on Steel Industry for the 12 th Five Year Plan, in 
addition to the on going R&D Scheme 'Promotion of Research & 
Development in Iron & Steel Sector', had recommended the interest 
subsidy scheme 'Promotion of Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low grade 
iron ore & ore fines' with an estimated budget of Rs. 2417 crore for the 
12th Five Year Plan period. However, Planning Commission allocated 
only Rs. 200 crore to Ministry of Steel for the 12th Five Year Plan. Due 
to the insufficient allocation, the aforesaid interest subsidy scheme 
could not be taken up. It is also pertinent to sta te that the interest 
subsidy scheme was not on R&D but for promoting capacity building 
for Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines.  

 
 
However, the recommendation/ observation of the Committee have 
been taken up with the planning Comm ission with a request to allocate 
sufficient funds to run the aforesaid interest subsidy scheme.  
It is however, informed that Government has been pursuing R&D on 
Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines under the 
on-going scheme of 'Promotion of Research & Development in Iron & Steel 
Sector'.  In fact, the main emphasis on R&D under the aforesaid scheme 
in the 11 th Five Year plan was Beneficiation & Agglomeration & lnd the 
Scheme has been continued in the 12th Five Year Plan Period. 
The following R&D projects are being pursued under the aforesaid 
scheme:- 
 Improvement in sinter productivity through deep beneficiation 
and agglomeration technologies for rational utilization of low 
grade iron ores and fines by National Metallurgical Labor atory 
(CSIR-NML) Jamshedpur. 
 
 Alternate complementary Route of Iron/Steel making with 
reference to Indian raw material viz. low grade iron ore and non 
coking coal (adopting beneficiation of low grade ore) by National 
Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIRNML) Jamshedpur. 
 
 Beneficiation of Iron Ore slimes from Barsua and other mines in 
India by Research & Development Centre for Iron & Steel 
(RDCIS), SAIL, Ranchi.  
 
 Development of pilot scale pelletization technology for Indian 
Goethitic/ hematite ore with varying degree of fineness by 
Research & Development Centre for Iron & Steel (RDCIS), SAIL, 
Ranchi.  
 
In addition to the above one more R&D project viz. 'Quality 
Improvement of Low Grade Iron Ore' is being pursued by RDCIS, SAIL, 
Ranchi, with financial assistance from Steel Development Fund. 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
About 97% magnetite resources are located in four states of Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan,  Karnataka and Tamilnadu. Out of which, major 
magnetite resources are in the Western Ghat area that could not be 
exploited due to environmental concern. Considering the importance of 
natural resources as well as of environment preservation together, 
feasibility of underground mining may be explored at Western Ghat area. 
However processing of mined out iron ore from Western Ghat may be 
carried out outside the forest area. 

 
 
In the year 2012 -13, SAIL mines have produced about 21.48 
million tonnes of iron ore fo r its steel plants. To meet the enhanced 
requirement of iron ore for ongoing capacity expansion, the production 
capacity of existing mines at Gua, Bolani, Kiriburu, Meghahatuburu are 
being expanded to their maximum potential. As a result, iron ore 
production capacity of SAIL mines will be enhanced to about 40 Mtpa in 
the next 2 years time which will take care of the iron ore requirement for 
ongoing hot metal capacity expansion to 23.46 Mtpa. Further new mines 
are planned to be developed at Rowghat, Chiria and Taldih.  
SAIL is now ramping up hot metal capacity to approx 24 million 
tonnes per annum (Mtpa), & plans to embark on the next phase of 
expansion to raise it further to about 50 Mtpa by 2025. In order to meet 
enhanced requirement of iron ore of about 83  Mtpa by 2025 and beyond, 
new iron ore mines have to be developed as the reserve in  existing 
operating iron ore mines may get depleted in due course of time. For this, 
SAIL has submitted PL/ML applications to the State Govt. of Jharkhand, 
Odisha, Chhattis garh, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Tamilnadu, Uttar Pradesh 
and Maharashtra. The matter is being constantly pursued with the 
respective State Governments.  
In order to further enhance resources of iron ore in the area where 
forest clearances were available, the d rilling of about 30,000 meters in 
last 5 years has been carried out in SAIL mines. During 2013 -14, there is 
further plan of exploratory drilling of about 12,000 meters by Mineral 
Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) in SAIL iron ore mines.  
Most of SAIL iron mines are in the area of reserves forest where 
presently forest clearances are not available and exploratory drilling for 
resource enhancement could not be taken up. Therefore attempt is being 
taken up to explore these areas through Geomagnetic/Geophy sical 
surveys.       
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
With respect to NMDC, the Company has already planned expansion 
of its iron ore mining capacity from the existing 32 million Tonne per year 
to 46.5 MT per year by end of twelfth five year plan (2016 -17) and 52.5. 
MT by the year 2010-21. 
 
Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited 
  
Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd is a public sector undertaking 
functioning under Ministry of Mines. MECL, with its well developed 
infrastructure and expertise, is committed to execute cost and time 
effective comprehensive programme(s) from reconnaissan ce survey to 

 
 
detailed exploration of minerals and developmental mining projects on a 
turn key basis. 
 
At present, Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited is carrying out 
detailed exploration work for iron ore as per the details given below:  
    
(i)  MECL has entered into MoU with M/s. Steel Authority of India Ltd 
(SAIL), to carry out detailed exploration of new iron ore deposits as 
well as in existing mines including geological services and 
preparation of geological report.  The exploratory drilling activities 
includes core drilling and RC drilling in different mine areas of SAIL 
(Bhilai Steel Plant & Raw Material Division).  The period of MoU is 
upto February 2015.  
 
(ii) MECL has also entered into MoU recently with Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Ltd (RINL) f or a period of 5 years, to carry out detailed 
exploration for iron ore, limestone and other minerals.  Under this 
MoU, MECL proposes to take up exploration work for various iron 
ore prospects allocated to RINL in different parts of the country.  
 
MECL is f urther enhancing its capacity in iron ore exploration by 
procuring one RC drilling rig and accordingly MECL fully equipped to take 
up detailed exploration for new iron ore prospects in the country in 
addition to above, depending on the availability of work. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 and 8  
Recommendation  Serial No. 7    
18. The Committee note that a large quantity of iron ore, mainly fines, 
are being exported from the country on the plea that the country does not 
have adequate facilities for use of fines and therefore, these fines have to 
be exported for economic and environmental reasons. The Committee find 
that to encourage optimum utilization of iron ore resources of the country 
and to improve domestic utilization of low grade iron ore and fines 
through beneficiation and pelletization, import duty on plants and 
equipments u sed for initial setting up and substantial expansion of 
beneficiation and pelletization plants has been reduced from 7.5% to 
2.5% in the General Budget for year 2012 -13. Besides, export duty on 

 
 
pellets has been reduced to zero. Though, appreciating the Min istry of 
Steel for this prudent measure of reducing import duty on plants and 
equipments used for initial setting up and substantial expansion of 
beneficiation and pelletization plants, the committee do not concur with 
the decision of the Government to red uce export duty on pellets to zero. 
The Committee are of the opinion that imposition of higher export duty on 
iron ore fines and non -exemption from export duty to pellets will give an 
impetus to setting up of pelletization plants in the country by the stan d 
alone miners. Setting up of more pelletization plants will also generate 
employment opportunities and will also generate more revenue in terms 
of value added products. The Committee have been informed that 
Pelletization capacity increased from about 18 M T in 2006 to about 48 MT 
in 2012 and Sintering Capacity increased from about 30 MT in 2006 to 
about 57 MT in 2012. Also, Pelletization and Sintering capacities are 
expected to go up to 84 Mt and 86 MT respectively by 2015. In the 
context of pelletisation c apacity, the Committee desire that a 
comprehensive study on the impact of the free export of pellets should be 
carried out by the Ministry of Steel, and the Committee would also like to 
be apprised of the facts and progress in this regard. At the same time , 
taking note of the present pelletisation capacity in the country which is 
highly inadequate, the Committee would like the Ministry to take 
immediate steps to create sophisticated iron ore beneficiation facility 
followed by pelletisation so that lower qua lity of iron ore produced in the 
country is fully utilized by domestic steel plants.  
 
 
 Recommendation Serial No.  8  
      
19. Till recent past, the domestic steel industry was mainly using higher 
grades of iron ore due to their easy availability. As per a study done by 
Economic Research Unit under Ministry of Steel during 2007 on 'Iron ore 
fines utilization in India', there will be rapid demand of iron ore fines by 
domestic steel industry as the technology matrix of the various capacity 
expansion plans and new steel plants is heavily biased towards 
technologies using agglomerated fines. The Committee has taken note 
that as per thi s study, the share of fines in steel making in country is 

 
 
further likely to increase from 52.2% during 2005 -06 to an estimated 
about 72% by 2019 -20. Taking note of the rapid depletion of high grade 
iron ore reserves in the country, the Committee feel that steel industry 
should come up with an investment plan in beneficiation and 
agglomeration (sintering and pelletization) facilities for utilizing low grade 
iron ore fines also. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Government should come with a policy measure to ensure that all the 
upcoming new steel plants and expansion of existing steel plants should 
be based on technologies, which can utilize iron ore fines and desire that 
100% utilization of iron ore fines be achieved by the end of 12th plan 
period.  
 
20. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply  to the above two 
recommendations  have informed the Committee as follows:- 
The iron ore beneficiation / pelletisation capacity is increasing as 
per the demand of the steel sector and cost competitive ness associated 
with it.  Steel is a deregulated sector and decisions regarding setting up 
new facilities for pelletisation / ore beneficiation are taken by the project 
proponents.  Government has already incentivized these activities by 
taking appropriate fiscal measures like rebate in import duty on plant / 
machinery.  
In the case of a deregulated sector like steel, the Government plays 
the role of a facilitator and commercial decisions regarding use of a 
particular technology etc. are taken by the industry and the entrepreneurs 
concerned.  However, to facilitate setting up of pellitisation plants in the 
country, the Government has reduced the Basic Custom Duty on capital 
goods equipment required for initially setting up or substantial expansion 
of iron or e pellet plants and iron ore beneficiation plants, from 7.5% to 
2.5% since 2012 -13.  There are technological limitations also and 
development of suitable technology may not be given a time limit.  
However, Government, recognizing the importance of the issu e, would 
facilitate development of such technologies as a matter of policy. 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
From mineral conservation point of view it is essential to plan for 
utilization of total resource including the low grade ore by blending, 
beneficiation and agglomeration techniques.  While SAIL has extensive 
facilities for blending and agglomerations (sin tering) at its plants, efforts 
are being made for mineral conservation by utilizing iron ore slimes 
(generated after washing/processing and lying in tailing ponds) and low 
grade fines through large scale beneficiation and pelletisation at various 

 
 
locations. Process has already been initiated for installation of 4 MTPA 
capacity pellet plant at Gua, 2 MTPA at Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) and 1 
MTPA at Dalli mine. This would also improve the quality of burden to blast 
furnaces.   
After ongoing capacity expansion programme, the sinter capacity in 
the SAIL Steel plants would increase from present level of about 17 Mtpa 
to 30 Mtpa by 2015 -16. Under this expansion, new sinter plants of 3.80 
Mtpa capacity each at RSP and ISP are already commissioned. 
  In SAIL for steel making, BF/BOF route is in place which utilizes iron 
ore in form of lump and agglomerated fines in form of sinter which 
constitutes 70 % of BF burden. With installation of large size Blast 
Furnaces (4060m3 commissioned at RSP & another coming soon at IS P) 
with the state of the facilities in future the need for agglomerated burden 
(sinter + pellet) will further increase up to the level of 80%. With these 
SAIL is aiming for utilization of 100 % fines. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
RINL has been using Sintering Technology which can utilize iron ore 
fines, since inception. RINL - had installed two Sinter Machines under 
3Mtpa Plant to produce about 5.3 Mt of sinter using iron ore fines.  RINL -
VSP has been utilizing nearly 70% of iron ore fines in its ch arge sinter 
since inception.  
New Sinter Plant (SP#3) with capacity of 3.61Mt has been 
commissioned under 6.3 Mtpa expansion programme. This will further 
enhance the usage of iron ore fines. 
As a further step in this direction, RINL along with NMDC has 
undertaken to set up a Pelletisation plant of capacity of around 6 Mtpa in 
Visakhapatnam.  The input material would be iron ore concentrate 
prepared by NMDC using iron ore fines at their mine -head in Bailadilla. It 
is also planned, as part of JV, to lay a pipe line of capacity 13 Mtpa to 
carry iron ore slurry from Nagarnar to Visakhapatnam.  
 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
With respect to NMDC, the Company is setting up  two pellet plants 
and  both  are  b eing set up by using  Pellet Plant Feed (PPF) produced 
from low grade iron ore by beneficiating them at respective beneficiation 
plants also being set-up by NMDC. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 15 and 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.9.  
     
The Committee have been informed that iron ore export of NMDC‟s 
is being done through MMTC as per decision taken by the Union Cabinet 
from time to time and last such long term contract was signed in 2012-13 
for a period of 3 years i.e. till 2014 -15. Though Ministry of Steel have 
apprised the Committee that NMDC exports a very small percentage of the 
total exports of the country and the quantum of export has decreased 
from 3.78 MT in 2007 -08 to 0.39 MT during 2011 -12, the Committee are 
not in agreement with the views of the Ministry and desire that NMDC's 
iron export contract be reviewed immediately so as to make the 
availability of iron ore for the domestic industry in required quantity.  
 
Action Taken  
 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
With respect to NMDC, the Company has entered into long -term 
agreement with Japanese Steel Mills (JSMs) & POSCO, South Korea during 
2012-13 for a validity period of 3 years (i.e. upto 2014 -15) in accordance 
with the decision of Union Cabinet. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10.   
            
The Committee note that iron ore, a non-renewable and critical raw 
material for steel industry is poised for huge capacity expansion and 
according to the Ministry of Steel, policy measures are needed to conserve 
this resource for long term requirement of domestic steel industry. The 
Committee are however, concerned to note that as per the present foreign 
trade policy regarding export of iron ore, iron ore upto 64% Fe content is 
freely allowed. Further, export of iron ore of Goa origin is freely allowed to 
China, Europe, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan (irrespective of Fe 
content) and export of iron ore from Redi region to all markets 
(irrespective of Fe content) is also freely allowed. As regards export of 
iron ore with Fe content above 64%, the Committee find that these 
exports were canalized through MMTC and high grade iron ore not 
exceeding 1.8 million tonnes(lumps) and 2.7 million tonnes (fines) from 
Bailadila, Chhattisgarh is allowed to be exported. In view of the free trade 
of iron ore upto 64% Fe content and even export of higher grade of iron 
ore, the Committee recommend that the Government should take 
immediate necessary policy measures not only to ban the export of iron 
ore reserves of higher grade but also those upto 64% Fe content which 
are presently freely allowed. In view of the limited beneficiation 

 
 
agglomeration facilities in the country, the Committee feel that the high 
grade iron ore with Fe content more t han 64% from Bailadila, 
Chhattisgarh which can be used by the existing steel plants should not be 
permitted for export and be made available to meet the requirement of 
domestic steel industry.  
Action Taken 
 
Export of high grade ore is permitted only for e xport by MMTC / 
NMDC to Japan and South Korea under Long Term Agreements (LTAs) 
which have been in existence since 1970.  Presently, the LTAs have been 
renewed for the period from 01-04-2012 to 31-03-2015 with the approval 
of the Cabinet in view of our lon g-term strategic relationship with these 
countries. 
Total ban over export of iron ore is not considered to be the only 
way to discourage export of iron ore and to improve availability of iron ore 
for domestic consumers.  Government has been, on the recommendations 
of Ministry of Steel, increasing export duty on iron ore and at present it is 
at 30%. 
NMDC Limited (NMDC) 
 
As informed by Department of Commerce Export of high grade ore 
is permitted only for export by MMTC/NMDC to Japan and South Korea 
under Long Term Agreements (LTAs) which have been in existence since 
1970.  Presently, the LTAs have been renewed for the period from 
1.4.2012 to 31.3.2015 with the approval of the Cabinet in view of our 
long-term strategic relationship with these countries. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 21 and 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation Serial No.6. 
               
The Committee note that as per the estimates of Ministry of Steel, 
the present reserves of iron ore in the country may not be sufficient to 
meet the requirement of domestic iron and steel industry beyond next 20 
to 25 years. The Committee feel that the policy regarding exploitation of 
iron ore reserves should aim at attracting investment in steel making 
capacity in the country so that the value additions and export of finished 
products are promoted instead of exporting raw materials. Conservation of 
iron ore, particularly of higher quality should be the most critical 
component of this policy. Though the Government have contended that 
there is no shortage of iron ore at present for domestic iron and steel 
industry, the recent developments in India's mining sector have given rise 
to uncertainties in regard to adequate supply of raw material potential, 
especially of iron ore and have brought the issue of long term raw 
material security for India's burgeoning steel indus try to the centrestage. 
The currently assessed reserves for iron ore seems inadequate if the steel 
industry capacity expansion and production potential are to be fully 
utilized. The committee expresses concern over uncertain situation 
regarding availability of raw materials and their imprudent utilization for 
domestic iron and steel industries. Therefore, taking into account the iron 
ore requirement for the domestic iron and steel industry which from the 
present level of 135.7 MT in 2012-13 is likely to be 206.2 MT by 2016-17, 
the Committee recommend that iron ore resources need to be preserved 
for domestic utilization as a long term measure. The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Ministry of Steel to draft a new Steel Policy 
keeping in view the long term goals of future sustainability of iron ores in 
the country.  
Action Taken  
 
New National Steel Policy is in draft stage and the recommendation 
regarding long term goals of future sustainability of iron ore in the country 
would be duly taken care of, in consultation with the Ministry of Mines. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(14)/2012 dated 27.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 KALYAN BANERJEE 
17  February, 2014                                                           Chairman           
28 Magha, 1935 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

 
 
Annexure-II 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 17 FEBRUAY, 2014 IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM 'E’,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
PRESENT 
             Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
    LOK SABHA  
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Sanjay Bhoi  
4.    Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
5.    Shri  Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
6.    Shri  Govind Prasad Mishra 
7.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
8.    Shri Om Prakash yadav 
       RAJYA  SABHA  
9.    Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
10. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Abhijit Kumar   -   Joint Secretary   
2.  Shri Shiv Singh   -  Director 
3.  Shri Arvind Sharma   -  Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
1. Shri  G. Mohan Kumar, Secretary(Steel) 
2. Shri Lokesh Chandra, Joint Secretary(Steel) 

 
 
3. Shri Syedain Abbasi, Joint Secretary(Steel) 
4. Shri Malay Chhatterjee, CMD, KIOCL Ltd.  
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members and 
representatives of the Ministry of Steel and KIOCL Ltd. to the sitting 
of the Committee.  The Committee, then s ought clarification of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Steel and KIOCL Ltd. on the issues 
of imposition of export duty on pellets.   
                     The witness then withdrew.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the 
following Draft Reports:- 
(i)  Draft Report on the subject  „Marketing and Transportation 
of Steel by Public Sector Steel Companies‟ relating to the 
Ministry of Steel; 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
observations / recommendations contained in the Thirty -
Eighth Report of the Committee on  “Review of Export of 
Iron Ore Policy”  pertaining to the Ministry of Steel. 
4. The Com mittee adopted the Reports without any  
changes/modifications. The Committee then authorized the 
Chairman to finalise the Reports on the basis of factual verification 
from the concerned Ministry and present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
  

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-III  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made       10  
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government  (vide 
recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1 and  5)                                               02 
Percentage of total                       20%  
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. Nil) 00 
Percentage of total                             0% 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2,3,4,7,8, 9 and 10)        07 
Percentage of total                     70% 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. No. 6)                          01 
Percentage of total                      10% 