STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STEEL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands For Grants (2009-2010)
of the Ministry of Steel]
10
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands For Grants (2009-2010)
of the Ministry of Steel]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 December, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 December, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


CC&S. No. 49
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2010 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
16
44
45
48
50
52
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ...................................................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
CHAPTER I Report......................................................................
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government......................................
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies.......................................................................
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee......................................................
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government is still awaited....................
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2010-11) held on 29th October, 2010.........
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Third Report of
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)............................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2010-11)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G . Ahir
3. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury
6. Shri Ismail Hussain
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire*
8. Shri Yashbant Laguri
9. Shri Narahari Mahato
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
12. Kumari Saroj Pandey
13. Shri Ramesh Rathod
14. Shri Rakesh Sachan
 15. Shri Adhi Sankar
16. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
17. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
18. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  (Lalan)
19. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
20. Shri Shibu Soren
21. Dr. G. Vivekanand
(iii)
*Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27.09.2010

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mohd. Amin
23. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
24. Shri Jugul Kishore
25. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty
26. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao
27. Ms. Mabel Rebello
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
31. Shri R.C. Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Md. Aftab Alam — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in
the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2009-2010)” of the Ministry
of Steel.
2. The Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 18th October, 2009. Replies
of the Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the
Report were received on 18th May, 2010.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 20th September, 2010.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on
the observations/recommendations contained in the Third Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.
  N EW DELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
23 November , 2010 Chairman,
2 Agrahayana , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel (2009-10) “Demands for Grants (2009-10)”
of the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 18.12.2009.
1.2 The Report contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of all
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been
categorised as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Serial Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19
and 20.
Total – 17
(Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Serial No.16.
Total – 01
(Chapter III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Serial No. 14.
Total – 01
(Chapter IV)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Serial No. 17.
Total – 01
(Chapter V)
1.3 The Committee desire that replies to Observations/
Recommendations contained in Chapter – I and final reply in respect
of Observation/Recommendation given in Chapter – V should be
furnished to them expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Ministry
on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the Third Report.
Annual Plan outlay for 2009-10
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
1.5 The Committee had noted that as against the total plan outlay of
Rs. 13,755.66 crore including budgetary support of Rs. 33 crore, the
Planning Commission approved an outlay of Rs. 13756.66 crore with
budgetary support of Rs. 34 crore for the year 2009-10. The Committee had
further noted that Budgetary Support (BS) was being provided to some
of the financially week and loss making PSUs and Internal and Extra
Budgetary Resource (I&EBR) were being raised by profit making PSUs
for implementing their schemes. They had also noted that in case of
Hindustan Steel Construction Ltd. (HSCL) an amount of Rs. 7 crore had been
sought as Plan Budgetary Support for Capital Repair and procurement of new
construction equipment and machinery. The Committee, however, were
constrained to point out that no amount had been released as comprehensive
Business Organisation and Financial Restructuring proposal of the Company
was still under consideration of the Government. Besides, the Committee
were also given to understand that HSCL was not getting adequate support
from SAIL in terms of approval of their plans because of which their plans
got delayed. Similarly, the Budgetary Support of 1 crore during 2008-09 for
AMR schemes of BSLC, a company under the Bird Group of Companies
which could not be utilized due to default by the company on past repayment
of Government Loan was linked to restructuring/revival plans and was carried
forward to 2009-10.

3
1.6 The Ministry of Steel in its Action Taken Reply have stated the
following:—
“The 2009-10 BE provision of Rs. 7.00 crore for HSCL was reduced
to Rs. 3.00 crore in RE. The RE provision of Rs. 3.00 crore has been
released to HSCL in March, 2010 after obtaining special dispensation
from Ministry of Finance as HSCL has defaulted in repayment of
Government loans and interest. The restructuring proposal of the
company is under active consideration of the Government.
As regards utilization of budget provision of Rs. 1.00 crore by Bird
Group of Companies during 2009-10, it is stated that the company did
not require the fund consequent to approval of its restructuring proposal
by the Government. The restructuring of M/s Bird Group of Companies
has been approved by the Government on 10.9.2009.
A proposal for restructuring of HSCL was approved by the Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) on 13.5.2008.
Based on the recommendations of BRPSE, this Ministry circulated a
note for consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.
However, there are some financial issues that have to be finally resolved
with the Ministry of Finance, particularly regarding the waiver of
outstanding loans and interest thereon. The proposal will be referred
to CCEA shortly thereafter. Pending the approval of restructuring Plan
loan of Rs.3.00 crores has been released to HSCL under AMR Scheme
during the year 2009-10.
HSCL is being associated with some of the repair and maintenance
works in SAIL Plants/Units on nomination basis. However for capital
projects, award of work is being done on the basis of competitive
bidding and work is being awarded on the lowest price offer basis.”
1.7 The Committee note that although the proposal for
restructuring of Hindustan Steel Construction Ltd. (HSCL) was
approved by the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
(BRPSE) in May, 2008, final approval of the Government of India in
the matter is still awaited. The Committee deprecate the inordinate

4
delay in granting approval for restructuring of HSCL. The reasons
advanced by the Ministry are not convincing enough. As the financial
health of HSCL is in a very poor state, the Committee desire that the
Government should give topmost priority in according approval to the
restructuring proposal of HSCL by taking immediate necessary
measures so that it can be brought back in to a sound financial health
at the earliest.
Projection and Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
1.8 The Committee had noted that in case of the National Mineral
Development Corporation (NMDC) Ltd., out of Rs. 700 crore allotted to
them for the year 2009-10, the actual expenditure upto July 2009 was only
85.59 crore. The Committee were unable to understand as to how NMDC
would utilize their earmarked funds in the remaining period of the year. The
statutory/non-statutory clearances if any for NMDC projects should have
been obtained expeditiously from concerned Ministries so that they were able
to utilize their allotted funds.
1.9 Similarly, in case of Bird Group of Companies, the Committee had
desired that the matter regarding getting requisite approval for mining
operations over the total leasehold areas be taken up with the State
Government vigorously. They had also urged the Ministry to periodically
review the progress of fund utilization made by PSUs in this regard and kept
them apprised about the status of fund utilisation.
1.10 Since the Plan outlay proposed by most of the PSUs for the year
2009-10 had been approved by the Planning Commission without any
cut and the plan outlay for the promotion of R&D on Iron and Steel
sector has been given due weightage with an increase of Rs. 1 crore, the
Committee had expressed hope that the funds allotted to PSUs would be fully
and prudently utilized by them without surrendering or asking for additional
funds.
1.11 In Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Steel have stated that
estimates for BE 2009-10 at Rs.700 crore were prepared anticipating

5
completion of various expansion schemes and receipt of equipment
ordered under Addition Modification and Replacement (AMR) schemes.
However, during review, certain delays were anticipated in completion of
the new schemes/receipt of equipment. Hence, suitable revision was made
and the Budget Provision for 2009-10 of Rs. 700 crore was revised to
Rs. 543 crore. Out of the revised estimate of Rs. 543 crore, an expenditure
of Rs. 378.88 crore was made up to 31.3.10.
“The main reasons for shortfall were:—
• An amount of Rs. 200 crore was provided in BE 2009-10 towards
Deposit 11B Project, since the process of procurement of Heavy
Earth Moving (HEM) equipment was in progress. But as
procurement of equipment was postponed to 2010-11, BE amount
was scaled down from Rs.200 crore to Rs.90 crore in the RE
of 2009-10.
• Due to frequent Naxalite activities, contractors of Deposit 11B
project were forced to de-mobilize and mobilize equipments
repeatedly. Due to this, many working days were lost. Night
working could not be effectively implemented. Contractor’s
construction equipment was also burnt by the Naxalites. This
affected the construction progress and the planned targets could
not be met. The actual expenditure on 11B project during
2009-10 was Rs. 56.27 crore as against RE of Rs.90 crore.
Balance expenditure is likely to materialise in 2010-11 and will be
considered in RE 2010-11.
• An amount of Rs.100 crore was provided in BE 2009-10 towards
3 million tonne per annum capacity (MTPA) Steel Plant at
Nagarnar. Expression of Interest (EOI) for nine packages had
been released and the consultants were in the process of short
listing the prospective bidders which took more time than
anticipated. Further, acquisition of about 380 hectares of
additional land and statutory clearance for 25.72 hectares of forest
land out of the above is in process. Considering this, the plan
outlay was revised from Rs.100 crore to Rs.50 crore. Actual
expenditure on the project during 2009-10 was Rs. 42.26 crore.

6
• Rs. 80 crore was considered in the RE of 2009-10 for the
acquisition of SIIL. The Company received an order dated
18th January 2010 from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
(MoCA), Government of India, sanctioning the scheme of merger
of SIIL with the Company. The scheme would become effective
from the date on which the certified copy of the order of MoCA
is filed with the Registrar of Companies (ROC), Andhra Pradesh,
India. Under the MoCA order, the order is required to be filed
with the ROC within 30 days of its receipt. However, as the
disinvestment process of NMDC was going on, to smoothen the
process of disinvestment, NMDC through its legal counsel for the
merger process, filed an application on 9th February, 2010 with
the MoCA seeking grant of extension of time for filing of the order
of merger with the ROC within 30 days of the completion of the
allotment of the offer shares under the disinvestment process.
Hence the amount of Rs. 80 crore could not be spent in
2009-10 and is likely to be spent in 2010-11 and will be considered
in RE 2010-11.
• The tender enquiry issued for Crushing Plant of Kumaraswamy
has been retendered due to poor response; hence the construction
activities at site could not be started as planned. Actual expenditure
on the project during 2009-10 was Rs.0.53 crore against the RE
of Rs. 10 crore. This shall now be considered for 2010-11.
Bird Group of Companies—The Orissa Mineral Development
Company Ltd. (OMDC)
The Orissa Mineral Development Company (OMDC), a Company
under the Bird Group of Companies is having six mining leases
in the State of Orissa. The renewal of these mining leases are at
various stages of processing. The company is vigorously taking
up the matter with the State Govt. to complete the formalities of
Forest & Environmental clearance, which are pre-condition for
renewal of mining lease, for getting the mining leases renewed
at the earliest.”
1.12 The Ministry of Steel have admitted that due to the delay
in completion of new schemes/receipt of equipment, NMDC had to
resort to downward revision of the Budget Provision of 2009-10 of

7
Rs. 700 crore to Rs. 543 crore. The Committee regret to observe that
NMDC has failed to fully utilise even the revised amount of Rs. 543
crore during 2009-10. The Ministry have been repeatedly impressed
upon to facilitate its PSUs overcome the constraints faced by them in
implementation of the schemes/projects but no visible improvement is
discernible. A case in point in this regard is the gross underutilization
of fund by NMDC during 2009-10. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Ministry to undertake an exercise to identify major constraints
faced by NMDC in implementation of its schemes/projects and
utilisation of funds to ensure timely completion of ongoing projects and
fullest utilisation of allocated funds. The Committee are distressed to
note that despite formalities being completed by NMDC and other Steel
PSUs to get forest and environmental clearances, such clearances are
not being given within reasonable time by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests causing undue delay. The Committee do not appreciate
such a lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should render
all the necessary assistance to NMDC in getting the requisite Forest
and Environmental clearance from the Government of Orissa.
Achievement of global benchmarks by SAIL
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
1.13 The Committee were given to understand that in attaining the
global benchmark, the thrust of modernization and expansion plan of SAIL
was to adopt technology which was in addition to cost effective as also
energy efficient and environmental friendly. However, still many constraints
were being faced by the company such as dependence of purchased coal
from domestic and overseas suppliers, higher manpower cost and adherence
to a number of rules and procedures depriving SAIL to become a global leader
in Steel. The Committee desired the Ministry to address these issues seriously.
1.14 The Committee were informed that SAIL had taken certain
measures to reduce dependence on imported coking coal and was in the
process of acquiring and developing new coal blocks and entering into
strategic partnership with Coal India Ltd. and with some other companies,
besides formation of an SPV for acquisition of coal assets overseas. In
addition to these initiatives, the Ministry should also look for technologies

8
that would reduce the use of coking coal in blast furnaces and also develop
their R&D. In this connection, the Ministry might explore the possibility of
cutting ash content in coking coal and increasing production, which would
meet most of the coking coal requirement through indigenous mines, thereby
cut imports and being a cheaper proposition.
1.15 The Committee had desired the Ministry to pursue their case
vigorously with the Ministry of Coal to get more coal mines accordingly urge
upon the government to give priority to the requirements of SAIL and
consider allotting coal mines particularly in Jharkhand and West Bengal.
1.16 The Ministry of Steel in its Action Taken Reply have stated that
in order to reduce dependence on purchased coking coal, both domestic as
well as imported, SAIL is taking following actions:
(1) (a) “Developing captive coking coal mines at Tasra &
Sitanala
(i) Tasra Coking Coal Block:
All statutory clearances have been obtained. Planned
mine capacity is 4 Million Tonne Per Annum (MTPA)
[Run of Mine (ROM)] to produce about 2 MTPA of
clean coal. Selection of Mine Developer cum Operator
(MDO) is in progress. Through tendering process,
L-1 bidder has been identified and work order is to
be issued shortly. In the meantime, small scale
production has been started from November, 2009.
(ii) Sitanala Coking Coal Block:
Mine planned for production of 0.3 Million Tonne
Per Annum (MTPA) [Run of Mine (ROM)] to produce
about 0.2 Million Tonne Per Annum (MTPA) clean
coal. Project report has been prepared, mine plan
approved and grant of environment clearance is in
advance stage.
(b) Allocation of new coking coal blocks for captive mining
In order to further augment captive coking coal production,
SAIL has identified two potential coking coal blocks namely,
Jhirki/Jhirki West OC & Rhone-Routpara West in Jharkhand

9
and requested Ministry of Steel and the Ministry of Coal for
allocation of the blocks. Coal blocks are yet to be allocated to
SAIL. Hon’ble Minister of Steel has requested Hon’ble Minister
of State for Coal in February. 2010 to allocate these coking coal
blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation route.
(c) Joint Venture with Tata Steel
SAIL and Tata Steel Ltd. have formed “S&T Mining Company
Private Limited”, a Joint Venture Company (JVC) with 50:50
equity. As a first step company has initiated the process for
acquisition and development of coal assets in India. JVC has been
short listed for submission of bid for revival of old/ abandoned
mines of CIL. JVC is also attempting to develop Bhutgoria mine
of BCCL. The company has submitted tender to Bharat Coking
Coal Limited (BCCL) for construction of washery at Dugda for
Non Linked Washery (NLW) coal. The company is also exploring
possibility to install a standalone NLW coal washery at Malkera.
(d) SPV for acquisition of coal assets overseas
SAIL along with CIL, NTPC, RINL & NMDC has also formed
International Coal Ventures Limited (ICVL), a joint venture
company for acquisition of coal assets abroad. Attempts are being
made by ICVL for acquisition of coal assets.
Allocation of thermal coal blocks for captive use
Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is being met by
supplies from Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of
thermal coal availability, SAIL has identified six thermal coal
blocks namely Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & Extension, Bankhui
(Orissa), Gand Bahera Ujheni (Uttar Pradesh), Puta Parogia and
Pindrakhi (Chhattisgarh) and requested Ministry of Steel &
Ministry of Coal for allocation of at least 2-3 blocks. Hon’ble
Minister of Steel has requested Hon.ble Minister of State for Coal
in February, 2010 to allocate these thermal coal blocks to SAIL
through Govt. dispensation route.
(2) Besides taking action to acquire captive coal mines, SAIL has been
pursuing with Coal India Limited (CIL) to supply higher quantities

10
of Indigenous Coking Coal and improve its quality. The ash
content in coking coal can be reduced by CIL by improving the
health of their washeries.
In addition, actions have been taken by SAIL to adopt technologies
which will reduce consumption of coking coal. All Blast Furnaces
of SAIL (except those planned to be phased out) are being
equipped with auxiliary fuel injection system. So far, 8 Blast
Furnaces are equipped with Coal Dust Injection system and 5
Blast Furnaces with Coal Tar Injection system. R&D engineers
are also assisting plants in increasing CDI usage.
(3) In order to reduce the high manpower cost, SAIL has been
rationalizing its manpower in the past and is likely to continue in
future also. In the last 3 years, SAIL has been able to rationalize
its manpower by around 17000 through judicious manpower
planning, multi-skilling, redeployment, selective recruitment etc.
With rationalization of manpower, several systemic changes such
as cluster system of working, flexibility in deployment, automated
working, adoption of best practices have been encouraged /
implemented thereby leading to improved efficiency and better
work culture. While the manpower has steadily been reducing,
the labour productivity has increased from 150 to 226 Tonne/Man/
Year (T/M/Y) in the last 5 years.
(4) In order to further reduce consumption of coking coal, SAIL is
exploring possibility of technology tie-up for new technology of
making iron from non coking coal like Finex and ITMK3 through
Joint Venture route. The final decision on selection of technology
and details of Joint Venture are subject to techno-economic
viability and necessary approvals.
(5) A draft policy on “Outward Investment for acquisition of raw
material assets abroad” is being undertaken under the leadership
of Chairman, National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council
(NMCC). The procedural hurdles hindering overseas acquisitions
by PSUs are being highlighted in the NMCC forum for discussions
and suitable redressal at the highest levels in Government.”

11
1.17 The Committee are of the view that in the context of
modernisation and expansion of SAIL, it is essential that two coking
coal blocks namely Jhirki/ Jhirki West OC & Rhone-Routpara West
in Jharkhand are allotted to SAIL through Government dispensation
for its captive use expeditiously. Similarly, out of six thermal coal
blocks in Chhattisgarh identified by SAIL, atleast 2 or 3 may be allotted
to them at the earliest. In this connection, the Ministry are stated to
have initiated some steps. However, the Committee feel that matter
needs to be taken up at the highest level with the concerned States
and their concerns, if any, may be addressed appropriately and
expeditiously to enable them to grant necessary Forest and
Environmental clearance relating to the said coking/thermal coal
blocks.
Under-utilization of allocated funds by RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
1.18 The Committee noted that RINL had been allocated Rs. 4,166
crore in BE 2008-09 which was reduced to Rs. 2,815.50 crore at RE stage.
In BE 2009-10, the amount had further been reduced to Rs. 2,437 crore.
The Committee were constrained to note that out of this Rs. 2,437 crore,
the Company was able to utilize a meager amount of Rs. 516.24 crore till
July, 2009. While in some schemes/projects, there had been a little progress,
many schemes/projects such as Acquisition of iron ore, Coking coal and other
mines, BF-1 Category repairs, facilities for Iron ore storage, augmentation
of 220 KV power system for receiving 400 MV A power, there has been no
progress at all. The corrective measures taken by the RINL to overcome these
weaknesses did not seem to have bore any fruit. The Committee felt that
underutilization of funds was directly affecting the implementation of
important schemes and ultimately the performance of Company. The
Committee had impressed upon the Ministry that RINL should utilize the full
allocation made for the year 2009-10 so that schemes did not suffer due to
poor utilization of funds. The Committee had urged upon the Ministry to
address the weakness listed out by RINLs with a sense of seriousness and
sincerity, lest the perennial underutilization of fund by the Company should
be highly detrimental to the growth of production and improvement in
productivity of steel sector. Committee had also urged Ministry to facilitate
RINL to ensure early acquisition of iron ore, coking coal and other mines.

12
1.19 In Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Steel have stated as
under:—
“Necessary steps have since been taken to ensure that the expenditure
for the year 2009-10 is as per the target. Although the expenditure upto
July, 2009 was only Rs. 516.24 crores out of Rs. 2437 crores in the
BE, the expenditure upto January, 2010 was Rs. 1850 crores, which
is a substantial improvement from the levels of expenditure in July,
2009. RINL is now expected to fulfil the target for the year 2009-10.
For the year 2008-09 as well, 100% target was fulfilled. The actual
expenditure for the year was Rs. 2886 crores against RE of Rs. 2815
crores.
Progress of implementation of expansion and all other schemes as
mentioned in the recommendation have further been stepped up by
taking several corrective measures by RINL which include deployment
of additional resources, expediting design & engineering by across
the table discussions, higher empowerment, providing construction
equipments by plant to agencies as an additional support wherever
required, off loading jobs from failing agencies, effective monitoring
at various levels etc.. Orders for major packages of other schemes like
Iron Ore Storage, 220 KV power station system, Blast Furnace
revamping etc., either have been placed or are in various stages of
finalization. Civil work, design & engineering for structural and
equipment have also commenced for Iron Ore Storage system.
RINL has been making efforts since 2003 for acquisition of iron ore,
coking coal and other mines and submitted mining lease applications
for iron ore in the States of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh and
Rajasthan. In addition to this, RINL-VSP has requested the State Govts.
of Jharkhand, Orissa and Karnataka for allocation of iron ore blocks
and has also conveyed it’s interest in setting up value added projects
in the State through Joint Ventures with the State Mineral Development
Corporations. In this regard, written requests from CMD-RINL VSP
and Secretary, Ministry of Steel were sent to Chief Secretary & Chief
Development Commissioner to Govt. of Orissa, Chief Secretary to
Govt. of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary to Govt. of Karnataka.

13
Grant of lease for mines by respective State Government/Govt. of India
would be of considerable help to RINL for meeting the enhanced level
of its requirement. The issue is becoming more and more important
for RINL from the point of view of cost of key raw materials and its
securitization for consistent operation at higher level of production and
productivity”.
1.20 According to the Ministry of Steel the grant of lease for
acquisition of iron ore, coking coal and other mines would be of
considerable help to Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) for meeting
its post expansion raw material demand. However, concrete steps are
required to be taken to help RINL in getting the mining leases from
the concerned States. The Committee would, therefore, suggest that
the Ministry of Steel should form a special task group to expedite the
grant of mining leases to RINL by overcoming the procedural
bottlenecks and resolving the issues/concerns of the respective State
Governments relating to various statutory/non-statutory clearances.
Renewal of Mining Leases
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
1.21 The Committee noted that financial strength of Steel PSUs beyond
2012 would mainly depend on renewal of existing mining leases pending with
State Governments of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa. They also note
that SAIL had been granted 25 mining leases of iron ore in the States of
Jharkhand, Orissa and Chhattisgarh. Out of these only 5 leases are valid,
15 are under deemed extension and balance 5 are under dispute. Without valid
leases, SAIL is facing difficulty for making an investment for the expansion
of its existing mines. The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the
delay in granting the mining leases for iron ore and allotment of coal blocks
to Public Sector companies and feel that Ministry has also failed to play
its role as facilitator in getting these mining leases renewed. The
Committee further noted that Jharkhand Government have reportedly
agreed to renew the leases of Chiria mines in favour of SAIL, the Committee
desired the Ministry to constantly pursue this matter and impress upon
the State Governments for granting for lease of remaining mines on priority
basis.

14
1.22 The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply have stated
inter alia that out of 26 iron ore mining leases in the States of Jharkhand,
Orissa and Chhattisgarh, only 6 leases are valid. This includes grant of Mining
Lease at Rowghat in Chhattisgarh in October, 2009.
“Status of leases is shown below:
 Details Jharkhand Orissa Chhattisgarh T otal
 No. of leases 13 7 6 26
 Valid Nil 1 5 6
 Under deemed 9 5 1 15
 extension
 Under dispute 4 1 Nil 5
For early renewal of leases particularly in Jharkhand and Orissa,
continuous effort is being made by SAIL and the Ministry of Steel.
In connection with renewal of leases for Chiria and Gua, the State
Government of Jharkhand suddenly rejected some leases of Chiria and
Gua mines on 15.12.04. Against the rejection order, SAIL sought relief
from concerned legal forum that is Mining Tribunal and the matter has
since gone into prolonged litigation in higher courts.
Vigorous efforts have been made by the Ministry of Steel with the State
Government of Jharkhand at appropriate levels in the Government of
India to resolve the matter amicably out of court. Ministry of Steel made
special out of court efforts and played the role of a facilitator bringing
the stakeholders of SAIL and Government of Jharkhand under
mediation of the Prime Minister’s Office. The meetings under the
auspices of the PMO precipitated the decision that Jharkhand State
Government would renew mining leases for reserves of about 1 billion
tonne immediately and for balance reserve of 1 billion tonne SAIL &
State Government will sign an MoU and State Government would
release the reserves against SAIL meeting the milestones.
On request of the Ministry of Steel, a meeting was held by Secretary
(Mines), GoI on 5-10-2009 which was also attended by the

15
Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand, Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Steel, Controller General IBM, Director General, GSI and Chairman,
SAIL. As decided in the meeting, SAIL vide letter dated 19.10.09,
requested Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand to renew mining
leases for 1 billion tonne of Chiria and Gua mines immediately and to
initiate dialogue for renewal of the balance leases. Following the
persuasions, the State Government of Jharkhand conveyed its in-
principle approval on renewal for the Budhaburu lease (823.62 ha) of
Chiria iron mine on 23.10.09. SAIL vide letter dated 18.11.09 has
further requested Jharkhand Government to renew leases correspond-
ing to 1000 million tonnes keeping all four leases of Gua and Ajitaburu
of Chiria in the present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. Secretary
(Steel) also held meeting with Chief Secretary, Government of
Jharkhand on 17-2-2010 on the issue of renewal of mining leases
including Chiria. SAIL is following up with State Government for
expediting formal approval in respect of Budhaburu lease.”
1.23 The Committee had desired the Ministry to constantly
pursue the matter relating to renewal of leases of existing mines and
impress upon the State Governments to grant renewal of leases on
priority basis. However, renewal of lease of only one more mine has
since been granted. Presently, leases of 15 mines are under deemed
extension and renewal of 5 mines are under dispute. The Committee
desire that the Ministry need to step up their efforts to convert the
mines which are under deemed extension into valid leases. Further,
it is not clear from the reply about the action taken by the Ministry
to resolve the issues relating to grant of leases in respect of mines
which are under dispute. The Committee would like the Ministry to
evolve an effective mechanism in this regard and take up the matter
with the concerned States for amicable settlement of the disputes
between SAIL and the concerned State Governments at the earliest.

16
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Since this year the Demands for Grants (2009-10) have already been
passed by Parliament, the Committee’s observations/recommendations as
detailed in the succeeding paragraphs relate to implementation of the plans/
projects of the PSUs/Organisations under its administrative control. The
Ministry should ensure proper utilization of allotted funds and observations/
recommendations of the Committee should be taken into consideration while
implementing plans/projects.
Action Taken
The Ministry of Steel has been strengthening its monitoring and control
system to monitor the utilization of funds by the PSUs and also
implementation of their schemes/projects.
The utilization of plan funds has improved during 2009-10 compared
to previous year. In 2008-09, the utilization of fund against BE provision was
89.37% while during 2009-10 the percentage of utilization of funds is 96.80%
(Approx).
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Steel Industry being a core sector, has a vital role in sustaining
the pace of economic development. The sustained growth of steel sector is
one of the vital pre-requisite for attaining the level of GDP growth envisaged
in the 11th Plan. The Committee have been given to understand that India
has risen to be the 5th largest crude steel producer in the world and largest
producer of sponge iron. The contribution of the Indian Iron and Steel

17
Industry in our GDP is stated to be around 2% and its weight in India’s
Industrial Production (IPP) is 6.20%.
The Indian Iron and Steel industry which had been bogged down by
global recession in the recent past has exhibited its inherent strength by
posting a positive growth rate even at the peak of crisis period when all the
major steel companies world over exhibited a negative growth. The
Committee however, feel that due to expected shortfall in global demand for
steel products, excess production capacity may find its way into India and
consequently could emerge as an attractive market for global producers,
sparking intense competition between domestic players and global players and
global suppliers. The Committee, therefore, feel that to meet this challenge
abound, the Government ought to give due importance to this sector and
accordingly should take necessary policy initiative. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the precise steps taken/proposed to be taken in this regard.
Action Taken
The World Steel Association (worldsteel) in its ‘Short Range Outlook’
published in October 2009 has reported that there are signs of recovery in
the steel sector across the world from the beginning of the second half of
2009 and that the global steel demand in 2010 is forecast to grow by 9.2%
to 1,206 million metric tonnes. According to the worldsteel Report China will
rebound 19% in 2009 and 5% in 2010. Emerging economies will slow down
17% in 2009, to grow 12% in 2010. Apparent steel use in developed
economies, that contracted 34% in 2009, will rebound 15% in 2010.
Therefore, worldsteel forecasts that global steel demand will return to growth
in 2010 but this is expected to be moderate. As before the financial crisis,
the emerging economies, especially China, will be the critical factor in driving
world steel demand in the near future.
Nonetheless the Government is keeping a close look at the developments
in the global steel market and would take appropriate fiscal and other
measures whenever necessary. In order to provide a level playing field to
the steel producers and consumers, as well as to boost the steel industry
in the country, the following fiscal measures already exist:
(i) Export Duty on steel items (except melting scrap) withdrawn with
effect from 31.10.2008;

18
(ii) Duty Entitled Pass Book (DEPB) on steel items restored with
effect from 14.11.2008;
(iii) Import Duty on iron and non-alloy steel items re-imposed at
5% with effect from 18.11.2008;
(iv) Countervailing duty (CVD) on Thermo Mechanically Treated
(TMT) bars and structurals were reintroduced with effect from
02.01.2009; and
(v) Export Duty on iron ore has been revised w.e.f. 24.12.2009 to
10% on lumps and pellets and 5% on iron ore items.
Further, the Government has constituted an Inter-Ministerial Group
(IMG) under the chairmanship of Secretary (Steel) to monitor and coordinate
implementation issues concerning major steel investments in the country. The
IMG will review and co-ordinate measures for early completion of the major
steel projects and address various problems concerning:—
• Infrastructure constraints related to ports, rail, road network;
• Availability of iron ore and coal;
• Speedy environmental clearance for project sites as well as for
iron ore and coal mining activities;
• Availability of land, water resources and issues concerning
rehabilitation;
For the Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) units, the Government
has reduced import duty on scrap and other raw materials to zero in order
to make available quality inputs at competitive prices through the import route.
It is also in dialogue with different States regarding quality and tariff of
electrical energy to these secondary units.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Based on the Statement made by the Minister under rule 73A of
Directions by the Speaker and the Action Taken Note furnished by the

19
Ministry on the observations/recommendations/contained in the thirty eighth
Action Taken Report. The Committee while taking note of the action taken
by the Ministry on some of its recommendations, desire that the Ministry
of Steel should monitor the progress of work in respect of recommendations
no. 1.11, 3.18, and 3.38 so as to ensure their early implementation.
Action Taken
Merger of Bharat Refractories Ltd. (BRL) with Steel Authority of India
Ltd. (SAIL)
Bharat Refractories Limited (BRL) has been finally merged with Steel
Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) with effect from 1.04.2007 by an Order of
Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA) dated 28.7.2009. The Order of MCA
was filed by SAIL with the Registrar of Companies on 27.8.2009. Thus, the
process of amalgamation of BRL with SAIL has completed and BRL stands
dissolved on and from the appointed date i.e. 1.4.2007 without winding up.
BRL has been renamed as “SAIL Refractory Unit (SRU)”. The financial
restructuring of BRL, as a part of merger conditionalities, has also been
completed in the process of amalgamation. The Net-worth of BRL turned
positive after its merger with SAIL. Therefore, BRL has since come out of
the purview of Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction.
Restructuring of Bird Group of Companies
The Restructuring proposal of Bird Group of Companies has been
approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 10.09.2009. The restructuring
proposal envisaged converting Companies under Bird Group namely EIL,
OMDC and BSLC into Government Companies/ Public Sector Undertakings
and vesting their management control to Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)
in a holding cum subsidiary structure in order to make these companies viable
and sustainable. The commercially unviable companies under the Bird Group
namely KDCL and SSL would be wound up and their employees would be
adjusted in other sister companies under the Group or would be offered VRS.
The Principal amount of Government loan in respect of BSLC would be
converted into equity of the Company and the outstanding amount of interest
thereon would be waived off. The outstanding amount of Government loan
and outstanding interest thereon in respect of KDCL and SSL would be

20
waived off. Necessary action to implement the decision of the Cabinet has
already been initiated.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that as against the total plan outlay of
Rs. 13,755.66 crore including budgetary support of Rs. 33 crore, the
Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 13756.66 crore with
budgetary support of Rs. 34 crore for the year 2009-10. The Committee
further note that Budgetary Support (BS) is being provided to some of the
financially week and loss making PSUs and Internal and Extra Budgetary
Resource (I&EBR) are being raised by profit making PSUs for implementing
their schemes. They also note that in case of Hindustan Steel Construction
Ltd. (HSCL) an amount of Rs. 7 crore has been sought as Plan Budgetary
Support for Capital Repair and procurement of new construction equipment
and machinery. The Committee however, are constrained to point out that
no amount has been released so far as comprehensive Business Organisation
and Financial Restructuring proposal of the Company is still under
consideration of the Government. Besides, the Committee has also been given
to understand that HSCL is not getting adequate support from SAIL in terms
of approval of their plans because of which their plans get delayed. Similarly,
the Budgetary Support of Rs. 1.00 crore during 2008-09 for AMR schemes
of BSLC, a company under the Bird Group of Companies which could not
be utilized due to default by the company on past repayment of Government
Loan was linked to restructuring/revival plans and was carried forward to
2009-10.
Action Taken
The 2009-10 BE provision of Rs. 7.00 crore for HSCL was reduced
to Rs. 3.00 crore in RE. The RE provision of Rs. 3.00 crore has been released
to HSCL in March, 2010 after obtaining special dispensation from Ministry
of Finance as HSCL has defaulted in re-payment of Govt. loans and interest.
The restructuring proposal of the company is under active consideration of
the Government.

21
As regards utilization of budget provision of Rs. 1.00 crore by Bird
Group of Companies during 2009-10, it is stated that the company did not
require the fund consequent to approval of its restructuring proposal by the
Govt. The restructuring of M/s Bird Group of Companies has been approved
by the Govt. on 10.9.2009.
A proposal for restructuring of HSCL was approved by the Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) on 13.5.2008. Based
on the recommendations of BRPSE, this Ministry circulated a note for
consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. However, there
are some financial issues that have to be finally resolved with the Ministry
of Finance, particularly regarding the waiver of outstanding loans and interest
thereon. The proposal will be referred to CCEA shortly thereafter. Pending
the approval of restructuring Plan loan of Rs.3.00 crores has been released
to HSCL under AMR Scheme during the year 2009-10.
HSCL is being associated with some of the repair and maintenance
works in SAIL Plants/Units on nomination basis. However for capital
projects, award of work is being done on the basis of competitive bidding
and work is being awarded on the lowest price offer basis.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
In this connection, the Committee would like to point out in their 25th
Report (14th Lok Sabha) the Ministry was asked for early approval of
restructuring of HSCL. The fact that the restructuring proposal has still not
been approved is regrettable. Similarly, the restructuring proposal of Bird
Group of Companies functioning directly under the Ministry of Steel has not
been approved and allocation of fund to the company is linked with this
proposal. The very survival of these sick companies has put a question mark
in the absence of budgetary support which is linked with their restructuring

22
proposal. The Committee deprecate non-allocation of funds to these already
sick units. The Committee therefore urge upon the Government to approve
the restructuring proposals of these Companies without any loss of time and
adequate funds be provided to them.
Action Taken
Restructuring Proposal of HSCL
A proposal for restructuring of HSCL was approved by the Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) on 13.5.2008. Based
on the recommendations of BRPSE, this Ministry circulated a note for
consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. However, there
are some financial issues that have to be finally resolved with the Ministry
of Finance, particularly regarding the waiver of outstanding loans and interest
thereon. The proposal will be referred to CCEA shortly thereafter. Pending
the approval of restructuring, Plan loan of Rs.3.00 crore has been released
to HSCL under AMR Scheme during the year 2009-10.
Restructuring Proposal of Bird Group of Companies
The Restructuring proposal of Bird Group of Companies has been
approved by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 10.09.2009. The restructuring
proposal envisaged converting Companies under Bird Group namely EIL,
OMDC and BSLC into Government Companies/ Public Sector Undertakings
and vesting their management control to Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)
in a holding cum subsidiary structure in order to make these companies viable
and sustainable. The commercially unviable companies under the Bird Group
namely KDCL and SSL would be wound up and their employees would be
adjusted in other sister companies under the Group or would be offered VRS.
The Principal amount of Government loan in respect of BSLC would be
converted into equity of the Company and the outstanding amount of interest
thereon would be waived off. The outstanding amount of Government loan
and outstanding interest thereon in respect of KDCL and SSL would be
waived off. Necessary action to implement the decision of the Cabinet has
already been initiated.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]

23
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that in case of the National Mineral Development
Corporation (NMDC) Ltd., out of Rs. 700 crore allotted to them for the year
2009-10, the actual expenditure upto July 2009 is only 85.59 crore. The
Committee are unable to understand as to how NMDC will utilize their
earmarked funds in the remaining period of the year. The statutory/non-
statutory clearances if any for NMDC projects should be obtained
expeditiously from concerned Ministries so that they are able to utilize their
allotted funds.
Similarly, in case of Bird Group of Companies, the Committee desire
that the matter regarding getting requisite approval for mining operations over
the total leasehold areas be taken up with the State Government vigorously.
They also urge the Ministry to periodically review the progress of fund
utilization made by PSUs in this regard and keep them apprised about the
status of fund utilisation.
Since the Plan outlay proposed by most of the PSUs for the year
2009-10 has been approved by the Planning Commission without any cut
and the plan outlay for the promotion of R&D on Iron and Steel sector has
been given due weightage with an increase of Rs. 1 crore, the Committee
hope that the funds allotted to PSUs will be fully and prudently utilized by
them without surrendering or asking for additional funds.
Action Taken
NMDC Ltd.
Estimates for BE 2009-10 at Rs.700 crore were prepared anticipating
completion of various expansion schemes and receipt of equipment ordered
under Addition Modification and Replacement (AMR) schemes. However,
during review, certain delays were anticipated in completion of the new
schemes/receipt of equipment. Hence, suitable revision was made and the
Budget Provision for 2009-10 of Rs.700 Crore was revised to Rs.543 crore.
Out of the revised estimate of Rs. 543 crore, an expenditure of
Rs.378.88 crore was made up to 31.3.2010.

24
The main reasons for shortfall are:-
• An amount of Rs.200 crore was provided in BE 2009-10 towards
Deposit 11B Project, since the process of procurement of Heavy
Earth Moving (HEM) equipment was in progress. But as
procurement of equipment was postponed to 2010-11, BE amount
was scaled down from Rs.200 crore to Rs.90 crore in the RE
of 2009-10.
• Due to frequent Naxalite activities, contractors of Deposit 11B
project were forced to de-mobilize and mobilize equipments
repeatedly. Due to this, many working days were lost. Night
working could not be effectively implemented. Contractor’s
construction equipment was also burnt by the Naxalites. This
affected the construction progress and the planned targets could
not be met. The actual expenditure on 11 B project during 2009-
10 was Rs. 56.27 crore as against RE of Rs.90 crore. Balance
expenditure is likely to materialise in 2010-11 and will be
considered in RE 2010-11.
• An amount of Rs.100 crore was provided in BE 2009-10 towards
3 million tonne per annum capacity (MTPA) Steel Plant at
Nagarnar. Expression of Interest (EOI) for nine packages had
been released and the consultants were in the process of short
listing the prospective bidders which took more time than
anticipated. Further, acquisition of about 380 hectares of
additional land and statutory clearance for 25.72 hectares of forest
land out of the above is in process. Considering this, the plan
outlay was revised from Rs.100 crore to Rs.50 crore. Actual
expenditure on the project during 2009-10 was Rs. 42.26 crore.
• Rs. 80 crore was considered in the RE of 2009-10 for the
acquisition of SIIL. The Company received an order dated
18th January 2010 from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
(MoCA), Government of India, sanctioning the scheme of merger
of SIIL with the Company. The scheme would become effective
from the date on which the certified copy of the order of MoCA
is filed with the Registrar of Companies (ROC), Andhra Pradesh,

25
India. Under the MoCA order, the order is required to be filed with
the ROC within 30 days of its receipt. However, as the
disinvestment process of NMDC was going on, to smoothen the
process of disinvestment, NMDC through its legal counsel for the
merger process, filed an application on 9th February, 2010 with
the MoCA seeking grant of extension of time for filing of the order
of merger with the ROC within 30 days of the completion of the
allotment of the offer shares under the disinvestment process.
Hence the amount of Rs. 80 crore could not be spent in 2009-
10 and is likely to be spent in 2010-11 and will be considered in
RE 2010-11.
• The tender enquiry issued for Crushing Plant of Kumaraswamy
has been retendered due to poor response; hence the construction
activities at site could not be started as planned. Actual expenditure
on the project during 2009-10 was Rs.0.53 crore against the RE
of Rs. 10 crore. This shall now be considered for 2010-11.
Bird Group of Companies-The Orissa Mineral Development Company
Ltd. (OMDC)
The Orissa Mineral Development Company (OMDC), a Company under
the Bird Group of Companies is having six mining leases in the State of Orissa.
The renewal of these mining leases are at various stages of processing. The
company is vigorously taking up the matter with the State Govt. to complete
the formalities of Forest & Environmental clearance, which are pre-condition
for renewal of mining lease, for getting the mining leases renewed at the
earliest.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 1.12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee regret to observe that out of total outlay of Rs. 45607.08
crore approved by the Planning Commission for the 11th Plan, the expenditure

26
made during the first two years was only Rs. 12356.89 crores. While during
the year 2007-08 they could spend only Rs. 3831.03 (61.75%) of the allotted
fund, the expenditure during 2008-09 was Rs. 6203.00 crores. The
Committee feel that either the estimates prepared for SAIL and RINL were
inflated or they have failed to utilize the allotted fund during the first two
years in the plan. The reasons cited are mainly administrative in nature and
could have been dealt with by the Ministry by way of improvement in their
system and speedy disposal of things. The precise reasons for under
utilization of funds may be identified and suitable remedial measures need
to be taken so that not only all the funds are timely utilized and various
projects/programmes of these PSUs are completed without any delay.
Action Taken
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL)
The funds against the projects are allocated depending upon projected
progress and schedule for completion of identified milestones. In the initial
period of modernization & expansion plan of SAIL, the provision had been
kept primarily for expenditure on enabling works and initial milestone
payments. Accordingly, during 2007-08, the outlay was reviewed and revised
to Rs.2007 crore as against original budget of Rs.2641 crore. Against this,
the actual expenditure was Rs.2181 crore. In 2008-09, the expenditure was
envisaged to be increased with the progress of works like design engineering,
civil & structural works, supply & erection jobs etc. and hence higher outlay
of Rs.4674 crore was kept. Against this outlay, SAIL has incurred an
expenditure of Rs.5233 crores. Thus the actual expenditure of Rs.7414
crores has exceeded the budgeted outlay of Rs.7348 crores for the years
2007-08 & 2008-09 taken together.
Similarly, in the year 2009-10 the budget outlay of Rs.10,356 crores
was kept against which an expenditure of Rs.10,606 crores (Provisional) has
been incurred.
SAIL has made various efforts like regular monitoring and review of
expenditure vis-s-vis target at Plant and Corporate level to achieve the
budgeted outlay. The financial progress is also being reviewed by Additional
Secretary & Financial Advisor on quarterly basis.

27
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)
The budget estimates for the major expansion and modernization
projects are prepared based on the schedules given by the consultants and
various other agencies. Before the actual start of the work, the major steps
required to be taken include finalization of tenders, floating the global tenders,
evaluation of technical bids and award of job. For the major jobs there is
a monopolistic suppliers market. Invariably, the initial time schedules
anticipated by the company do not match with the actual time taken
in finalization of the suppliers, because sometimes adequate numbers
of parties do not respond or after submitting their tenders the negotiations
take some extra time. Consequently, there is an initial delay in the start of
the work.
In the case of RINL, the shortfall with respect to original budget during
initial years e.g., 2007-08 & 08-09 was mainly due to delay in placement
of orders ( i.e., entering into large contracts) due to inadequate and delayed
response of bidders to global tenders arising out of the then prevailing buoyant
global market, bidders asking for changes in contract terms/ asking for longer
time for execution than stipulated etc. The progress of expenditure is now
reaching steady state and is expected to be in line with the expected schedule
of completion of various packages.
Progress of implementation of expansion and all other schemes have
been stepped up as desired by the Committee and as is warranted in the last/
finishing stages of the mega projects, by taking several measures which
include deployment of additional resources, expediting design & engineering
by across the table discussions, higher empowerment, providing construction
equipments by the company to the agencies as an additional support wherever
possible & required, off loading jobs from some of the failing agencies,
effective monitoring at various levels etc. With this, RINL has already spent
about Rs.1850 Cr. during the year till Jan’10 and is expected to fulfil 100%
target for the year 2009-10 as desired by the Standing Committee during the
last meeting. For the year 2008-09 as well, 100% target was fulfilled by
achieving expenditure of Rs.2886 Cr. against RE of Rs.2815.5 Cr.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]

28
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee note the annual outlay of the SAIL has been increased
in BE 2009-10 to Rs. 10356 crore from BE/RE of Rs 4674 crore in 2008-
09 based on projected progress of various schemes/projects. However, the
Ministry have stated that the expenditure of SAIL in the first quarter of 2009-
10 has been only Rs. 2469 crores. Going by the past experience, the
Committee apprehend that in the past PSUs have been unable to overcome
the obstacles in utilizing the allotted funds and hope that plan expenditure
of Rs. 10,356 crore would be fully utilized by SAIL. The Committee therefore
desire the Government to ensure that there is no downward revision in the
target and all the programmes/schemes contemplated in two phases are
completed in time bound manner with the help of I &EBR allotted for specific
purpose. To ensure full utilization of allotted funds, Committee would like
the Ministry to periodically review the utilization of funds and remove
procedural bottlenecks, if any. The Committee would like to be apprised of
steps taken in this regard.
Action Taken
SAIL has incurred an expenditure of Rs.10606 crore (provisional)
against the budgeted target of Rs. 10356 crore during the year 2009-10, based
on the actual progress of various capital projects including modernization and
expansion projects under implementation at five integrated steel plants and
one special steel plant. The actual expenditure has exceeded the budgeted
target during 2009-10. For achieving this, various efforts like regular
monitoring and review of expenditure vis-a-vis target have been made in SAIL
as well as by the Ministry of Steel.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee understand that SAIL has decided to delay its expansion
Plan by 2 years due to the global economic downturn and a weaker than
expected pick up in domestic demand. The explanation offered by Chairman,
SAIL during the course of evidence for not completing the expansion plan
by 2010 is not only unsatisfactory but rather alibi. The Committee do not
approve such a decision of SAIL. In fact, SAIL has failed to keep the

29
commitment by them to the extent that the modernization would be
completed by 2010. The Committee would like to be satisfied whether it was
prudent on the part of SAIL to defer expansion of 2 years or expansion
programme could have been carried out in phases. Since the steel sector
worldwide is coming out of recession and demand for steel is gradually
picking up, the SAIL can pursue the expansion plan vigorously. The
difficulties/problems/constraints being experienced should be effectively
tackled by taking appropriate measures so that expansion and modernization
plan of SAIL could be implemented at the earliest to avoid cost and time
overrun.
The Committee appreciate that SAIL propose to carry out plantation
work in all the steel plants like Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant. Since Alloy Steel
Plant is serving many strategic sectors in the country, especially, naval
warships which are pending, the first effort of SAIL should be to make it
profitable and to move ahead with the modernization.
Action Taken
• The planning for Modernisation & Expansion of SAIL was
initiated in 2003 under its Corporate Plan–2012 which envisaged
increase in capacity in a phased manner by the year 2012.
• In view of global resurgence of the steel industry and indications
of accelerated growth in domestic demand, the growth and
investment targets were revised upwards in 2006-07. Further, it
was decided to implement different packages in a plant together
and compress the timelines to year 2010 as against year 2012
envisaged earlier.
• Due to buoyant steel market and seller’s market condition, order
placement for some of the major critical technological packages
took longer time as quoted prices were much higher than the
estimates. In July 2008, due to the following difficulties/problems/
constraints faced during the Modernisation & Expansion was
reviewed by SAIL to optimize the investment.
– Inadequate response against various tenders; consequently,
time limit for submission of tenders had to be extended in
many cases on the request of bidders.

30
– Deviations in offers vis-à-vis tender terms and conditions
including the desired delivery schedules for completing the
projects; Bidders seeking extension in time limit for
submitting clarifications and submitting incomplete
clarifications/maintaining deviations, leading to several
rounds of techno-commercial discussions
– In many cases, price bids submitted by bidders were higher
than Consultant’s estimates. For some of the packages,
SAIL had to go for retender or engage in several rounds of
negotiations on account of higher prices.
• Further due to global meltdown since October’ 2008, SAIL Board
felt that there was a need to review the expansion plan of SAIL
including financing pattern. After consultations with the
consultants and due deliberation (Feb-June. 2009), it was
proposed that the production build-up be achieved in two phases.
• As per present progress, installation of facilities at SSP are likely
to be completed by June’ 2010 and that of ISP by June’ 2011.
For BSP, DSP, RSP and BSL, Modernisation and Expansion is
likely to be completed progressively by 2012-13.
Various measures to closely monitor each and every activity of the
project, both at micro and macro levels have been put in place in SAIL. The
projects are being monitored on day-to-day basis by the respective Project
Managers of the Plants and the Project Heads through latest on-line project
monitoring system. Further, the expansion plan is also being monitored by:
• Plant Level Standing Committee comprising of Head of Projects,
Head of Works and Head of Finance on a monthly basis. This
Plant Level Standing Committee submits its action plan to the
Managing Director/ Chief Executive of the Plant for remedial
actions, if any, to be taken to ensure that the projects are
completed in time. Managing Director/ Chief Executive of the
Plant reviews the projects for timely action to complete the
projects on schedule.
• A Board Sub Committee (BSC) comprising Independent
Directors, Government nominee Director, Functional Directors
and Managing Directors has been constituted for review of the
progress of Modernisation and Expansion plan on regular basis.

31
At Alloy Steels Plant, Durgapur, SAIL has already implemented several
schemes which include installation of Refining Converter (Argon Oxygen
Decarburisation), Replacement of Electric Arc Furnace, Procurement of 25
MV A Transformer, Oxygen Plant on Build-Own-Operate (BOO) Basis etc.
Further, installation of one Ladle Furnace is under consideration for
implementation. It may be mentioned that capital investments are being made
at ASP continuously depending on the requirement/viability of schemes.
Tree plantation of about 2.1 lakhs have been done during 2009-10 at
various SAIL Steel Plants, Mines and township with a cumulative plantation
of 175 lakhs till date. Afforestation programme are being followed in all SAIL
plants/ mines. During the year 2010-11, SAIL has planned for plantation of
about 1.9 lakhs of saplings.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee note with satisfaction that with a view to meet increased
customer demand for tailor made steel products near the consumption point,
particularly in a State where no steel plant is located and where steel
consumption is low, SAIL have proposed to set up Steel Processing Units
(SPUs). Some places have already been identified and in some places this
is under implementation. While the Committee hope by this initiative of the
Ministry would increase the domestic demand and steel consumption in the
country, they desire that the scheme should be accorded priority and
completed under a time bound programme. The Committee also desire that
efforts should be made in future to cover other potential areas also in the
country with low steel consumption under this scheme so that all sections
of society in far flung areas are also benefitted from the scheme.
Action Taken
Setting-up of Steel Processing Units
SAIL Board had accorded ‘in-principle’ approval for setting-up of
10 SPUs at various states as given under:
• Bettiah, Mahnar and Gaya in Bihar

32
• Hoshangabad, Ujjain and Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh
• Guwahati in Assam and Lakhimpur in Uttar Pradesh
• Srinagar in Jammu and Kashmir and Kangra in Himachal Pradesh
The work for setting-up the SPU at Bettiah is in progress and the unit
is likely to be completed by September, 2010.
Land for the 10 SPUs has been acquired. Chief Project Manager for
each SPU has been designated and tendering activities are in progress.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee have been given to understand that in attaining the global
benchmark, the thrust of modernization and expansion plan of SAIL is to
adopt technology which is in addition to cost effective is also energy efficient
and environmental friendly. However, still many constraints are being faced
by the company such as dependence of purchased coal from domestic and
overseas suppliers, higher manpower cost and adherence to a number of rules
and procedures depriving SAIL to become a global leader in Steel. The
Committee would like the Ministry to address these issues seriously.
The Committee have been informed that SAIL have taken certain
measures to reduce dependence on imported coking coal and is in the process
of acquiring and developing new coal blocks and entering into strategic
partnership with Coal India Ltd. and with some other companies, besides
formation of an SPV for acquisition of coal assets overseas. In addition to
these initiatives, the Ministry should also look for technologies that would
reduce the use of coking coal in blast furnaces and also develop their
R and D. In this connection, the Ministry may explore the possibility of
cutting ash content in coking coal and increasing production, which would
meet most of the coking coal requirement through indigenous mines, thereby
cut imports and being a cheaper proposition.
The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue their case vigorously
with the Ministry of Coal to get more coal mines accordingly urge upon the

33
government to give priority to the requirements of SAIL and consider allotting
coal mines particularly in Jharkhand and West Bengal.
Action Taken
(1) In order to reduce dependence on purchased coking coal, both domestic
as well as imported, SAIL is taking following actions :
(a) Developing captive coking coal mines at Tasra and Sitanala
(i) Tasra Coking Coal Block:
All statutory clearances have been obtained. Planned
mine capacity is 4 Million Tonne Per Annum (MTPA)
[Run of Mine (ROM)] to produce about 2 MTPA of clean
coal. Selection of Mine Developer cum Operator (MDO) is
in progress. Through tendering process, L-1 bidder has been
identified and work order is to be issued shortly. In the
meantime, small scale production has been started from
November.2009.
(ii) Sitanala Coking Coal Block:
Mine planned for production of 0.3 Million Tonne Per
Annum (MTPA) [Run of Mine (ROM)] to produce about
0.2 Million Tonne Per Annum (MTPA) clean coal. Project
report has been prepared, mine plan approved and grant of
environment clearance is in advance stage.
(c) Allocation of new coking coal blocks for captive mining
In order to further augment captive coking coal production, SAIL
has identified two potential coking coal blocks namely, Jhirki/
Jhirki West OC and Rhone-Routpara West in Jharkhand and
requested Ministry of Steel and the Ministry of Coal for allocation
of the blocks. Coal blocks are yet to be allocated to SAIL. Hon’ble
Minister of Steel has requested Hon’ble Minister of State for Coal
in February, 2010 to allocate these coking coal blocks to SAIL
through Government dispensation route.

34
(c) Joint Venture with Tata Steel
SAIL and Tata Steel Ltd. have formed “S and T Mining Company
Private Limited”, a Joint Venture Company (JVC) with 50:50
equity. As a first step company has initiated the process for
acquisition and development of coal assets in India. JVC has been
short listed for submission of bid for revival of old/ abandoned
mines of CIL. JVC is also attempting to develop Bhutgoria mine
of BCCL. The company has submitted tender to Bharat Coking
Coal Limited (BCCL) for construction of washery at Dugda
for Non Linked Washery (NLW) coal. The company is also
exploring possibility to install a stand alone NLW coal washery
at Malkera.
(d) SPV for acquisition of coal assets overseas
SAIL along with CIL, NTPC, RINL and NMDC has also formed
International Coal Ventures Limited (ICVL), a joint venture
company for acquisition of coal assets abroad. Attempts are being
made by ICVL for acquisition of coal assets.
Allocation of thermal coal blocks for captive use
Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is being met by supplies
from Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of thermal coal
availability, SAIL has identified six thermal coal blocks namely Tentuloi,
Ghogharpalli and Extension, Bankhui (Orissa), Gand Bahera Ujheni
(Uttar Pradesh), Puta Parogia and Pindrakhi (Chhattisgarh) and
requested Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Coal for allocation of at
least 2-3 blocks. Hon’ble Minister of Steel has requested Hon’ble
Minister of State for Coal in February’2010 to allocate these thermal
coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation route.
(2) Besides taking action to acquire captive coal mines, SAIL has been
persuing with Coal India Limited (CIL) to supply higher quantities of
Indigenous Coking Coal and improve its quality. The ash content in
coking coal can be reduced by CIL by improving the health of their
washeries.

35
In addition, actions have been taken by SAIL to adopt technologies
which will reduce consumption of coking coal. All Blast Furnaces of
SAIL (except those planned to be phased out) are being equipped with
auxiliary fuel injection system. So far, 8 Blast Furnaces are equipped
with Coal Dust Injection system and 5 Blast Furnaces with Coal Tar
Injection system. R and D engineers are also assisting plants in
increasing CDI usage.
(3) In order to reduce the high manpower cost, SAIL has been rationalizing
its manpower in the past and is likely to continue in future also. In the
last 3 years, SAIL has been able to rationalize its manpower by
around 17000 through judicious manpower planning, multi-skilling,
redeployment, selective recruitment etc. With rationalization of
manpower, several systemic changes such as cluster system of
working, flexibility in deployment, automated working, adoption of best
practices have been encouraged / implemented thereby leading to
improved efficiency and better work culture.
While the manpower has steadily been reducing, the labour productivity
has increased from 150 to 226 Tonne/Man/Year (T/M/Y) in the last
5 years.
(4) In order to further reduce consumption of coking coal, SAIL is
exploring possibility of technology tie-up for new technology of making
iron from non coking coal like Finex and ITMK3 through Joint Venture
route. The final decision on selection of technology and details of Joint
Venture are subject to techno-economic viability and necessary
approvals.
(5) A draft policy on “Outward Investment for acquisition of raw material
assets abroad” is being undertaken under the leadership of Chairman,
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC). The
procedural hurdles hindering overseas acquisitions by PSUs are being
highlighted in the NMCC forum for discussions and suitable redressal
at the highest levels in Government.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]

36
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee note that RINL has been allocated Rs. 4,166 crore in
BE 2008-09 which was reduced to Rs. 2,815.50 crore at RE stage. In BE
2009-10, the amount has further been reduced to Rs. 2,437 crore. The
Committee are constrained to note that out of this Rs. 2,437 crore, the
Company was able to utilize a meager amount of Rs. 516.24 crore till
July, 2009. While in some schemes/projects, there has been a little progress,
many schemes/projects such as Acquisition of iron ore, Coking coal and other
mines, BF-1 Category repairs, facilities for iron ore storage, augmentation
of 220 KV power system for receiving 400 MV A power, there has been no
progress at all. The corrective measures taken by the RINL to overcome these
weaknesses do not seem to have bore any fruit. The Committee feel that
underutilization of funds is directly affecting the implementation of important
schemes and ultimately the performance of Company. The Committee
impress upon the Ministry that RINL should utilize the full allocation made
for the year 2009-10 so that schemes do not suffer due to poor utilization
of funds. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to address the weakness
listed out by RINLs with a sense of seriousness and sincerity, lest the
perennial underutilization of fund by the Company should be highly
detrimental to the growth of production and improvement in productivity of
steel sector. Committee also urge Ministry to facilitate RINL to ensure early
acquisition of iron ore, coking coal and other mines.
Action Taken
Necessary steps have since been taken to ensure that the expenditure
for the year 2009-10 is as per the target. Although the expenditure upto
July, 2009 was only Rs. 516.24 crores out of Rs. 2437 crores in the BE,
the expenditure upto January, 2010 was Rs. 1850 crores, which is a
substantial improvement from the levels of expenditure in July, 2009. RINL
is now expected to fulfil the target for the year 2009-10. For the year
2008-09 as well, 100% target was fulfilled. The actual expenditure for the
year was Rs. 2886 crores against RE of Rs. 2815 crores.

37
Progress of implementation of expansion and all other schemes as
mentioned in the recommendation have further been stepped up by taking
several corrective measures by RINL which include deployment of additional
resources, expediting design and engineering by across the table discussions,
higher empowerment, providing construction equipments by plant to agencies
as an additional support wherever required, off loading jobs from failing
agencies, effective monitoring at various levels etc. Orders for major
packages of other schemes like Iron Ore Storage, 220 KV power station
system, Blast Furnace revamping etc., either have been placed or are in
various stages of finalization. Civil work, design and engineering for structural
and equipment have also commenced for Iron Ore Storage system.
RINL has been making efforts since 2003 for acquisition of iron ore,
coking coal and other mines and submitted mining lease applications for iron
ore in the States of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. In
addition to this, RINL-VSP has requested the State Govts. of Jharkhand,
Orissa and Karnataka for allocation of iron ore blocks and has also conveyed
its interest in setting up value added projects in the State through Joint
Ventures with the State Mineral Development Corporations. In this regard,
written requests from CMD-RINL VSP and Secretary, Ministry of Steel were
sent to Chief Secretary & Chief Development Commissioner to Govt. of
Orissa, Chief Secretary to Govt. of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary to Govt.
of Karnataka.
Grant of lease for mines by respective State Government/Government
of India would be of considerable help to RINL for meeting the enhanced
level of its requirement. The issue is becoming more and more important
for RINL from the point of view of cost of key raw materials and its
securitization for consistent operation at higher level of production and
productivity.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee note that the availability of critical inputs e.g. iron ore
and coking coal are key determinants for attaining country’s steel production
target. The Government have admitted that iron ore resources of the country
should be conserved for the use of domestic steel industry and have taken
recourse of certain fiscal initiatives. However, no firm decision appears to
have been taken to protect the interests of domestic steel industry. The
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to their earlier
recommendation for banning on export of iron ore in phases and
encouragement of value addition of iron ore rather than export in order to
not only protect the interests of domestic steel industry. They therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that export of iron ore should be
gradually stopped altogether and encourage value addition of iron ore rather
than export.
Action Taken
Ministry of Steel has been continuously highlighting the need to
discourage export of iron ore from the country, so that iron ore resources
of the country may be conserved for long term utilization of the domestic
steel industries. As a result of continuous efforts of Ministry of Steel, the
Government decided that iron ore resources of the country should be
conserved for the use of domestic steel industry. It was also decided that
although conservation of iron ore resources of the country is of paramount
importance, the same may not be achieved by banning or capping the export
of iron ore, but by taking recourse to appropriate fiscal measures. At present,
5% ad-valorem export duty is levied on iron ore fines, whereas 10%
ad-valorem export duty is levied on iron ore, other than fines. Ministry of
Steel from time to time has taken up with Ministry of Finance for imposing
an appropriate export duty on iron ore.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee observe that for production of steel, SAIL needs more
coal block in the State of Jharkhand and West Bengal. The Committee

39
recommend that the Ministry of Steel should take up the matter with the
Ministry of Coal for considering the prayer of SAIL for allotment of coal
blocks for increase of production. The Committee desire that SAIL should
get priority in the case of allotment of coal blocks in the State of West Bengal
and Jharkhand being a Public Sector Undertaking for meeting the steel
production target prescribed by the Ministry if such coal blocks have not
been allotted to CIL.
Action Taken
As mentioned in the Action Taken Replies for para 5.17 above,
continuous effort by SAIL and the Ministry of Steel is being made for
allocation of coking coal and thermal coal blocks to SAIL. In this
regard, SAIL has already identified two coking coal blocks namely, Jhirki/
Jhirki West OC and Rhone-Routpara (Jharkhand) West and six thermal
coal blocks namely, Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & Extension, Bankhui (Orissa),
Gand Bahera Ujheni (Uttar Pradesh), Puta Parogia and Pindrakhi
(Chhattisgarh) and requested for allocation of blocks has been made. Hon.ble
Minister of Steel has also requested Hon.ble Minister of State for Coal in
February, 2010 to allocate coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation
route.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
The Committee note that the prices of steel in the country are
determined by the domestic and international market forces and the cost of
essential raw materials. They also note that the Government has taken certain
fiscal measures for sustained growth in the steel sector resultantly the steel
industry in India has remained least affected by the global financial meltdown
and the growth in production and consumption of finished steel has also
continued in the first quarter of current year. According to the Ministry there
has been a price stability on domestic steel market because of these initiatives.
The Committee however, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
Ministry of Steel should take a lead and Steel PSUs should not only maintain
price line but also pass on the benefits of lower cost of production to

40
consumers. The Committee hold the view that in order to boost the
consumption of steel in rural and semi-urban areas, the affordability of the
product is essential. They feel that one of the major reasons for our low
per capita steel consumption is the lack of focus on vast rural sectors. An
endeavour should be made by the Ministry for steel to be acceptable, in
preference to other replacements, as affordable and cost effective. The
Committee desire Industry to focus on improving distribution in the remote
and rural areas and an intensity oriented growth in addition to volume of
growth.
The Committee have also been given to understand that to study on
the assessment of steel demand in rural India, it is expected that the Joint
Plant Committee will soon engage a competent agency to carry out study.
The Committee may be apprised of its findings and action initiated thereon
by the Ministry.
Action Taken
Ministry of Steel is getting a survey carried out through Joint Plant
Committee to assess the demand for steel in rural areas. The objective of
the survey is to assess trends in consumption pattern of different items of
steel in the Indian rural market. The survey would also capture the steel
demand arising from investment going into infrastructure development
through projects like Bharat Nirman, etc. focused exclusively on development
of rural India.
A Technical Committee, headed by a Joint Secretary of Ministry of
Steel and comprising of members from industry and industry associations
has been constituted to monitor the survey. IMRB International, a pioneer
in market research, has been selected by the Technical Committee to conduct
the field and analytical work of the survey. The survey would be based on
stratified sampling of the rural population, taking into consideration the
following:
• All the 35 States and union territories separately
• 300 districts (based on percentage of rural population)
• 1500 villages (based on percentage of rural population)

41
• At least 15-20 households and all institutions like gram panchayats
in each village
• A total of 4500 manufacturers and 8000 retailers (based on output/
turnover) at the rural level.
Data, for analysis purpose, for the survey would be collected for the
three years viz., 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 and assessment of rural steel
demand would be for the periods 2011-12, 2016-17, and 2019-20. A pilot
survey has already been conducted covering one district from each of the
four zones (north, south, east, and west) in the country. The districts
identified were Nadia in West Bengal (east), Rae Bareilly in Uttar Pradesh
(north), Ahmednagar in Maharashtra (west) and Vellore in Tamil Nadu
(south).
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
The Committee note that a new R&D scheme for promotion of R&D
in the Iron and Steel sector has been included in the 11th Plan with an outlay
of 118 crores with an objective to evolve a mechanism to promote and
accelerate R&D for development of innovative and appropriate technologies
for cost effective production of quality steel in an environmental friendly
manner. However, the Committee are surprised to find that the amount of
Rs. 18.50 crore provided in BE 2008-09 for this scheme, could not be utilized.
According to the Secretary of the Ministry of Steel, it is a matter of concern
that out of 59 R&D projects costing Rs. 408 crore approved by the
Empowered Committees under the chairmanship of Secretary of Steel so far
Rs. 13 crore has been disbursed and only 26 R&D projects completed. It
clearly indicate the lack of concern by the Ministry of Steel for the research
and development work. The Committee feel that Research and Development
programmes are investments futuristic and underutilization of meagre
allocation would certainly effect the productivity and efficiency of the Steel
industry. The Committee feel that to meet with increasing competition in Steel
sector both nationally and internationally, R&D focus needs to be increased,
as technological upgradation in the steel sector has become unavoidable in
order to make better and cheaper steel for all sections of society. The
Committee would like the Ministry of Steel to step up the request thrust to
R&D sector in 11th Plan.

42
Action Taken
1.0. Ministry of Steel operating the following two schemes for
promotion of R&D in Iron and Steel Sector:
(i) Financial assistance from Steel Development Fund (SDF) under
the mechanism of Empowered Committee (EC).
(ii) Financial assistance from Government Budgetary Support (GBS)
during the 11th Five Year Plan Period.
2.0. The EC under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel) has met
20 times and approved 64 R&D projects costing Rs. 422 crore with SDF
assistance of Rs.178 crore. So far Ministry of Steel has released Rs.120 crore
from Steel development Fund (SDF). Out of 64 R&D projects, 31 projects
have been completed yielding benefits to the industries, 9 projects have been
stopped after mid term review and 24 projects are in progress.
3.0. The expert panel for scrutinizing the R&D proposals under GBS
has shortlisted 8 R&D project proposals in three research areas approved
by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The 1st meeting of Project
Approval and Monitoring Committee (PAMC), set up by the EFC for
approval/monitoring of such R&D projects, was held on 11.02.2010 wherein
4 R&D projects have been approved. Ministry of Steel has released
Rs.4.14 crore in respect of the 4 R&D projects on 30.3.2010.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 20)
The Committee note that the National Steel Policy 2005 sets out the
Government’s vision for future of Steel industry and one of the major
objectives of the Policy is to augment the demand and consumption of the
Steel in the Country by conscious promotion of Steel usage. The Committee
feel that to attain the goals envisaged in the National Steel Policy, the
promotion of steel usage is imperative. The per capita consumption of steel
in India is little in comparison to China and USA due to lack of infrastructure,
namely, buildings, bridges, ports etc. as compared to other countries. The
Institute for Steel Development and Growth must take effective steps in this

43
regard. Publicity of utility of steel must be increased by all sectors. All steel
producers must span out to be semi-urban and rural areas and open more
and more centre.
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and INSDAG
has been directed to prepare a roadmap for implementing the recommendation
of the Committee. Further, all the major and main steel producers also have
been apprised of the recommendation of the Committee to span out in semi
urban and rural areas and open more and more centres.
While second phase of National Steel Promotion Campaign is yet to
start, INSDAG had initiated several initiative (in the form of projects) to
increase steel consumption in India. Some of the important activities of
INSDAG are listed below:
• All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) has been
requested to include the latest methodology for steel design based
on IS: 800-2007 in the under-graduate level of engineering
courses. In turn, AICTE has requested all Universities/Colleges
to incorporate the same in the curriculum. Many premier
Institutions such as IIT Madras, IISC-Bangalore, Anna University
have already revised the syllabus suitably. Many other colleges are
also updating their syllabus and teaching.
• INSDAG is organizing about 15 training programmes for both
professionals and faculties of engineering colleges every year.
This facilitates updating the knowledge of the teachers, designers
and user in connection with steel usage. They gain confidence
and are inclined to recommend use of steel as the material of
construction.
• INSDAG has been providing consultancy services for steel
intensive projects in both government and non-government
sectors. These consultancies are generally non-remunerative in
nature but help in propagating innovative design of steel
structures. INSDAG use these as opportunities to motivate users
to go for steel intensive structures.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]

44
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
Taking note of the manifold increase in the requirement of the raw
material to meet the future demands and massive capacity expansion plans,
there is a necessity to look for alternate reserves in forests without disturbing
the environment and to monitor a balance between the environment and
development of steel sector. They therefore, desire that possibilities of
inclined mining in an environment friendly manner may be explored to tap
the mineral reserves in forests and urge the government to accord a serious
thought to this proposal and want Ministry also to pursue this matter with
the concerned Ministry. The Committee also urge the Government to make
a survey in the North-Eastern States of the country to explore the possibilities
of getting iron ore and Mineral.
Action Taken
Government of India has approved the National Mineral Policy, 2008.
The NMP provides for scientific mining and enforcement of mining plans
for adoption of proper mining methods to ensure optimum utilisation of
minerals. The NMP also envisages for taking a comprehensive view to
facilitate the choice or order of land use keeping in view the needs of
development as well as needs of protecting the forests, environment
and ecology. Both aspects have to be properly coordinated to facilitate and
ensure a sustainable development of mineral resources in harmony with
environment.
As regards survey in the North-Eastern States of the Country to explore
the possibilities of getting iron ore and Mineral, it is mentioned that Ministry
of Mines is the nodal Ministry dealing with mineral resource survey and
exploration. Geological Survey of India, a premier organisation of earth
science survey and research under Ministry of Mines undertakes survey of
the country for identifying resources of minerals, which inter-alia include
iron ore. Further, the reconnaissance permit and prospecting licences for iron
ore and other minerals are awarded by the concerned State Governments
to the applicants. As such, Ministry of Steel has no role in this regard.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]

45
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee further note that financial strength of Steel PSUs
beyond 2012 would mainly depend on renewal of existing mining leases
pending with state governments of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa. They
also note that SAIL had been granted 25 mining leases of iron ore in the States
of Jharkhand, Orissa and Chattisgarh. Out of these only 5 leases are valid,
15 are under deemed extension and balance 5 are under dispute. Without valid
leases, SAIL is facing difficulty for making an investment for the expansion
of its existing mines. The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the
delay in granting the mining leases for iron ore and allotment of coal blocks
to Public Sector companies and feel that Ministry has also failed to play its
role as facilitator in getting these mining leases renewed. The Committee
further note that Jharkhand Government have reportedly agreed to renew the
leases of Chiria mines in favour of SAIL, the Committee desire that Ministry
to constantly pursue this matter and impress upon the State Governments
for granting for lease of remaining mines on priority basis.
Action Taken
Out of 26 iron ore mining leases in the states of Jharkhand, Orissa and
Chhattisgarh, only 6 leases are valid. This includes grant of Mining Lease
at Rowghat in Chhattisgarh in October, 2009. Status of leases is shown below:
 Details Jharkhand Orissa Chhattisgarh T otal
 No. of leases 13 7 6 26
 V alid Nil 1 5 6
 Under deemed 9 5 1 15
 extension
 Under dispute 4 1 Nil 5

46
For early renewal of leases particularly in Jharkhand and Orissa,
continuous effort is being made by SAIL and the Ministry of Steel.
In connection with renewal of leases for Chiria and Gua, the State
Government of Jharkhand suddenly rejected some leases of Chiria and Gua
mines on 15.12.04. Against the rejection Order, SAIL sought relief from
concerned legal forum that is Mining Tribunal and the matter has since gone
into prolonged litigation in higher Courts.
Vigorous efforts have been made by the Ministry of Steel with the State
Government of Jharkhand at appropriate levels in the Government of India
to resolve the matter amicably out of court. Ministry of Steel made special
out of Court efforts and played the role of a facilitator bringing the
stakeholders of SAIL and Government of Jharkhand under mediation of the
Prime Minister’s Office. The meetings under the auspices of the PMO
precipitated the decision that Jharkhand State Government would renew
mining leases for reserves of about 1 billion tonne immediately and for balance
reserve of 1 billion tonne SAIL & State Government will sign an MOU and
State Government would release the reserves against SAIL meeting the
milestones.
On request of the Ministry of Steel, a meeting was held by Secretary
(Mines), GoI on 5-10-2009 which was also attended by the Chief Secretary,
Government of Jharkhand, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Steel, Controller
General IBM, Director General, GSI and Chairman, SAIL as decided in the
meeting, SAIL vide letter dated 19.10.09, requested Chief Secretary,
Government of Jharkhand to renew mining leases for 1 billion tonne of Chiria
and Gua mines immediately and to initiate dialogue for renewal of the balance
leases. Following the persuasions, the State Government of Jharkhand
conveyed its in-principle approval on renewal for the Budhaburu lease
(823.62 ha) of Chiria iron mine on 23.10.09. SAIL vide letter dated 18.11.09
has further requested Jharkhand Government to renew leases corresponding
to 1000 million tonnes keeping all four leases of Gua and Ajitaburu of Chiria
in the present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. Secretary (Steel) also
held meeting with Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand on 17-2-2010 on
the issue of renewal of mining leases including Chiria. SAIL is following up

47
with State Government for expediting formal approval in respect of
Budhaburu lease.
As mentioned in the Action Taken Replies for para 5.17 above,
continuous effort by SAIL and Ministry of Steel is also being made, for getting
allocation of coking coal and thermal coal blocks to SAIL. In this regard,
Hon’ble Minister of Steel has requested Hon’ble Minister of State for Coal
in February’2010 to allocate coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation
route.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.
dated 18th May, 2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report)

48
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee note that the Orissa Government have since decided
not to allot Khandadhar Iron Ore deposit in Sundergarh District to KIOCL
on which drilling/exploratory work cost has already been borne by the
Company and instead recommended to allot the mining lease in favour of
M/s POSCO. Against this, KIOCL is reported to have filed revised petition
before the Mining Tribunal under the Ministry of Mines. The Committee
consider the allotment of this mining lease to KIOCL very essential as this
would help the company to overcome its crisis. It is pertinent to note that
Supreme Court has imposed a complete ban on mining activities at
Kudremukh. The Committee would like the Ministry to forcefully plead the
case on behalf of KIOCL before the Mining Tribunal for the allotment of
above Mining Lease. They also expect that the Ministry would protect the
interest of the Company by impressing upon the Orissa Government for
allotment of above mine to KIOCL.
Action Taken
The matter has been taken up by Ministry of Steel with Ministry of
Mines bringing out the grounds which would merit allotment of the
Khandadhar Iron Ore Deposit to KIOCL Ltd. Central Mines Tribunal had fixed
the hearing on 23.2.2010. KIOCL submitted the arguments before the Mines
Tribunal against the order of the State Government of Orissa recommending
the name of M/s POSCO for grant of prospecting license in Khandadhar Iron
Ore deposit. KIOCL submitted that it had carried out the prospecting
operation to the extent of 10.5 square kilometers, out of 54.1 square
kilometers of Khandadhar Iron Ore deposit in Sundergarh District and KIOCL
had also paid more than Rs.1 crore to the Directorate of Geology, Govt. of
Orissa for the exploratory drilling works. Further it was also brought to the

49
notice of the Mines Tribunal that KIOCL has requisite experience, expertise
manpower and investment capacity. It was also submitted that KIOCL’s
application for prospecting license is much earlier to the application of
M/s. POSCO and thus is a strong ground for claiming preferential right under
Section 11(1) of the Mines and Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957. The verdict of the Mines Tribunal is awaited.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(6)/2009-Parl.,
dated 18th May, 2010]
  N EW DELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
20 September , 2010 Chairman,
29 Bhadrapada , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

50
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 20TH SEPTEMBER, 2010 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1500 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee —  Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G . Ahir
3. Shri Ismail Hussain
4. Shri Yashbant Laguri
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Shri Ramesh Rathod
7. Shri Rakesh Sachan
8. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan)
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
11. Dr. G. Vivekanand
12. Shri Mohd. Amin
13. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
14. Ms. Mabel Rebello
15. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
16. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Smt. Sunita — Deputy Secretary
3. Md. Aftab Alam — Under Secretary

51
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting
of the Committee.
2. ** ** ** **
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Report
on Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel on the recommendations contained
in the 3rd Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel viz. “Demands
for Grants (2009-10)”, Ministry of Steel.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize these Reports
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the
concerned Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
5. ** ** ** **
6. ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.

52
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDA TIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 20
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government
(vide recommendation at S1.Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19 and 20) 17
Percentage of total 85%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies
(vide recommendation at S1.No. 16) 01
Percentage of total 5%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
(vide recommendation at Sl.No. 14.) 01
Percentage of total 5%
V . Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation at Sl.No. 17) 01
Percentage of total 5%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”