1 
 
 
19 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2010-2011) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"MODERNISATION AND EXPANSION OF STEEL SECTOR" 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)  
on "Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sector" of the Ministry of Steel] 
                 
 
 
NINTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2011 /   Bhadra, 1933(Saka) 
 

2 
 
NINTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
"MODERNISATION AND EXPANSION OF STEEL SECTOR" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)  
on "Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sector of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  29.08.2011 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on   29.08.2011 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 August, 2011/Bhadra, 1933(Saka) 

3 
 
CC&S No. 58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

4 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
                     
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………………………………………  
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………...……………………………………………………………………………….. (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report   ……………………………………………………………………………………… 1 
   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
………………………………………………………………………… 
15 
   
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies……………….. 
 
34 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
35 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited……………………………….  
36 
   
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2010-11) held on 19.08.2011…………….……………………………. 
 
38 
II. 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…. 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2010-11) 
 
    
  Shri Kalyan Banerjee -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
        
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale  
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury 
6. Shri Ismail Hussain   
7. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
8. Shri Narahari Mahato 
9. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
10. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
11. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
12. Shri Ramesh Rathod 
13. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
14. Shri Adhi Sankar 
15. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
16. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
17. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
18. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
19. Shri Shibu Soren 
20. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
21. Vacant 
 
 
 Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Mohd. Amin* 
23. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
24. Shri Jugul Kishore 
25. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty  
26. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao 
27. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai  
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
31. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 18.08.2011. 
 
(iii) 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Md. Aftab Alam    - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee o n Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Ninteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the  Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Modernisation and Expansion 
of Steel Sector' of the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 4th February, 2011. Replies of the 
Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 23rd May, 2011.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 19.08.2011.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-IV.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observation s and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                       KALYAN BANERJEE 
26 August, 2011                                                                               Chairman 
04 Bhadra, 1933(Saka)                      Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

8 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing C ommittee on Coal and Steel  
on Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sector  of the Ministry of Steel which was 
presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th February, 2011.    
 
2. The Report contained 15  Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes 
have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 15. 
           
          Total – 13 
          (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do no t desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. No. Nil. 
 Total – 00  
 (Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. No. nil. 
 Total – 00  
 (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 9 & 13. 
  Total – 02  
  (Chapter V) 
 
3.   The Committee hope that utmost importance w ould be given for 
expeditious implementation of their recommendations.  The Committee also 
desire that the replies to Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter–I and final reply in respect of Observation s/Recommendations 
given in Chapter–V should be furnished to them expeditiously. 

9 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Ministry on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations made in the Twelfth Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
 
5. As regards, progress of the modernization and expansion programme of SAIL 
and RINL, the Co mmittee regretted to note that major packages such as Coke Oven 
battery, Blast Furnace,  Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF), Bloom Caster, Continuous 
Casting facilities, Steel Melting Shop (SMS -II) etc. were yet to be received.  Due to 
delay in receipt of requisit e packages, the install ation of aforesaid facilities was  likely 
to miss the laid down targets.  Further, the design, engineering, civil and structural 
works were also likely to take considerable time for their completion which would 
further hamper timely i nstallation of various facilities which ha d been ordered.  The 
Committee need ed hardly emphasise that phasing out of obsolete technology and 
introduction of energy efficiency and environment friendly technology would assume 
critical importance in the moder nization of steel PSUs.  They expect ed that with the 
introduction of state of the art technology in units/plants of Steel Authority of India 
Ltd. (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), their techno -economic parameters 
such as Coke Oven rate and ener gy consumption would substantially improve.  
Accordingly, it was essential that immediate remedial steps need to be taken to 
ensure early delivery of packages, orders for which have been placed.  Further, to 
facilitate the erection / installation of techno logical facilities, civil and engineering 
works of the plants should be completed well before the receipt of packages.  During 
the course of their study visit to IISCO Steel Plant (ISP), Burnpur in June, 2010, the 
Committee found that civil engineering works relating to modernization and expansion 
of the ISP had  been undertaken by SAIL.  The Committee were given to understand 
that both management and the workers were putting in their best efforts for making 
the modernization programme of ISP successful.  Th e Committee were satisfied with 
the performance of all laboureres/ employees / officers of ISP for building up such a 
big project relating to modernization and expansion of the plant.  However, the 
Committee were surprised to note that boundary wall of cer tain stretches of the new 
plant area had not been erected due to protests by the local residents of the area and 
boundary wall of the old plant area was too low.  The Committee desire d that the 
matter might  be sorted out with the help of local administrati on and the boundary 
wall of the entire plant m ight be constructed/ height of the boundary wall be raised 
appropriately within a reasonable time frame.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in the matter.  The Committee also trust ed that units of 
SAIL and RINL would make optimum utilization of the facilities as result of 
implementation of modernization programme. 
 
6. The Ministry in their in their written reply have stated as under:   
"STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
In SAIL, various packages under Modernisation & Expansion plan of its plants/ 
units have been ordered in phased manner due to prevailing market 
conditions. Accordingly, commissioning of various packages has been 
synchronized. The supplies from the vendors/contractors are being received in 
sequential manner matching with the commissioning schedule. 
 

10 
 
Further, all efforts are being made to ensure completion of engineering and 
civil & structural works well before the receipt of supplies under various 
packages for their timely installation. 
 
Expansion of Salem Steel Plant has been completed and the facilities are in 
regular operation. For other plants, major packages have been ordered and 
design engg, civil & structural works and supply & erection jobs are in 
progress.  
 
Construction of boundary wall in ISP: 
 
SAIL-ISP is continuously following up with the local administration as well as 
concerned authorities of Govt. of West Bengal for their help and support to 
complete the boundary wall of the new plant.  
 
A) For Modernization and Expansion site : 
 
Area  Job done (Boundary wall) 
 
Dharampur 90 mtrs. 
 
The height of newly constructed boundary wall of modernization / 
expansion area is 4.2 metre (including concertina wire). 
 
As regards completing the boundary wall at Purusottampur ar ea, Govt. of West 
Bengal has been requested to allot 10.66 acres of Govt. vested land to ISP to 
enable SAIL to create alternate water body on this land before the equivalent 
water bodies can be filled up inside the plant area.  Addl. District Magistrate, 
Asansol and District Land & Land Reforms Officer, Asansol -Durgapur Zone, 
after causing an enquiry, has recommended to OSD and ex -Officio, Special 
Secretary, L&LR Deptt. Govt. of West Bengal for long term settlement of 10.66 
acres Govt. vested land at Purusottampur mouza in favour of ISP on 4.1.2011. 
  
Immediately upon allotment of the said land to ISP, work for creating the water 
body shall start.  After this, the boundary wall at Purusottampur area can be 
completed with the support of local administration. 
 
Regarding closing of the boundary wall at Muri ghar at Purusottampur, the 
notice to vacate the premises has been served by Estate Officer on 3.2.2011 
under PP (Eviction of unauthorized occupants) Act, 1971 to the unauthorized 
occupant.  Hirapur Police Sta tion has been intimated about this.  The part of 
the boundary wall at this area can be closed after eviction with the support of 
local administration.   
 
(B) For Existing Plant  
 
(i) Some of the portion of boundary wall in the existing plant, where level 
was low because of damage to the boundary wall, have been repaired. 
 
(ii) Besides, there was provision of barbed wire over the boundary wall.  
This got broken at places which have been repaired. 
 
 (iii) Other measures taken to strengthen the security are: 

11 
 
(a) 16 (Sixteen) nos. of High Mast Towers have been installed and 
commissioned. 
(b) 7 (Seven) nos. of Revolving security lights were provided at 
different strategic locations. 
(c) Watch Towers have been erected at vulnerable places. 
(d) Two QRT (Quick Response Team) of CISF have been organized. 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
Under the ongoing expansion programme of RINL upto 6.3 Mtpa liquid steel, 
RINL has adopted newer technologies which are environment friendly, energy 
efficient with higher productivi ty and yield. As far as the receipt of equipment 
is concerned, most of the equipment covered under the scope of major 
technological packages i.e. Sinter Plant -3, Blast Furnace -3, Converter Shop 
and Continuous Casting Department of SMS -2, WRM -2 units coming  under 
Stage-1 of the expansion, have already been received at VSP site and the 
erection works are under steady progress. 
 
The supply of equipment for the 2 rolling mills i.e. Special Bar Mill and 
Structural Mill coming under Stage -2 of expansion from the equipment 
suppliers is in steady progress. 
 
RINL is putting forth all out efforts in following up with the equipment suppliers 
for completion of the balance supplies. 
 
To meet the future needs of coke, a consultant is being appointed for 
installation of Co ke Oven Battery No.5 with its associated facilities in addition 
to the 4 batteries under operation. 
 
With respect to Design & Engineering, the design part is complete and the 
engineering portion is also completed by and large for all major expansion 
units. Efforts are on to follow up with the consultants as well as equipment 
suppliers towards completion of left out portion of engineering and the same 
may not hamper the progress of ongoing site activities. 
 
The civil and other allied works are progressing in  full swing to facilitate 
erection of the equipment received at site. 
 
Modernization of operating units 
 
The modernization programmes envisaged in the operating units of 3.0 Mtpa 
stage i.e. revamping & up-gradation of sinter machines, capital repairs of bl ast 
furnaces, revamping & up -gradation of LD converter of Steel Melt Shop are 
under different stages of progress status of which is brought out at reply to 
Recommendation No. 2 above. 
 
Under the modernization programme, the state of the art technologies, w hich 
are energy efficient and environmental friendly, have been introduced and the 
obsolete technologies will be phased out so as to improve the techno -economic 

12 
 
parameters such as coke rate in blast furnaces and substantial improvement in 
energy consumption. 
 
7. While reviewing the modernisation and expansion programme of SAIL 
and RINL, the Committee  had recommended that immediate remedial steps 
be taken for introduction of energy efficiency and e nvironment friendly 
technology and ensu ring early delivery of  packages for which orders hav e 
been placed. The Committee had  desired that for constr uction of boundary 
wall of ISP , the matter should be taken up with local administration owing 
to protest from local residents.  The Ministry in their action taken reply have 
informed that modernisation and expansion of only Salem Steel Plant has 
been completed.  In respect of rest of the Plants of SAIL, major packages 
have been ordered and design engineering, civil and structural works and 
supply and erection jobs are in p rogress.  It has further been informed that 
SAIL-ISP is following up with local administration as well as concerned 
authorities of Government of West Bengal for their help and support to 
complete the boundary wall of the new  plant. The Committee expect tha t 
SAIL and RINL will act fast for the early delivery of packag es for which 
orders have been p laced for ensuring  timely modernisation and expansion.  
The Committee hope that the issue of construction of boundary wall of ISP 
would be amicably sorted out with  local residents with the help of local 
administration.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
 
8. The Committee had been given to understand that during the course of 
implementation of modernization and expansion plan, SAIL had faced certain 
problems/constraints  such as inadequate response to tenders, price bids 
submitted by the bidders being higher than the consultant's estimates, etc. 
The Committee were of the considered opinion that had SAIL adhered to the 
timeline of 2010 for completion of modernization progr amme, despite the 
then meltdown, i ts financial performance would have been far better given 
the present stability in the steel market. In this connection, it was pertinent 
to note that SAIL had also resorted to retendering due to high price quoted  
by the v endors. The Committee we re of the view that what SAIL saved 
financially on account of retendering would be much less than the profit it 

13 
 
could ha d earned on account of completion of modernization programme in 
2010 itself. 
 
9. The Ministry in their in their written reply have stated as under:   
 
"While the main packages of SAIL expansion plan were being finalised, due to 
buoyant steel market & seller‟s market conditions, for major facilities viz. Blast 
Furnace, BOF, CCP etc, most of the globally reputed parti es were willing to 
accept only plant & equipment portion involving technological jobs but not the 
civil & structural jobs. In view of this, SAIL had to re -tender some packages 
after splitting which took longer time for finalising the tenders thereby 
resulting in shifting of the timelines for completion of Modernisation & 
Expansion programme. The high prices offered by the bidders therefore were 
not the only reason for re-tendering of the packages." 
 
10. The Ministry have informed that SAIL had to undertake retendering for 
some packages after splitting some jobs as certain global parties were 
willing to accept only plant and equipment portion involving technological 
jobs but not civil and structural jobs  due to buoyant steel market and 
sellers market conditio ns.  Consequently, it has taken  longer time for 
finalising the tenders resulting in shifting of deadlines for completion of the 
modernisation and expansion programme. The Committee feel that 
considerable time had already elapsed on account of retendering p rocess 
thereby delaying the expansion plans.  The Committee would like that the 
matter be accorded top priority and they may be apprised of the present 
position in this matter.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
11. The Committee regretted to point out that SAIL having compressed the target 
for modernisation and expansion from 2013 to 2010 to encash the buoyancy in the 
steel industry failed to meet the revised target. However, SAIL was stated to have 
taken several corrective steps such as strengthening projec t monitoring and project 
management organization, convening pre bid conferences and consultations with 
technology suppliers and their partners for ensuring wider participation/response in 
the tenders, streamlining project manuals etc. With these measure, t he Committee 
expected the SAIL to complete its modernization and expansion within the revised 
target (August 2010 to December, 2012). The Committee would like to be informed of 
the present position in this regard.  

14 
 
12. The Ministry in their in their written reply have stated as under:   
 
"Expansion of Salem Steel Plant has been completed and the facilities are in 
regular operation. For other plants, major packages have been ordered and 
design engg, civil & structural works and supply & erection jobs are in 
progress. SAIL is putting in all efforts to complete current phase of 
modernisation & expansion plan by 2012-2013." 
 
13. The Committee had noted that consequent upon buoyancy in the steel 
industry, SAIL had compressed the target for modernisation and expan sion 
from 2013 to 2010. However, this revised target could not be achieved.  The 
Committee had expressed the hope that after taking corrective measures like 
project monitoring and streamlining project manuals etc. SAIL would be able  
to complete the said pr ogramme by 2012 . The Committee have been 
informed that while expansion of Salem Steel Plant has been completed and 
for rest of the plants certain civil and structural works, supply and erection 
jobs are in progress and the current phase of modernisation an d expansion 
will be comple ted by 2012 -13. The Committee  regret to find  that the 
completion schedule of modernisation and expansion of SAIL has been 
further revised from 2012 to 2013 which would ultimately result in cost 
overrun.  The Committee strongly feel that h ad SAIL adhered to earlier 
target, its financial performance would have been far better. Obviously, 
there have been shortcomings in Planning, execution and monitoring of the 
projects which needed to be identified and overcome. The Committee would 
like the precise reasons and justifications for frequently revising the 
completion schedule of modernisation and expansion of SAIL. The Committee 
desire that quarterly progress of all the plants should be reviewed at the 
highest level so that there should be no further revision in completion target.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
14. The Committee found that the pre-tendering delay in completion of schedule of 
RINL against the original schedule had been mainly attributed to delay in appointment 
of consultants, tender process and order placement.  The post ordering delays include 
engineering and supply and erections of equipment by BHEL and MECON, structural 
work by HSCL, structural and equipment erections by Bridge and Roof, supply of 
equipments from Chine se sources etc.  The Committee fe lt that the pre and post 
ordering delays could have been avoided had there been stringent monitoring 

15 
 
mechanism in place.  The Committee recommend ed that Ministry of Steel/ RINL 
should chalk out a strategy to make up for the  loss due to time over -run and ensure 
that the modernization and expansion programme of RINL was monitored at highest 
level so as to ensure there was no further time and cost overrun. 
 
15. The Ministry in their in their written reply have stated as under:   
"The status/ progress of work the packages of engineering and supply & 
erection of equipment by BHEL and MECON, structural work by HSCL, 
structural and equipment erections by Bridge and Roof, supply of equipments 
from Chinese sources etc. are given below: 
 
a) M/s BHEL – Four projects are being implemented by M/s BHEL namely 
TB-4, TG-5, Boiler-6 and Electrics for SMS-2. There has been improvement 
by M/s BHEL in supplies and site activities for all the above packages 
during last 2 months on continuous follow u p by RINL and also on taking 
up the matter by JS (Steel).  However, BHEL is yet to complete supplies 
from their Hyderabad Unit which has now been committed to complete by 
Mar‟11 and commission the unit by early May‟11.  Any delay will affect 
commencement of production from BF -3 and the matter is being followed 
up. Commissioning of SMS -2 is dependent on completion of electrics by 
BHEL, Bangalore.  Continuous persuasion is being made with BHEL to 
ensure balance supplies and erection of electrical systems so t hat first heat 
is taken in June‟11/ July‟11. To integrate entire expansion of Stage -I and 
to commence production, it is required to commission this unit as per 
target; otherwise overall schedule will get affected.    
  
b) M/s MECON  – New Wire Rod Mill is bein g installed by MECON as a 
consortium member along with M/s Siemens VAI – Morgan,  USA.   There 
has been overall improvement in progress of the package and 
Commissioning has already commenced.  With persuasion, MECON has 
advanced completion of electrics up to intermediate stage but still behind 
schedule in other areas which is also being pursued.  MECON has agreed to 
deploy additional man power for electrical and piping works which is must 
to maintain the schedule for integrated commissioning of WRM. 
 
c) M/s HSCL - Jobs being executed by M/s HSCL has picked up and are now 
no more critical.   
   
d) M/s Bridge & Roof – Four major packages are being executed by M/s 
Bridge & Roof for VSP namely structural and equipment erection for SMS-2, 
civil work for RMHP, Structura l work for SBM and civil work for iron ore 
storage augmentation. Their performance has improved, but in some of the 
areas progress is behind and being pursued. 
 
e) Supply of equipments from Chinese sources – After rigorous follow up, 
for Stage-1 units, equipm ent is already supplied & received at site and for 
Stage- 2 units, part equipment is under transit and the balance is under 
inspection.  
 

16 
 
In order to make up for the loss due to time over run, the progress of work on 
all fronts in various units of expansio n is being reviewed regularly at the 
highest management level at RINL -VSP. Also, on a day -to-day basis various 
activities are closely monitored in the Projects division at the levels of 
Executive Director, General Managers etc.  Ministry of Steel has also held 
review meetings on the capex programmes of SAIL and RINL regularly." 
 
16. Keeping in view the pre -tendering and post ordering delays the 
Committee had desired Ministry of Steel/RINL to chalkout strategy  to make 
up  for loss due to  time overrun and to  ensure there is no further time and 
cost over run and this be monitored at the highest level to avoid further 
delay.  The Ministry have informed that progress of work is being reviewed 
regularly at highest management level and on day to day basis in the 
projects division. The Committee regret to note despite the progress being 
monitored at the highest level and also on day today basis, the  supply of 
packages/equipments fr om different agencies is till awaited.  This  is 
evident from the fact that c ommissioning of SMS -2 is dependent on 
completion of electric s by BHEL, MECON and Bridge &  Roof are still behind 
in some areas.  The Committee are inclined to conclude that the existing 
mechanism for moni toring is not effective. The Committee desire that the 
concerned agencies who are responsible for supply of engineering packages 
and erection of equipments and structural work should be made 
accountable if further delay takes place in honouring their commitment. The 
Committee would like a status report in the matter.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
 
17. The Committee recommend ed that the thermal coal mines identified by SAIL 
should be allotted to it for captive use from the Government dispensation besides 
according top priority to the renewal of Chiria mines. The Mini stry of Steel should also 
take up the matter with Government of Jharkhand with regard to renewal of leases 
viz. Budhaburu, Dhobil and Ankua keeping in view the fact that Government of 
Jharkhand ha d already given its in -principle approval. With regard to ot her leases 
which were pending for want of forest and environment clearances, the concerns of 
the Ministry of Environment  and Forest/ State Government might  be addressed to 
enable them to grant necessary statutory clearances expeditiously. The Committee 
further recommend ed that Ministry of steel should provide all possible help to 
Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant (VISL) and Salem Steel Plant (SSP) in grant of iron 

17 
 
ore leases keeping in view that they had already applied for grant of leases as they do 
not have their own iron ore mines. They also recommend ed that coal blocks identified 
by SAIL viz. Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & extension, Bankhui, Gand Bahera, Ujheni, Puta 
Parogia and Pindrakhi should be allotted to it to ensure raw material security in 
respect of thermal coal. 
18. The Ministry in their in their written reply have stated as under:   
 
"Renewal of Chiria & Gua lease after grant of in -principle approval by 
Jharkhand State Government for renewal of Budhaburu lease of Chiria on 
23.10.09: 
 
 On 28.10.09, Chai rman SAIL, during his meeting with Hon‟ble Governor, 
Advisor to the Governor and Chief Secy, Jharkhand requested for renewal 
of other leases of Chiria & Gua. 
 On 18.11.09, SAIL informed Jharkhand Govt. to renew leases 
corresponding to 1000 million tonnes ke eping all four leases of Gua & 
Ajitaburu of Chiria in the present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. 
 Secretary (Steel) held meeting with Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand on 
17.2.10 on the issue of renewal of mining leases including Chiria & Gua 
mines of SAIL. 
 Secretary Steel vide letter dated 14.7.10 requested Advisor to His 
Excellency, Governor of Jharkhand for his intervention for renewal of under 
deemed extension  leases of Chiria & Gua in view of Rule 24 B of MCR 
1960. 
 Chairman SAIL met His Excelle ncy Governor of Jharkhand and Chief 
Secretary Jharkhand on 20.7.10 and requested for early renewal of Chiria 
& Gua leases. 
 SAIL vide letter dated 22.7.10 requested Secretary Mines & Geology, 
Jharkhand for renewal of under deemed extension leases of Chiria & Gua.  
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 28.7.10, requested His Excellency, 
Governor of Jharkhand for early renewal of five under deemed extension 
leases of Chiria & Gua. 
 For early renewal of pending Chiria leases, MD, BSL met Advisor to the 
Hon‟ble Govern or of Jharkhand on 10.8.10. As discussed in the meeting, 
MD, BSL vide letter dated 28.8.10, communicated the available iron ore 
reserves vis -à-vis iron ore requirement for next 50 years in view of 
ongoing and future expansion plans of SAIL.  
 Hon‟ble Minister of Steel, vide letter dated 5.10.10 solicited Chief Minister, 
Jharkhand‟s intervention for early action by State Govt. for formally 
renewing the mining leases at Dhobil and Ankua of Chiria and Duargaiburu, 
Topailore and Jhillingburu -II of Gua and also f or computing one billion 
tonne of deposits to be immediately allocated to SAIL from Chiria-Gua belt.  
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jharkhand on 
20.12.10 requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua 
mines. 

18 
 
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 23.12.10 requested Hon‟ble Chief Minister 
Jharkhand for his intervention for immediate renewal of the five mining 
leases, namely Dhobil & Ankua at Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailore & 
Jhillingburu-II at Gua and also requested fo r initiation of subsequent 
discussion on renewal of balance four leases namely Ajitaburu, Sukri -Latur 
& Tatiburu at Chiria & Jhillingburu-I at Gua.  
 Vide letter dated 26.1.11, Hon‟ble Chief Minister, Jharkhand assured SAIL 
that State Govt. will take necess ary actions to ensure that SAIL does not 
suffer from deficiency of any raw materials required in the State. 
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jharkhand on 
10.3.11 requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua 
mines. 
 
Concerning pending forest & environment clearances proposals with 
Ministry of Environment & Forests: 
 
 Chairman, SAIL met Minister Environment & Forests, GoI in June‟10, 
August‟10, November‟10 & January‟11 and requested for early grant of 
pending forest & environment clearance proposals of SAIL. 
 Secretary (Steel) vide letter dated 30.6.10 requested Secretary MoEF for 
consideration of forest clearance proposal of Budhaburu lease of Chiria in 
next FAC meeting and also to consider the grant of environment cle arance 
proposal of Budhaburu lease. 
 In the context of ongoing capex programme of SAIL, Secretary (Steel) vide 
letter dated 9.8.10 requested Secretary (MoEF) for early grant of forest & 
environment clearance proposals of Chiria Iron Ore mines. 
 Secretary (Steel) vide letter dated 23.9.10 requested Secretary (MoEF) to 
favourably consider the forest clearance proposals of Budhaburu, 
Ajiataburu & Sukri -Latur lease of Chiria iron ore mines in the forthcoming 
FAC meetings. 
 Secretary (Steel), vide letter dated 22.1 2.10 requested Chief Secretary 
Jharkhand for his personal intervention for expediting the comprehensive 
report of the State Government so that SAIL proposals for forest clearance 
of Chiria leases can be considered in the forthcoming FAC meetings. 
 Hon‟ble M inister of Steel, vide letter dated 3.2.11 requested Minister 
(MoEF) for his personal intervention for consideration of forest clearance 
proposals for Ajitaburu, Budhaburu & Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria iron ore 
mine in favour of SAIL. 
 As a sequel to above  actions, Forest and Environment clearances have 
been granted to SAIL mines by MoEF as given below : 
 
a) Grant of stage-I forest clearance by MoEF: 
  
i) For diversion of 644.25 ha of forest land in Lease -I of Kiriburu -
Meghahatuburu Mines in Jharkhand on 29.3.10. 
ii) For diversion of 247.50 ha of forest land for development of South -
Central Blocks in Lease -I of Kiriburu -Meghahatuburu Mines in 
Jharkhand on 18.10.10. 
iii) For diversion of 1152.80 ha of forest land in 5.1 Sq. Mile Lease -I of 
Bolani  Mines in Orissa on 12.11.10. 

19 
 
iv) For diversion of 379.228 ha of forest land in Budhaburu lease of 
Chiria  Mines in Jharkhand on 7.3.11. 
v) For diversion of 153.04 ha of forest land in Ajitaburu lease of Chiria  
Mines in Jharkhand on 7.3.11. 
vi) For diversion of 33.40 ha of forest land in S ukri-Latur lease of Chiria  
Mines in Jharkhand on 7.3.11. 
vii) For diversion of 2341.931 ha of forest land in ML -130 lease of 
Barsua-Taldih-Kalta Mines in Orissa on 8.3.11. 
  
b) Beside above MoEF also granted working permission for Duargaiburu 
leases of Gua iro n ore mine for continuation of mining for one year in 
already broken area on 15.6.10. 
 
c) Grant of environment clearance by MoEF: 
 
MoEF, vide order dated 29.10.10, granted environment clearance for 
integrated Barsua -Taldih-Kalta iron ore mining (ML -130 lea se) & 
Beneficiation and Pelletisation plant for 8.05 MTPA (ROM) capacity.  
 
 Regarding grant of environment clearance proposals of Chiria mines, 
Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF has already considered the 
environment clearance proposals pertaining t o Budhaburu, Ajitaburu, 
Dhobil & Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria .  MOEF has since accorded 
environment clearance for Budhaburu lease on 23.3.2011. 
 
Status with regard to grant of mining lease in favour of VISP/SAIL : 
 
1. Government of Karnataka forwarded its rec ommendations vide its letter 
dated 30.07.07 to Government of India  to reserve the NEB (140 ha) area 
as requested by VISP for a period of 30 years. 
2. Against the Karnataka Govt. decision dated 30.7.07, four applicants filed 
Revision Application before the Director, Ministry of Mines, GoI.  
3. Revision applications of three of them were dismissed for default by Mining 
Tribunal vide Order dated 06.11.08. Revision Application of fourth i.e. M/s 
B. Kumar Gowda was dismissed by majority judgment vide order dated 
15.09.09. Accordingly impugned  order dated 30.7.07 of the State 
Government was upheld for reserving the area in favour of VISP. 
4. In the meantime, vide letter dated 06.01.10, Government of Karnataka 
forwarded the proposal to Ministry of Mines, GOI, for approval to grant of 
mining lease in favour of M/s VISP (SAIL)  over an area of 140Ha at NEB 
Range in Bellary district for mining iron ore for a period of 30 years. 
5. Against the Mining Tribunal order dated 15.9.09, one of the party, M/s B. 
Kumar Gowda filed writ peti tion in High Court at New Delhi. Vide order 
dated 28.10.10 Hon‟ble High Court stated that the “Court is not inclined to 
interfere with the impugned final order dated 15.9.09 of the Mines 
Tribunal. Accordingly, the writ petition of M/s B. Kumar Gowda is 
dismissed”. Against the State Govt. decision dated 6.1.10, Court stated 
that the order dated 6.1.10 does not create equity in favour of any party, 
much less VISP. 
6. In light of High Court order dated 28.10.10, Ministry of Mines, GoI is not 
considering the State  Govt. proposal for grant of ML over an area of 140 
Ha at NEB in favour of VISP but considering reservation of area in favour of 
VISP/SAIL. 

20 
 
7. Minister of Steel vide letter dated 15.2.11 requested Minister of Mines for 
his intervention in grant of mining leases to VISP/SAIL. 
8. Minister of Mines vide his letter dated 21.2.11 has informed Minister of 
Steel that the proposal is being sent to concerned department for 
appropriate action. 
 
Status with regard to grant of mining lease in favour of SSP/SAIL:  
 
1. SSP submitted an application for grant of mining lease over an area of 1000 
ha in Kanjamalai Iron Ore deposit to the State Government on 13.6.08.The 
recommendation on the State Government for approval of Central 
Government is awaited.  
2. In the mean time, Industry Dep artment of Govt. of Tamilnadu has informed 
that a case pertaining to felling of trees in the reserves forests in India is 
pending in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court (Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995) 
and unless a decision comes out in the matter, State Govt . would not 
consider any proposal of grant of mining leases in the reserved forest area. 
Judgment of Supreme Court is awaited. 
 
Status with regard to allocation of thermal coal blocks to SAIL for 
captive use 
 
Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is  being met by supplies from 
Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability, SAIL 
has identified six thermal coal blocks namely Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & 
Extension, Bankhui, Gand Bahera Ujheni, Puta Parogia and Pindrakhi and  
requested Ministry of Steel & Ministry of Coal for allocation of at least 2 -3 
blocks. Hon‟ble Minister of Steel has also requested Hon‟ble Minister of State 
for Coal in February‟2010 to allocate these thermal coal blocks to SAIL through 
Govt. dispensation route." 
 
 
19. The Committee had recommended that the matter regarding allotment 
of thermal coal mines to SAIL and renewal of Chiria Mines should be 
accorded top priority. The Committee have been informed that the 
Jharkhand Government had accorded in principa l approval of Budhaburu 
lease of Chiria on 23.10.2009.  The Ministry in their reply have further 
stated that the Ministry of Steel/ SAIL have had several meetings with the 
Government of Jharkhand at different level to sort out the impending issue .  
The Committee are dismayed to note that despite the in -principal approval 
by Government of Jharkhand on 23.10.2009, no tangible result  has been 
made in this matter even after a passage of nearly two years.  The 
Committee had also desired Ministry of Steel/SAIL to obtain environmental 
clearances of proposals pending with Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
The Ministry have also informed that stage -I forest clearance has been 
obtained for 7 proposals.  Besides, working permission for Duargaiburu 

21 
 
leases of Gua iron ore mine, environmental clearance for integrated Barsua -
Taldih Kalta iron ore mining and budhaburu have been obtained.  The 
Committee understand that with the completion of modernisation and 
expansion programme of SAIL, the requirement of critical raw material like 
iron ore and co king coal would increase manifo ld.  It is, therefore, 
imperative that advance action plan is initiated to accomplish this task.  The 
mining leases of SAIL are reported to be pending with the State 
Governments and the Ministr y of Fo rest and Environment for want of 
various statutory clearances for one reason or other.  Need less to say that 
non availability of these critical inputs are essential and will not only erode 
the profitability of SAIL but also affect the end users.  What is n eeded is to 
take up the issue of mining leases of SAIL at the highest level and if needed 
the matter should be r eferred to the Group of Ministers  (GOM) as is being 
done in the case of allotment of coal mines to different end users.  

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
In the aftermath of liberalization and globalization, steel PSUs witnessed a 
strong competition from the private steel producers who started building up their 
capacities by setting up new steel plants.  Steel PSUs thus faced the challenge of 
retaining their predominant position in steel sector.  This necessitated them to draw 
up a modernization and expansion plan of their steel plants not only in terms of 
capacity building but also technological upgradation, introduction of energy efficient 
and environment friendly technology.  Availability of proper infrastructure, land, 
critical inputs and skilled workforce would undoubtedly play a major role in success of 
modernization and expansion of steel PSUs. 
 
Action Taken 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
SAIL is implementing modernization & expansion plan at its five integrated 
steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and special steel plant at 
Salem to enhance its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in 
the current phase. 
 
Besides capacity enhancement, the growth plan adequately addresses the 
need of SAIL Plants towards eliminating technological obsolescence, energy saving, 
enriching product mix, pollution control, developing mines & collieries to meet higher 
requirement of key inputs, introduce customer centric processes and have matching 
infrastructure facilities in the Plant to support higher production volumes and to lower 
the cost of production. 
 
All major facilities at Salem Steel Plant have been completed by Sep‟10 and 
are in use for production and supply of stainless steel to the customers. Work for 
Modernisation & Expansion plans of other steel plants viz. IISCO, Bhilai, D urgapur, 
Rourkela and Bokaro is in progress and are scheduled to be completed progressively 
by 2012-2013. 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
RINL has excellent layout and land suitable to expand capacity upto 20 million 
tonnes per annum. The plant has well connected logistic infrastructure facilities like 
two main ports at close proximity, National highway and railway lines adjacent to the 
plant and skilled workforce. Based on this advantageous position including fund 
availability then, RINL has encashed on the growth opportunity in the country and has 
undertaken expansion to almost double it‟s capacity to 6.3 Mt of liquid steel. 
In the current expansion to 6.3 mt of liquid steel, latest technologies are being 
adopted include pulverised coal injection, combin ed blowing for converters etc. which 
will further improve the techno -economic indices. In addition to this, upgradation of 
the existing equipment / technology is being undertaken / planned through 
modernisation programme to further enhance efficiency & pro ductivity and also the 

23 
 
quality of it‟s products.  Projects have already been identified, which are at various 
stages of implementation and commissioning. However, VSP doesn‟t have captive 
mines for major raw materials like iron ore and coal mines and in sp ite of continuous 
efforts being made by VSP for allotment of captive iron ore mines, no State 
Government has proposed for allotment of such mines.  
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011 of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the modernization and expansion programme of 
plants of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) viz IISCO Steel Plant (ISP), Salem Steel 
Plant (SSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) and Rourkela Steel 
Plant (RSP) was  approved „in principle‟ by SAIL Board between June, 2006 to July, 
2007.  The Committee have been informed that the modernization and expansion 
plan of the plants of SAIL envisaged installation of major facilities such as a new Coke 
Oven Battery, Sinter Machines, installation of new/upgradation of Blast Furnace, Basic 
Oxygen Furnace Convereters, Bloom Casters, continuous casting facilities, New Cold 
Rolling Mill Complex, phasing out of low yield and energy intensive units, new steel 
melting shop and New Bil let Casters/Billet -cum-Bloom Casters etc.  In the case of 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL), the Committee have been informed that 
modernization and expansion was necessitated in view of consistently operating at 
high levels of capacity utilization, cri tical equipments like Blast Furnace, Basic Oxygen 
Furnace (BOF), Sinter Plant and Coke Oven etc. required major revamp/ capital 
repairs to bring them back to earlier reliability and efficiency levels. 
 
Action Taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
SAIL is implementing modernization & expansion plan at its five integrated 
steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and special steel plant at 
Salem to enhance its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in 
the current phase. 
 
Besides capacity enhancement, the growth plan adequately addresses the 
need of SAIL Plants towards eliminating technological obsolescence, energy saving, 
enriching product mix, pollution control, developing mines & collieries to meet higher 
requirement of key inputs, introduce customer centric processes and have matching 
infrastructure facilities in the Plant to support higher production volumes and to lower 
the cost of production. 
 
All major facilities at Salem Steel Plant have been completed by S ep‟10 and 
are in use for production and supply of stainless steel to the customers. Work for 
Modernisation & Expansion plans of other steel plants viz. IISCO, Bhilai, Durgapur, 
Rourkela and Bokaro is in progress and are scheduled to be completed progressiv ely 
by 2012-2013. 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 

24 
 
In order to cater to the growing domestic market for steel, enhance economies 
of scale and also utilise advantageous position with respect to land, infrastructure & 
then available funds, RINL formulated  its long term directional plan to expand the 
capacity upto 16/20 million tonnes, of which expansion to 6.3 mtpa of liquid steel is 
currently under progress.  
 
In addition, as a result of consistently operating at high levels of capacity 
utilization and, c ritical equipment in the plant requiring major revamps / capital 
repairs to bring them back to earlier reliability and efficiency levels, RINL has also 
initiated various steps for modernisation & major revamp/ capital repairs of critical 
equipments like Bl ast Furnace, Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF), Sinter Plant and Coke 
Oven.  
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
According to the Ministry, the original target for completion of modernizati on 
and expansion of plants of SAIL was between June, 2010 to March, 2013.  Owing to 
buoyancy in the steel industry, the timeline for implementation of different packages 
was initially compressed to 2010.  However, as per the further revised targets, the 
plants of SAIL are to be commissioned between August, 2010 to December, 2012.  
Similarly in the case of RINL, the original schedule for completion of stage -1 of 
modernization and expansion was between October, 2008 to February, 2010 which 
has been subsequently revised to March 2011. 
 
Action Taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
SAIL is implementing modernization & expansion plan at its five integrated 
steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and special steel plant at 
Salem to enhance its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in 
the current phase. 
 
Besides capacity enhancement, the growth plan adequately addresses the 
need of SAIL Plants towards eliminating technological obsolescence, energy saving, 
enriching product mix, pollution control, developing mines & collieries to meet higher 
requirement of key inputs, introduce customer centric processes and have matching 
infrastructure facilities in the Plant to support higher production volumes and to lower 
the cost of production. 
 
All major facilities at Salem Steel Plant have been completed by Sep‟10 and 
are in use for production and supply of stainless steel to the customers. Work for 
Modernisation & Expansion plans of other steel plants viz. IISCO, Bhilai, Durgapur , 
Rourkela and Bokaro is in progress and are scheduled to be completed progressively 
by 2012-2013. 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
 The initial delay in expansion was due to poor response of the bidders, 
inadequate & delayed response, extensions sought by bidders, non-submission of bids 

25 
 
in line with specification seeking deviations, delay in response to freeze techno -
commercial bids & opening of price bids etc., asking for changes in contract terms/ 
asking for longer time for execution than stipulated et c. by major process package 
suppliers arising out of the then prevailing buoyant global market mainly due to 
simultaneous expansion of steel industry undertaken globally.   
 
However, RINL-VSP has taken all the necessary steps / actions to expedite the 
critical activities of expansion and since then delays have been made up with which in 
Stage-I of expansion plan of RINL, several units got commissioned which includes 
Power Supply System, Water Supply Units, High Capacity Cranes, part of Raw 
Material Handling System, light up of Reheating Furnace of WRM and several others 
and under operation to supply inputs.   The major portion of site activities in terms of 
volume has either already been completed or in advance stage of completion. 
Equipment erection has bee n completed except few areas. Trial run of individual 
equipments of major units also commenced. Integrated commissioning planned by 
Jun‟11 to start trial production from July‟11. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
As regards, progress of the modernization and expansion programme of SAIL 
and RINL, the Committee regret to note that major packages such as Coke Oven 
battery, Blast Furnace,  Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF), Bloom Caster, Cont inuous 
Casting facilities, Steel Melting Shop (SMS -II) etc. are yet to be received.  Due to 
delay in receipt of requisite packages, the installation of aforesaid facilities is likely to 
miss the laid down targets.  Further, the design, engineering, civil a nd structural 
works are also likely to take considerable time for their completion which would 
further hamper timely installation of various facilities which have been ordered.  The 
Committee need hardly emphasise that phasing out of obsolete technology an d 
introduction of energy efficiency and environment friendly technology would assume 
critical importance in the modernization of steel PSUs.  They expect that with the 
introduction of state of the art technology in units/plants of Steel Authority of India 
Ltd. (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), their techno -economic parameters 
such as Coke Oven rate and energy consumption would substantially improve.  
Accordingly, it is essential that immediate remedial steps need to be taken to ensure 
early delivery of packages, orders for which have been placed.  Further, to facilitate 
the erection / installation of technological facilities, civil and engineering works of the 
plants should be completed well before the receipt of packages.  During the course of 
their study visit to IISCO Steel Plant (ISP), Burnpur in June, 2010, the Committee 
found that civil engineering works relating to modernization and expansion of the ISP 
have been undertaken by SAIL.  The Committee were given to understand that both 
management and the workers were putting in their best efforts for making the 
modernization programme of ISP successful.  The Committee are satisfied with the 
performance of all laboureres/ employees / officers of ISP for building up such a big 
project relating to modernization and expansion of the plant.  However, the 
Committee are surprised to note that boundary wall of certain stretches of the new 
plant area has not been erected due to protests by the local residents of the area and 
boundary wall of the old plant  area is too low.  The Committee desire that the matter 
may be sorted out with the help of local administration and the boundary wall of the 
entire plant may be constructed/ height of the boundary wall be raised appropriately 
within a reasonable time frame .  The Committee would like to be informed of the 

26 
 
action taken in the matter.  The Committee also trust that units of SAIL and RINL 
would make optimum utilization of the facilities as result of implementation of 
modernization programme. 
 
Action Taken 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
In SAIL, various packages under Modernisation & Expansion plan of its plants/ 
units have been ordered in phased manner due to prevailing market conditions. 
Accordingly, commissioning of various packages has been synchronize d. The supplies 
from the vendors/contractors are being received in sequential manner matching with 
the commissioning schedule. 
 
Further, all efforts are being made to ensure completion of engineering and 
civil & structural works well before the receipt of supplies under various packages for 
their timely installation. 
 
Expansion of Salem Steel Plant has been completed and the facilities are in 
regular operation. For other plants, major packages have been ordered and design 
engg, civil & structural works and supply & erection jobs are in progress.  
 
Construction of boundary wall in ISP: 
 
SAIL-ISP is continuously following up with the local administration as well as 
concerned authorities of Govt. of West Bengal for their help and support to complete 
the boundary wall of the new plant.  
 
A) For Modernization and Expansion site : 
 
Area  Job done (Boundary wall) 
 
Dharampur 90 mtrs. 
 
The height of newly constructed boundary wall of modernization / 
expansion area is 4.2 metre (including concertina wire). 
 
As regards completing the boundary wall at Purusottampur area, Govt. of West 
Bengal has been requested to allot 10.66 acres of Govt. vested land to ISP to enable 
SAIL to create alternate water body on this land before the equivalent water bodies 
can be filled up inside the plant area.  Addl. District Magistrate, Asansol and District 
Land & Land Reforms Officer, Asansol -Durgapur Zone, after causing an enquiry, has 
recommended to OSD and ex -Officio, Special Secretary, L&LR Deptt. Govt. of West 
Bengal for long term settleme nt of 10.66 acres Govt. vested land at Purusottampur 
mouza in favour of ISP on 4.1.2011. 
  
Immediately upon allotment of the said land to ISP, work for creating the water 
body shall start.  After this, the boundary wall at Purusottampur area can be 
completed with the support of local administration. 
 
Regarding closing of the boundary wall at Muri ghar at Purusottampur, the 
notice to vacate the premises has been served by Estate Officer on 3.2.2011 under PP 
(Eviction of unauthorized occupants) Act, 1971 to t he unauthorized occupant.  Hirapur 

27 
 
Police Station has been intimated about this.  The part of the boundary wall at this 
area can be closed after eviction with the support of local administration.   
 
(B) For Existing Plant  
 
(i) Some of the portion of bound ary wall in the existing plant, where level 
was low because of damage to the boundary wall, have been repaired. 
 
(ii) Besides, there was provision of barbed wire over the boundary wall.  
This got broken at places which have been repaired. 
 
 (iii) Other measures taken to strengthen the security are: 
 
(a) 16 (Sixteen) nos. of High Mast Towers have been installed and 
commissioned. 
(b) 7 (Seven) nos. of Revolving security lights were provided at 
different strategic locations. 
(c) Watch Towers have been erected at vulnerable places. 
(d) Two QRT (Quick Response Team) of CISF have been organized. 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
Under the ongoing expansion programme of RINL upto 6.3 Mtpa liquid steel, 
RINL has adopted newer technologies which are environment frie ndly, energy efficient 
with higher productivity and yield. As far as the receipt of equipment is concerned, 
most of the equipment covered under the scope of major technological packages i.e. 
Sinter Plant-3, Blast Furnace -3, Converter Shop and Continuous Ca sting Department 
of SMS-2, WRM-2 units coming under Stage -1 of the expansion, have already been 
received at VSP site and the erection works are under steady progress. 
 
The supply of equipment for the 2 rolling mills i.e. Special Bar Mill and 
Structural Mill coming under Stage -2 of expansion from the equipment suppliers is in 
steady progress. 
 
RINL is putting forth all out efforts in following up with the equipment suppliers 
for completion of the balance supplies. 
 
To meet the future needs of coke, a consult ant is being appointed for 
installation of Coke Oven Battery No.5 with its associated facilities in addition to the 4 
batteries under operation. 
 
With respect to Design & Engineering, the design part is complete and the 
engineering portion is also complete d by and large for all major expansion units. 
Efforts are on to follow up with the consultants as well as equipment suppliers 
towards completion of left out portion of engineering and the same may not hamper 
the progress of ongoing site activities. 
 
The ci vil and other allied works are progressing in full swing to facilitate 
erection of the equipment received at site. 
 

28 
 
Modernization of operating units 
The modernization programmes envisaged in the operating units of 3.0 Mtpa 
stage i.e. revamping & up -gradation of sinter machines, capital repairs of blast 
furnaces, revamping & up -gradation of LD converter of Steel Melt Shop are under 
different stages of progress status of which is brought out at reply to 
Recommendation No. 2 above. 
 
Under the modernization pr ogramme, the state of the art technologies, which 
are energy efficient and environmental friendly, have been introduced and the 
obsolete technologies will be phased out so as to improve the techno -economic 
parameters such as coke rate in blast furnaces and  substantial improvement in 
energy consumption. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011 of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
Please see Para no. 5 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
The Committee have be en given to understand that during the course 
of implementation of modernization and expansion plan, SAIL had faced 
certain problems/constraints such as inadequate response to tenders, price 
bids submitted by the bidders being higher than the consultant's estimates, 
etc. The Committee are of the considered opinion that had SAIL adhered to 
the timeline of 2010 for completion of modernization programme, despite the 
then meltdown, its financial performance would now have been far better 
given the present stabi lity in the steel market. In this connection, it is 
pertinent to note that SAIL had also resorted to retendering due to high price 
quoted by the vendors. The Committee are of the view that what SAIL saved 
financially on account of retendering would be much  less than the profit it 
could have earned on account of completion of modernization programme in 
2010 itself. 
 
Action Taken 
While the main packages of SAIL expansion plan were being finalised, due to 
buoyant steel market & seller‟s market conditions, for major facilities viz. Blast 
Furnace, BOF, CCP etc, most of the globally reputed parties were willing to accept 
only plant & equipment portion involving technological jobs but not the civil & 
structural jobs. In view of this, SAIL had to re -tender some pack ages after splitting 
which took longer time for finalising the tenders thereby resulting in shifting of the 
timelines for completion of Modernisation & Expansion programme. The high prices 
offered by the bidders therefore were not the only reason for re -tendering of the 
packages. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
Please see Para no. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

29 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
The Committee regret to point out that SAIL  having compressed the target for 
modernisation and expansion from 2013 to 2010 to encash the buoyancy in the steel 
industry failed to meet the revised target. However, SAIL is stated to have taken 
several corrective steps such as strengthening project mon itoring and project 
management organization, convening pre bid conferences and consultations with 
technology suppliers and their partners for ensuring wider participation/response in 
the tenders, streamlining project manuals etc. With these measure, the Co mmittee 
expect the SAIL to complete its modernization and expansion within the revised 
target (August 2010 to December, 2012). The Committee would like to be informed of 
the present position in this regard.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Expansion of Salem Steel Plant ha s been completed and the facilities are in 
regular operation. For other plants, major packages have been ordered and design 
engg, civil & structural works and supply & erection jobs are in progress. SAIL is 
putting in all efforts to complete current phase of modernisation & expansion plan by 
2012-2013.  
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
Please see Para no. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
The Committee find that the pre -tendering delay in completion of schedule of 
RINL against the original schedule has been mainly attributed to delay in appointment 
of consultants, tender process and order placement.  The post ordering delays include 
engineering and supply and  erections of equipment by BHEL and MECON, structural 
work by HSCL, structural and equipment erections by Bridge and Roof, supply of 
equipments from Chinese sources etc.  The Committee feel that the pre and post 
ordering delays could have been avoided had there been stringent monitoring 
mechanism in place.  The Committee recommend that Ministry of Steel/ RINL should 
chalk out a strategy to make up for the loss due to time over -run and ensure that the 
modernization and expansion programme of RINL is monitore d at highest level so as 
to ensure there is no further time and cost overrun. 
 
Action Taken 
 The status/ progress of work the packages of engineering and supply & 
erection of equipment by BHEL and MECON, structural work by HSCL, structural and 
equipment erections by Bridge and Roof, supply of equipments from Chinese sources 
etc. are given below: 
 
a) M/s BHEL – Four projects are being implemented by M/s BHEL namely TB -4, 
TG-5, Boiler-6 and Electrics for SMS -2. There has been improvement by M/s 
BHEL in supplies and site activities for all the above packages during last 2 
months on continuous follow up by RINL and also on taking up the matter by 
JS (Steel).  However, BHEL is yet to complete supplies from their Hyderabad 
Unit which has now been committed to complet e by Mar‟11 and commission 

30 
 
the unit by early May‟11.  Any delay will affect commencement of production 
from BF -3 and the matter is being followed up. Commissioning of SMS -2 is 
dependent on completion of electrics by BHEL, Bangalore.  Continuous 
persuasion is being made with BHEL to ensure balance supplies and erection of 
electrical systems so that first heat is taken in June‟11/ July‟11. To integrate 
entire expansion of Stage -I and to commence production, it is required to 
commission this unit as per target ; otherwise overall schedule will get 
affected.    
  
b) M/s MECON – New Wire Rod Mill is being installed by MECON as a consortium 
member along with M/s Siemens VAI – Morgan,  USA.   There has been overall 
improvement in progress of the package and Commissioni ng has already 
commenced.  With persuasion, MECON has advanced completion of electrics 
up to intermediate stage but still behind schedule in other areas which is also 
being pursued.  MECON has agreed to deploy additional man power for 
electrical and piping  works which is must to maintain the schedule for 
integrated commissioning of WRM. 
 
c) M/s HSCL - Jobs being executed by M/s HSCL has picked up and are now no 
more critical.   
   
d) M/s Bridge & Roof – Four major packages are being executed by M/s Bridge 
& Roof for VSP namely structural and equipment erection for SMS -2, civil work 
for RMHP, Structural work for SBM and civil work for iron ore storage 
augmentation. Their performance has improved, but in some of the areas 
progress is behind and being pursued. 
 
e) Supply of equipments from Chinese sources – After rigorous follow up, for 
Stage-1 units, equipment is already supplied & received at site and for Stage - 
2 units, part equipment is under transit and the balance is under inspection.  
 
 In order to make up for the  loss due to time over run, the progress of work on 
all fronts in various units of expansion is being reviewed regularly at the highest 
management level at RINL -VSP. Also, on a day -to-day basis various activities are 
closely monitored in the Projects divis ion at the levels of Executive Director, General 
Managers etc.  Ministry of Steel has also held review meetings on the capex 
programmes of SAIL and RINL regularly. 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
Please see Para no. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
 The Committee find that current installed capacity of Hot Metal, Crude Steel 
and saleable Steel in respect of SAIL is 13.8, 12.8 and 11.1 million tonnes 
respectively which is stated to go up to 23.46, 21.20 and 20.23 million tonnes 
respectively after implementation of modernization and expansion programme.  
Similarly, in the case of RINL their current installed capacity of Hot Metal, Liquid Steel 
and saleable Steel which is presently 3.4, 3.0 and 2.656 million tonnes respectively is 
stated to go up to 6.5, 6.3 and 5.72 million tonnes respectively after the ongoing 
expansion programme.  The Committee are surprised to find that though SAIL and 

31 
 
RINL have currently u ndertaken Brownfield projects to expand the capacities of their 
existing plants during 2008 -09, Bokaro Steel Plant and IISCO Steel Plant could not 
fully utlize their installed capacity as their capacity utilization was only 82% and 83% 
in 2008 -09 respectiv ely.  The Ministry attributed the reason for underutilization of 
these capacities to the snags in the blast furnaces.  The Committee are not convinced 
with the reason put forth by the Ministry as the problem should have been envisaged 
well in advance and fixed without much delay.  The Committee urge upon the Ministry 
of Steel/SAIL to undertake capital repair/ replacement of the worn out equipment as 
a part of their current modernization programme so that the bottlenecks in the full 
capacity utilization of t hese plants are removed.  It should be endeavour of the 
SAIL/RINL to fully utilize the existing capacities as only then the increase in the 
capacities could be justified. 
 
Action taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
Capacity utilisation in 2008 -09 at BSL was lower as one Blast furnace was 
under shutdown since Dec‟2008. At ISP, one Blast Furnace was shutdown in October 
2008. This was mainly due to depressed market conditions. 
 
Further, the Modernisation & Expansion plan of SAIL apart from  capacity 
enhancement, adequately addresses the need of SAIL Plants towards eliminating 
technological obsolescence, energy saving, enriching product mix, pollution control, 
developing mines & collieries to meet higher requirement of key inputs, introducing 
customer centric processes and have matching infrastructure facilities in the Plant to 
support higher production volumes,  lowering the cost of production and removing 
bottlenecks for full capacity utilization of SAIL plants. 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
RINL has been surpassing rated capacities of it‟s production units since 2001 -
02. Capacity Utilization for the last three years is given below: 
 
Item 2007-
08 
2008-
09* 
2009-
10 
Liquid Steel (Mt) 3.322 3.145 3.399 
Capacity Utilization (%) 111 105 113 
Saleable Steel (Mt) 3.074 2.701 3.167 
Capacity Utilization (%) 116 102 119 
* Despite production cuts in 2008 -09 due to global meltdown, the 
capacity utilization was above 100%. 
 
Capacity utilization is expected to improve from existing levels, once major 
revamp and capital repairs are completed. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
  
 The Committee note that steel PSUs would meet the expenditure on their 
modernization and expansion from ou t of their internal accruals and external 
borrowings without seeking budgetary support from, Government of India. A sum of ` 
70,169 crore and ` 15005 crore respectively have been sanctioned on account of 
various schemes of modernization and expansion of – SAIL & and RINL.  SAIL could 
utilize only ` 17,352 crore upto June, 2010 on various schemes of its plant which 
works out to about 25% of the approved cost.  Expenditure trend of RINL in respect 
of its modernization is relatively better as they have spent ` 7,508 crore up to June, 
2010 which is about 50% of the approved cost of the project. The Committee is not 
satisfied with the progress of utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose of 
modernization and expansion. The Committee recommend that SAIL and R INL should 
take suitable steps so as to fully utilize the allocated fund for timely completion of the 
projects / schemes related to modernization and expansion of their respective 
units/plants.  
 
Action Taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
An expen diture of ` 23,848 crore has been incurred by SAIL on its 
Modernisation & Expansion plan till Feb‟11. Capital Expenditure requirement in SAIL is 
worked out on the basis of projected progress and schedule vis -à-vis actual 
achievements for identified milesto nes. All efforts are being made to fully utilize the 
allocated funds for timely completion of the projects related to modernization and 
expansion of plants/units. 
 
The utilization vis-à-vis allocation of funds by SAIL for last three years is given 
below: 
 
                                                                                          (`  Crore) 
 2007-08  2008-09 2009-10 
 RE Actuals RE Actuals RE Actuals 
SAIL 2007 2181 4674 5233 10356 10606 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
RINL has undertaken  several initiatives for augmentation/modernization/up 
gradation and Expansion of operating capacities besides total revamp of certain key 
units like Blast Furnaces, Converter Shop, Sinter Plant and other auxiliaries which 
have outlived their economic live s. These projects are at various stages of 
implementation and are planned to be completed progressively by 2013.  As on 
28.02.11, nearly 60% of the expenditure has already been met out of the total outlay 
of ` 15096.20 crs. The table next shows scheme -wise details of Project cost and the 
expenditure incurred till 28.02.2011.  
 
 
 

33 
 
(` Crs.) 
S. 
No Scheme Project 
cost 
Expenditure upto 
Feb ‘11 
1 Coke Oven Battery – IV , (Phase – I) 380.46 365.10 
2 Pulverized coal injection 133.0 72.26 
3 Expansion to 6.3 Mtpa  12499(#) 7958.58 
4 Air Separation unit -IV & V  299.00 94.87 
5 20.6 MW Waste heat recovery – Sinter 
straight line cooler of Sinter Machine 1&2 96.00 0.50 
6 Battery-4 (Ph–II) Coal 138.44 
93.96 
7 Battery-4 (Ph–II) BP 216.86 
8 Supply & Erection of Plant, Machinery for 
one 330 tph Boiler System 350 203.24 
9 Supply & Erection of Plant, Machinery for 
one 67.5 MW Turbo Generator. 358 210.57 
10 Iron ore Storage Capacity Augmentation 481 67.07 
11 220 KV Switching station & MRS 
Augmentation 86.34 
 
30.87  
 
12 Augmentation of 220KV power system for 
receiving 400MVA power 58.10 0.00 
 Total 15096.20 9097.02 
 
# Original approved cost – ` 8692. Crs. (Base Jun 2005), Revised Cost Estimate of ` 
12499 crs (Base: Dec. 2009) excluding the cost towards 3 rd converter & 4th caster and 
power plant, duly approved by RINL Board, was submitted to GoI for approval. 
However, consequent to grant of Navratna status to RINL, GoI approval is not 
required now. The project cost is being updated considering current price level. 
 
RINL has adequately utilized the funds against the total approved outlay for 
the XI Five Year Plan and has already incurred expenditure to the tune of 95% and 
will be fulfilling 100% of the target by the end of 2011-2012.  
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
  
Availability of critical inputs such as iron ore and coking coal is one of the pre -
requisites of modernization and expansion of Indian Steel Industry. The Committee 
observes that although India has total coking coal reserves of 33.413 billion tones, it 
is difficult to mine most of the reserves. The Committee find that except BCCL 
Collieries, coking coal reserves in India are having high ash content. Thus, the 
domestic steel industry is highly dependent upon import of coking coal to fulfill its 
requirement. The Committee observe that post modernization and expansion, raw 
material requirement of Indian Steel Industry would increase substantially. Thus, 
there is an urgent need for having  raw material security. The Committee desire that 
SAIL should step up efforts to expand the mining capacity of their existing iron ore 
mines and develop captive coking coal blocks namely Tasra and Sitanala. The Ministry 
of Steel/ SAIL should make all out e fforts and take up the matter with the Ministry of 

34 
 
Coal at the highest level for acquisition of coal blocks of Jhirki, Jhirki West OC and 
Rhone-Routpara west. 
Action Taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
SAIL is implementing its growth plan to raise  hot metal production capacity to 
23.46 million tons per annum by 2012 -13 against present production of around 14.6 
million tons. With above expansion, requirement of major raw materials is estimated 
to increase as below: 
 
 2009-10 (Actual) 2012-13 (After Expansion) 
Hot Metal 14.6 23.46 
Iron Ore 23.2 39.00 
Coking Coal 13.6 21.00 
Thermal Coal 7.0 12.00 
 
Presently almost entire requirement of iron ore is being met from captive 
mines. In order to meet iron ore requirement for the expanded capacity of its steel 
plants, SAIL is in the process of expanding the production capacity of its existing 
mines and upgrading beneficiation plants. Moreover, development of new mines at 
Chiria, Rowghat, Taldih & Thakurani, installation of beneficiation plant at Gua and 
installation of pelletisation plants at mines/ plant locations are also planned.  
 
In order to augment captive coking coal production, development of Tasra and 
Sitanala coking coal blocks is in progress. Status is as given below : 
 
i) Tasra Coking Coal Block:  
 
 All statutory clearances for mine development have been obtained. Planned 
mine capacity is 4 MTPA (ROM) to produce about 2 MTPA of clean coal. 
Approval of Terms of Reference (TOR) in connection with Environmental 
Clearance for new washery is under con sideration at MoEF. Against the 
previous NIT issued in August‟2010 for selection of Mine Developer cum 
Operator (MDO), nine offers were received, however, none of the bidders 
qualified on financial eligibility criteria.  Issue of fresh NIT with modified 
eligibility criteria is in process.  In the meantime, small scale production has 
been started from November‟2009 and around 77,000 tons of coal has been 
produced till March‟2011. 
 
ii)  Sitanala Coking Coal Block:  
 
All statutory clearances for mine developme nt have been obtained. Mine 
planned for production of 0.3 MTPA (ROM). Issue of revised NIT in process for 
selection of Mine Developer cum Operator (MDO).  
 
In order to further augment captive coking coal production, SAIL has identified 
three potential coking coal blocks namely, Jhirki/ Jhirki West OC block, Routpara block 
and Routpara along with Rohne -Routpara (West) block in Jharkhand and requested 
Ministry of Steel & Ministry of Coal for allocation of the blocks. Coal blocks are yet to 

35 
 
be allocated to SAI L. Ministry of Steel has already requested to Ministry of Coal   to 
allocate these coking coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation route. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
 To conserve iron ore resources for long term utilization of domestic steel 
industry, the Government is discouraging export of iron ore from the country through 
fiscal measures and in this regard, Government of India has recently increased export 
duty on all varieties of iron ore (excluding pellets) to 20% ad-valorem. 
 
 As regards coking coal, domesti cally available metallurgical coal has high ash 
content and therefore, there are constraints regarding domestic availability of quality 
metallurgical coal for Indian Steel industry.  The domestic steel industry has to 
depend on the import of coking coal to  fulfill its requirement.  However, to impove 
long-term security of coal for the domestic steel industry, the Government is 
encouraging the formation of joint ventures between steel companies to scquire 
coking coal assets abroad.  A Special Purpose Vehicle  namely International Coal 
Ventures Limited (ICVL) with participation of Coal India Limited (CIL), Steel Authority 
of India Limited (SAIL), National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited (RINL) and NMDC Limited has been formed for  acquisition of coal 
assets abroad. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
The Committee recommend that the thermal coal mines identified by SAIL 
should be allotted to it for captive u se from the Government dispensation besides 
according top priority to the renewal of Chiria mines. The Ministry of Steel should also 
take up the matter with Government of Jharkhand with regard to renewal of leases 
viz. Budhaburu, Dhobil and Ankua keeping i n view the fact that Government of 
Jharkhand has already given its in -principle approval. With regard to other leases 
which are pending for want of forest and environment clearances, the concerns of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest/ State Government may be addressed to enable 
them to grant necessary statutory clearances expeditiously. The Committee further 
recommend that Ministry of steel should provide all possible help to Visvesvaraya Iron 
& Steel Plant (VISL) and Salem Steel Plant (SSP) in grant of iron ore leases keeping in 
view that they have already applied for grant of leases as they do not have their own 
iron ore mines. They also recommend that coal blocks identified by SAIL viz. Tentuloi, 
Ghogharpalli & extension, Bankhui, Gand Bahera, Ujheni,  Puta Parogia and Pindrakhi 
should be allotted to it to ensure raw material security in respect of thermal coal. 
Action Taken 
 
Renewal of Chiria & Gua lease after grant of in -principle approval by 
Jharkhand State Government for renewal of Budhaburu lease o f Chiria on 
23.10.09: 
 
 On 28.10.09, Chairman SAIL, during his meeting with Hon‟ble Governor, Advisor 
to the Governor and Chief Secy, Jharkhand requested for renewal of other leases 
of Chiria & Gua. 

36 
 
 On 18.11.09, SAIL informed Jharkhand Govt. to renew leases  corresponding to 
1000 million tonnes keeping all four leases of Gua & Ajitaburu of Chiria in the 
present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. 
 Secretary (Steel) held meeting with Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand on 
17.2.10 on the issue of renewal of min ing leases including Chiria & Gua mines of 
SAIL. 
 Secretary Steel vide letter dated 14.7.10 requested Advisor to His Excellency, 
Governor of Jharkhand for his intervention for renewal of under deemed 
extension  leases of Chiria & Gua in view of Rule 24 B of MCR 1960. 
 Chairman SAIL met His Excellency Governor of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary 
Jharkhand on 20.7.10 and requested for early renewal of Chiria & Gua leases. 
 SAIL vide letter dated 22.7.10 requested Secretary Mines & Geology, Jharkhand 
for renewal of under deemed extension leases of Chiria & Gua.  
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 28.7.10, requested His Excellency, Governor of 
Jharkhand for early renewal of five under deemed extension leases of Chiria & 
Gua. 
 For early renewal of pending Chiria leases, M D, BSL met Advisor to the Hon‟ble 
Governor of Jharkhand on 10.8.10. As discussed in the meeting, MD, BSL vide 
letter dated 28.8.10, communicated the available iron ore reserves vis -à-vis iron 
ore requirement for next 50 years in view of ongoing and future expansion plans 
of SAIL.  
 Hon‟ble Minister of Steel, vide letter dated 5.10.10 solicited Chief Minister, 
Jharkhand‟s intervention for early action by State Govt. for formally renewing 
the mining leases at Dhobil and Ankua of Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailo re and 
Jhillingburu-II of Gua and also for computing one billion tonne of deposits to be 
immediately allocated to SAIL from Chiria-Gua belt.  
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jharkhand on 20.12.10 
requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua mines. 
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 23.12.10 requested Hon‟ble Chief Minister 
Jharkhand for his intervention for immediate renewal of the five mining leases, 
namely Dhobil & Ankua at Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailore & Jhil lingburu-II at 
Gua and also requested for initiation of subsequent discussion on renewal of 
balance four leases namely Ajitaburu, Sukri -Latur & Tatiburu at Chiria & 
Jhillingburu-I at Gua.  
 Vide letter dated 26.1.11, Hon’ble Chief Minister, Jharkhand assure d 
SAIL that State Govt. will take necessary actions to ensure that SAIL 
does not suffer from deficiency of any raw materials required in the 
State. 
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jharkhand on 10.3.11 
requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua mines. 
 
Concerning pending forest & environment clearances proposals with Ministry 
of Environment & Forests: 
 
 Chairman, SAIL met Minister Environment & Forests, GoI in June‟10, August‟10, 
November‟10 & January‟11 and reque sted for early grant of pending forest & 
environment clearance proposals of SAIL. 

37 
 
 Secretary (Steel) vide letter dated 30.6.10 requested Secretary MoEF for 
consideration of forest clearance proposal of Budhaburu lease of Chiria in next 
FAC meeting and also to consider the grant of environment clearance proposal 
of Budhaburu lease. 
 In the context of ongoing capex programme of SAIL, Secretary (Steel) vide 
letter dated 9.8.10 requested Secretary (MoEF) for early grant of forest & 
environment clearance proposals of Chiria Iron Ore mines. 
 Secretary (Steel) vide letter dated 23.9.10 requested Secretary (MoEF) to 
favourably consider the forest clearance proposals of Budhaburu, Ajiataburu & 
Sukri-Latur lease of Chiria iron ore mines in the forthcoming FAC meetings. 
 Secretary (Steel), vide letter dated 22.12.10 requested Chief Secretary 
Jharkhand for his personal intervention for expediting the comprehensive report 
of the State Government so that SAIL proposals for forest clearance of Chiria 
leases can be considered in the forthcoming FAC meetings. 
 Hon‟ble Minister of Steel, vide letter dated 3.2.11 requested Minister (MoEF) for 
his personal intervention for consideration of forest clearance proposals for 
Ajitaburu, Budhaburu & Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria iron ore mine  in favour of 
SAIL. 
 As a sequel to above actions, Forest and Environment clearances have 
been granted to SAIL mines by MoEF as given below : 
 
a) Grant of stage-I forest clearance by MoEF: 
  
viii) For diversion of 644.25 ha of forest land in Lease -I of Kiriburu -
Meghahatuburu Mines in Jharkhand on 29.3.10. 
ix) For diversion of 247.50 ha of forest land for development of South -
Central Blocks in Lease -I of Kiriburu -Meghahatuburu Mines in 
Jharkhand on 18.10.10. 
x) For diversion of 1152.80 ha of forest land in 5.1 Sq. Mile Le ase-I of 
Bolani  Mines in Orissa on 12.11.10. 
xi) For diversion of 379.228 ha of forest land in Budhaburu lease of 
Chiria  Mines in Jharkhand on 7.3.11. 
xii) For diversion of 153.04 ha of forest land in Ajitaburu lease of Chiria  
Mines in Jharkhand on 7.3.11. 
xiii) For diversion of 33.40 ha of forest land in Sukri -Latur lease of Chiria  
Mines in Jharkhand on 7.3.11. 
xiv) For diversion of 2341.931 ha of forest land in ML -130 lease of 
Barsua-Taldih-Kalta Mines in Orissa on 8.3.11. 
  
b) Beside above MoEF also granted working perm ission for Duargaiburu 
leases of Gua iron ore mine for continuation of mining for one year in 
already broken area on 15.6.10. 
 
c) Grant of environment clearance by MoEF: 
 
MoEF, vide order dated 29.10.10, granted environment clearance for 
integrated Barsua -Taldih-Kalta iron ore mining (ML -130 lease) & 
Beneficiation and Pelletisation plant for 8.05 MTPA (ROM) capacity.  
 
 Regarding grant of environment clearance proposals of Chiria mines, Expert 
Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF has already considered the envi ronment 
clearance proposals pertaining to Budhaburu, Ajitaburu, Dhobil & Sukri -Latur 

38 
 
leases of Chiria .  MOEF has since accorded environment clearance for 
Budhaburu lease on 23.3.2011. 
 
d) Status with regard to grant of mining lease in favour of VISP/SAIL : 
 
 Government of Karnataka forwarded its recommendations vide its letter 
dated 30.07.07 to Government of India  to reserve the NEB (140 ha) area 
as requested by VISP for a period of 30 years. 
 Against the Karnataka Govt. decision dated 30.7.07, four applicant s filed 
Revision Application before the Director, Ministry of Mines, GoI.  
 Revision applications of three of them were dismissed for default by Mining 
Tribunal vide Order dated 06.11.08. Revision Application of fourth i.e. M/s 
B. Kumar Gowda was dismissed by majority judgment vide order dated 
15.09.09. Accordingly impugned  order dated 30.7.07 of the State 
Government was upheld for reserving the area in favour of VISP. 
 In the meantime, vide letter dated 06.01.10, Government of Karnataka 
forwarded the propos al to Ministry of Mines, GOI, for approval to grant of 
mining lease in favour of M/s VISP (SAIL)  over an area of 140Ha at NEB 
Range in Bellary district for mining iron ore for a period of 30 years. 
 Against the Mining Tribunal order dated 15.9.09, one of th e party, M/s B. 
Kumar Gowda filed writ petition in High Court at New Delhi. Vide order 
dated 28.10.10 Hon‟ble High Court stated that the “Court is not inclined to 
interfere with the impugned final order dated 15.9.09 of the Mines 
Tribunal. Accordingly, the  writ petition of M/s B. Kumar Gowda is 
dismissed”. Against the State Govt. decision dated 6.1.10, Court stated 
that the order dated 6.1.10 does not create equity in favour of any party, 
much less VISP. 
 In light of High Court order dated 28.10.10, Ministry  of Mines, GoI is not 
considering the State Govt. proposal for grant of ML over an area of 140 
Ha at NEB in favour of VISP but considering reservation of area in favour of 
VISP/SAIL. 
 Minister of Steel vide letter dated 15.2.11 requested Minister of Mines f or 
his intervention in grant of mining leases to VISP/SAIL. 
 Minister of Mines vide his letter dated 21.2.11 has informed Minister of 
Steel that the proposal is being sent to concerned department for 
appropriate action. 
 
e) Status with regard to grant of mining lease in favour of SSP/SAIL:  
 
 SSP submitted an application for grant of mining lease over an area of 1000 
ha in Kanjamalai Iron Ore deposit to the State Government on 13.6.08.The 
recommendation on the State Government for approval of Central 
Government is awaited.  
 In the mean time, Industry Department of Govt. of Tamilnadu has informed 
that a case pertaining to felling of trees in the reserves forests in India is 
pending in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court (Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995) 
and unless a decision comes out in the matter, State Govt. would not 
consider any proposal of grant of mining leases in the reserved forest area. 
Judgment of Supreme Court is awaited. 
 
f) Status with regard to allocation of thermal coal blocks to SAIL for 
captive use 
 

39 
 
Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is being met by supplies from 
Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability, SAIL has 
identified six thermal coal blocks namely Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & Extension, Bankhui, 
Gand Bahera Ujheni, Puta Parogia and Pindrakhi and  requested Ministry of Steel & 
Ministry of Coal for allocation of at least 2 -3 blocks. Hon‟ble Minister of Steel has also 
requested Hon‟ble Minister of State for Coal in February‟2010 to allocate these 
thermal coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation route. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
Please see Para no. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
    
The Committee note that critical infrastructure projects such as new rail links, 
augmentation of important existing routes, ports and road connectivity projects etc. 
are vital for growth of the country and are dependent to a certain extent on the steel 
sector. Keeping in view the critical importance of development of infrastructure, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Steel expeditiously complete their 
modernisation and expansion programme so that such projects do not feel shortage 
of good quality of steel.  
 
Action Taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
Considering the potential growth of Infrastructure sector in India and projected 
increase in steel requirement, SAIL is implementing modernization & expansion plan 
at its five integrated steel plants at  Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and 
special steel plant at Salem to enhance its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 
Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in the current phase. 
 
All major facilities at Salem Steel Plant have been completed by Sep‟10 and 
are in use for production and supply of stainless steel to the customers. Work for 
Modernisation & Expansion plans of other steel plants viz. Iisco, Bhilai, Durgapur, 
Rourkela and Bokaro is in progress and are scheduled to be completed progressively 
by 2012-2013. 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
Current Expansion of RINL is already in advanced stage of implementation of 
Stage-I costing around ` 12500 crores to almost double its capacity to 6.3 Million 
Tonnes of Liquid Steel by 2011 -12. With this, RINL will be able to make higher 
volume of steel available in the country for use by critical infrastructure projects such 
as new rail links, augmentation of important existing routes, ports and road 
connectivity projects etc. which are vital for growth of the count ry. Also, RINL is in 

40 
 
the process of upgrading the existing facilities along with the addition of Converter & 
Caster and thereby increasing its capacity further to 7.3 mtpa. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
 The Committee note that in the current economic scenario, there is huge 
growth potential for Indian steel Industry. The Committee have been given to 
understand that stee1 consumption in the country will grow at an average rate  of 
more than 10% for the next 5 years. On the basis of this projection of consumption 
growth, steel demand in the country would be approximately 68 million tonnes for the 
year 2011 -12and it may rise to approximately 100 million tonnes by 2015 -16. The 
Committee agree with the View of the Ministry of Steel that a fresh examination of 
production, consumption, export and import projections for the next 10 years is 
required for which Ministry propose to constitute a committee. The Committee desire 
that since various Greenfield and Brownfield projects are going to be commissioned in 
next 2-3 years, the proposed committee may be constituted on priority basis to look 
Into the projections of steel consumption etc. on year -by-year basis for the next 10  
years so as t o plan and suggest measures to boost the requisite output of  steel. As 
regards consumption of steel in India, the Committee find that per capita 
consumption of steel was 47 kg in 2008 -09 which was much less compared to global 
average of 190.4 kg. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that Government should 
take initiative to focus on increasing the consumption of steer in the rural areas given 
the growth potential of  consumption of steel in the rural area for purposes like rural 
housing, rural infrastructure etc. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 
 It has been decided in the Ministry of Steel to formulate a New National Steel 
Policy which should taken into account the dynamic shift in the steel sector over the 
past few years and formulate new set of projections, policy guideli nes and action 
plants, so as to make India an important steel producer in the world, not only to meet 
the domestic needs but also to supply value added quality steel in the international 
market.  As apex Committee, consisting of representatives of Planning  Commission, 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government and concerned State Governments has 
been already constituted.  Various Task Forces will be further constituted to formulate 
detailed policy documents.  SAIL, RINL and other steel producers are expan ding their 
sales networks with a particular emphasis on tapping the rising demand for steel in 
the rural sector as a result of rising rural incomes.  INSDAG is also promoting the 
usage of steel in rural/semi-urban areas. 
 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
 

41 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

42 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

43 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
 According to the Ministry of Steel, post  completion of current modernization 
and expansion programme, the capacity of hot metal, crude steel and saleable steel 
in respect of SAIL will go up to about 75% of the present installed capacity.  Similarly, 
in case of RINL, after completion of the ongoing expansion, their capacity will be twice 
of the existing installed capacity.  The Committee find that private steel players have 
proposed huge investments for setting up Greenfield projects in order to enhance 
their production capacities.  Major private players such as Tata Steel, Essar Steel, 
Jindal Steel & Power Ltd., Electro Steel Casting Ltd., POSCO, Arcelor Mittal India, JSW 
Steel have embarked upon major Greenfield projects in Orissa, Jharkhand, West 
Bengal and Chhattisgarh for which process of land  acquisition is already in progress.  
Some of these projects are likely to be completed by 2011 -12.  The Committee desire 
that as in the case of private sector, public sector steel companies should also 
consider the feasibility of setting up of Greenfield projects after completion of first 
phase of current modernization and expansion programme so as to remain 
competitive and keep pace with the private sector steel companies. 
 
Action Taken 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. (SAIL) 
 
SAIL had earlier planned to se t up a 12 MTpa Greenfield steel plant in the 
State of Jharkhand subject to land allocation, allocation of iron ore leases and other 
clearances. The viability report on the project was submitted to the  Jharkhand State 
Govt. on 8 th October‟2007 for allocati on of land and signing of MoU. The Government 
response is still awaited.  
 
In its pursuit of setting up greenfield steel plant in the State of Jharkhand, 
SAIL approached Ministry of Fertilisers (MoF) in January‟ 2010, for setting up a steel 
plant at the si te of M/s Fertiliser Corporation of India Ltd.‟s (FCIL) closed unit at 
Sindri. This unit is closed since March‟ 2002 and has 6653 acres of land available on 
freehold basis. Sindri is very close to Bokaro. It has the requisite industrial 
infrastructure and the proposed Haldia -Jagdishpur Gas pipeline will also be passing 
through this area.  
 
SAIL intimated to MoF that it is willing to setup a greenfield steel plant of 5.6 
MTpa capacity at Sindri if the land is allotted to SAIL on nomination basis. SAIL has 
also agreed to set up a 1.15 MTpa Urea plant at Sindri which is a precondition by MoF 
for allocation of land.  
 
Ministry of Fertlisers (MoF) has prepared a draft CCEA Note dated January 19‟ 
2011 on the revival of  closed units of Hindustan Fertiliser Corpora tion Limited and 
Fertiliser Corporation of  India Ltd. including Sindri unit.  The note has taken 
cognizance of SAIL‟s proposal.  

44 
 
Vide this Note MoF  has sought approval of the CCEA to authorize/ empower 
ECOS to consider and approve any proposal received f rom PSUs Consortium, for 
revival of any of the units, with fully tied up proposal.  
 
The Note is still under discussion stage and will be submitted to Cabinet after 
finalization. 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LTD. (RINL) 
 
RINL has plans for setting up steel capac ity at Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd. 
(NINL), which has potential to become a 5 mtpa.  Discussions are on with Ministry of 
Commerce in this regard. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011  of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
  
 The Committee find that SAIL and Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) intend to 
form a Joint Venture Company for development of captive coking coal block for which 
Coal India Ltd. is not giving its nod.  The Committee urge upon Ministry of Steel to 
persuade Ministry of Coal/CIL to give their approval for development of captive coking 
coal block.  The Committee also recommend that more such JVCs may be formed with 
CIL and its subsidiaries mutually agreed to by them as the same would be beneficial 
to both of them. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Kapuria Block of BCCL has a mineable reserve of about 37 MT, which can be 
developed into a modern mine of about 2 MTPA capacity. After long persuasion by 
SAIL, the Board of BCCL had cleared the proposal in June‟2008 for formation of a joint 
venture company of SAIL & BCCL for development of Kapuria block. Before signing 
MOU, BCCL sought clearance of Coal India Ltd. (CIL). However, CIL is not in favour of 
formation of Joint Venture Company of SAIL & BCCL for development of Kapuria 
Block. The matter shall be again pursued with CIL. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2011-Parl. dated 23 May, 2011 of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                       KALYAN BANERJEE 
26 August, 2011                                                                             Chairman 
04 Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

45 
 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL (2010-11) HELD ON 19.08.2011 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 'D',  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R.C. Singh – In the Chair 
 
      MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale 
4. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
6. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
7. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
   
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty 
10. Shri Nand Kumar Sai 
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh    - Director 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose Shri R.C. Singh 
to chair the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure.  Thereafter, 
the chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter t ook up for consideration the following Draft 
Reports:- 
(i) **   **   **   ** 
(ii) **   **   **   ** 

46 
 
(iii)   **   **   **   ** 
(iv) Action Taken Report on observations/recommendations contained in the 12 th 
Report on 'Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sec tor of the Ministry of 
Steel 
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft reports without any changes/modifications  
and authorized the Chairman to present these Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 

47 
 
 ANNEXURE- II 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made         15 
    
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11,12,14 and 15)   13 
        
             
 
Percentage of total                86.7% 
              
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies        
(vide recommendation at S1. No.nil)         00 
            
Percentage of total           Nil 
          
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee       
 
(vide recommendation at S1. No.nil)                                          00 
    
 
Percentage of total                                             Nil 
            
   
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited          
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 9 and 13)        2 
    
 
Percentage of total        13.3% 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 