1 
 
46 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"DEMANDS FOR GRANTS(2013-14)" 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth  Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DE LHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935(Saka) 
 

2 
 
FORTY-SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"DEMANDS FOR GRANTS(2013-14)" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  06.02.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   06.02.2014 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2014/Magha 1935 (Saka) 

3 
 
CC&S No. 85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

4 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v) 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
………………………………………………………………………… 
39 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies………………. 
65 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
66 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited………………………………..  
84 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Details of scheme–wise Capital Expenditure by NMDC……………….. 90 
II. Details of the Unutilised CSR Fund during the years (i.e. FY 
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13) in the CSR Budget Provision by 
MECON……………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
91 
III. Details of Physical & Financial Performance from 2009 -10 to 
2012-13 and Bisra Stone Lime company‟s revival plan………………. 
 
92 
IV. Details of CSR activities done by various PSUs during the last 
five years along with percentag e of expenditure in Uttar 
Pradesh………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
95 
V. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 17.12.2013…………………………………………... 
 
       
102 
VI. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on  the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
     104 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 

5 
 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21. Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
 
 (iii) 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
(iv)

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to pr esent the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sa bha) on "Demands for Grants (2013 -
14)" pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Thirty-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 nd May, 2013. Replies of the 
Government to all the ob servations/recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 8th November, 2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on  17.12.2013.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-VI.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I  of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
      __ December, 2013                                                                           Chairman 
      __ Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 

9 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (Fift eenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel  on Demands for Grants (20 13-14) of the 
Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sab ha/laid in Rajya Sabha  on 
02.05.2013.    
 
2. The Report contained 2 1 Observations/Recommendations. Action 
taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of all 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report  on                  
8th November, 2013. These have been categorised as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
   
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 17 and 21. 
           
 Total – 12 
  (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
Sl. No. Nil 
 Total – 00  
 (Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. Nos.  4, 5, 7, 11, 12 and 20 
 Total – 06  
 (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. Nos. 14, 18 and 19 
  Total – 03  
  (Chapter V) 

10 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations a ccepted by 
the Government.  In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, 
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation.  The Committee desire t hat further Action 
Taken notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I and final Action Taken replies to the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to them at an 
early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal wi th the action taken by the Ministry on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the Thirty-Fifth 
Report. 
 
 
PLAN HEAD: PROMOTION OF R&D SCHEMES IN STEEL SECTOR  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.1 
 
5. The Committee note d that the two schemes on 'Promotio n of 
beneficiation & agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines' and 
'Improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector' were proposed to be 
implemented during the 12 th Five Year Plan. A sum of Rs. 2417 crore was 
proposed for the scheme for promot ion of beneficiation & agglomeration of 
low grade iron ore & ore fines for the 12th Plan Period and Rs. 1693 crore for 
the 13th Plan Period. Similarly, for the scheme on improving energy efficiency 
of secondary steel sector a sum of Rs. 272 crore was propo sed for 12 th Plan 
Period and Rs. 191 crore for the 13th Plan Period. However, Planning 
Commission had allocated Rs. 200 crore to Ministry of Steel for the 12 th Five 
Year Plan only for the scheme 'Promotion of R&D in Iron & Steel Sector'. The 

11 
 
Committee had  been given to understand that these schemes were not 
pursued since the required fund to pursue these schemes was not 
substantial. The Committee we re however unable to comprehend the 
rationale behind not pursuing these two important R&D schemes. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the study, if any, conducted for likely 
benefits from implementation of these schemes, and the grounds on which 
Planning Commission had  not recommended the required funds. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to pursue the matter with 
Planning Commission and the Commission be apprised about the ground 
work already done in the matter and be requested to resume allocation to 
these two important schemes during the current financial year in order to 
sustain long term growth of the Indian steel sector. 
 
6. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
 
"The Working Group on Steel Industry for the 12 th Five Year Plan, had 
recommended a token provision of Rs. one crore each for the two 
interest subsidy schemes, namely, „Promotion of Beneficiation & 
Agglomeration of low grade iron ore & low grade iron ore & ore fines‟ 
and „Improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector‟ with an 
estimated budget of Rs. 2417 crore and Rs. 272 crore r espectively for 
the 12 th Five Year Plan Period. However, Planning Commission 
allocated Rs. 200 crore only to Ministry of Steel for the 12 th Five Year 
Plan. Due to the insufficient allocation, the aforesaid two interest 
subsidy schemes were dropped.  
 
It is , however relevant to mention that the objective of the first 
scheme viz. „Promotion of Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low grade 
iron ore & low grade iron ore & ore fines‟ was to promote setting up of 
new facilities for beneficiation & agglomeration. It is satisfying to note 
that off late large number of beneficiation & agglomeration plants have 
been set up and are being set up. Further, Ministry of Steel is 
supporting two high value R&D projects to facilitate beneficiation & 
agglomeration of Indian Iron Ore.   
 
In so far as the second scheme viz. „Improving energy efficiency of 
secondary steel sector‟, Ministry of Steel and UNDP have already been 
pursuing an Energy Efficiency Improvement Programme in Steel Re -
rolling Mills in India. Further, a new project  have been approved with 
financial assistance from UNDP, Australian Government and Ministry of 
Steel through Steel Development Fund, for addressing the issue of 

12 
 
energy efficiency improvement in Steel Re -rolling Mills & related sub 
sector such as Induction Furnace Units. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, Ministry of Steel has taken up the matter 
with Planning Commission for giving the required allocation for the 
aforesaid two scheme." 
 
 
7. The Committee had observed that a  sum of Rs.2417 crore was 
proposed for the  scheme for promotion of beneficiation & 
agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines for the 12 th Plan 
Period and Rs.1693 crore for the 13 th Plan Period. Similarly, for the 
scheme on improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector a 
sum of Rs.272  crore was proposed for 12 th Plan Period and Rs.191 
crore for the 13 th Plan Period.  The Committee were given to 
understand that  these schemes were not pursued since the required 
fund to pursue these schemes was not substantial. The Committee do 
not agree with the reply of the Government that because of late large 
number of beneficiation & agglomeration plants have been set up 
and are being set up and as Ministry of Steel is supporting two high 
value R&D projects to facilitate beneficiation and agglomeratio n of 
Indian Iron Ore, the Government should  shelve the 'Promotion of 
Beneficiation and Agglomeration of low grade iron ore and low grade 
iron ore and ore fines for which Rs. 2417 crore were proposed during 
12th Plan and Rs. 1693 crore for the 13th Five Yea r Plan.  The 
Committee further, note that as regards second scheme, viz. 
'Improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector' , Ministry of 
Steel and UNDP have already been pursuing an Energy Efficiency 
Improvement Programme in Steel Re -rolling Mills in  India.  The 

13 
 
Ministry have further informed that a new project has been approved 
with financial assistance from UNDP, Australian Government and 
Ministry of Steel through Steel Development Fund for addressing the 
issue of energy efficiency improvements in S teel Re-rolling Mills and 
related sub sector such as Induction Furnace Units. Although, the 
Committee would like that both the schemes be vigorously pursued 
by the Ministry of Steel with Planning Commission, the Committee 
desire that the Gover nment should ensure that there should be  no 
overlapping in implementation of schemes by two different agencies.   
 
 
MODERNISATION AND EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF SAIL  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
 
8. The Committee noted that SAIL had been implementing Modernisation 
and E xpansion Programme of its five integrated Steel Plants at Bhilai, 
Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and Special Steel Plant at Salem to 
increase steel production capacity of crude steel from 12.84 million tonnes 
per annum to 21.4 million tonnes per annu m. While observing that Orders 
worth around Rs. 58000 crore ha d been placed against which actual 
expenditure of Rs. 42893 crore has been incurred till February, 2013 and the 
expansion of Salem Stee l Plant ha d been completed in 2010 -11, the 
Committee were unhappy to note that physical performance of the Company 
indicate a stagnant production as approximately 14.5 MT of Hot metal, 13.6 
MT of crude steel, 12.8 MT of saleable steel and 0.3 MT of pig iron had  been 
produced by the Company during each of the last four years (2009 -10 to 
2012-2013). The Committee were anguished to note that due to poor 
performance of the contractors, the completion of modernization and 
expansion of Bh ilai, Durgapur Steel Plants had  been delayed resulting in 

14 
 
underutilization of outlays. Against the project cost of Rs. 18884 crore, only 
Rs. 7353 crore had been spent so for by Bhilai Steel Plant. Similarly out of a 
project cost of Rs. 3164 crore, Durgapur Steel Plant could spend only Rs. 
1282 crore so far. In the case of Bokaro Steel Pla nt, project implementation 
had been delayed and is to be completed in June, 2013 as against the targe t 
date of December, 2011. What was disturbing to the Committee wa s that 
lISCO expansion project which was to be com pleted by the December, 2010 
had been badly delayed and now the completion will be by June, 2013. The 
Committee desired the Government/SAIL to make all out efforts to ensure 
that the Mo dernization and Expansion plan wa s not dragged on year after 
year and wa s completed during the current fiscal t o avoid cost and time 
overrun. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the resultant 
enhancement of the crude steel production capacity from the ongoing 
modernization and expansion plans as well as the action taken against the 
contractors who had  failed to achieve the milestones causing delay in the 
implementation of various projects of SAIL plants.  
 
9. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
 
"SAIL is putting in all efforts to complete modernisation and expa nsion 
plan within the revised target schedule. Regular review of the 
implementation is being taken by Board Sub-Committees SAIL Board & 
Ministry of Steel.  For expediting the implementation for achievement 
of planned milestones, the matter is being continu ously followed up 
with the top management of contracting agencies to ensure adequate 
resources at site. Risk Purchase Notices have been issued to erring 
contractors and packages have been re -ordered at risk & cost of the 
defaulting contractors. 
 
The crude steel production capacity shall be achieved after the current 
modernization & expansion plan as given below:- 
 
 Installed (Mtpa) After Modernisation & 
expansion (Mtpa) 
Crude Steel capacity 12.84 21.40 
 
Expansion of Salem Steel Plant was completed in Sept ember, 2010 
and is under regular operation. Commissioning of individual units is 

15 
 
being done at other steel plants.  Present status of various Plants is as 
under:- 
 
 At Rourkela Steel Plant, Ore Bedding & Blending Plant, COB-6 complex 
including Coal Handling Plant, Coke Dry Cooling Plant & Coal Chemicals 
Deptt, Sinter Plant -3 & Continuous Caster have been completed and 
are under operation/stabilisation.  Integrated testing & trials of Blast 
Furnace-5 have been completed. Preparations are on for blowing -in of 
the furnace.  
 
 At IISCO Steel Plant, Coke Oven Battery, Sinter Plant & Wire Rod Mill 
have been completed and are under operation/stabilisation. Coke and 
sinter is presently being sent to sinter plants. The Blast Furnace & 
Oxygen Plant are ready and commissi oning is linked with the 
completion of BOF Shop.  
 
 At Bokaro Steel Plant, Acid Regeneration Plant, Coil Packaging Lines, 
Skin Pass Mill & Power supply facilities required for new CRM have 
been completed. Integrated trial run of Pickling Line and Cold Tande m 
Mill done in Jul‟13 for reduction of Pickled HR coils through Cold 
Tandem Mill.   
  
 At Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgapur Steel Plant, facilities are in various 
stages of execution.  
 
Efforts are on to complete the current phase of Modernization & 
Expansion progressively by 2013-14. 
 
In case of Expansion at ISP Burnpur, difficult & unforeseen soil 
conditions, removal of underground boulders and hillocks etc led to 
increase in civil & structural work substantially and also took extra 
time. For commissioning o f Coke Oven Battery and Sinter Plant, the 
coke & sinter dispatch systems were required to be constructed which 
was falling in the area of village deity known as „Jhoraburi‟. The work 
for shifting the deity to some alternate place outside the plant 
premises was obstructed by the local villagers. After continuous 
efforts, the issue was resolved and the deity has been shifted to the 
alternate place in Jun‟12 after which the work was resumed." 
 
10. The IISCO Steel Plant by its letter dated 10th December, 2013 
informed the Committee as regards development of modernisation of 
Burnpur Plant which reads as follows:-  
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 

17 
 

18 
 

19 
 
11. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by Burnpur Plant for 
completion of modernisation.  The Committee expect that the 
Burnpur plant wi ll complete its modernization programme as 
expeditiously as possible.  
 
12. The Committee were unhappy to note that except for 
Modernization and Expansion of Salem Steel Plant plan, all other 
plants of SAIL are under various stages of implementation.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the original time schedule for 
completion of Rourkela Steel Plant and Bokaro Steel Plant was 
March, 2013 and December, 2011 respectively.  Though the Ministry 
have informed that Risk Purchase Notices issued to erring 
contractors and packages have been re -ordered at risk and cost of 
the defaulting contractors as a part of follow up measures, yet the 
Committee feel that the delay  cannot be compensated by the 
contractor as not only the project got escalated, but the company has 
been deprived of the resultant benefits from Modernization and 
Expansion of its plant. The Committee also recollect that during oral 
evidence in connection with examination of the subject 
"Modernization and Expansion of Steel Sector" held on 19.02.2010 , 
the then Secretary (Steel) had informed the Committee that original 
cost for expansion of IISCO Steel Plant, Durgapur as envisaged by 
the consultant was Rs. 8900 crore and it was to be completed by 
December, 2010.  By February, 2010, the cost got escalat ed to Rs. 
14400 crore.  The Committee further note that though the original 

20 
 
plan of SAIL was to complete its Modernisation and Expansion 
programme by December, 2012, the Ministry of Steel in a letter to 
Prime Minister's Office had reportedly directed the c ompany to 
compress the completion schedule and ensure that new facilities are 
commissioned by 2010.  The then Chairman, SAIL during oral 
evidence on 6.4.2011 had also committed that Modernisation and 
Expansion Programme will be completed by December, 2012.   The 
Committee are unable to accept the various administrative delays 
adduced by the Ministry in completion of projects and feel that 
desired attention has not been paid and the programme has been 
badly delayed even after commitment has been given to Hon' ble PM 
in this regard.  Not at all happy with the pace of progress of work on 
Modernization and Expansion programme of SAIL, the Committee 
feel that adequate groundwork has not been done before 
implementation and initiation of the programme which has led t o 
delays.  The Committee, therefore cannot but deplore the 
lackadaisical approach of the SAIL management in completing the 
project in time and desire that the  'Modernisation and Expansion 
Programme' be completed at the earliest and all pending issues be 
individually looked into and effective mechanism to resolve them be 
put into place and the programme be completed at the earliest.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the latest position and 
targeted date for completion of all ongoing Moderniza tion and 
Expansion projects of SAIL and the investments made therein so far.   
 

21 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED  
 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 5 & 7 
 
13. The Committee acknowledge d the fact that RINL has to suffer on 
account of absence of captive mines for iro n ore and coal. The Committee 
had earlier recommended Ministry of Steel to vigorously pursue the matter 
with the concerned State Governments for acquiring iron ore mines and 
Ministry of Coal for allocation of coal blocks reserved for integrated PSUs. The 
Committee were dismayed to learn that no significant progress ha d been 
made in the matter. The Committee we re, however, happy to note that the 
Ministry of Mines, Government of India , had  cleared the proposal on 
19.03.2013 for issue of Letter of Intent (Lol)  to RINL for mining lease for an 
area of 999.08 hectares in Bhilwara District in Rajasthan.  LoI was expected 
to be issued by the Government of Rajasthan shortly. The Committee also 
noted that Ministry of Steel was pursuing the matter for allotment of iron ore 
mines to RINL with State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha. 
Further, in principle,· approval ha d been obtained for allotment of 2 iron ore 
blocks directly to RINL and 1 block through Andhra Pradesh Mineral                                                  
Development Corporation (APMDC).  Applications of RINL for iron ore mining 
were also reported to be pending in States of Jharkhand, U.P., Karnataka and 
Chhattisgarh.  While appreciating the concerted efforts made by the Ministry 
of Steel and RIN L for allocation of captive iron ore mines, the Committee 
hoped that concrete results would emerge from other sources as well. 
Meanwhile, the Committee were, however, concerned to note that no 
significant progress had  been made in allocation of coal blocks  reserved by 
the Ministry of Coal for integrated PSUs to RINL. The Committee therefore, 
strongly recommended that the Ministry of Steel should take up the matter 
at the highest level of the Government and the representatives of Ministry of 
Steel/RINL take up the matter with the Ministry of Coal to resolve the issue 
expeditiously.  
 
14. Though the Committee we re happy to note that feasibility study for 
next phase of expansion of RINL to 11 MTPA of crude steel ha d already 

22 
 
commenced and implementation was envi saged by 2017 -18, they we re 
apprehensive about the time line for the implementation of the expansion 
programme given the scarcity of raw material being faced by the Company. 
The Committee would like RINL to analyze and study the constraints being 
faced by them during the current modernization programme and overcome 
them by drawing up an advance action plan for implementing the next phase 
of expansion programme.  
 
15. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
"Iron Ore: 
 
I. Rajasthan: LOI from Govt. of Rajasthan for 1st ever Iron Ore block in 
the State received on 31/05/13. Another Iron Ore block is under active 
consideration of Govt. of Rajasthan. 
 
 However, to get actual benefits of mining of Iron Ore and bring to VSP 
for use would  depend on how fast all the balance statutory 
clearances are given by Govt. - Matter is being  pursued. 
 
II. Jharkhand: Govt. of Jharkhand got favourable order from Supreme 
Court for allotment of Ghatkuri mines to PSUs.  Accordingly, the 
matter is being pursued by Ministry of Steel and RINL with Govt of 
Jharkhand for which series of meetings took place in April & May, 2013 
– the last being on 28 th May, 2013 by Secretary (Steel) with Advisors 
to the Governor of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary, Govt of Jharkhand. 
 
 Jharkhand is most suited location for sourcing of Iron Ore at moderate 
freight rate by RINL. 
 
III. Andhra Pradesh:  There has been good response from Govt of AP 
recently.  But, for early accrual of benefits to RINL, expeditious 
movement of  proposal by Govt of AP for necessary clearances is 
essential.    
 
IV Odisha: Government of Odisha is being persued by the Ministry of 
Steel for expediting the allotment of mines to RINL in Odisha. 
  
Coal: 
 
Secretary (Steel) has written to Secretary (Coal)  on 26 th Mar‟13 for 
considering early  allotment of at least one or two coal blocks in 
favour of RINL which are earmarked for PSEs by Ministry of Coal, 
preferably Aluara and Parbatpur North. 

23 
 
 
Feasibility study for the next phase of 11 Mtpa of Crude Steel has been 
carried out.  Addressing the following major constraints is essential for 
achieving the growth plans of RINL. 
 
Iron Ore:  Recent positive developments in respect of mines in 
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Jharkhand are reassuring.  However, 
expeditious clearances from the respective State and Central 
Governments are most essential at this juncture.   
 
Coal: Secretary (Steel) has written to Secretary (Coal) on 26 th March, 
2013 for considering early allotment of at least one or two coal blocks 
in favour of RINL which are earmarked for PSEs by Ministry of Coal, 
preferably Aluara and Parbatpur North.  Early action from Ministry of 
Coal is essential. 
 
Water: RINL is facing acute problem in getting water from Govt of AP 
even for 6.3 Mtpa stage, though contra ct exists.  RINL has taken up 
with AP State Govt. to get adequate water supply and also going for 
augmentation of water storage facility by constructing a new Water 
Reservoir. As an alternative, RINL is also exploring installation of 
Desalination Plant; but, it would add to the cost. 
 
Power:  RINL is expanding its power production capacity by 
implementing various new power production schemes. RINL has also 
taken up with AP Transco for strengthening of infrastructure facility to 
receive adequate power and fo r increasing quantum of contractual 
maximum demand power import signed earlier. 
Funds: RINL has been generating surplus cash with which Expansion 
up to 6.3 Mtpa has almost been completed.  RINL has now started 
borrowing for Modernisation and Upgradation sc hemes, which would 
enhance the capacity to 7.3 Mtpa.  For further expansion to 11 Mtpa, 
significant increase in surplus cash is required, for which all efforts are 
being made by RINL.  Early allotment of Iron Ore and Coking Coal 
mines would help in enhanci ng the margins and generation of surplus 
cash."    
 
16. The Committee had been vigorously pursuing the matter of  
allocating captive mines of iron ore and coal to RINL. The Committee 
have time and again recommended that the Ministry of Steel and 
RINL should take up the matter with representatives of Ministry of 
Coal and concerned State Governments in this regard.  The 
Committee have been informed  that on 26th March, 2013,  Secretary 
(Steel) has written to Secretary (Coal) for early allotment of at least 

24 
 
1 or 2 coal blocks preferably Aluara and Parbatpur North which have 
been  earmarked for the purpose.  As regards allocation of iron ore 
mines, the Committee have been informed that Letter of Intent (LOI) 
from Government of Rajasthan for 1st ever Iron Ore blo ck in the 
State has been received by RINL on 31.05.2013.   Further, 
Government of Jharkhand got favourable order from Supreme Court 
for allotment of Ghatkuri mines to PSUs.  Accordingly, the matter is 
being pursued by Ministry of Steel and RINL with Govern ment of 
Jharkhand for which series of meetings took place in April & May, 
2013. The Committee are , however, concerned to note the inaction 
on the part of the Ministry as no action has been taken by the 
Ministry of Steel since 26th March, 2013 when Secretary, Steel wrote 
to Secretary, Coal for considering allotment of coal blocks to RINL.  
The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry of Steel to 
immediately take up the matter with the Ministry of Coal for 
allotment of captive coal block to RINL .  The Co mmittee also expect  
the Ministry of Steel and RINL to take timely action to ensure that 
the expansion plan of the company do not go haywire due to scarcity 
of raw material and they get iron ore mining lease well in time before 
their targeted expansion programmes.    
 
NATIONAL MINERAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NMDC)  
 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
Appointment of CMD for NMDC  
 
17. The Committee note d that National Min eral Development Corporation 
had been without a permanent Chairman and Managing Director since  
December 31, 2011. The Committee had  been given to understand that 
Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) in July, 2011 had reportedly 
recommended the name of Shri M.S. Rana, CMD, Security Printing and 
Minting Corporation of India, to head NMDC. The Co mmittee were surprised 
to note that PSEB's recommendation was not accepted by the Ministry of 
Steel and instead the Director (Technical), NMDC was given the additional 

25 
 
charge for three months.  Now Shri C.S. Verma, CMD SAIL wa s currently 
holding additional charge of CMD of NMDC. The Committee ha d been 
informed by the Ministry that the panel recommended by PSEB had been 
scraped and a five Member Search Committee headed by a Planning 
Commission Member ha d been constituted for selection of the CMD, NMDC. 
The ma nner in which the name of Shri M.S. Rana who was duly 
recommended by PESB was ignored and subsequently the panel scrapped by 
the Ministry creates doubt of its being transparent in the whole process. The 
Committee felt that important policy decisions we re to be taken at this level 
which needs full attention and some one with an additional charge would not 
be able to do justice as there were pressing demands to run the organization 
efficiently which needs urgent handling. The Committee, therefore 
recommended that at least now immediate steps be taken so that the 
process was expedited and NMDC gets a full-fledged CMD immediately.  
 
18. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
 
"A Search Committee for the selection of cand idates for appointment 
to the post of CMD, NMDC Ltd was constituted on 17.01.2013. The 
Search Committee gave wide publicity to the vacant post of CMD, 
NMDC and invited applications from eligible candidates. The short 
listed were interviewed on 30.05.2013 a nd the names recommended 
by the Search Committee have been sent to CVC on 07.06.2013 for 
vigilance clearance. On receipt of vigilance clearance, approval of 
Competent Authority will be taken for appointment of a candidate as 
CMD, NMDC Ltd." 
 
19. As regards  the post of Chairman and Managing Director of 
NMDC which was lying vacant since December, 2011, the Committee 
had recommended that immediate steps should be taken to expedite 
selection process to ensure that the company gets a full-fledged CMD 
immediately.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel have 
informed the Committee that a Search Committee for the selection of 

26 
 
candidate for appointment to the post of CMD, NMDC Ltd. was 
constituted on 17 January, 2013.  The shortlisted candidates were 
interviewed on 13th May, 2013 and the names recommended by the 
Search Committee were sent to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) 
on 7 June, 2013 for vigilance clearance.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that even after lapse of six months when the names 
were referred to CVC, the same have yet to be cleared by the 
organisation.  As no reasons have been put forward by the 
Government for this delay by CVC, the Committee strongly urge the 
Government to vigorously pursue the matter with CVC so that NMDC 
Ltd. get s its full -fledged Head so that he is able to discharge his 
duties in the overall interest of the company.   
 
IDLE EQUIPMENT AT KUDREMUKH  
 
Recommendation Serial No.11 
 
 
20. The Committee were appalled to note that equipments worth 
rupees hundreds of crores are lying idle for more than seven years at 
KIOCL plant in Kudremukh which was closed following a Supreme 
Court order. Moreover, the company had  to maintain them as these 
equipments ha d been lying idle since December, 2005 when the 
mining activities were  stopped. The Committee further note d that 
though KIOCL approached SAIL, NMDC and RINL for utilization of 
these· equipments, yet none of them showed interest to utilize/ 
purchase the same. The Committee fail ed to understand the role the 
Ministry of Steel who had been providing a platform for interaction of 
all producers and overseeing the performance of PSUs under its 
control as it had failed to act as a facilitator to help the Company to 
dispose off or properly utilize the equipments. As Ministry of Steel 

27 
 
and other steel PSUs had not shown any interest in proper utilization 
of these equipments, the company (KIOCL) was reported to have 
shifted some mining equipments to KIOCL's Managalore unit for their 
use and remaining items were auctioned. The Committee ha d been 
given to understand that M/s Annam Steel Pvt. Ltd., Chennai, which 
stood as the H1 bidder in the global auction at a price of Rs. 227.11 
crores had  asked for extension of time for payment by 8.5.2013. 
Taking note of the fact that these steps had  not been taken earlier, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the amount spent to 
maintain the equipment and the total market price at the time of 
purchase of all equipments which were now being sold as scrap. The 
Committee expect ed that in future due ca re was taken by the 
Ministry/Steel PSUs so that scarce public funds used to procure such 
heavy equipments should be properly utilized.  
 
21. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
 
"The mining activities at Kudremuk h were stopped as per the order of 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court w.e.f. 01.01.2006, consequently the mining 
and beneficiation equipments are lying idle. To upkeep these 
equipments in proper conditions and for better realization, KIOCL is 
maintaining these equipments. For guarding against theft etc. of these 
equipments, KIOCL has been utilizing the services of Central Industrial 
Security Force. From the date of closure to till date KIOCL spent 
Rs.60.56 crores on maintenance and security. The break - up of the 
same is as follows:- 
 
Sl. No. Details Amount (Rs. in 
crores) 
1. Spares and Consumables 0.18 
2. Power Charges 20.62 
3. Security 39.76 
 Total 60.56 
 
The above mentioned amount does not include salary and allowance 
paid to the employees of Kudremukh unit.   
 
The procurement cost of the Mining & Beneficiation Equipments 
together with stores and spares which is offered for sale was 

28 
 
Rs.442.28 crores. The book value of the Mining & Beneficiation 
Equipments together with stores and spares  is Rs.690." 
 
22. Taking note of the  equipments worth Rs. hundreds of crores 
lying idle for more than 7 years at KIOCL Plant, Kudremukh, the 
Committee observed that the Ministry of Steel had failed to act as a 
facilitator to help the company to dispose them off properly or utilize 
the equipments. The Committee, therefore, had desired that in future 
due care be taken by the Ministry of Steel so that scarce public funds 
used to procure heavy equipment should be properly utilized.  In 
their action taken reply, the Government have inform ed the 
Committee that procurement cost of mining and beneficiation 
equipment together with source and spares is offered for sale at Rs. 
442.28 crore against the book value of Rs. 690 crore.  What has 
further perturbed the Committee is that from the date of  closure to 
till date, KIOCL had spent Rs. 60.56 crore on maintenance and 
security.  The break up of expenditure indicate that an amount of Rs. 
39.76 crore were spent on security only.  In view of the wasteful 
expenditure of public money on account of equi pment lying idle for 
more than 7 years and huge expenditure incurred on maintenance 
and security of these equipments, the reply of the Ministry of Steel is 
silent on the steps to be taken by them for disposal or otherwise 
utilisation of equipment lying idl e by other steel companies.   The 
Committee, therefore,  reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that the Ministry of Steel should take due care in future and 
act as a facilitator to help the companies to dispose off or properly 

29 
 
utilize the equip ments and would like to be a pprised of the  steps 
taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
Recommendation Serial No.12 
 
23. The Committee note d that the overall performance of KIOCL ha d not 
been very encouraging ever since the mining activities were discont inued at 
Kudremukh with effect from 1.1.2006 in pursuance of Supreme Court Order 
and the Company ha d been encountering serious challenge since then for 
one reason or other. Due to non -availability of assured quantity and quality 
of iron ore, the Company was unable to enter into any long term contract 
with its buyers and therefore limiting to the option of selling its pellets in spot 
market. Needless to say th at the survival of the company wa s at stake. The 
Committee therefore would like the Ministry of Steel to take up the matter of 
issue of allotment of iron ore mines to KIOCL at the highest level. 28 
applications for mining lease and 9 applications for prospecting lice nces 
applied by the Company had  been pending with the State Governments of 
Karnataka, Odi sha and Jharkhand for approval. Though t he Secretary 
Ministry of Steel wa s reported to have taken up the matter with the Chief 
Secretary of respective States, no progress had been made so far.  
 
24. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
 
"In pursuance to the directive of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, mining 
activities at Kudremukh were stopped w.e.f.01.01.2006. Consequent 
to closure of mining activities at Kudremukh, Company has been 
exploring various alternatives for mining at other locations within 
Karnataka and also other States. The details of latest developments 
made to get iron ore mining lease are given as under:- 
 
(i) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Andhra Pradesh 
State Mineral Development Corporation (AP MDC) Limited, 
Hyderabad  
 
Industries & Commerce Department, Govt of Andhra Pradesh issued 
memo dated 18.04.2013 conveying decision of Govt of AP to grant 
prospecting license for iron ore  over an extent of 1513 hectares in 

30 
 
Minchery RF, Rayadurgam Range Bom manhal Mandal, Anantapur dist 
in favour of APMDC, being state public sector undertaking. Govt of 
Andhra Pradesh also permitted APMDC to form joint venture with 
KIOCL Ltd for exploration and exploitation of iron ore deposit for the 
aforesaid area. 
 
KIOCL had entered into Tri-partite MoU with M/s APMDC, an arm of the 
provincial government of Andhra Pradesh and M/s RINL on 
22.06.2013. As per understanding between the three entities, KIOCL 
and APMDC would jointly explore and develop iron ore reserves in the 
Anantpur Dist., in AP, while KIOCL would set up beneficiation and 
pelletisation plant near the mines. 50% of pellets produced by KIOCL 
will be given to RINL on cost plus basis. The remaining 50% of the 
pellets produced may be sold in the open market or offere d to RINL at 
mutually agreed price. 
 
(ii) Allocation of Category “C’ mines 
 
The Central Empowered Committee has submitted its final report 
dated 03.02.2012 to Hon‟ble Supreme Court in WP No.(C) 562 of 2009 
regarding mining leases surveyed by the joint team  in the districts of 
Bellary, Chitradurga and Tumkur and classification of the mining leases 
into different categories on the basis of illegalities found. Based on the 
report of Central Empowered Committee, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court  
by its judgment dated 18.04.2013, allowed all Category “A” and “B” 
mines for operation with conditions and recommended for cancellation 
of mines under Category “C” in the districts of Bellary, Tumkur and 
Chitradurga. Pending decision of KIOCL‟s application for allotment of 
mines, it was requested that the Govt. of Karnataka to consider for 
allocation of Category “C” mines in order to make pellet plant 
operations viable.  
 
Hon‟ble Minister of Steel vide D.O. No.6(4)/2012 -KDH/5600 dated 
20.06.2013 requested Hon‟ble Chief Minister of Karnataka for his 
intervention for allocation of Category “C” mines by Govt. of Karnataka 
to KIOCL in order to make the pellet plant operation viable. 
 
(iii) Hombalghatta and Hosahalli Mining Lease (Chikkanaykanahalli 
Iron Ore Mining Lease, Karnataka) 
 
Govt of Karnataka recommended for grant of mining lease(ML) in block 
no. 02 over an area of 116.55 Ha in Hombalghatta & Hosahalli villages, 
Chikkanaykanahalli Taluk, Tumkur District vide letter No.709/MMM/04-
2005-06 dated 06.03.2006 against Govt. Notificat ion No.CI63 MMM 
2004 dated 20.07.2004 .  
 
KIOCL is awaiting revised ML sketch from Directorate of Mines and 
Geology to obtain Forest Clearance for the project and other statutory 
clearances. Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 

31 
 
18.04.2013, pronoun ced that an embargo on grant of fresh mining 
leases need not be continued any further i.e. Govt of Karnataka can 
grant fresh mining leases in future. Grant of fresh mining leases and 
consideration of pending applications be dealt with in accordance with 
law. With this judgment, Govt of Karnataka need to sort out the 
overlapping issue among all ML allottees and issue revised sketch for 
obtaining forest and other clearances.    
 
(iv) Ramanadurga (Block no. 13/1) iron ore deposit, Bellary Dist., 
Karnataka 
 
An application for grant of Mining Lease for an area of 1573 hectares 
(about 6.5 sq. miles) in Ramanadurga area to the Director, Mines and 
Geology, Govt. of Karnataka (Government of Karnataka) was 
submitted by KIOCL on 09.03.2000, as the area was reserved for  
State Exploitation at that time. Subsequently, Secretary (Mines, 
Textile and SSI) Government of Karnataka conducted a hearing on 
31.08.2010 and 02.09.2010 for consideration of KIOCL‟s application 
for grant of mining lease for iron ore in block No. 13/1. K IOCL 
submitted a map on 14.09.2010 demarcating 50% of area available in 
block No. 13/1 Ramanadurga Range to an extent of 840 hectares for 
grant of mining lease with a copy to Secretary (Mines, Textile and 
SSI), Government of Karnataka. 
 
Hon‟ble Supreme Cou rt vide its judgment dated 18.04.2013, 
pronounced that an embargo on grant of fresh mining leases need not 
be continued any further. Grant of fresh mining leases and 
consideration of pending applications be dealt with in accordance with 
law i.e. Govt of Ka rnataka can grant fresh mining leases in future. 
With this judgment, Govt of Karnataka has to take appropriate 
decision for allotment of mining lease of block No 13/1 (Ramanadurga 
iron ore deposit), since already hearing was held on 31.08.2010 and 
02.09.2010. Company is pursuing the matter with Govt of Karnataka 
to resolve the issue and allocate ML at the earliest.   
 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel vide DO No.6(4)/2012 -KDH dated 
07.01.2013 requested Chief Secretary, Govt. of Karnataka for looking 
into KIOCL‟s pending prospecting/mining lease including block No.13/, 
Ramanadurga iron ore deposit on priority. 
 
(v) Khandadhar iron ore deposit, Odisha 
 
KIOCL submitted PL application on 17.10.2002 over an area of 54.1 sq 
km in village Barsua, Rajabasha, Khandadhar &  Rantha in the district 
of Sundargrah, Odisha and ML application on 29.03.2006. Dept of 
Geology, Govt. of Odisha, on behalf of KIOCL did prospecting drilling 
from 2003 to 2005 in the applied area and submitted report in 
December, 2005. 
 

32 
 
Govt. of Odisha rejected the KIOCL applications and recommended the 
applied area to POSCO. KIOCL challenged the Govt. of Odisha decision 
in various courts. Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 
10.05.2013 set aside the impugned judgment dated 14.07. 2010 
passed by th e Division Bench of the Orissa High Court and remit the 
matter to the Central Government to consider the question of approval 
under Section 5(1) taking into consideration the recommendations 
made by the State Government. 
 
(vi) Ghatkuri iron ore deposit, Jharkhand  
 
KIOCL Ltd submitted its application for grant of Mining Lease (ML) on 
21.07.2007 for an area of 2500 ha against Gazette Notification on 
30.10.2006. KIOCL Ltd also submitted Prospecting License (PL) 
application for the same area on 25.08.2012. vid e No. A/MM -
40510/62-6209/M dated 21 Dec 1962 and No. B/M-6-1019/68-1564/M 
dated 28 Feb 1969 of the then State of Bihar reserved the Ghatkuri 
iron ore deposit for explitation by Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) or 
Joint Venture Project of the State Govt. Spe cial Leave Petition (SLP) 
filed by some of Private Mining Companies was dismissed by Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court in Jul 2012 and upheld year 2009 order of the 
Jharkhand High Court, that the Govt has right to reserve areas for 
exploitation by PSU. Secretary, Mini stry of Steel vide DO letter 
No.6(4)/2012-KDH dated 07.01.2013 requested for looking into 
KIOCL‟s pending Prospecting/Mining Lease application on priority. 
 
A meeting was held under Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel), MoS 
with RINL, SAIL and KIOCL on 17.05. 2013 to discuss the issue related 
to allocation of iron ore mines in the State of Jharkhand to Central 
Steel Sector PSUs i.e. SAIL RINL & KIOCL.  
 
(vii) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Kerala State 
Industrial Development Corporation Limited (KSIDC) 
 
A MoU was signed between KIOCL Limited (KIOCL) and Kerala State 
Industrial Development Corporation Limited (KSIDC) for iron ore 
mining, setting up of beneficiation & pelletisation Plant in the 
Kasaragod / Kozhikode Dist. in the state of Kerala on 22.09.20 11 at 
New Delhi.The MoU was valid for a period of one year from the date of 
signing and shall be renewed thereafter upon mutual consent. KIOCL 
took up with M/s KSIDC for extension of MoU till the execution of JV 
agreement. CMD, KIOCL met Hon‟ble CM of Kera la on 16.10.2012 at 
Thiruvananthapuram to discuss on the status of MoU. In furtherance, 
Director (Commercial) vide letter dated 20.10.2012 requested the 
intervention of Hon‟ble CM in allotment of mining lease to KIOCL for 
establishing a suitable business entity in Kerala.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel vide DO letter No.6(4)/2012 -KDH dated 
07.06.2013 requested Chief Secretary, Govt. of Kerala for suitable 

33 
 
mineral rights in the State of Kerala to the proposed joint venture of 
KSIDC and KIOCL and also possibl e joint venture among KIOCL, 
KSIDC and KEMDEL to take up the Titanium Dioxide separation plant." 
 
25. In view of the discontinued mining activities of KIOCL at 
Kudremukh w.e.f. 1.1.2006 and due to non -availability of assured 
quantity and quality of iron or e; the Committee were informed that 
KIOCL was unable to enter into any long term contract with its 
buyers and therefore, overall performance  of the company had not 
been very encouraging.  The Committee were given to understand 
that 28 applications for min ing lease and 9 applications for 
prospecting licenses applied by the company have been pending with 
the State Governments of Karnataka, Odisha and Jharkhand for 
approval.  The Committee had desired the Ministry of Steel to take up 
the issue of allotment of iron ore mines to KIOCL at the highest level 
with respective State governments.  In pursuance to the Committee's 
recommendation, the Ministry of Steel have informed the Committee 
that Memoranda of Understanding between KIOCL and Andhra 
Pradesh State Miner al Development Corporation was signed on 
22.6.2013 to develop iron ore reserves in Anantpur (Andhra 
Pradesh).  Moreover, on 20.6.2013 the State Government of 
Karnataka were requested to allocate category 'C' mines in order to 
make pellet plant operational and viable.  Furthermore, MoU have 
been reportedly signed between KIOCL Ltd. and Kerala State 
Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. to get suitable mineral 
rights allocated for joint venture.  As regards the Ghatkuri iron ore 
deposits in Jharkhand, the C ommittee have been apprised that 

34 
 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel vide his D.O. letter dated 7.1.2013 has 
requested for looking into KIO CL's pending Prospecting/Mining 
Lease  application on priority.  While appreciating the joint venture 
formed by KIOCL in And hra Pradesh and Kerala, the  Committee find 
that no action has been taken as regard Ghatkuri iron ore deposits in 
Jharkhand after they had made the recommendation and the Ministry 
of Steel have furnished the status only as on 7.1.2013 i.e. much 
before the Committee made the recommendation.  The Committee 
are pained to observe that the Ministry has failed time and again to 
furnish updated reply and desire the Ministry to take appropriate 
action on their recommendation with all sincerity and due care be 
taken in future  so that only updated replies be furnished to them.  
The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to immediately 
pursue the issues pertaining to allotment of Ghatkuri iron ore mine in 
Jharkhand, allotment of  Category 'C' mines by State Gove rnment of 
Karnataka and allocation of suitable mining lease in Kerala  at the 
highest level and the Committee be apprised.  
 
CSR ACTIVITIES IN STEEL PSUS  
 
Recommendation Serial No.20 
 
26. The Committee fou nd that as per DPE guidelines Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) was a concept whereby organizations serve the interest 
of society by taking responsibility for the impact of their activities on 
customers, employees, shareholders, communities and the environment in all 
aspects of their op erations. The C ommittee also fe lt that CSR activities 
should ethically be undertaken within the operational area or within the 
periphery of the plants/mine where the company was carrying out its activity 

35 
 
to directly benefit the people residing therein and who were the mo st 
affected. But the Committee had  found that there ha d been no criteria for 
doling out goodies under the garb of CSR activities by Steel PSUs to areas of 
their own choice. The Committee were appalled to note the haphazard 
manner in which CSR activities ha d been carried out by Steel PSUs in 
particularly 2 districts of Uttar Pradesh namely Barabanki and Gonda.  
  
 The Committee fail ed to understand the logic behind concentrating 
their activities by all the steel PSUs in these 2 districts as if the  headquarters 
of these PSUs had been shifted to these two districts. Incidentally, one of the 
districts happened to be constituency of the Steel Minister. The Committee 
noted that during the year 2012 -13 the profit of SAIL was around 2200 
crores and Rs. 64 clore was spent on CSR which comes to about three 
percent. The Committee note d that according to the Department of Public 
Enterprises Guidelines dated 9 April, 2010 when the profit of a company was 
Rs. 500 crores and abo ve, 0.5% to 2% of the profit had  to be spent o n CSR 
activities. But the surprising fact wa s that maximum amount had been spent 
in 1 district only i.e. Barabanki in Uttar Pradesh. Another surprising fact 
which came out during the evidence w as that there wa s no existing steel 
plant in Barabanki and a new project was coming up at Jagdishpur. 
  
 The Committee had bee n informed that out of a total amount of Rs. 
8,19,98,180 spent by SAIL on CSR activities in the State of UP, SAIL spent 
an amount of Rs. 7,43,32,180 during 2012 -13 in Barabanki, Gonda and 
Balrampur, Uttar Pradesh which comes to 90.6% of the total amount spent in 
the State. Compared with other States, the total CSR expenditure for 2012 -
13 forU.P. stands fourth, next only to Jharkhand, Odisha and Chhattisgarh; 
other States like West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra 
Pradesh etc. lag far behind.  
 
 The Committee further observe d that RINL spent Rs. 12.68 crore on 
CSR activities during (2012-13), out of which Rs. 2.06 crore ha d been spent 

36 
 
in D.P. second only to Andhra Pradesh, despit e the fact that RINL ha d no 
steel plant in U.P.  
 
 As regards NMDC, the Committee found that NMDC had  spent Rs. 
5,15,52,000 in Uttar Pradesh during 2011-12. Out of the 7 projects it took up 
in Uttar Pradesh, 5 of them were in Gonda and Barabanki i.e. out o f total 
5,15,52,000, an amount of Rs. 5,01,67,000 was spen t in these two districts 
which was 97% of the total amount spent. Similarly, during 2012-13 out of a 
total amount of 3,63,18,000 spent for Uttar Pr adesh, about Rs. 3,53,44,000 
had been spent in Barabanki and Gonda district which again constitute. 97% 
of the total amount spent. Similarly, out of the total amount of Rs. 
6,55,91,000/- spent for CSR a ctivities by MOIL unit which had  its 
headquarter at Nagpur, during the las t three years, Rs. 83,38,000 ha d been 
spent for Gonda district, Uttar Pradesh. It might be pertinent to mention here 
that apart from its activities in Maharashtra and  Madhya Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh was the only State for which MOIL had spent its CSR allocation. 
 
Regarding MECON Ltd. the Committee observe d that out of total 
expenditure of Rs. 2,34,40150/ - on CSR activities during 2012 -13, Rs. 
31,56,786/- were spent in 3 districts in U.P. namely Balrampur, Barabanki 
and Gonda and rest of Rs. 2,02,83,365/- had been spent in Jharkhand. 
 
Regarding MSTC, the Committee noted that during 2011-12, out of Rs. 
166.38 lakh spent on CSR activities, Rs. 115.75 lakh i.e. 70% were spent for 
a single project i.e. community centre project in Barabanki. The remaining 
30% amount was spent on 16 projects in West Bengal. During 2012-13, for a 
total amount of Rs. 128.28 lakh spent, Rs. 91.61 lakh i.e. 71% was spent on 
Gonda District, Uttar Pradesh and rest 29% for West Bengal. MSTC Ltd. ha d 
no activities in Uttar  Pradesh. Similarly, HSCL had also spent Rs. 18.21 lakh 
on up gradation of Karura Tarapur link rural road in District Barabanki, U.P.  
 
Although, the Ministry of Steel in  their Annual Report 2012 -13 had 
mentioned that it wa s not mandatory to confine CSR activities in the 

37 
 
periphery of the PSE only but at th e same time the pr inciple behind CSR 
activities might be carried out elsewhere was only for the purpose of keeping 
in view the long supply chain, broadening of consumer base and social and 
environmental demands. The Committee note d with concern that the 
utilization of major CSR funds has taken place by steel PSUs in these districts 
of Uttar Pradesh where none of the above mentioned PSUs had  any major 
steel plant or project in the constituency of Steel Minister. The Committee 
were unable to understand how sp ending in these tw o districts of Uttar 
Pradesh would help the long supply chain, broadening of consumer base and 
social and environmental demands of all steel PSUs including those who were 
otherwise rendering consultancy services only. This was nothing but  gross 
abuse of power by the Ministry and to satisfy the Minister in charge. The 
activities of Steel PSUs were beyond any norms. This type of attitude of 
Public Sector Undertaking were detrimental to the nation's interest.  
 
While recording their strong di sapproval of t he manner in which CSR 
funds had been spent by all steel PSUs in these two districts of Barabanki 
and Gonda in Uttar Pradesh at the cost of all the deserving places where 
actual funds were required to be spent, the Committee strongly 
recommended the Government to enquire into the whole matter of investing 
CSR funds recklessly in these two districts of Uttar Pradesh by all PSUs 
through a Central Investigating Agency and those found responsible and 
guilty be made accountable for misutilization o f funds. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the stringent departmental action taken against 
those officials of steel PSUs who sanctioned CSR funds for these two districts.  
 
27. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnishe d as 
follows:- 
"As per DPE guidelines, every year, each CPSE is required to make a 
budgetary allocation for CSR and Sustainability activities/projects for 
the year.  The budgetary allocation will be based on the profitability of 
the company.  More specific ally, it will be determined by the Profit 
After Tax (PAT) of the company in the previous year as shown here 
under: 
 

38 
 
PAT of CPSE in the previous year Range of Budgetary allocation for 
CSR and Sustainability activities 
(as % of PAT in previous year) 
(i) Less than Rs. 100 crore 3%-5% 
(ii) Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 500 crores 2%-3% 
(iii) Rs. 500 crore and above  1%-2% 
  
The guidelines also make it mandatory for all CPSEs to undertake 
some projects for the development of the backward district of the 
country. Gonda and Barabanki are identified as backward districts. The 
list of CSR activities done by various PSUs during the last five years along 
with percentage of expenditure in Uttar Pradesh is at Annexure –IV.  
PSU-wise details are as under:- 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
Audited PAT of SAIL for FY 2012 -13 is Rs.2170 crore and CSR 
expenditure during 2012-13 stands at Rs.53.29 Crore. Provisional CSR 
expenditure for 2012 -13 (un-audited) was Rs.63.65 crore, estimated 
based on the projected activities. 
 
SAIL earmarked Rs .42 Crore towards CSR budget for 2012 -13 i.e. 
1.19% of previous year‟s (2011-12) PAT of Rs.3543 Crore in the range 
of 0.5 – 2.0 % of net profit of pervious year prescribed by the DPE 
guidelines on CSR.  
 
Additionally, a carry forward amount of Rs.28.48 Cro re on account of 
unspent budget from previous years was also available for CSR 
projects during 2012 -13, thereby making a total fund availability of 
Rs.70.48 Crore for CSR projects.  
 
CSR activities in Gonda, Barabanki and Balrampur: 
 
SAIL plants/units were set up during 60s -70s in the green field areas 
which were extremely backward in terms of modern civic -societal 
amenities. SAIL being a responsible corporate body took up this 
opportunity to develop the peripheral areas and developed the region 
into moder n townships of today, equipped with state of art civic 
amenities viz. hospitals, schools, roads, drinking water 
facilities/sanitation, parks, community centres and other related 
infrastructure. SAIL now a MAHARATNA has more responsibility 
towards social sector and have expanded its CSR efforts to pan India. 
 
SAIL, as a part of its expansion plan, acquired the assets of M/s 
Malvika Steel at Jagdishpur (U.P) in the year 2009, now known as 
Jagdishpur SAIL Unit (JSU). Commissioning of facilities at Jagdishpur 
SAIL Unit is in advance stages. SAIL Board also approved setting up of 
Steel Processing Units (SPUs) at a number of new strategic locations 

39 
 
and out of the total 12 SPUs planned in the northern region; seven 
belong to Uttar Pradesh and as such the region pro mises huge 
potential for SAIL. The SPUs are planned to be set up in Gonda, 
Barabanki and Behraich districts of Uttar Pradesh.  
 
It is relevant to mention here that Gonda, Barabanki and Balrampur 
districts have been identified as Backward Districts by the P lanning 
Commission for the purpose of Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF). 
These districts are quite backward from all socio -economic aspects as 
evident from the fact that literacy rates of Gonda, Barabanki and 
Balrampur are 61.16 %, 63.76% and 51.76% respec tively which are 
much below the national figure of 74.04 %. These districts have very 
low HDI values. 
 
As SAIL is expanding its presence by commissioning of some new 
plants/units in this region, it was felt that creating a brand name 
would bring in goodwil l for SAIL amongst the local mass. In order to 
build conducive and harmonious atmosphere and with a view to 
replicate the SAIL‟s developmental model, a number of development 
oriented social welfare schemes were undertaken in these places also. 
To start with, different facilities were created in the region, under the 
CSR thrust areas i.e. education, medical & health -care, infrastructure 
building at Jagdishpur, Barabanki, Gonda, Balrampur etc. in the last 
few years. 
 
Compared with other states, on the basis o f CSR expenditure in 2012-
13, Uttar Pradesh stands third after Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
The CSR activities in UP comprises of education infrastructure, drinking 
water, community infrastructure, environmental (solar ) and skill 
development for youth which have all been also established at Vizag 
under the vicinity of the Plant.  Such activities are also being planned 
at other backward regions of the country too.   
 
RINL is a company with commercial outlets at 5 regions & 23 branches 
covering all major States.  Out of 23 marketing branches all over 
India, RINL is having 3 branches in Agra, Ghaziabad and Kanpur in 
Uttar Pradesh, with a total business of   around Rs. 600 crores per 
annum.  RINL is also in the process of op ening marketing branch at 
Allahabad and Consignment Sales Agent (CSA) at Varanasi. In the 
backdrop of expansion and product volume increasing from 3 million 
tonnes to 7.3 million tonn es, the Company is planning to spread its 
distribution network further.   
 
Recent developments indicate that in the case of mining lease, in some 
of the States, the State Governme nt favoured other applicants        
vis-a-vis RINL which could be due to the better general public opinion 

40 
 
and goodwill generated in the minds of peop le of the State due to 
higher levels of CSR activities by these applicants as compared to 
RINL.  Therefore, it is felt essential that RINL also gives equal thrust to 
such initiatives as being done by others more importantly since RINL 
will shortly be a 7.3 MT steel producer and plans to further increase its 
capacity RINL would also be increasingly dependent on the potential 
steel consumption in the rural markets. 
 
UP State has both vast rural dominance and population which are 
advantageous for future steel marketing in rural areas.  Recently, RINL 
has launched Rural Dealership Scheme (RDS) at Lucknow and has 
appointed 11 (eleven) rural dealers.  The total business, with the plans 
of expanding RINL‟s commercial activities, is expected to grow much 
more in the  coming years in UP.  The Company has also filed 
application for Iron Ore Mining Lease at Lalitpur, Uttar Pradesh (UP).  
Hence, it is essential that RINL makes its presence felt in the State of 
UP so as to maintain a competitive edge in rural areas especia lly for 
long products which will be available in large quantities after the 
current capacity expansion of RINL and also increase its image as a 
responsible Corporate Citizen in the State of UP. 
 
It is also expected that, in the days to come, steel markets would 
become more volatile and customer retention for preferential sourcing 
will depend to a great extent on goodwill generated.  Rural markets 
would ideally qualify for CSR activities with this end in mind.   While 
the coverage in Western UP is adequate, Eastern UP ie from 
Barabanki, Gorakhpur, Gonda, Balarampur, Basti and Bahraich needs 
to be catered to.  Gonda district is a central hub for Eastern UP and is 
also one of the backward districts in UP as per the list of Backward 
Areas published by the Planning Commission.   
 
Govt. of India has laid emphasis on rural infrastructure as the 
foundation for Rural Development.  Infrastructure development also 
generates relevant employment especially in the skilled & semi -skilled 
sector.  The recent report of the st udy on sector -wise manpower 
requirements in skill gaps by the National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC) projects that the gap is maximum in the 
infrastructure skill development domain. Considering the importance of 
development of rural infrastructure and its concurrent relation to steel 
consumption/marketability of the Company‟s products in rural sector, 
various CSR activities in UP have been taken up for skill development 
as a Project in line with the Company‟s natural corollary of business.  
These act ivities taken up in rural areas of the largest State, Uttar 
Pradesh will be of strategic benefit both from business as well as from 
social responsibility points of view.   Such projects are also being 
initiated in other backward areas of the Country. Initi ally skill 
development center/ITI model have been initiated in Gonda and Vizag.  
In view of the HDI being lowest in Gonda, the first project among the 
proposed ten (10) locations was initiated here.   

41 
 
 
Further RINL by its inherent nature is an energy inten sive industry.  
Energy consumed should be returned in some form or other so as to 
make an energy neutral impact; otherwise the future generations will 
be deprived of even essential means.  In this context investment in 
Solar Power & Wind Mill technology, r ain water harvesting etc are 
currently nascent domains of RINL.   
 
Moreover this domain is also a high priority focus area for the 
Government.  As such RINL has also made significant contribution in 
the areas of solar street lighting in remote and rural ar eas, solar 
lighting in schools and homes for night study for children. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
The amount spent in Uttar Pradesh during 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 has 
to be seen in the overall perspective of CSR expenditure of NMDC.  
During the year 2011 -12, NMDC has spen t Rs.86.72 crore and for the 
year 2012-13 the CSR expenditure was Rs.101.10 crore.  The amount 
spent in Uttar Pradesh constitute only 6.3% and 4.3% of the total CSR 
expenditure of NMDC during these two years respectively. The Districts 
of Barabanki and Gon da are listed in the backward districts identified 
by Planning Commission under Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) 
and for this reason CSR projects in the above districts have been 
undertaken apart from other backward districts in UP like Sitapur, 
Balrampur, etc.  Thus, the funds have been mostly utilized for 
infrastructural development in these backward districts through Public 
Sector agencies like M/s. HSCL, UP Rajkiya Nirman Nigam Limited and 
UP Jal Nigam Limited. 
 
MSTC Limited 
  
MSTC is a trading organi zation and acts as a service provider to the 
various Government Departments and PSU‟s by holding web based e -
auction / e-tender for sale/ procurement of various items. MSTC does 
not have any manufacturing unit. It has presence in about 10 locations 
whereas its activities as e -commerce service provider are spread 
across the country. MSTC has got more than 350 Principals for whom 
it acts as selling agent / procurement agent. MSTC has got thousand 
of registered buyers across the country who participate/bid in the e-
auctions / e -tenders conducted by MSTC on behalf of its Principals. 
Therefore, although the Head Office of MSTC is situated at Kolkata, the 
e-commerce activities of the company are spread all over the country 
and there are locations where the busines s volume of e -Auction is 
actually more than that around Kolkata, where the company‟s head 
quarter is situated. The business volume of the company in the state 
of Uttar Pradesh, which comes under jurisdiction of the Northern 
Regional Office located at New Delhi, in the last two financial years viz. 
2011-12 and 2012 -13 to the tune of Rs.250.00 Crore and Rs.300.00 

42 
 
Crore respectively.  In the state of Uttar Pradesh alone, MSTC has 
about 28 Principals and about 2300 bidders, who participate in e -
auction / e -tenders. In coming years the volume of business is 
expected to grow further. In fact, a proposal has already being mooted 
for opening an office at Lucknow to focus on the business in and 
around Uttar Pradesh since the state has got tremendous prospect in 
terms of growth in the e-commerce business. Accordingly, expenditure 
has been incurred by the company in the state of Uttar Pradesh 
towards CSR. Proposals received from the local bodies of Uttar Pradesh 
were, considered for CSR activities, particularly in the a reas of 
infrastructure and skill enhancement. All the 3 districts of U.P., where 
MSTC made investments on CSR activities viz. Balrampur, Barabankee 
and Gonda are backward districts identified by the planning 
commission for Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF ). The proposals 
for investments in different projects in all the three districts where 
approved by the CSR Committee and the Board of Directors of MSTC. 
MSTC has also invested in a host of projects in West Bengal, from 
were most of the proposals were rece ived because of proximity to the 
head office of the Company. The Proposals received from Karnataka, 
New Delhi, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Tamilnadu were also 
accepted in the last few years under the CSR activities of the 
company. The Regional and Branch Offices of the company have also 
been advised to send suitable proposals for CSR allocation. The 
company shall also take more pro -active steps to obtain proposals 
from various states, particularly from backward districts to spread out 
its CSR activity in future. 
 
KIOCL Limited 
 
 
KIOCL have not undertaken any Corporate Social Responsibility 
activities in the two districts of Barabanki and Gonda in Uttar Pradesh 
state as reported in the observations/recommendations of the Hon‟ble 
Committee. 
 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL) 
 
HSCL spent Rs.18.21 Lac for Up gradation of 1 Km rural road from 
Karaura to Tatarpur in District Barabanki, UP during 2012 -13.HSCL 
also spent Rs.3.26 Lac towards donation of one Ambulance to District 
Hospital at Kailashsahar in Tripura during 2012-13. 
 
HSCL allocates its CSR budget in accordance with the CSR policy, duly 
approved by the Board of Directors in line with the DPE guidelines. 
While taking up CSR activities, business integration of the Company is 
given due consideration. 
 
HSCL has unit offices in Lucknow and Varanasi for monitoring its 
projects under execution for Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Central 

43 
 
University for Tibetan Studies (CUTs) and CSR projects of other PSUs. 
Besides this, HSCL has its major business e xposure with NTPC at 
Unchahar, Vindhyachal and Shaktinagar in UP.  HSCL is also exploring 
possibilities to increase its business volume in the State.  The 
Company executed about Rs.80 Cr. worth of orders in UP during the 
last 2 years 2011-12 and 2012-13 and generated surplus of over Rs.5 
Cr. 
  
In view of the reasons stated above, HSCL took up CSR activities in 
the State of UP also along with other parts of the country.  
 
MECON Limited 
 
1. The company ended -up financial year 2009 -10 with PAT of 
Rs.8262.77 lakhs and CSR expenditure of Rs.80.72 lakhs only.  
 
2. In order to ensure that “Carry -forward CSR Fund”, are well 
directed towards the under privileged / backward sections of the 
society /LWE (Left Wing Extremism) affected villages, through 
planning, based o n “Need Assessment” (with the involvement of 
villagers / Gramsabha etc.) was considered essential. 
 
3. Accordingly, the company began by adopting following villages 
of Jharkhand State, which are in LWE (Left Wing Extremism) affected 
areas and are also in b ackward districts of Jharkhand State, for 
development of basic amenities and infrastructure. 
 
Village District of Jharkhand 
Pancha Ranchi 
Pandu Ranchi 
Rupru Ranchi 
Belagara Khunti 
Sungi Khunti 
Rai Khunti 
 
4. The mechanism of undertaking & executing Projects in LWE 
(Left Wing Extremism) affected villages, through involvement of 
Village-Pradhan / Gramsabha for Need -assessment, making available 
the requisite land with NOC etc is very time consuming. 
 
5. Finding a suitable executing agency for working in  LWE affected 
villages is difficult.  The pace of project execution in this area is also 
slow leading to lower utilization of CSR funds. 
 
6. ln line with this scenario, the CSR budget provisions were being 
progressively raised in financial years FY 2010 -11 & 201 1 -12 and all 
the "Unutilised CSR fund w.r.t. allocations as per DPE Guidelines" of 

44 
 
previous years (i.e. FY 2010 -11 & 2011-12) are carried-forward in the 
CSR Budget Provision of FY 2012-13,as indicated in Annexure-ll. 
 
 
7 . Moreover, in current finan cial year 2013 -14 also, all the 
“Unutilised CSR fund of previous years, w.r.t. allocations as per DPE 
Guidelines" have been included in the Budget Provision." 
 
28. The Committee were appalled to note the haphazard manner in 
which CSR activities have been carried out by Steel PSUs, particularly 
in 2 districts of Uttar Pradesh, namely Barabank i and Gonda.  While 
recording their strong disapproval of the manner in which CSR funds 
were spent by all steel PSUs in these two districts of Baranbak i and 
Gonda in Uttar Pradesh at the cost of all the deserving places where 
actual funds should have been spent, the Committee had strongly 
recommended the Government to enquire into the whole matter of 
investing CSR funds recklessly in these two districts of Uttar Pradesh 
by all PSUs through a Central Investigating Agency and those found 
responsible and guilty be made accountable for misutilization of 
funds.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel have 
informed the  Committee that Gonda, Barabanki  and Behraich hav e 
been identified as backward districts by Planning Commission for the 
purpose of backward region grant fund.  It has been further stated 
that  SAIL as a part of its expansion plan acquired the assets of M/s 
Malvika Steel at Jagdishpur (U.P.) in the year 2 009, now known as 
Jagdishpur SAIL Unit (JSU).  Commissioning of facilities at 
Jagdishpur SAIL Unit is in advance stages.  SAIL Board has also 
approved setting up of Steel Processing Units at a number of new 
strategic locations including Gonda, Barabank i and Behraich.  As 

45 
 
regards RINL, the Committee have been informed that the company 
has filed application for iron ore mining lease at Lalitpur, Uttar 
Pradesh and plans to expand its marketing network in the State, 
hence, it is felt essential that RINL should make its presence felt in 
State of Uttar Pradesh by taking higher levels of CSR activities.   In 
respect of MSTC Ltd., the Committee were informed that the 
Company has about 28 Principals and about 2300 bidders from Uttar 
Pradesh to participate in e -auction / e-tenders.  Of the 3 districts of 
Uttar Pradesh where MSTC Ltd. made investments on CSR activities 
viz.  Barabank i, Balrampur and Gonda are backward districts 
identified by the Planning Commission for backward region grant 
fund.  The Committee find the  reply of the Ministry as unsatisfactory 
as all the Steel Public Undertakings are concentrating their CSR 
activities, in these districts on the ground of expanding their 
business activities to target rural areas for the marketing of steel 
products and these districts are reported to be eligible for backward 
region grant fund by the Planning Commission.  Even the Steel 
companies engaged in e -tendering process like MSTC Ltd. and the  
like MECON who give consultancy services have spent their CSR 
funds in the 3  districts of UP namely Balrampur, Barabank i and 
Gonda.  While strongly disproving the method by which CSR funds 
were spent by all Steel PSUs in these districts of Uttar Pradesh where 
all Steel PSUs showed more and more interests rather than other 
identified backward region of the State and the country, the 
Committee deplore the way all steel companies are taking the one or 

46 
 
the other plea to justify carrying out CSR activities in these districts  
in complete discrimination to other backward districts in the country.  
The Committee, therefore, cannot but reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and recommend that the matter be investigated 
through a Central Investigating Agency and those found responsible 
and guilty be made accountable for mis-utilization of funds.  

47 
 
CHAPTER –II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
PLAN HEAD: PROMOTION OF R&D SCHEMES IN STEEL SECTOR  
 
Recommendation Serial No.1 
 
The Committee note that the two schemes on 'Promotion of beneficiation 
& agglome ration of low grade iron ore & ore fines' and 'Improving energy 
efficiency of secondary steel sector' were proposed to be implemented during the 
12th Five Year Plan. A sum of Rs. 2417 crore was proposed for the scheme for 
promotion of beneficiation & agglo meration of low grade iron ore & ore fines for 
the 12th Plan Period and Rs. 1693 crore for the 13 th Plan Period. Similarly, for 
the scheme on improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector a sum of 
Rs. 272 crore was proposed for 12 th Plan Period and  Rs. 191 crore for the 13th 
Plan Period. However, Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 200 crore to 
Ministry of Steel for the 12 th Five Year Plan only for the scheme 'Promotion of 
R&D in Iron & Steel Sector'. The Committee have been given to understand th at 
these schemes were not pursued since the required fund to pursue these 
schemes was not substantial. The Committee are however unable to 
comprehend the rationale behind not pursuing these two important R&D 
schemes. The Committee would therefore, like to be apprised of the study, if any, 
conducted for likely benefits from implementation of these schemes, and the 
grounds on which Planning Commission has not recommended the required 
funds. The Committee therefore, recommend the Ministry to pursue the matter 
with Planning Commission and the Commission be apprised about the ground 
work already done in the matter and be requested to resume allocation to these 
two important schemes during the current financial year in order to sustain long 
term growth of the Indian steel sector. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Working Group on Steel Industry for the 12 th Five Year Plan, had 
recommended a token provision of Rs. one crore each for the two interest 
subsidy schemes, namely, „Promotion of Beneficiation & Agglomeration of low 
grade iron ore & low grade iron ore & ore fines‟ and „Improving energy efficiency 
of secondary steel sector‟ with an estimated budget of Rs. 2417 crore and Rs. 
272 crore respectively for the 12 th Five Year Plan Period. However, Planning 
Commission allocated Rs. 200 crore only to Ministry of Steel for the 12 th Five 
Year Plan. Due to the insufficient allocation, the aforesaid two interest subsidy 
schemes were dropped.  
 
It is, however relevant to mention that the objective of the first scheme viz. 
„Promotion of Ben eficiation & Agglomeration of low grade iron ore & low grade 

48 
 
iron ore & ore fines‟ was to promote setting up of new facilities for beneficiation & 
agglomeration. It is satisfying to note that off late large number of beneficiation & 
agglomeration plants have been set up and are being set up. Further, Ministry of 
Steel is supporting two high value R&D projects to facilitate beneficiation & 
agglomeration of Indian Iron Ore.   
 
In so far as the second scheme viz. „Improving energy efficiency of secondary 
steel sector‟, Ministry of Steel and UNDP have already been pursuing an Energy 
Efficiency Improvement Programme in Steel Re -rolling Mills in India. Further, a 
new project have been approved with financial assistance from UNDP, Australian 
Government and Ministry  of Steel through Steel Development Fund, for 
addressing the issue of energy efficiency improvement in Steel Re -rolling Mills & 
related sub sector such as Induction Furnace Units. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, Ministry of Steel has taken up the matter with 
Planning Commission for giving the required allocation for the aforesaid two 
scheme. 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
UTILIZATION OF APPROVED PLAN OUTLAY  
Recommendation Serial No.2 
 
The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 91174.64 crores have been 
provided for the Ministry of Steel during the 12th Plan Period, out of which an 
outlay for 2012 -13 is pegged at Rs. 21802 crore. While scrutinizing the a ctual 
expenditure of PSUs during 2012 -13, the Committee find that actual utilization of 
outlay (upto December, 2012) by most of the PSUs has been very dismal. During 
2012-13, against an approved outlay of Rs. 14500 crore only Rs. 6554 crore 
were spent by SAIL till December, 2012 which is about 45% of the total outlay for 
the year. RINL had an outlay of Rs. 1942 crores for 2012 -13 of which only 42% 
of the funds i.e. Rs. 833 crore have been utilized till December, 2012. Similarly, 
the utilization of funds by NMDC up to December, 2012 is a disappointing 21.8% 
as only Rs. 1018 crore could be spent against the approved outlays of Rs. 3080 
crore. Utilization of funds by other PSUs like KIOCL (1.3%) and MOIL (16.2%) 
depicts a similar story. The quarterly utilizatio n of funds by PSUs shows 
disturbing trend amongst most of the steel PSU's as more than 50% of the 
I&EBR allocation is utilized in the final quarter. The Committee have time and 
again been emphasizing on even utilization of funds from the beginning of the 
financial year itself. The Committee feel that ideally by the third quarter 75% of 
the funds allocated should have been utilized. But while studying quarterwise 
utilization of funds by different PSUs during the years 2010 -11 and 2011-12, the 
Committee note that SAIL utilized 65.30% & 51.02% respectively of the total 
funds allocated in the first 3 quarters. Similarly, RINL could utilize 53.23% and 
41.00% of the allocated in the first three quarters. The figures for other PSUs for 

49 
 
utilization of funds in the f irst 3 quarters of 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 were also 
similar. MECON (0% & 102.5%), MSTC (0% & 9.8%), FSNL (69.17% & 29.08%), 
NMDC (72.17% & 24.97%) etc.  In view of the lower utilization of funds in the first 
3 quarters of financial year, the Committee strongl y urge the Ministry of 
Steel/PSUs to take adequate advance action and planning to ensure that 
quarterwise uniform outlays be utilized in order to avoid drastic reduction in plan 
funds of steel PSUs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the corrective  
measures initiated by all PSUs so that the funds allocated are properly and fully 
utilized and evenly spent throughout the year.   
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
The capital expenditure during any financial year mainly depends on the 
physical work planned and actual progress made during that year may not be 
uniform in every quarter.  SAIL has been putting in all efforts to ensure that more 
or less uniform quarterly outlays be maintained.  The actual expenditure during 
2012-13 was R s. 9731 crore which is around 81% of the Revised approved 
outlay (RE) of Rs. 12000 crore. The quarter wise distribution of fund and actual 
expenditure is given below:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Quarter-I Quarter-II Quarter-III Quarter-IV 
Plan Actual Plan Actual Plan Actual Plan Actual 
2200 1960 2600 2454 2900 2140 4300 3177 
  
For the financial year 2013-14, SAIL has made advance planning for each 
quarter for full utilization of the outlays during the year.  The expenditure 
monitoring is being done with the plants/u nits on regular basis against the 
physical progress of work. Shortfall is due to delay in completion of expansion 
programmes.  Also, efforts are being made to ensure funds availability through 
I&EBR matching with the plan.  
 
No Budgetary support is provided to Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
for its plan outlay. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL has fulfilled over 100% target of expenditure for 2012 -13 (RE) as 
given below:- 
  Plan : Rs.1, 260 Cr. 
  Actual : Rs.1, 287 Cr. (102% fulfilment) 
 However, BE was revised from Rs.1, 800 Cr . to Rs.1, 260 Cr . depending 
on the capital expenditure plan.  About quarterly expenditure, which generally 
vary to a great extent with supplies, it is to be mentioned that all efforts are being 
made to fulfill 100 % target every quarter.  Major payments in most of projects 
pertain to supply of equipment and  it is not always feasible to  make such 

50 
 
payments uniform quarter -wise.  However, RINL has noted the concern and 
corrective actions are being taken to make it uniform to the extent feasible. 
 
NMDC Limited 
The Lower utilization of funds in case of NMDC for the first three quarters 
of FY-2012-13 was mainly due to following reasons:- 
 
(i) Delay in awarding & signing of contract agreement for Steel Melting 
Shop package and Thin Slab Caster and Hot Strip Mill pac kage in 
respect of 3.MTPA from  Steel Plant at Nagarnar. Further some of 
the auxiliary packages also could not be awarded as envisaged. 
(ii) Delay in opening of LC for some of the Parties thus delaying the 
foreign payments. 
(iii) Slow progress of work at site by the contractors executing the work 
with respect to approved schedule.  
 
For proper utilization of the plan funds, following corrective measures have 
been taken by NMDC:- 
 
(i) The budget estimates have been linked to milestones  for better 
monitoring and effective control. 
(ii) Project execution teams at project locations headed by separate 
Project Managers have been established to monitor the 
implementation through respective EPCM consultants for quicker 
resolution of construction issues on day to day basis. 
(iii) Teams at Head Office have been established to oversee & monitor for 
speedy coordination w.r.t. engineering, procurement and all issues of 
contract management with consultant, contractors, sub - suppliers etc. 
based on daily and weekly reporting system. 
(iv) Detailed work planning and expenditure planning commitments are 
being obtained from the contracting agencies in line with the projected 
budget outlays. 
(v) Availability of working drawings with requisite approvals by Consultant 
are ensure d to meet the work plan requirements of the contracting 
agencies at site and at their manufacturing units.  
(vi) Progress review meetings are taken with suppliers, contractors and 
consultants. 
(vii) Weekly/ monthly review meetings are being taken at site. 
(viii) Video confe rences from Head Office are being arranged at the 
Directors level for monitoring the progress. 
(ix) Quarterly progress/expenditure of ongoing projects is reviewed by the 
Sub-Committee of the Board of Directors. 
 
The Capital BE 2013 -14 of Rs . 2720 crores in resp ect of NMDC is 
quarterly distributed as below:- 
 
 

51 
 
Quarter-1                               =            Rs. 450 Crs. 
Quarter-2                               =            Rs. 503 Crs. 
Quarter-3                               =            Rs. 837 Crs. 
Quarter-4                               =            Rs. 930 Crs. 
                                                         --------------------------- 
Total for BE 2013-14             =          Rs. 2720 Crs. 
                                                        -----------------------------  
 As against the quarter -1 target of Rs. 450 Crs.  the actual expenditure 
achieved is Rs . 525.55 Crs. The scheme –wise detail for the same is attached 
herein as Annexure-1. 
  
MSTC Limited 
The target of Rs.  5.00 Crore for the ye ar 2010 -11 was earmarked for 
logistics of a Joint Venture.  Earlier it was envisaged that the expenditure for 
logistic will be incurred when the stockyard will be ready for operation. But the 
stockyard was given on rent to a third party during 2010 -11; hen ce no 
expenditure has been made in this regard. The target for the year 2011 -12 was 
Rs.15.00 Crore i.e. the balance amount of Eleventh Plan period. An amount of 
Rs.5.00 Crore was identified for up -gradation of server and DPR for Shredding 
plant and balance  Rs.10.00 Crore was kept for unidentified projects. During 
2011-12 Rs.4.77 Crore was spent for up -gradation of Server and DPR of 
Shredding Plant and the balance remained unutilized in absence of any viable 
project.  
 
MOIL Limited 
 The details of utilization of plan outlay are as under: 
                                      (Rs. In Crore) 
2012-13 2012-13 % to 
total 
outlay 
as per 
BE 
% to 
total 
outlay 
as per 
RE 
Budget Estimates Actual Expenditure 
(upto March 2013) 
Plan 
Outlay 
(BE) 
Plan 
Outlay 
(RE)* 
Total 
(BE) 
Total 
(RE) 
Plan 
Outlay 
Total 
208.00 103.76 208.00 103.76 54.89 54.89 26.39% 52.90% 
 
* Plan outlay of Rs. 70 crores in FY 2012 -13 on investment in joint venture 
companies formed with SAIL and RINL is not included above as technical 
specifications of furnace are reworked in tune with their revised requirement of 
silico and ferro manganese. Taking into consideration the RE figures, the actual 
expenditure upto March, 2013 (Provisional) works out to 52.90%. The Company 
is making all efforts to improve the utilization of plan outlay in a uniform manner. 
 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL) 
 
Being a Project Management Consultancy Company (PMC), HSCL has no 
project of its own.  It is only an implementing agency for civil construction work.  
Hence question of utilization of target does not arise. 

52 
 
KIOCL Limited 
 
KIOCL prepared the Capital Budget for 2012 -13 envisaging an 
expenditure of Rs.409 crores. However, due to non -receipt of environmental 
clearance and litigation in acquisition of land, the m ajor projects like Coke Oven 
Battery, Permanent Railway Siding and Bulk Material Handling at Mangalore 
could not be taken up. As such the target could not be achieved. 
 
Keeping the above points in view, KIOCL has allocated Rs.95 crores in 
the Plan Outlay f or the year 2013-14. The annual target is split into four quarters 
and the performance is being monitored closely for achieving the target. All out 
efforts are put to achieve the plan target of Rs.95 crores during 2013-14. 
 
Ferro Scrap Nigam Limited (FSNL) 
 
Statement showing outlay earmarked and Actual expenditure of 
I&EBR of Ferro Scrap Nigam Limited for last 3 years. 
 
         (Rs. in crore) 
 Particulars 2010-11 
(FY) 
2011-12 
(FY) 
2012-13 
(FY) 
I. Approved outlay in Annual Plan 12.00 12.00 12.00 
II. Outlay earmarked upto 3rd quarter 9.00 9.00 9.00 
II. Actual Expenditure upto 3 rd 
quarter 
9.05 3.49 6.34 
IV. % of Actual expenditure to outlay 
earmarked (II/III*100) 
100.56 38.78 70.44 
 
The company has already placed purchase order for procurement of 
capital equipments to the tune of Rs.5.80 crores. Moreover capital equipment of 
worth Rs.4.68 crores already supplied by the vendor. Purchase order for capital 
equipment to the tune of Rs.5.76 crores is to be placed in the present FY 2013 -
14 and thus approve d outlay of Rs.12.00 crores will be properly and fully utilize d 
and will be evenly spent within the FY 2013-14.  
 
The company will spend capital expenditure evenly in every quarter of 
financial year 2013-14. 
 
MECON Limited 
 
Year wise and quarter wise beakup of utilization of I&EBR is as follows:- 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Approved 
Outlay 
Utilisation of I&EBR 
Upto Qtr I Upto Qtr II Upto Qtr III Upto Qtr IV 
2010-11 2.27 NIL NIL NIL 1.79 
2011-12 2.00 0.23 0.23 2.05 2.38 

53 
 
2012-13 5.00 NIL 0.78 3.46 5.01 
2013-14 5.00 0.53 1.91 
(upto 31.7.2013) 
- - 
 
 From the above, it can be seen that although utilization of I&EBR was not 
uniform for the FY 2010 -11, steps have been taken to ensure that approved 
outlays are utilized uniformly for all quarters from the FY 2011-12 onwards. 
 
Orissa Minerals Development Company Ltd. (OMDC) 
 
 The approved plan out lay of OMDC for the year 2012 -13 was Rs.142 
crores.  In the Revised Capital outlay the amount was Rs.105.56 crores.  Due to 
closure of all the six mines of OMDC and also uncertainty in opening of mines, all 
the proposal for the capital expenditure are put into hold except pressing 
expenditure for Hospital, repairing Roads , etc.  The actual Capital outlay for 
2012-13 was Rs.8.12 crores only. 
 
Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited (BSLC)  
 
 The proposed capital outlay of BSLC for 2012 -13 was Rs.30 lakhs and 
expenditure incurred during the year was 15.22 Lakhs due to poor financial 
condition. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
PERFORMANCE OF PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS  
 
Recommendation Serial No.3 
 
Steel Authority of India  
 
Decline in profitability of SAIL  
 
The Committee note that the profitability of SAIL has been declining during 
the last 3 years and the Company has not been able to arrest this trend. The  
Profit After Tax (PAT) during (2009 -10) was Rs. 6754 crores which declined to 
Rs. 4905 crores during 2010 -11. There was a further decrease in profit of the 
Company during 2011-12 which was Rs. 3543 crore. What further perturbed the 
Committee is that upto to December, 2012, an amount of only Rs. 1724 crore 
has been shown as PAT for SAIL. The Ministry of Steel/SAIL have attributed the 
decline in profitability to adverse impact of input prices consisting of iron ore 
including royalty, lime stone, dolomite, si lica manganese, furnace oil/LSHS, LPG 
and power purchased for the plant and increase in consumption of external coke, 
furnace oil, stores & spares, repairs & maintenance, depreciation, lower interest 
earnings on term deposits, etc. The Committee feel that the company should 
have focused on increase in production and sales realization etc. to reverse the 
ongoing trend. To ensure that SAIL a premier PSU, should not lose its position, 

54 
 
the Committee feel that all out measures be taken by the management by givin g 
adequate attention to areas such as identification and sale of idle assets, sale of 
surplus scrap, sale of non -moving/obsolete stores & spares, identification and 
closure of uneconomic activities, waste management, full utilization of 
engineering shops, strict control on demurrage expenses, reduction in 
procurement cost through strict monitoring, control of administrative expenses 
etc. so that this trend of declining of profit of the company is contained.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 Plan for 13-14 envisages following which will help in improving profitability 
of SAIL:- 
 
 Production of 14.3 MT of saleable steel with a growth of 15% over 12-13. 
 Production of 6.6 MT of value added steel with a growth of 31% over 12-13. 
 Production of 10.8 MT of crude steel through energy efficient concast route 
with a growth of 14% over 12-13. 
 Specific energy consumption of 6.6 Gcal/tcs has been planned with an 
improvement of 1% over 12-13. 
 
In order to decrease wagon detention all plants of SAIL engaged M/s 
RITES (an organization under Mi nistry of Railways) for study of the existing 
infrastructure, prepare the feasibility reports/Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for 
up-gradation/ modernization and development of rail infrastructure. MECON, who 
is the main consultant for expansion projects, have integrated the suggestion/ 
recommendations of M/s RITES in the expansion schemes of respective plants, 
which are under different stages of implementation.  
 
In addition, measures as under are being taken by SAIL to arrest the fall in 
profits:- 
 
1. Close interaction & meetings with Plants/Units to reduce cost and improve 
revenue in various areas of operations. 
 
2. All Plants/Units have been advised to focus on operating as well as on 
non-operating areas to improve the profitability position of the Compa ny.  
In addition to improvement in production, sales, product -mix & value 
added products, techno -economic parameters, the following are the other 
areas for profitability improvement: 
 
 Increase usage of Coal Dust injection in Blast Furnaces thereby 
reducing the BF   Coke consumption. 
 Maximizing production through the energy and cost effective Concast 
route. 
 Reduction in  specific refractory consumption/cost. 
 Reduction in specific water consumption. 
 

55 
 
 Identification and sale of idle assets. 
 Sale of surplus scrap. 
 Sale of non-moving/obsolete stores & spares. 
 Maximizing sales of coal chemicals, by-products & secondary steel. 
 Reduction in inventory of finished/semi -finished goods, raw materials 
and stores & spares. 
 Identification and closure of uneconomic activities. 
 Waste utilisation/ Management. 
 Full utilisation of engineering shops and replacing purchased items. 
 Strict control on demurrage expenses. 
 Reduction in procurement cost through strict monitoring. 
 Control of administrative expenses. 
 
3. Close monitoring of major procurement/service contracts of Plants/Units 
by Corporate Office.  
 
4. The management of funds is being given due importance.  In this regard, 
the following efforts are worth mentioning:- 
 
 Borrowing of short -term loans at competitive rates in the  form of 
Buyers‟ Credit, Commercial Paper, etc. instead of cash credit from 
banks. 
 Substitution of higher cost loans with lower cost. 
 Keeping in view the volatility in Forex Market, the FX loans are being 
taken on a hedged basis. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
MODERNISATION AND EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF SAIL  
 
Recommendation Serial No.4 
 
The Committee note that SAIL has been implementing Modernisation and 
Expansion Programme of its five integrated Steel Plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, 
Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and Special Steel Plant at Salem to increase steel 
production capacity of crude steel from 12.84 million tonnes per annum to 21.4 
million tonnes per annum. While observing that Orders worth around Rs. 58000 
crore have been placed against which actual expenditure of Rs. 42893 crore has 
been incurred till February, 2013 and the expansion of Salem Steer Plant has 
been completed in 2010 -11, the Committee are unhappy to note that physical 
performance of the Company indicate a  stagnant production as approximately 
14.5 MT of Hot metal, 13.6 MT of crude steel, 12.8 MT of saleable steel and 0.3 
MT of pig iron have been produced by the Company during each of the last four 
years (2009-10 to 2012-2013). The Committee are anguished to  note that due to 
poor performance of the contractors, the completion of modernization and 
expansion of Bhilai, Durgapur Steel Plants have been delayed resulting in 

56 
 
underutilization of outlays. Against the project cost of Rs. 18884 crore, only Rs. 
7353 crore has been spent so for by Bhilai Steel Plant. Similarly out of a project 
cost of Rs. 3164 crore, Durgapur Steel Plant could spend only Rs. 1282 crore so 
far. In the case of Bokaro Steel Plant, project implementation has been delayed 
and is to be complete d in June, 2013 as against the target date of December, 
2011. What is disturbing to the Committee is that lISCO expansion project which 
was to be completed by the December, 2010 has been badly delayed and now 
the completion will be by June, 2013. The Commi ttee desire the 
Government/SAIL to make all out efforts to ensure that the Modernization and 
Expansion plan is not dragged on year after year and is completed during the 
current fiscal to avoid cost and time overrun. The Committee would also like to 
be apprised of the resultant enhancement of the crude steel production capacity 
from the ongoing modernization and expansion plans as well as the action taken 
against the contractors who have failed to achieved the milestones causing delay 
in the implementation of various projects of SAIL plants.  
 
Action Taken 
 
SAIL is putting in all efforts to complete modernisation and expansion plan 
within the revised target schedule. Regular review of the implementation is bei ng 
taken by Board Sub -Committees SAIL Board & Min istry of Steel.  For expediting 
the implementation for achievement of planned milestones, the matter is being 
continuously followed up with the top management of contracting agencies to 
ensure adequate resources at site. Risk Purchase Notices have been iss ued to 
erring contractors and packages have been re -ordered at risk & cost of the 
defaulting contractors. 
 
 The crude steel production capacity shall be achieved after the current 
modernization & expansion plan as given below:- 
 
 Installed (Mtpa) After Modernisation & 
expansion (Mtpa) 
Crude Steel capacity 12.84 21.40 
 
Expansion of Salem Steel Plant was completed in September, 2010 and is 
under regular operation. Commissioning of individual units is being done at other 
steel plants.  Present status of various Plants is as under:- 
 
 At Rourkela Steel Plant, Ore Bedding & Blending Plant, COB -6 complex 
including Coal Handling Plant, Coke Dry Cooling Plant & Coal Chemicals 
Deptt, Sinter Plant -3 & Continuous Caster have been completed and are 
under operation/stabilisation. Integrated testing & trials of Blast Furnace -5 
have been completed. Preparations are on for blowing-in of the furnace.  
 At IISCO Steel Pl ant, Coke Oven Battery, Sinter P lant & Wire Rod Mill 
have been completed and are under operation/stabilisati on. Coke and 
sinter is presently being sent to sinter plants. The Blast Furnace & Oxygen 

57 
 
Plant are ready and commissioning is linked with the completion of BOF 
Shop.  
 At Bokaro Steel Plant, Acid Regeneration Plant, Coil Packaging Lines, 
Skin Pass Mill & Po wer supply facilities required for new CRM have been 
completed. Integrated trial run of Pickling Line and Cold Tandem Mill done 
in Jul‟13 for reduction of Pickled HR coils through Cold Tandem Mill.    
 At Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgapur Steel Plant, facilit ies are in various 
stages of execution.  
 
Efforts are on to complete the current phase of Modernization & 
Expansion progressively by 2013-14. 
 
In case of Expansion at ISP Burnpur, difficult & unforeseen soil conditions, 
removal of underground boulders and hillocks etc led to increase in civil & 
structural work substantially and also took extra time. For commissioning of Coke 
Oven Battery and Sinter Plant, the coke & sinter dispatch systems were required 
to be constructed which was falling in the area of vil lage deity known as 
„Jhoraburi‟. The work for shifting the deity to some alternate place outside the 
plant premises was obstructed by the local villagers. After continuous efforts, the 
issue was resolved and the diety has been shifted to the alternate place in Jun‟12 
after which the work was resumed. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED  
 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
 
The Committee acknowledge the fact that RINL has to suffer on account 
of absence  of captive mines for iron ore and coal. The Committee had earlier 
recommended Ministry of Steel to vigorously pursue the matter with the 
concerned State Governments for acquiring iron ore mines and Ministry of Coal 
for allocation of coal blocks reserved f or integrated PSUs. The Committee are 
dismayed to learn that no significant progress has been made in the matter. The 
Committee are, however, happy to note that the Ministry of Mines, Government 
of India, has cleared the proposal on 19.03.2013 for issue of  Letter of Intent (Lol) 
to RINL for mining lease for an area of 999.08 hectares in Bhilwara District in 
Rajasthan.  LoI is expected to be issued by the Government of Rajasthan shortly. 
The Committee also note that Ministry of Steel is pursuing the matter f or 
allotment of iron ore mines to RINL with State Governments of Andhra Pradesh 
and Odisha. Further, in principle,· approval has been obtained for allotment of 2 
iron ore blocks directly to RINL and 1 block through Andhra Pradesh Mineral 
Development Corporation (APMDC).  Applications of RINL for iron ore mining are 
also reported to be pending in States of Jharkhand, U.P., Karnataka and 
Chhattisgarh.  While appreciating the concerted efforts made by the Ministry of 
Steel and RINL for allocation of captive ir on ore mines, the Committee hope that 
concrete results would emerge from other sources as well. Meanwhile, the 

58 
 
Committee are, however, concerned to note that no significant progress has 
been made in allocation of coal blocks reserved by the Ministry of Coa l for 
integrated PSUs to RINL. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Ministry of Steel should take up the matter at the highest level of the Government 
and the representatives of Ministry of Steel/RINL take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Coal to resolve the issue expeditiously.  
 
Action Taken 
Iron Ore: 
 
I. Rajasthan: LOI from Govt of Rajasthan for 1st ever Iron Ore block in the 
State received on 31/05/13. Another Iron Ore block is under active 
consideration of Govt of Rajasthan. 
 
 However, to get actual benefits of mining of Iron Ore and bring to VSP for 
use would  depend on how fast all the balance statutory clearances are 
given by Govt. - Matter is being  pursued. 
 
II. Jharkhand: Govt of Jharkhand got favourable order from Supreme Court 
for allotment of Ghatkuri mines to PSUs.  Accordingly, the matter is being 
pursued by Ministry of Steel and RINL with Govt of Jharkhand for which 
series of meetings took place in April & May, 20 13 – the last being on 28 th 
May, 20 13 by Secretary (Steel) wit h Advisors to the Governor of 
Jharkhand and Chief Secretary, Govt of Jharkhand. 
 
 Jharkhand is most suited location for sourcing of Iron Ore at moderate 
freight rate by RINL. 
III. Andhra Pradesh:  There has been good response from Govt of AP 
recently.  But, for early accrual of benefits to RINL, expeditious movement 
of proposal by Govt of AP for necessary clearances is essential.    
 
IV Odisha: Government of Odisha is being persued by the Ministry of Steel 
for expediting the allotment of mines to RINL in Odisha. 
  
Coal: 
 Secretary (Steel) has written to Secretary (Coal) on 26 th Mar‟13 for 
considering early  allotment of at least one or two coal blocks in favour of RINL 
which are earmarked for  PSEs by Ministry of Coal, preferably Aluara and 
Parbatpur North. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
Regarding reduction in Excise Duty on rebars used by common people 
and export benefit of 6% for furnished steel and 3% of pig iron in Duty Drawback 

59 
 
Scheme (DDBS), as suggested by RINL, the Committee recommend that Steel 
Ministry should immediately send a concrete proposal to the Ministry of Finance.   
 
Action Taken 
 
Revision of rates in duty drawback scheme for pig iron and finished 
products etc. will be taken a t the time of sending budget proposals for steel 
industry to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue for the year 2014-15. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.8 
 
The Committee note that RINL has registered a profit (PAT) of Rs. 796.67 
crore, Rs. 658.49 crore and Rs. 751.46 crore during the 2009 -10, 2010-11 and 
2011-12 respectively. However, the profit of the Company during 2012 -13 (upto 
December, 2012) has plummeted to Rs. 250.78 crore and e stimated profit for the 
year 2013-14 has been pegged at Rs. 95.38 crore. Sluggish market conditions, 
sharp drop in realizations, increase in prices of raw materials, power restrictions 
by Government of Andhra Pradesh, strikes called by the trade unions on several 
occasions have been cited by the Ministry for decline in the profit of RINL. The 
Committee note that several units of RINL got commissioned and are under 
operation as per the requirement and some are under stabilization. The balance 
units are under  advanced stage of commissioning and would be put into 
operation during 2013 -14. The Committee hope that the Company would show 
better results in view of the fact that most of the units have already been 
commissioned and the rest are to be commissioned dur ing 2013 -14. The 
Committee desire that RINL should commission all the remaining units during 
2013-14 and take all corrective measures to ensure that the same may not spill 
over to the next financial year. The Committee would also like RINL to adopt cost 
cutting measures to restrict the unwarranted expenditures. The Committee also 
would like the Ministry of Steel to take up the matter regarding power restrictions 
imposed on RINL by the Government of Andhra Pradesh. 
 
Action Taken 
 
As desired by the committee, to ensure commissioning of all the remaining 
units during 2013-14, necessary corrective actions are taken and commissioning 
activities are progressing as per schedule.  The major units commissioned 
includes New Blast Furnace, new Turbo Blower, New Casters  1&2, Oxygen 
Plant, Power Distribution System, Water Supply Complex, Gas & Utility Systems 
and several other auxiliary units and are in operation. Balance major units , 
namely, Converter Shop, Sinter Plant and Wire Rod Mill are at various stages of 
commissioning. Special Bar Mill and Structural Mill are at advanced stage of 
completion and planned to commence cold trials from 2nd Quarter so as to start 
production during the year 2013-14. 

60 
 
 
Cost cutting measures:   Austerity Measure & Controls have been put in p lace 
to reduce the Administrative Expenditure. Budgets have been cut for reducing 
the expenditure for  revenue and Capital Expenditure and  Non -Plan expenditure 
is permitted only when it is utmost urgent for functioning of the Company. 
 
 Thrust on cost cut ting measures to restrict expenditure has been further 
intensified in operational areas which have larger potential of cost cutting. 
Special drive has been launched in areas such as:- 
 
 Recycling of Tar sludge and Benzol Muck. 
 Optimization of coal blend. 
 Recycling of CRMP returns in place of BF Lime stone. 
 Recycling of LD slag and its use in place of BF Lime stone 
 Utilization of Metallurgical Waste to replace Iron ore fines. 
 Increase in Average Converter life. 
 Recycling of Copper Scrap and used refractory for usage in SMS. 
 Utilization of lime Briquette in SMS. 
 Recycling of Maintenance Scrap. 
 Conservation of Water. 
 
 In order to reduce the outgo on account of ocean freight, cape size 
vessels with a carrying capacity of about 1.5 lakh tonne are being nominated for 
coal shipments instead of Panamax vessels wherever feasible.   
 
Power Restrictions:  Power Restrictions were imposed on RINL by Govt. of 
Andhra Pradesh from Sept.2012 and are still in force.  Penal charges for 
exceeding the imposed power limits have bee n as high as 5 -6 times of normal 
charges, even for drawals well within the contracted limits.  On one hand 
adequate power as contracted is not made available, on the other hand heavy 
penal charges aggregating to Rs.118 Cr have been levied for the period fr om 
Sept.2012 to April 2013. 
 
 RINL has taken up the matter of exemption of R&C measures imposed by 
APEPDCL and waiver of penal charges with the Hon‟ble Chief Minister of Andhra 
Pradesh; Chief Secretary, Andhra Pradesh and Principal Secretary to the 
Hon‟ble Chief Minister for consideration and requested the following:- 
 
 to exempt RINL from the R&C measures and permitting drawal of 
power as per the Contracted Maximum Demand; 
 to regularize RINL‟s request for enhancement of Contracted Maximum 
Demand from 135 MVA to 235 MVA; and 
 waiver of penalty imposed on RINL. 
 
 RINL also filed a writ petition in the Hon‟ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
seeking relief from imposition of R&C measures.   

61 
 
 
 Honourable Minister of Steel has taken up the matter of exempting RINL -
VSP from R&C measures and penal charges with Chief Minister of Andhra 
Pradesh, vide letter dated 2.2.13. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
NATIONAL MINERAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NMDC)  
 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
Appointment of CMD for NMDC  
The Committee note that National Mineral Development Corporation has 
been without a permanent Chairman and Managing Director since December 31, 
2011. The Committee have been given to understand that Public Enterprises 
Selection Board (PESB) in July, 2011 had reportedly recommended the name of 
Shri M.S. Rana, CMD, Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India, to head 
NMDC. The Committee are surprised to note that PSEB's recommendation was 
not accepted by the Ministry of Steel and instead the Director (Technical), NMDC 
was given the additional charge for three months. Now Shri C.S. Verma, CMD 
SAIL is currently holding additional charge of CMD of NMDC. The Committee 
have been informed by the Ministry that the panel recommended by P SEB had 
been scraped and a five Member Search Committee headed by a Planning 
Commission Member has been constituted for selection of the CMD, NMDC. The 
manner in which the name of Shri M.S. Rana who was duly recommended by 
PESB was ignored and subsequently  the panel scrapped by the Ministry creates 
doubt of its being transparent in the whole process. The Committee feel that 
important policy decisions are to be taken at this level which needs full attention 
and some one with an additional charge would not be  able to do justice as there 
are pressing demands to run the organization efficiently which needs urgent 
handling. The Committee, therefore recommend that at least now immediate 
steps be taken so that the process is expedited and NMDC gets a full -fledged 
CMD immediately.  
 
Action Taken 
 
A Search Committee for the selection of candidates for appointment to the 
post of CMD, NMDC Ltd was constituted on 17. 01.2013. The Search Committee 
gave wide publicity to the vacant post of CMD, NMDC and invited application s 
from eligible candidates. The short listed were interviewed on 30.05.2013 and the 
names recommended by the Search Committee have been sent to CVC on 
07.06.2013 for vigilance clearance. On receipt of vigilance clearance, approval of 
Competent Authority wi ll be taken for appointment of a candidate as CMD, 
NMDC Ltd. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 

62 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 
Besides setting up a nu mber of brownfield projects, NMDC as a part of 
Greenfield expansion/diversification programme is also setting up an integrated 
steel plant at Nagarniu, Chhattisgarh at an estimated cost of Rs. 15525 crore. 
The acquisition of land for construction of the pl ant is completed and all required 
statutory clearances are reported to have been obtained. Further, all enabling 
packages have been awarded and works for some of the enabling packages are 
completed and the rest of the packages are reported to be in advance  stage of 
completion. MECON has been appointed as the consultant for engineering and 
design supervision and also project management during execution stage. Since 
land acquisition and all statutory clearances have been obtained and most of the 
packages have been awarded, there is no scope for commissioning of the project 
getting delayed, the Committee feel. The Committee therefore, recommend that 
NMDC should put their heads together to ensure that the project takes off as 
scheduled through strict monitoring.  
 
Action Taken 
 
NMDC is striving to ensure completion of Steel Plant Project in time, by 
taking the following actions:- 
 
(i) Approved schedules for the Major Technological Packages are being 
monitored periodically. 
(ii) Dedicated teams with Engineer in charge for the individual packages 
have been posted for effective and timely monitoring and execution 
of packages. 
(iii) Adequate personnel with experience in construction and operation of 
Steel Plants have been recruited and positioned and further such 
experienced and new  recruitment is being done for monitoring and 
executing the project. 
(iv) High level review meetings at regular intervals for monitoring, 
resolving of problems etc are being conducted. 
(v) Progress review meetings with supplier, contractor and consultants 
being conducted regularly. 
(vi) Fortnightly review meetings are being conducted by the functional 
Director. 
(vii) Sub-committee of Board is reviewing the progress of projects every 
quarterly. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
KIOCL JOINT VENTURE FOR COKE OVEN PLANT AND CAPTIVE POWER PLANT  
 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
 
The Committee note that KIOCL has approached M/s SAIL to form JV 
Partner for setting up of a 0.3 MTPA capacity Coke Oven Plant along with 25 

63 
 
MW captive power plant at an estima ted cost of Rs. 452.22 Crores. For carrying 
out detailed engineering services, order has been reportedly placed with M/s. 
TATA Consulting Engineering services. The Committee further note that the 
environmental clearance for the project from Ministry of Env ironment and Forest 
(MoEF) has been obtained during February 2013 and an application had been 
submitted to Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) for obtaining the 
Consent for Establishment (CFE) for the project. As inspection of the site by 
KSPCB officials has also been completed and consent for establishment is 
awaited, the Committee expect that this joint venture project between KIOCL and 
SAIL will be started during the current financial year and this will go a long way in 
improving the financial health of KIOCL which has been struggling hard to come 
out of the red. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the time -frame by 
which KIOCL and SAIL will complete the project.  
 
Action Taken 
 
1. Board of Directors of KIOCL Limited in its 201 st meeting held on 
25.03.2011 approved to set up 0.3 MTPA capacity Coke Oven Battery with 
25MW Captive Power Plant at an estimated cost of Rs.452.22 crores in the Blast 
Furnace Unit at Mangalore as a backward integration  with Debt: Equity ratio of 
1:2.  The pr oject requires environmental clearance from MoE &F, New Delhi for 
which KIOCL made necessary application as per the guidelines.  
2. During the pendency of  environmental clearance from Mo E&F, Board of 
Directors of KIOCL Limited in its 219 th meeting held on 03.01.2013 expressed its 
doubt regarding the prudence to make investment on Coke Oven Battery Project 
on standalone basis as the site is neither in proximity to the mine head nor near 
to the consumption centre.  The Board apprehended that this project may have to 
encounter the same challenges that are being encountered by the Pellet Plant 
due to non existence of Captive Mine.  Board appreciated the initiative taken by 
KIOCL to rope up SAIL for setting up of the Project on Joint Venture basis.   In 
view of th e expected early environmental clearance, Board suggested to 
expedite the matter of forming Joint Venture with SAIL for setting up of the Coke 
Oven Battery Project.  If SAIL does not come forward for setting up of Joint 
Venture, the investment decision reg arding setting up of the Coke Oven Battery 
Project requires re-look.  
3. As per the direction of KIOCL Board, M/s SAIL were approached for a 
possible tie up to take the above project forward on Joint Venture basis in the 
best interest of both KIOCL & VISL unit of SAIL at Bhadravati, as both the plants 
require coke for their furnaces. KIOCL is having regular interaction wi th SAIL 
officials and a draft Mo U to be entered into between the two organizations has 
also been forwarded to M/s  SAIL for their approval and for further course of 
action. The purpose of the MoU is to lay down the basic understanding between 
KIOCL & SAIL for setting up of 3 lakh tonnes per annum capacity Coke Oven 
Plant, adopting non-recovery route along with a waste heat recovery power plan t 
of 25 MW capacity at the BFU premises, Mangalore on Joint Ventu re basis. As 
per the proposed Mo U, KIOCL and SAIL will form a Joint Venture Company 
(JVC) for Establishment and Operation of the Coke Oven Plant.  The JV will have 

64 
 
the equity share of 74% wit h KIOCL and 26% with SAIL. The approval from M/s  
SAIL is awaited for carrying forward this project. As far as the statutory approvals 
are concerned, KIOCL has already obtained the environmental clearance for the 
project from MoE &F and consent for establish ment from Karnataka State 
Pollution Control Board (KSPCB). Once the JV is finalized between KIOCL and 
SAIL, the project will be taken up immediately and the implementation schedule 
for completion of the project is estimated to be 30 months from the date of  
commencement of tendering action for various packages identified for the coke 
oven project along with the associated captive power plant. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
BISRA STONE LIME COMPANY LIMITED (BSLC) 
 
 Recommendation Serial No.15 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note the poor physical and financial 
performance of BSLC, a century old company which is a major source of 
employment to the tribal people of Sundergarh District of Odisha and supply 
limestone and dolom ite mainly to steel plants located in the Eastern Regions. What 
further perturbed the Committee is that though BSLC became a Public Sector 
Undertaking on 19.03.2010 and became subsidiary of RINL on 05.01.2011, with an 
authorized and paid up capital of Rs. 87.50 crore and Rs. 87.29 crore, the total 
income of the company has come down from Rs. 58.89 crore in 2010 -11 to Rs. 
31.69 crore during 2011 -12. Further, against the BE and RE of Rs. 45.00 crore and 
13.85 crore for 2012 -13, the actual up to December, 2012  were reported to be Rs. 
18.33 crore. The dismal physical performance of the company also indicate that the 
company has failed to maintain the production target as against the actual of 2.09 
lakh MT of lime stone produced in 2009 -10, during 2010-11 and 2011-12, only 1.25 
lakh MT and 0.25 lakh MT was produced. Similarly, the production of dolomite of 9.j6 
lakh MT in 2009 -10 came down to 5.10 lakh MT during 2011 -12. The actual 
production for 2012 -13 (upto December, 2012) were reported to be 2.16 lakh MT. 
While the Government have extended grant of Rs. 149.50 crore to BSLC Ltd. for 
discharge of income tax liability arising out of restructuring of M/s Bird Group of 
Companies, the Committee expect that Ministry of Steel/RINL to aim for higher 
production targets o f limestone and dolomite by BSLC and a dedicated team be 
prepared to resolve all the issues in the right perspective to ensure that the company 
becomes a profitable one.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 BSLC became a PSU on 19 th March, 2010.  As per restructuring scheme, the 
accumulated interest of Rs.624 crores on Government loan of Rs.86.79 crores was 
waived of f without giving provision for meeting the income tax liability of Rs.117 
crores.  This liability had grown to Rs.149.45 crores till January, 2013 and met 
through a grant-in-aid of Rs.149.45 crores.  Similarly outstanding loan of Rs.86.79 
crores was converted into equity without giving the provision for accumulated losses 
of Rs.81.64 crores as on 31 -3-2010 in the restructuring scheme.  This caused the 
paid up capital of the company to be raised from Rs.50 lacs to Rs.87.29 crores and 
the company did not have money either for repairing the depleted & age old crushers 

65 
 
or to buy new mining equipments required for the mining company.  The company 
does not have any working  capital and meets its financial requirement through 
monthly sales only and its losses are huge because of poor sales realization 
compared to high cost of production due to huge manpower and fixed annual 
capacity of 9.6 lacs tonnes per annum of low value c ommodities of lime stone & 
dolomite put together. The Physical & Financial Performance from 2009 -10 to 2012-
13 and company‟s revival plan are given at Annexure-III. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
MANGANESE ORE (INDIA) LTD. (MOIL)  
 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
 
The Committee note that MOIL produces and sell high grade ores for 
production of Ferro manganese, medium grade ore for production of silico 
manganese, blast furnace grade ore required for production of hot metal and 
dioxide for dry battery cells and chemical industries. Further, MOIL has set up a 
plant based on indigenous technology to manufacture Electrolytic Manganese 
Dioxide (EMD) which is used for manufacture of dry battery cells. Although, the 
Ministry of Steel has informed the Committee that there is no shortfall in physical 
and financial performance of MOIL vis -à-vis targets, the Committee find that 
EMD production during 2011-12 decreased to 714 MT as compared to 805 MT in 
2010-11. Similarly, Ferro manganese  production has also fallen down to 8694 
MT during 2011 -12 as compared to 9081 MT in 2010 -11. The Committee are 
also concerned to note the decline in profit after tax of MOIL that come down to 
Rs. 410.77 crore during 2011 -12 from Rs. 588.06 crore in 2010 -11. The profit 
after tax during 2012 -13 are targeted only at Rs. 365.73 crore. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee cannot but deplore the continuous deterioration in the 
performance by MOIL and expect the Ministry of Steel/ MOIL to take corrective 
measures to improve its physical as well as financial performance. Furthermore, 
while appreciating the diversification programme of MOIL into Wind Energy Farm 
whereby it has installed 4.8 MW Wind Energy Farm at Nagda hills and 15.2 MW 
Wind Farm at Ratedi Hills,  District Dewas in Madhya Pradesh, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the total investments made therein and the income 
generated therefrom so far.  
 
Action Taken 
 As regards reduction in the production of EMD and Ferro Manganese during 
the year 20 11-12 as compared to the previous year 2010 -11, it is to be mentioned 
here that during 2011-12, the demand for EMD as well as Ferro Manganese fell down 
as compared to the previous year. In order to avoid built of stocks, the Company had 
decided to curtail the production in line with the market demand / conditions. 
Therefore, the reduction in the physical production of EMD and Ferro Manganese is 
on account of market conditions and done voluntarily by the company. 
 
As regards reduction in profit after tax, the reasons are given below: 
 

66 
 
(1) Reduction in profit after tax from Rs. 588.06 crores in 2010 -11 to Rs. 
410.77 crores in BE 2011 -12 and targeted profit after tax of Rs. 365.73 
crores in BE 2012-13: 
 Reduction in profit in 2011 -12 is mainly due to downward t rend in sales 
realization of manganese ore. Manganese ore prices fell by about 40% in 2011 due to 
piling up of inventories of manganese ore, which had major impact on the top line of 
the Company. Turnover of the Company came down from Rs. 1145.31 crores to  Rs. 
905.68 crores (i.e. a reduction of Rs. 239.63 crores). This had straightway affected 
profit before tax and after tax accordingly. BE 2012 -13 has been prepared taking into 
consideration situation prevailing at the time of preparation of budgets and 
accordingly, profit after tax was estimated at Rs. 365.73 crores. As against this, actual 
profit after tax (provisional) is Rs. 425.12 crores, which is more than budgeted profit as 
well as actual profit of financial year 2011-12. 
 
(2) Actual Results: 
 The tur n over of the Company has increased from Rs. 905.68 crores in FY 
2011-12 to Rs. 977.27 crores (provisional) in FY 2012 -13. The profit after tax for 
financial year 2012-13 is Rs. 425.13 crores (Provisional) as against Rs. 410.77 crores 
in financial year 2011-12 registering a growth of 3.49%. 
 
 As regards the investment made by MOIL in Wind Farm, this is to mention that 
MOIL has set up two farms in Nagda Hills (4.8MW) and Ratedi Hills (15.2MW) 
aggregating to 20MW. MOIL is the first PSU in the country to ventu re into wind power 
generation. The power generated through these wind farms are utilized partly for 
captive use in Ferro Manganese Plant / Mine at Balaghat and the balance is sold to 
the utilities. The total investment made in the wind farm is Rs. 97.73 cr ores in two 
phases viz Rs. 22.20 crores in 2006 -07 and Rs. 75.53 crores in 2007 -08. So far the 
Company has earned a sum of Rs. 76.24 crores, which includes savings in electricity 
bills of Balaghat mine and ferro manganese plant and revenue earned through s ale of 
power to utilities. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
Recommendation Paragraph No.17 
 
Rural steel consumption  
 
The Committee observe that per capita consumption of steel in India is 
abysmally low at 59 Kg. as com pared to world average of 200 Kg.  Further, the 
average per capita consumption of finished steel in rural India has been 
assessed at 9.78 Kg. during the period 2007 to 2009 which is estimated to 
increase to around 12 Kg. in 2020. While deploring the very l ow utilization of 
steel in the rural areas in the country as compared to India and world average, 
the Committee feel that the Government/Steel Companies have failed miserably 
in the development of Rural Areas by targeting increased steel production. While 
acknowledging the fact that there is huge competition of steel with plastic as far 
as the products for household consumption are concerned, the Committee feel 
that consumption of finished steel in rural India will increase only once the steel 

67 
 
products made  deep inroads into the remotest areas of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that steel companies should focus on consumption 
of steel in other related areas like the construction activities, items for 
professional use, furniture, vehicles, etc. The Committee also observe that in 
order to obtain a full picture of pattern of rural consumption in the country, an all 
India survey was coordinated by Joint Plant Committee, Kolkata and field work 
was carried out by Indian Market Research Bureau (IMRB) I nternational. The 
Study Report was examined by a high level Committee appointed by Ministry of 
Steel for devising roadmap for implementation of recommendations of the study. 
Taking note of the recommendations of the Study Report which inter-alia include 
shift in type of housing structure, re -looking steel design for various applications, 
investment in community structures, small and medium steel products 
manufacturing, highlighting advantages of steel, increasing aesthetics of steel, 
improving logistics & s upply chain for steel and addressing steel quality issues, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the implementation of these 
recommendations by the Government/Steel Companies for enhancing 
consumption of steel in rural India.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Joint Pla nt Committee (JPC) had undertaken a study / survey on 
Assessment of Steel Demand in Rural India.  The survey has made 
recommendations for enhancing the consumption of steel in rural India through 
shift in type of housing structure (with more steel) with:- 
 
 Re-looking steel design for various applications; 
 Investment in community structures; 
 Small and medium steel product manufacturing; 
 Highlighting the advantages of steel; 
 Increased aesthetics of steel, improving logistics & supply chain; and 
 Addressing steel quality issues. 
 
2.1.  It is necessary to make the rural consumers aware of the advantages of 
steel usage instead of the traditional materials like wood and plastic in terms of 
inherent strength, design flexibility, fire resistance, lesser deterioration  over time 
and life cycle cost advantage besides the eco friendliness of using steel in 
construction, storage and other household items. Rural campaign for promotion 
of steel aims to achieve these ends. 
 
2.2. According to reports from INSDAG, some steel co mpanies have come 
forward to sponsor “Showcase Models “of specially designed steel houses for 
villages. Besides this, the Institute has been assigned the task of developing 
design manuals for rural infrastructure such as culverts and bridges where steel 
could be used as a major material. Another innovative concept popularised by 
INSDAG is to promote “steel bullock carts” in villages in association with the 
“Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute”, Durgapur. These bullock 
carts will have a minimum  life span of 20 years. Public sector Banks have been 
roped in for providing loan to rural people for purchase of the steel bullock carts. 

68 
 
The Institute is also engaged in convincing the steel companies to support 
production of the steel carts. Several loc al NGOs and Khadi &Village Industries 
Corporations are taking part in this initiative to promote the said item. From one 
village in Odisha an order for 250 such bullock carts has been received and more 
efforts are underway from several other villages.   
 
3.1  Consequent to the survey a Committee was constituted by the Ministry of 
Steel to suggest measures for implementation of the recommendations in the 
Study Report.  As per the decisions of this Committee, the recommendations of 
the Study were communicated by the Ministry of Steel to concerned Departments 
of the Government of India, as well as the State Government and steel 
producers, for further action. A Monitoring Committee has also been constituted 
by the Ministry of Steel under the chairmanship of Join t Secretary to Government 
of India and comprising representatives from public sector steel plants i.e. SAIL, 
RINL, Ministry of Steel, JPC and INSDAG. The Terms of Reference of the 
Monitoring Committee include:- 
 
a) to monitor the implementation of the various  action areas approved in 
the Action Plan. 
b) to periodically review the results of the various action areas, post 
implementation. 
c) to build up a database on rural stock points of various steel producers 
and any other parameter considered important . 
d) to suggest areas for further improvement. 
e) any other related area considered important over course of time. 
  
3.2  Joint Plant Committee has been entrusted with the role of the Secretariat 
of the Monitoring Committee which will meet on a quarterly / half -yearly basis.  
As of now, two meetings of the Monitoring Committee have been held (on 7 th 
November 2012 and 1 st February 2013) both at Ministry of Steel under the 
chairmanship of Shri Sydedain Abbasi, Joint Secretary to Govt of India, Ministry 
of Steel.  
 
3.3 The said meetings have reviewed in detail the extent of implementation of 
the recommendations of the Rural Study Demand Report, which included, among 
others:- 
 funding of INSDAG projects on rural skill development program under 
the Market Development Project scheme by JPC. 
 collection of data on rural level stock points by INSDAG. 
 publication of books/study reports in connection with framed steel 
structures for rural areas by INSDAG. 
4.1. INSDAG had prepared training modules for masons and fabricators. In 
this connection, INSDAG had organized masons training programmes with RINL 
at Vizag, SAIL at Burdwan District, West Bengal and Tata Steel at Guwahati. On 
the use of steel in fabrication as well as for masonry jobs like bar bending etc. 
Tata Steel and JSW Ispat had a lso organized training programmes at 
Jamshedpur, Bhubaneswar, Rourkela, Dehradun and Jalandhar respectively. 
 

69 
 
4.2. Regarding propagation of steel fabrication in rural areas, a programme on 
Skill cum Entrepreneurship Development had been organized by INSDAG  under 
MDP programme sanctioned by Ministry of Steel near Kolkata (West Bengal) at 
ESAB Welding Institute for 25 village entrepreneurs during December 03 – 22, 
2012 and at Advanced Training Institute, Kanpur (UP) for 35 participants during 
June 03 – 22, 2013. These entrepreneurs have been given theoretical training as 
well as hands -on training in the workshop to enable them to become steel 
fabricators for various fabricated items required by the rural household. After 
publication of the scheme by PMEGP on 1 6th / 20 th May 2013, INSDAG is 
providing all hand -holding support to these village entrepreneurs which includes 
preparation of project reports to enable them to receive subsidized bank loans 
from banks like Union Bank of India under the Prime Minister‟s Em ployment 
Generation Programme (PMEGP), getting pollution certificate and electricity 
connection, identification of the machinery required for fabrication at designated 
places, etc. INSDAG has written to all the major steel producers including SAIL, 
RINL, Tata Steel, Essar Steel, JSW and JSPL to sponsor one programme each 
at their places for Skill cum Entrepreneurship Development programme for 
village entrepreneurs as steel fabricators. Tata Steel has already sponsored one 
such programme at Bhubaneswar (Odis ha) for 55 nos. of rural entrepreneurs to 
make them steel fabricators during February 11 – March 02, 2013. Next 
programme for Tata Steel is likely to be held at Ranchi, Jharkhand shortly. 
Bokaro Steel Plant (SAIL) will also organize such programme at Bokar o in 
coming months. In addition to the already approved MDP funded projects (West 
Bengal, UP and Patna) INSDAG has also requested Ministry of Steel to approve 
another two programmes one each at Tripura and UP. The proposals are under 
active consideration of the Ministry of Steel.  
4.3. Regarding publication of books/study reports in connection with framed 
structures made of steel in the rural areas, a lot of work in the field of analysis 
and design of one model (in steel) with the model plan for the single storied 
residential building for Indira Awas Yojana scheme rural house, structural steel 
framing and ferro cement wall panel for wall cladding, analysis and design of one 
model of school building and analysis, design and detailed drawings for a 
meeting hall has been done by INSDAG. The structural steel framing and ferro 
cement wall panel for wall cladding are viable and the total cost is Rs.1.35 lakhs 
under Indira Awas Yojana. The main producers will be exhorted to take it up 
under their CSR activities. 
4.4. Regarding revisiting of de signs of various pre -fabricated/semi fabricated 
applications and increasing the aesthetics of steel used by rural populations, 
INSDAG has already initiated discussion with Centre for Engineering and 
Technology (CET)/SAIL and RDCIS (SAIL). 
5.1. SAIL has launched a Dealership Scheme in 2006 with a view to increasing 
consumption of steel in far flung areas of the country and to carry out steel 
business at grass root level. At present SAIL has a network of 2314 dealers 
under this scheme spread across 611 district of the country. SAIL Dealership has 
helped in easy availability and increased usages of items like TMT Bars, GP/GC 
Sheets and Structurals required by common man in interior areas.  
 

70 
 
5.2.  SAIL has introduced Rural Dealership Scheme during August, 2011 to 
expand its scope of business in rural areas (block/taluka) of the country with the 
primary objective of meeting the steel demands of the small rural consumers at 
block, tehsil and taluka levels which will keep in increasing st eel consumption in 
rural areas. Under this scheme , 665 rural dealers have been appointed as on 
1.5.2013. 
5.3. Promotional activities like outdoor advertisements, printed materials, audio 
visuals, events etc. are also undertaken by SAIL and its dealers.   
 
6.1 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
 RINL adopted a 3 pronged approach for promotion of steel consumption, 
especially in the rural areas. These are enumerated below:- 
 
I. Widening Marketing Distribution Network 
 
Objective: To make steel available eas ily to consumer in nook and corner of the 
country. 
Special thrust is being given by RINL for steel to reach to common mass 
so as to promote steel usage and push higher volume for mutual benefit to 
Consumers and the Company. In this endeavour, RINL has been  widening the 
distribution network across the country.  
 
Under the Rural Dealership Scheme introduced by RINL, the number of 
Dealers has increased six fold to 606 in the last three years. Region-wise number 
of Rural Dealers is as under:- 
 
                                                                                Unit : Nos. 
Region March, 2010 March, 2013 
North 3 190 
West 8 81 
South 29 162 
East 25 158 
Andhra 35 15 
Total 100 606 
 
Out of 606 Dealers, 90 belong to SC/ST category and 109 belong to OB C 
category. 
In order to further improve distribution of steel in rural areas, it is planned 
to increase the number of Dealers to 1000 by end of current year. Keeping in 
view the ongoing and future expansion of the plant capacity actions have been 
initiated to open 6 New Branches and also plans to appoint Marketing Contact 
Officers (MCOs) at 7 locations. 
 
II. Development of new products  
 
Objective: To serve customers better by meeting their requirement of quality and 
cost competitive products.  
 

71 
 
Product development is a continuous process at RINL to meet the specific 
requirements of customers. In response to the customers need, product 
development is taken up and successfully developed products are supplied to 
them.  
 
During last 3 years, about 65 new produc ts have been developed. The 
new products developed are aimed at improving the quality and cost 
competitiveness. The rebars produced by RINL make steel usage economical 
with higher strength at nominal cost.  
 
III. Advertisement Campaigns  
 
Objective: To build brand name of the company and to promote steel usage 
by bringing awareness amongst larger cross section of people. 
 
 Earlier, RINL was depending more on mouth -to-mouth publicity arising out 
of its excellent Marketing Services. Survey made by PM‟s Trophy  Team has also 
brought out this feature. Hence, there was limited expenditure on publicity. 
However, now with expansion products and availability of higher product volume, 
RINL‟s expenditure on sales promotion is getting increased in stages. During the 
last 2 years, expenditure increased by 53% to Rs 3.05 cr. of last year i.e. 2012 -
13. Keeping in view the need and the initiatives required to be taken for product 
campaigns, Board of RINL has also enhanced the budget for product promotion 
to Rs .15 per tonne o f steel sales. Steel promotion activities being taken 
includes:- 
 
 Conducting workshops of Architects, Designers, Builder, Consultants 
etc. at Major Metros (New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai 
Hyderabad, Bangalore, Ahmadabad, Patna, Bhubaneswar, 
Kanpur/Agra). 
 RINL organized Training Program on “Increasing Awareness and 
Usage of Steel in Construction Industry” for Masons, Bar Benders and 
Fabricators at Visakhapatnam. 
 Meet on Rural Marketing to promote “Steel consumption in Rural 
Areas” was undertaken in association with CII and ASSOCHAM. 
 Partners Summit is held every year at HQ, Visakhapatnam, where 
Rural Dealers participate and discuss various interface issues.  
 Regular Rural Dealers Meets are being conducted in the Branch 
Offices. 
 CSR Programmes along with p romotion of steel in rural areas have 
been conducted in Bhubaneswar, Bangalore, Jaipur, Lucknow and 
Kanpur & such programmes will be taken up in other areas. 
 Advertisements during important Sports Events, Seminars etc.  
 Making a Product Film in local langu ages and telec ast through local 
Cable Network. 
 Making a CD consisting of Product Features and Contact Persons.  
 Advertisements on Buses, Hoardings at Bus Stands, Airports, Railway 
Stations and vantage points. 

72 
 
 Glow Sign Boards at Stock Yards, Retailers, DLDs and RDs locations. 
 Product Campaign through News papers, Magazines etc. 
 Product Campaign in Airlines In-flight Magazines. 
 Hoardings on RINL‟s Products in Tier II Cities & Rural Areas. 
 Projections of video clips on RINL Products in Cinema Halls. 
 Participation in Exhibitions for displaying RINL‟s Products. 
 Printing of Product Brochures for Circulation amongst customers. 
 RINL along with INSDAG has also taken up steel product promotion 
campaign for improving steel consumption in the country. 
 
RINL has also ta ken several CSR activities in other States to improve its 
visibility and branding of products. Such initiatives are giving twin benefits of 
societal development / public goodwill and publicity to the company.  
 
Institute for Steel Development and Growth (I NSDAG), promoted by the 
major steel producers in the country and the Ministry of Steel (MOS) has been 
acting as a nodal agency for undertaking promotion of steel usage campaign in 
the country. RINL is a member of this campaign committee and finances the 
promotional activities undertaken by INSDAG. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 
26TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation Serial No.21 
 
The Committee have analyz ed the implementation of the 
observations/recommendations contained in their Twenty -Sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants for the year 2012-13 of the Ministry of Steel. The analysis of 
the Committee shows that out of the 22 recommendations pertaining to the 
Ministry of Steel contained in their Report, 2 recommendations have been 
implemented by the Government. 19 recommendations are under the process of 
being implemented by the Ministry and the reply in respect of 1 recommendation 
has not been accepted by the C ommittee. The Committee would review the 
implementation of its recommendations by the Ministry in due course. The 
Committee, therefore, wish that the process of implementation of the 
recommendations under process be also expedited at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
 

73 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

74 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
MODERNISATION AND EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF SAIL  
 
Recommendation Serial No.4 
 
The Committee note that SAIL has been implementing Modernisation and 
Expansion Programme of its five integrated Steel Plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, 
Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur and Special Steel Plant at Salem to increase steel 
production capacity of crude steel from 12.84 mill ion tonnes per annum to 21.4 
million tonnes per annum. While observing that Orders worth around Rs. 58000 
crore have been placed against which actual expenditure of Rs. 42893 crore has 
been incurred till February, 2013 and the expansion of Salem Steer Plan t has 
been completed in 2010 -11, the Committee are unhappy to note that physical 
performance of the Company indicate a stagnant production as approximately 
14.5 MT of Hot metal, 13.6 MT of crude steel, 12.8 MT of saleable steel and 0.3 
MT of pig iron have been produced by the Company during each of the last four 
years (2009-10 to 2012-2013). The Committee are anguished to note that due to 
poor performance of the contractors, the completion of modernization and 
expansion of Bhilai, Durgapur Steel Plants have  been delayed resulting in 
underutilization of outlays. Against the project cost of Rs. 18884 crore, only Rs. 
7353 crore has been spent so for by Bhilai Steel Plant. Similarly out of a project 
cost of Rs. 3164 crore, Durgapur Steel Plant could spend only R s. 1282 crore so 
far. In the case of Bokaro Steel Plant, project implementation has been delayed 
and is to be completed in June, 2013 as against the target date of December, 
2011. What is disturbing to the Committee is that lISCO expansion project which 
was to be completed by the December, 2010 has been badly delayed and now 
the completion will be by June, 2013. The Committee desire the 
Government/SAIL to make all out efforts to ensure that the Modernization and 
Expansion plan is not dragged on year after y ear and is completed during the 
current fiscal to avoid cost and time overrun. The Committee would also like to 
be apprised of the resultant enhancement of the crude steel production capacity 
from the ongoing modernization and expansion plans as well as th e action taken 
against the contractors who have failed to achieved the milestones causing delay 
in the implementation of various projects of SAIL plants.  
 
Action Taken 
SAIL is putting in all efforts to complete modernisation and expansion plan 
within the revised target schedule. Regular review of the implementation is bei ng 
taken by Board Sub -Committees SAIL Board & Ministry of Steel.   For expediting 
the implementation for achievement of planned milestones, the matter is being 
continuously followed up with  the top management of contracting agencies to 
ensure adequate resources at site. Risk Purchase Notices have been issued to 

75 
 
erring contractors and packages have been re -ordered at risk & cost of the 
defaulting contractors. 
 The crude steel production capac ity shall be achieved after the current 
modernization & expansion plan as given below:- 
 
 Installed (Mtpa) After Modernisation & 
expansion (Mtpa) 
Crude Steel capacity 12.84 21.40 
 
Expansion of Salem Steel Plant was completed in September, 2010 and is 
under regular operation. Commissioning of individual units is being done at other 
steel plants.  Present status of various Plants is as under:- 
 At Rourkela Steel Plant, Ore Bedding & Blending Plant, COB -6 complex 
including Coal Handling Plant, Coke Dry Coolin g Plant & Coal Chemicals 
Deptt, Sinter Plant -3 & Continuous Caster have been completed and are 
under operation/stabilisation. Integrated testing & trials of Blast Furnace -5 
have been completed. Preparations are on for blowing-in of the furnace.  
 At IISCO S teel Pl ant, Coke Oven Battery, Sinter P lant & Wire Rod Mill 
have been completed and are under operation/stabilisation. Coke and 
sinter is presently being sent to sinter plants. The Blast Furnace & Oxygen 
Plant are ready and commissioning is linked with the  completion of BOF 
Shop.  
 At Bokaro Steel Plant, Acid Regeneration Plant, Coil Packaging Lines, 
Skin Pass Mill & Power supply facilities required for new CRM have been 
completed. Integrated trial run of Pickling Line and Cold Tandem Mill done 
in Jul‟13 for reduction of Pickled HR coils through Cold Tandem Mill.    
 At Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgapur Steel Plant, facilities are in various 
stages of execution.  
 
Efforts are on to complete the current phase of Modernization & 
Expansion progressively by 2013-14. 
 
In case of Expansion at ISP Burnpur, difficult & unforeseen soil conditions, 
removal of underground boulders and hillocks etc led to increase in civil & 
structural work substantially and also took extra time. For commissioning of Coke 
Oven Battery and Sinter Plant, the coke & sinter dispatch systems were required 
to be constructed which was falling in the area of village deity known as 
„Jhoraburi‟. The work for shifting the deity to some alternate place outside the 
plant premises was obstructed by the loc al villagers. After continuous efforts, the 
issue was resolved and the diety has been shifted to the alternate place in Jun‟12 
after which the work was resumed. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

76 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED  
 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
 
The Committee acknowledge the fact that RINL has to suffer on account 
of absence of captive mines for iron ore and coal. The Committee had earlie r 
recommended Ministry of Steel to vigorously pursue the matter with the 
concerned State Governments for acquiring iron ore mines and Ministry of Coal 
for allocation of coal blocks reserved for integrated PSUs. The Committee are 
dismayed to learn that no s ignificant progress has been made in the matter. The 
Committee are, however, happy to note that the Ministry of Mines, Government 
of India, has cleared the proposal on 19.03.2013 for issue of Letter of Intent (Lol) 
to RINL for mining lease for an area of 9 99.08 hectares in Bhilwara District in 
Rajasthan.  LoI is expected to be issued by the Government of Rajasthan shortly. 
The Committee also note that Ministry of Steel is pursuing the matter for 
allotment of iron ore mines to RINL with State Governments of Andhra Pradesh 
and Odisha. Further, in principle,· approval has been obtained for allotment of 2 
iron ore blocks directly to RINL and 1 block through Andhra Pradesh Mineral 
Development Corporation (APMDC).  Applications of RINL for iron ore mining are 
also reported to be pending in States of Jharkhand, U.P., Karnataka and 
Chhattisgarh.  While appreciating the concerted efforts made by the Ministry of 
Steel and RINL for allocation of captive iron ore mines, the Committee hope that 
concrete results would emer ge from other sources as well. Meanwhile, the 
Committee are, however, concerned to note that no significant progress has 
been made in allocation of coal blocks reserved by the Ministry of Coal for 
integrated PSUs to RINL. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Ministry of Steel should take up the matter at the highest level of the Government 
and the representatives of Ministry of Steel/RINL take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Coal to resolve the issue expeditiously.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Iron Ore: 
 
I. Rajasthan: LOI from Govt of Rajasthan for 1st ever Iron Ore block in the 
State received on 31/05/13. Another Iron Ore block is under active 
consideration of Govt of Rajasthan. 
 
 However, to get actual benefits of mining of Iron Ore and bring to VSP for 
use would  depend on how fast all the balance statutory clearances are 
given by Govt. - Matter is being  pursued. 
 
II. Jharkhand: Govt of Jharkhand got favourable order from Supreme Court 
for allotment of Ghatkuri mines to PSUs.  Accordingly, the matte r is being 
pursued by Ministry of Steel and RINL with Govt of Jharkhand for which 
series of meetings took place in April & May, 20 13 – the last being on 28 th 

77 
 
May, 20 13 by Secretary (Steel) with Advisors to the Governor of 
Jharkhand and Chief Secretary, Govt of Jharkhand. 
 
 Jharkhand is most suited location for sourcing of Iron Ore at moderate 
freight rate by RINL. 
 
III. Andhra Pradesh:  There has been good response from Govt of AP 
recently.  But, for early accrual of benefits to RINL, expeditious movement 
of proposal by Govt of AP for necessary clearances is essential.    
 
IV Odisha: Government of Odisha is being persued by the Ministry of Steel 
for expediting the allotment of mines to RINL in Odisha. 
  
Coal: 
 
 Secretary (Steel) has written to Secretary (Coal ) on 26 th Mar‟13 for 
considering early  allotment of at least one or two coal blocks in favour of RINL 
which are earmarked for  PSEs by Ministry of Coal, preferably Aluara and 
Parbatpur North. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
 
Though the Committee are happy to note that feasibility study for next 
phase of expansion of RINL to 11 MTPA of crude steel has already commenced 
and implementation is envisaged by 2017 -18, they are apprehensive about the 
time line for the implementation of the expansion programme given the scarcity 
of raw material being faced by the Company. The Committee would like RINL to 
analyze and study the con straints being faced by them during the current 
modernization programme and overcome them by drawing up an advance action 
plan for implementing the next phase of expansion programme.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Feasibility study for the next phase of 11 Mtpa of Crude Steel has been 
carried out.  Addressing the following major constraints is essential for achieving 
the growth plans of RINL. 
 
Iron Ore:  Recent positive developments in respect of mines in Rajasthan, 
Andhra Pradesh and Jharkhand are reassuring.  However, ex peditious 
clearances from the respective State and Central Governments are most 
essential at this juncture.   
 
Coal: Secretary (Steel) has written to Secretary (Coal) on 26 th March, 2013 for 
considering early allotment of at least one or two coal blocks in  favour of RINL 

78 
 
which are earmarked for PSEs by Ministry of Coal, preferably Aluara and 
Parbatpur North.  Early action from Ministry of Coal is essential. 
 
Water: RINL is facing acute problem in getting water from Govt of AP even for 
6.3 Mtpa stage, though  contract exists.  RINL has taken up with AP State Govt. 
to get adequate water supply and also going for augmentation of water storage 
facility by constructing a new Water Reservoir. As an alternative, RINL is also 
exploring installation of Desalination Plant; but, it would add to the cost. 
 
Power:  RINL is expanding its power production capacity by implementing 
various new power production schemes. RINL has also taken up with AP 
Transco for strengthening of infrastructure facility to receive adequate power  and 
for increasing quantum of contractual maximum demand power import signed 
earlier. 
 
Funds: RINL has been generating surplus cash with which Expansion up to 6.3 
Mtpa has almost been completed.  RINL has now started borrowing for 
Modernisation and Upgrad ation schemes, which would enhance the capacity to 
7.3 Mtpa.  F or further expansion to 11 Mtpa , significant increase in surplus cash 
is required, for which all efforts are being made by RINL.  Early allotment of Iron 
Ore and Coking Coal mines would help in  enhancing the margins and generation 
of surplus cash.    
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
IDLE EQUIPMENT AT KUDREMUKH  
 
Recommendation Serial No.11 
 
The Committee are appalled to note that equipments worth rupees 
hundreds of crores are lying idle for more than seven years at KIOCL 
plant in Kudremukh which was closed following a Supreme Court order. 
Moreover, the company has to maintain them as the se equipments have 
been lying idle since December, 2005 when the mining activities were 
stopped. The Committee further note that though KIOCL approached 
SAIL, NMDC and RINL for utilization of these· equipments, yet none of 
them showed interest to utilize/ purchase the same. The Committee fail 
to understand the role the Ministry of Steel who had been providing a 
platform for interaction of all producers and overseeing the performance 
of PSUs under its control as it had failed to act as a facilitator to help the 
Company to dispose off or properly utilize the equipments. As Ministry of 
Steel and other steel PSUs had not shown any interest in proper 
utilization of these equipments, the company (KIOCL) is reported to 
have shifted some mining equipments to KIOCL's  Managalore unit for 
their use and remaining items were auctioned. The Committee have 
been given to understand that M/s Annam Steel Pvt. Ltd., Chennai, 

79 
 
which stood as the H1 bidder in the global auction at a price of Rs. 
227.11 crores have asked for extension of time for payment by 8.5.2013. 
Taking note of the fact that these steps have not been taken earlier, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the amount spent to maintain the 
equipment and the total market price at the time of purchase of all 
equipments which are now being sold as scrap. The Committee expect 
that in future due care is taken by the Ministry/Steel PSUs so that scarce 
public funds used to procure such heavy equipments should be properly 
utilized.  
 
Action Taken 
 
The mining activities a t Kudremukh were stopped as per the order of 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court w.e.f. 01.01.2006, consequently the mining and 
beneficiation equipments are lying idle. To upkeep these equipments in proper 
conditions and for better realization, KIOCL is maintaining thes e equipments. For 
guarding against theft etc. of these equipments, KIOCL has been utilizing the 
services of Central Industrial Security Force. From the date of closure to till date 
KIOCL spent Rs.60.56 crores on maintenance and security. The break - up of the 
same is as follows:- 
 
Sl. No. Details Amount (Rs. in crores) 
1. Spares and Consumables 0.18 
2. Power Charges 20.62 
3. Security 39.76 
 Total 60.56 
 
The above mentioned amount does not include salary and allowance paid 
to the employees of Kudremukh unit.   
 
The procurement cost of the Mining & Beneficiation Equipments together 
with stores and spares which is offered for sale was Rs.442.28 crores. The book 
value of the Mining & Beneficiation Equipments together with stores and spares   
is Rs.690. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.12 
 
The Committee note that the overall performance of KIOCL has not been 
very encouraging e ver since the mining activities were discontinued at 
Kudremukh with effect from 1.1.2006 in pursuance of Supreme Court Order and 
the Company has been encountering serious challenge since then for one 
reason or other. Due to non -availability of assured quan tity and quality of iron 

80 
 
ore, the Company is unable to enter into any long term contract with its buyers 
and therefore limiting to the option of selling its pellets in spot market. Needless 
to say that the survival of the company is at stake. The Committee  therefore 
would like the Ministry of Steel to take up the matter of issue of allotment of iron 
ore mines to KIOCL at the highest level. 28 applications for mining lease and 9 
applications for prospecting licences applied by the Company have been pending 
with the State Governments of Karnataka, Odisha and Jharkhand for approval. 
Though the Secretary Ministry of Steel is reported to have taken up the matter 
with the Chief Secretary of respective States, no progress has been made so far.  
 
Action Taken 
 
In pu rsuance to the directive of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, mining 
activities at Kudremukh were stopped w.e.f.01.01.2006. Consequent to closure of 
mining activities at Kudremukh, Company has been exploring various 
alternatives for mining at other locations with in Karnataka and also other States. 
The details of latest developments made to get iron ore mining lease are given 
as under:- 
 
(i) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Andhra Pradesh State 
Mineral Development Corporation (APMDC) Limited, Hyderabad  
 
Industries & Commerce Department, Govt of A ndhra Pradesh issued 
memo dated 18.04.2013 conveying decision of Govt of AP to grant prospecting 
license for iron ore  over an extent of 1513 hectares in Minchery RF, 
Rayadurgam Range Bommanhal Mandal, Anantapur dist in favour of APMDC, 
being state public sector undertaking. Govt of Andhra Pradesh also permitted 
APMDC to form joint venture with KIOCL Ltd for exploration and exploitation of 
iron ore deposit for the aforesaid area. 
 
KIOCL had entered into Tri -partite MoU with M/s APMDC, an arm of the 
provincial government of Andhra Pradesh and M/s RINL on 22.06.2013. As per 
understanding between the three entities, KIOCL and APMDC would jointly 
explore and develop iron ore reserves in the Anantpur Dist., in AP, while KIOC L 
would set up beneficiation and pelletisation plant near the mines. 50% of pellets 
produced by KIOCL will be given to RINL on cost plus basis. The remaining 50% 
of the pellets produced may be sold in the open market or offered to RINL at 
mutually agreed price. 
 
(ii) Allocation of Category “C’ mines 
 
The Central Empowered Committee has submitted its final report dated 
03.02.2012 to Hon‟ble Supreme Court in WP No.(C) 562 of 2009 regarding 
mining leases surveyed by the joint team in the districts of Bellary, Chitradurga 
and Tumkur and classification of the mining leases into different categories on 
the basis of illegalities found. Based on the report of Central Empowered 
Committee, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court  by its judgment dated 18.04.2013, 

81 
 
allowed all Catego ry “A” and “B” mines for operation with conditions and 
recommended for cancellation of mines under Category “C” in the districts of 
Bellary, Tumkur and Chitradurga. Pending decision of KIOCL‟s application for 
allotment of mines, it was requested that the G ovt. of Karnataka to consider for 
allocation of Category “C” mines in order to make pellet plant operations viable.  
 
Hon‟ble Minister of Steel vide D.O. No.6(4)/2012 -KDH/5600 dated 
20.06.2013 requested Hon‟ble Chief Minister of Karnataka for his intervent ion for 
allocation of Category “C” mines by Govt. of Karnataka to KIOCL in order to 
make the pellet plant operation viable. 
 
(iii) Hombalghatta and Hosahalli Mining Lease (Chikkanaykanahalli Iron 
Ore Mining Lease, Karnataka) 
 
Govt of Karnataka recommended for grant of mining lease(ML) in block 
no. 02 over an area of 116.55 Ha in Hombalghatta & Hosahalli villages, 
Chikkanaykanahalli Taluk, Tumkur District vide letter No.709/MMM/04 -2005-06 
dated 06.03.2006 against Govt. Notification No.CI63 MMM 2004 dated 
20.07.2004 .  
 
KIOCL is awaiting revised ML sketch from Directorate of Mines and 
Geology to obtain Forest Clearance for the project and other statutory 
clearances. Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 18.04.2013, 
pronounced that an embargo on grant o f fresh mining leases need not be 
continued any further i.e. Govt of Karnataka can grant fresh mining leases in 
future. Grant of fresh mining leases and consideration of pending applications be 
dealt with in accordance with law. With this judgment, Govt of  Karnataka need to 
sort out the overlapping issue among all ML allottees and issue revised sketch 
for obtaining forest and other clearances.    
 
(iv) Ramanadurga (Block no. 13/1) iron ore deposit, Bellary Dist., 
Karnataka 
 
An application for grant of Minin g Lease for an area of 1573 hectares 
(about 6.5 sq. miles) in Ramanadurga area to the Director, Mines and Geology, 
Govt. of Karnataka (Government of Karnataka) was submitted by KIOCL on 
09.03.2000, as the area was reserved for State Exploitation at that ti me. 
Subsequently, Secretary (Mines, Textile and SSI) Government of Karnataka 
conducted a hearing on 31.08.2010 and 02.09.2010 for consideration of KIOCL‟s 
application for grant of mining l ease for iron ore in block N o. 13/1. KIOCL 
submitted a map on 14.09. 2010 demarcating 50% of area available in block N o. 
13/1 Ramanadurga Range to an extent of 840 hectares for grant of mining lease 
with a copy to Secretary (Mines, Textile and SSI), Government of Karnataka. 
 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 18. 04.2013, pronounced 
that an embargo on grant of fresh mining leases need not be continued any 
further. Grant of fresh mining leases and consideration of pending applications 

82 
 
be dealt with in accordance with law i.e. Govt of Karnataka can grant fresh 
mining leases in future. With this judgment, Govt of Karnataka has to take 
appropriate decision for allo tment of mining lease of block N o 13/1 
(Ramanadurga iron ore deposit), since already hearing was held on 31.08.2010 
and 02.09.2010. Company is pursuing the ma tter with Govt of Karnataka to 
resolve the issue and allocate ML at the earliest.   
 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel vide DO No.6(4)/2012 -KDH dated 07.01.2013 
requested Chief Secretary, Govt. of Karnataka for looking into KIOCL‟s pending 
prospecting/mining lease including block N o.13/, Ramanadurga iron ore deposit 
on priority. 
 
(v) Khandadhar iron ore deposit, Odisha 
 
KIOCL submitted PL application on 17.10.2002 over an area of 54.1 sq 
km in village Barsua, Rajabasha, Khandadhar & Rantha in the district of 
Sundargrah, Odisha and ML application on 29.03.2006. Dept of Geology, Govt. 
of Odisha, on behalf of KIOCL did prospecting drilling from 2003 to 2005 in the 
applied area and submitted report in December, 2005. 
 
Govt. of Odisha rejected the KIOCL applications a nd recommended the 
applied area to POSCO. KIOCL challenged the Govt. of Odisha decision in 
various courts. Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 10.05.2013 set 
aside the impugned judgment dated 14.07. 2010 passed by the Division Bench of 
the Orissa  High Court and remit the matter to the Central Government to 
consider the question of approval under Section 5(1) taking into consideration the 
recommendations made by the State Government. 
 
(vi) Ghatkuri iron ore deposit, Jharkhand  
 
KIOCL Ltd submitted its application for grant of Mining Lease (ML) on 
21.07.2007 for an area of 2500 ha against Gazette Notification on 30.10.2006. 
KIOCL Ltd also submitted Prospecting License (PL) application for the same 
area on 25.08.2012. vide No. A/MM -40510/62-6209/M dat ed 21 Dec 1962 and 
No. B/M -6-1019/68-1564/M dated 28 Feb 1969 of the then State of Bihar 
reserved the Ghatkuri iron ore deposit for explitation by Public Sector 
Undertaking (PSU) or Joint Venture Project of the State Govt. Special Leave 
Petition (SLP) file d by some of Private Mining Companies was dismissed by 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Jul 2012 and upheld year 2009 order of the Jharkhand 
High Court, that the Govt has right to reserve areas for exploitation by PSU. 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel vide DO letter N o.6(4)/2012-KDH dated 07.01.2013 
requested for looking into KIOCL‟s pending Prospecting/Mining Lease application 
on priority. 
 
A meeting was held under Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel), MoS with 
RINL, SAIL and KIOCL on 17.05.2013 to discuss the issue related to allocation of 

83 
 
iron ore mines in the State of Jharkhand to Central Steel Sector PSUs i.e. SAIL 
RINL & KIOCL.  
 
(vii) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Kerala State Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited (KSIDC) 
 
A MoU was signed between KIOC L Limited (KIOCL) and Kerala State 
Industrial Development Corporation Limited (KSIDC) for iron ore mining, setting 
up of beneficiation & pelletisation Plant in the Kasaragod / Kozhikode Dist. in the 
state of Kerala o n 22.09.2011 at New Delhi.The Mo U was va lid for a period of 
one year from the date of signing and shall be renewed thereafter upon mutual 
consent. KIOCL took up with M/s KSIDC for extension of MoU till the execution of 
JV agreement. CMD, KIOCL met Hon‟ble CM of Kerala on 16.10.2012 at 
Thiruvananthapuram to discuss on the status of MoU. In furtherance, Director 
(Commercial) vide letter dated 20.10.2012 requested the intervention of Hon‟ble 
CM in allotment of mining lease to KIOCL for establishing a suitable business 
entity in Kerala.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Steel vide DO letter No.6(4)/2012 -KDH dated 
07.06.2013 requested Chief Secretary, Govt. of Kerala for suitable mineral rights 
in the State of Kerala to the proposed joint venture of KSIDC and KIOCL and 
also possible joint venture among KIOCL, K SIDC and KEMDEL to take up the 
Titanium Dioxide separation plant. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
CSR ACTIVITIES IN STEEL PSUS  
 
Recommendation Serial No.20 
 
The Committee find that as per DPE guidelines Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) is a concept whereby organizations serve the interest of 
society by taking responsibility for the impact of their activities on customers, 
employees, sharehol ders, communities and the environment in all aspects of 
their operations. The Committee also feel that CSR activities should ethically be 
undertaken within the operational area or within the periphery of the plants/mine 
where the company is carrying out it s activity to directly benefit the people 
residing therein and who are the most affected. But the Committee have found 
that there has been no criteria for doling out goodies under the garb of CSR 
activities by Steel PSUs to areas of their own choice. The C ommittee are 
appalled to note the haphazard manner in which CSR activities have been 
carried out by Steel PSUs in particularly 2 districts of Uttar Pradesh namely 
Barabanki and Gonda.  
  

84 
 
The Committee fail to understand the logic behind concentrating their  
activities by all the steel PSUs in these 2 districts as if the headquarters of these 
PSUs have been shifted to these two districts. Incidentally, one of the districts 
happens to be constituency of the Steel Minister. The Committee note that during 
the year 2012-13 the profit of SAIL was around 2200 crores and Rs. 64 clore was 
spent on CSR which comes to about three percent. The Committee note that 
according to the Department of Public Enterprises Guidelines dated 9 April, 2010 
when the profit of a company  is Rs. 500 crores and above, 0.5% to 2% of the 
profit has to be spent on CSR activities. But the surprising fact is that maximum 
amount has been spent in 1 district only i.e. Barabanki in Uttar Pradesh. Another 
surprising fact which came out during the ev idence was that there is no existing 
steel plant in Barabanki and a new project is coming up at Jagdishpur. 
  
The Committee have been informed that out of a total amount of Rs. 
8,19,98,180 spent by SAIL on CSR activities in the State of UP, SAIL spent an 
amount of Rs. 7,43,32,180 during 2012 -13 in Barabanki, Gonda and Balrampur, 
Uttar Pradesh which comes to 90.6% of the total amount spent in the State. 
Compared with other States, the total CSR expenditure for 2012 -13 forU.P. 
stands fourth, next only to Jharkhand, Odisha and Chhattisgarh; other States like 
West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh etc. lag far 
behind.  
The Committee further observe that RINL spent Rs. 12.68 crore on CSR 
activities during (2012 -13), out of which Rs. 2.06 crore has been spent in D.P. 
second only to Andhra Pradesh, despite the fact that RINL has no steel plant in 
U.P.  
As regards NMDC, the Committee find that NMDC has spent Rs. 
5,15,52,000 in Uttar Pradesh during 2011 -12. Out of the 7 projects it took up in 
Uttar Pradesh, 5 of them were in Gonda and Barabanki i.e. out of total 
5,15,52,000, an amount of Rs. 5,01,67,000 was spent in these two districts which 
is 97% of the total amount spent. Similarly, during 2012 -13 out of a total amount 
of 3,63,18,000 spent for Uttar Pradesh, about Rs. 3,53,44,000 has been spent in 
Barabanki and Gonda district which again constitute. 97% of the total amount 
spent. Similarly, out of the total amount of Rs. 6,55,91,000/ - spent for CSR 
activities by MOIL unit which has its headqu arter at Nagpur, during the last three 
years, Rs. 83,38,000 has been spent for Gonda district, Uttar Pradesh. It may be 
pertinent to mention here that apart from its activities in Maharashtra and 
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh is the only State for which MO IL has spent its 
CSR allocation. 
Regarding MECON Ltd. the Committee observe that out of total 
expenditure of Rs. 2,34,40150/ - on CSR activities during 2012 -13, Rs. 
31,56,786/- were spent in 3 districts in U.P. namely Balrampur, Barabanki and 
Gonda and rest of Rs. 2,02,83,365/- has been spent in Jharkhand. 
Regarding MSTC, the Committee note that during 2011 -12, out of Rs. 
166.38 lakh spent on CSR activities, Rs. 115.75 lakh i.e. 70% were spent for a 
single project i.e. community centre project in Barabanki. The remaining 30% 
amount was spent on 16 projects in West Bengal. During 2012 -13, for a total 
amount of Rs. 128.28 lakh spent, Rs. 91.61 lakh i.e. 71% was spent on Gonda 

85 
 
District, Uttar Pradesh and rest 29% for West Bengal. MSTC Ltd. has no 
activities in Uttar Pradesh. Similarly, HSCL have also spent Rs. 18.21 lakh on up 
gradation of Karura Tarapur link rural road in District Barabanki, U.P.  
Although, the Ministry of Steel in their Annual Report 2012 -13 have 
mentioned that it is not mandatory to confine CS R activities in the periphery of 
the PSE only but at the same time the principle behind CSR activities may be 
carried out elsewhere is only for the purpose of keeping in view the long supply 
chain, broadening of consumer base and social and environmental d emands. 
The Committee note with concern that the utilization of major CSR funds has 
taken place by steel PSUs in these districts of Uttar Pradesh where none of the 
above mentioned PSUs have any major steel plant or project in the constituency 
of Steel Mini ster. The Committee are unable to understand how spending in 
these two districts of Uttar Pradesh will help the long supply chain, broadening of 
consumer base and social and environmental demands of all steel PSUs 
including those who are otherwise renderin g consultancy services only. This is 
nothing but gross abuse of power by the Ministry and to satisfy the Minister in 
charge. The activities of Steel PSUs are beyond any norms. This type of attitude 
of Public Sector Undertaking are detrimental to the nation's interest.  
While recording their strong disapproval of the manner in which CSR 
funds have been spent by all steel PSUs in these two districts of Barabanki and 
Gonda in Uttar Pradesh at the cost of all the deserving places where actual funds 
are required to be spent, the Committee strongly recommend the Government to 
enquire into the whole matter of investing CSR funds recklessly in these two 
districts of Uttar Pradesh by all PSUs through a Central Investigating Agency and 
those found responsible· and gui lty be made accountable for misutilization of 
funds. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the stringent 
departmental action taken against those officials of steel PSUs who sanctioned 
CSR funds for these two districts.  
 
Action Taken 
As per DPE g uidelines, every year, each CPSE is required to make a 
budgetary allocation for CSR and Sustainability activities/projects for the year.  
The budgetary allocation will be based on the profitability of the company.  More 
specifically, it will be determined by the Profit After Tax (PAT) of the company in 
the previous year as shown here under: 
 
PAT of CPSE in the previous year Range of Budgetary allocation for 
CSR and Sustainability activities (as 
% of PAT in previous year) 
(i) Less than Rs. 100 crore 3%-5% 
(ii) Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 500 crores 2%-3% 
(iii) Rs. 500 crore and above  1%-2% 
  
 The guidelines also make it mandatory for all CPSEs to undertake some 
projects for the development of the backward district of the country. Gonda and 
Barabanki are identified as backward  districts. The list of CSR activities done by 

86 
 
various PSUs during the last five years along with percentage of expenditure in 
Uttar Pradesh is at Annexure –IV.  PSU-wise details are as under:- 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
Audited PAT of SAIL f or FY 2012 -13 is Rs.2170 crore and CSR 
expenditure during 2012 -13 stands at Rs.53.29 Crore. Provisional CSR 
expenditure for 2012 -13 (un -audited) was Rs.63.65 crore, estimated based on 
the projected activities. 
 
SAIL earmarked Rs.42 Crore towards CSR budget  for 2012-13 i.e. 1.19% 
of previous year‟s (2011-12) PAT of Rs.3543 Crore in the range of 0.5 – 2.0 % of 
net profit of pervious year prescribed by the DPE guidelines on CSR.  
 
Additionally, a carry forward amount of Rs.28.48 Crore on account of 
unspent budget from previous years was also available for CSR projects during 
2012-13, thereby making a total fund availability of Rs.70.48 Crore for CSR 
projects.  
 
CSR activities in Gonda, Barabanki and Balrampur: 
 
SAIL plants/units were set up during 60s -70s in t he green field areas 
which were extremely backward in terms of modern civic -societal amenities. 
SAIL being a responsible corporate body took up this opportunity to develop the 
peripheral areas and developed the region into modern townships of today, 
equipped with state of art civic amenities viz. hospitals, schools, roads, drinking 
water facilities/sanitation, parks, community centres and other related 
infrastructure. SAIL now a MAHARATNA has more responsibility towards social 
sector and have expanded its CSR efforts to pan India. 
 
SAIL, as a part of its expansion plan, acquired the assets of M/s Malvika 
Steel at Jagdishpur (U.P) in the year 2009, now known as Jagdishpur SAIL Unit 
(JSU). Commissioning of facilities at Jagdishpur SAIL Unit is in advance stage s. 
SAIL Board also approved setting up of Steel Processing Units (SPUs) at a 
number of new strategic locations and out of the total 12 SPUs planned in the 
northern region; seven belong to Uttar Pradesh and as such the region promises 
huge potential for SAIL. The SPUs are planned to be set up in Gonda, Barabanki 
and Behraich districts of Uttar Pradesh.  
 
It is relevant to mention here that Gonda, Barabanki and Balrampur 
districts have been identified as Backward Districts by the Planning Commission 
for the p urpose of Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF). These districts are 
quite backward from all socio -economic aspects as evident from the fact that 
literacy rate s of G onda, Barabanki and Balrampur are  61.16 %, 63.76% and 
51.76% respectively which are much below the national figure of 74.04 %. These 
districts have very low HDI values. 
 

87 
 
As SAIL is expanding its presence by commissioning of some new 
plants/units in this region, it was felt that creating a brand name would bring in 
goodwill for SAIL amongst the local  mass. In order to build conducive and 
harmonious atmosphere and with a view to replicate the SAIL‟s developmental 
model, a number of development oriented social welfare schemes were 
undertaken in these places also. To start with, different facilities were  created in 
the region, under the CSR thrust areas i.e. education, medical & health -care, 
infrastructure building at Jagdishpur, Barabanki, Gonda, Balrampur etc. in the 
last few years. 
 
Compared with other states, on the basis of CSR expenditure in 2012 -13, 
Uttar Pradesh stands third after Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
The CSR activities in UP comprises of education infrastructure, drinking 
water, community infrastructure, environmental (solar) and skill development for 
youth which have all been also established at Vizag under the vicinity of the 
Plant.  Such activities are also being planned at other backward regions of the 
country too.   
 
 RINL is a company with commercial outlets at 5 regions & 23 branches 
covering all major States.  Out of 23 marketing branches all over India, RINL is 
having 3 branches in Agra, Ghaziabad and Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh, with a total 
business of   around Rs. 600 crores per annum.  RINL is also in the process of 
opening marketing branch at A llahabad and Consignment Sales Agent (CSA) at 
Varanasi. In the backdrop of expansion and product volume increasing from 3 
million ton ns to 7.3 million ton ns, the Company is planning to spread its 
distribution network further.   
 
Recent developments indicate that in the case of mining lease, in some of 
the States, the State Government favoured other applicants vis a vis RINL which 
could be due to the better general public opinion and goodwill generated in the 
minds of people of the State due to higher levels  of CSR activities by these 
applicants as compared to RINL.  Therefore, it is felt essential that RINL also 
gives equal thrust to such initiatives as being done by others more importantly 
since RINL will shortly be a 7.3 MT steel producer and plans to furt her increase 
its capacity RINL would also be increasingly dependent on the potential steel 
consumption in the rural markets. 
 
UP State has both vast rural dominance and population which are 
advantageous for future steel marketing in rural areas.  Recently,  RINL has 
launched Rural Dealership Scheme (RDS) at Lucknow and has appointed 11 
(eleven) rural dealers.  The total business, with the plans of expanding RINL‟s 
commercial activities, is expected to grow much more in the coming years in UP.  
The Company ha s also filed application for Iron Ore Mining Lease at Lalitpur, 
Uttar Pradesh (UP).  Hence, it is essential that RINL makes its presence felt in 

88 
 
the State of UP so as to maintain a competitive edge in rural areas especially for 
long products which will be available in large quantities after the current capacity 
expansion of RINL and also increase its image as a responsible Corporate 
Citizen in the State of UP. 
 
It is also expected that, in the days to come, steel markets would become 
more volatile and custo mer retention for preferential sourcing will depend to a 
great extent on goodwill generated.  Rural markets would ideally qualify for CSR 
activities with this end in mind.   While the coverage in Western UP is adequate, 
Eastern UP ie from Barabanki, Gorakh pur, Gonda, Balarampur, Basti and  
Bahraich needs to be catered to.  Gonda district is a central hub for Eastern UP 
and is also one of the backward districts in UP as per the list of Backward Areas 
published by the Planning Commission.   
 
Govt. of India has  laid emphasis on rural infrastructure as the foundation 
for Rural Development.  Infrastructure development also generates relevant 
employment especially in the skilled & semi -skilled sector.  The recent report of 
the study on sector -wise manpower requirem ents in skill gaps by the National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) projects that the gap is maximum in the 
infrastructure skill development domain. Considering the importance of 
development of rural infrastructure and its concurrent relation to steel 
consumption/marketability of the Company‟s products in rural sector, various 
CSR activities in UP have been taken up for skill development as a Project in line 
with the Company‟s natural corollary of business.  These activities taken up in 
rural areas of t he largest State, Uttar Pradesh will be of strategic benefit both 
from business as well as from social responsibility points of view.   Such projects 
are also being initiated in other backward areas of the Country. Ini tially skill 
development center/ITI model have been initiated in Gonda and Vizag.  In view 
of the HDI being lowest in Gonda, the first project among the proposed ten (10) 
locations was initiated here.   
 
Further RINL by its inherent nature is an energy intensive industry.  
Energy consumed shou ld be returned in some form or other so as to make an 
energy neutral impact; otherwise the future generations will be deprived of even 
essential means.  In this context investment in Solar Power & Wind Mill 
technology, rain water harvesting etc are currently nascent domains of RINL.   
 
Moreover this domain is also a high priority focus area for the 
Government.  As such RINL has also made significant contribution in the areas 
of solar street lighting in remote and rural areas, solar lighting in schools and 
homes for night study for children. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
The amount spent in Uttar Pradesh during 2011-12 and 2012-13 has to be 
seen in the overall perspective of CSR expenditure of NMDC.  During the year 
2011-12, NMDC has spent Rs.86.72 crore and for the year 20 12-13 the CSR 

89 
 
expenditure was Rs.101.10 crore.  The amount spent in Uttar Pradesh constitute 
only 6.3% and 4.3% of the total CSR expenditure of NMDC during these two 
years respectively. The Districts of Barabanki and Gonda are listed in the 
backward districts identified by Planning Commission under Backward Regions 
Grant Fund (BRGF) and for this reason CSR projects in the above districts have 
been undertaken apart from other backward districts in UP like Sitapur, 
Balrampur, etc.  Thus, the funds have been m ostly utilized for infrastructural 
development in these backward districts through Public Sector agencies like M/s. 
HSCL, UP Rajkiya Nirman Nigam Limited and UP Jal Nigam Limited. 
 
MSTC Limited 
 
MSTC is a trading organization and acts as a service provider  to the 
various Government Departments and PSU‟s by holding web based e -auction / 
e-tender for sale/ procurement of various items. MSTC does not have any 
manufacturing unit. It has presence in about 10 locations whereas its activities as 
e-commerce service provider are spread across the country. MSTC has got more 
than 350 Principals for whom it acts as selling agent / procurement agent. MSTC 
has got thousand of registered buyers across the country who participate/bid in 
the e -auctions / e -tenders conducted by MSTC on behalf of its Principals. 
Therefore, although the Head Office of MSTC is situated at Kolkata, the e -
commerce activities of the company are spread all over the country and there are 
locations where the business volume of e -Auction is actually mor e than that 
around Kolkata, where the company‟s head quarter is situated. The business 
volume of the company in the state of Uttar Pradesh, which comes under 
jurisdiction of the Northern Regional Office located at New Delhi, in the last two 
financial years  viz. 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 to the tune of Rs.250.00 Crore and 
Rs.300.00 Crore respectively.  In the state of Uttar Pradesh alone, MSTC has 
about 28 Principals and about 2300 bidders, who participate in e -auction / e -
tenders. In coming years the volume of bu siness is expected to grow further. In 
fact, a proposal has already being mooted for opening an office at Lucknow to 
focus on the business in and around Uttar Pradesh since the state has got 
tremendous prospect in terms of growth in the e -commerce business . 
Accordingly, expenditure has been incurred by the company in the state of Uttar 
Pradesh towards CSR. Proposals received from the local bodies of Uttar 
Pradesh were, considered for CSR activities, particularly in the areas of 
infrastructure and skill enha ncement. All the 3 districts of U.P., where MSTC 
made investments on CSR activities viz. Balrampur, Barabankee and Gonda are 
backward districts identified by the planning commission for Backward Regions 
Grant Fund (BRGF). The proposals for investments in d ifferent projects in all the 
three districts where approved by the CSR Committee and the Board of Directors 
of MSTC. MSTC has also invested in a host of projects in West Bengal, from 
were most of the proposals were received because of proximity to the head office 
of the Company. The Proposals received from Karnataka, New Delhi, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Tamilnadu were also accepted in the last few 
years under the CSR activities of the company. The Regional and Branch Offices 
of the company have also been  advised to send suitable proposals for CSR 

90 
 
allocation. The company shall also take more pro -active steps to obtain 
proposals from various states, particularly from backward districts to spread out 
its CSR activity in future. 
 
KIOCL Limited 
 
KIOCL have not undertaken any Corporate Social Responsibility activities 
in the two districts of Barabanki and Gonda in Uttar Pradesh state as reported in 
the observations/recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee. 
 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL) 
 
HSCL spent Rs.18.21 Lac for Up gradation of 1 Km rural road from 
Karaura to Tatarpur in District Barabanki, UP during 2012 -13.HSCL also spent 
Rs.3.26 Lac towards donation of one Ambulance to District Hospital at 
Kailashsahar in Tripura during 2012-13. 
 
HSCL allocates its CSR budget in accordance with the CSR policy, duly 
approved by the Board of Directors in line with the DPE guidelines. While taking 
up CSR activities, business integration of the Company is given due 
consideration. 
 
HSCL has unit offices in Luck now and Varanasi for monitoring its projects 
under execution for Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Central University for 
Tibetan Studies (CUTs) and CSR projects of other PSUs. Besides this, HSCL 
has its major business exposure with NTPC at Unchahar, Vindhya chal and 
Shaktinagar in UP.  HSCL is also exploring possibilities to increase its business 
volume in the State.  The Company executed about Rs.80 Cr . worth of orders in 
UP during the last 2 years 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 and generated surplus of over 
Rs.5 Cr. 
  
In view of the reasons stated above, HSCL took up CSR activities in the 
State of UP also along with other parts of the country.  
 
MECON Limited 
 
1. The company ended -up financial year 2009 -10 with PAT of Rs.8262.77 
lakhs and CSR expenditure of Rs.80.72 lakhs only. Details are at Annexure-IV.  
 
2. In order to ensure that “Carry -forward CSR Fund”, are well directed 
towards the under privileged / backward sections of the society /LWE (Left Wing 
Extremism) affected villages, through planning, based on “Need As sessment” 
(with the involvement of villagers / Gramsabha etc.) was considered essential. 
 
3. Accordingly, the company began by adopting following villages of 
Jharkhand State, which are in LWE (Left Wing Extremism) affected areas and 

91 
 
are also in backward di stricts of Jharkhand State, for development of basic 
amenities and infrastructure. 
 
Village District of Jharkhand 
Pancha Ranchi 
Pandu Ranchi 
Rupru Ranchi 
Belagara Khunti 
Sungi Khunti 
Rai Khunti 
 
4. The mechanism of undertaking & executing Projects i n LWE (Left Wing  
Extremism) affected villages, through involvement of Village-Pradhan /  
Gramsabha for Need-assessment, making available the requisite land with  NOC 
etc is very time consuming. 
 
5. Finding a suitable executing agency for working in LWE affected villages 
is difficult.  The pace of project execution in this area is also slow leading to lower 
utilization of CSR funds. 
 
6. ln line with this scenario, the CSR budget provisions were being  
progressively raised in financial years FY 2010 -11 & 201 1 -12 and all the  
"Unutilised CSR fund w.r.t. allocations as per DPE Guidelines" of previous  years 
(i.e. FY 2010 -11 & 2011 -12) are carried -forward in the CSR Budget  Provision of 
FY 2012-13,as indicated in Annexure-ll. 
 
 
7 . Moreover, in current financial year 2013-14 also, all the “Unutilised CSR 
fund of previous years, w.r.t. allocations as per DPE Guidelines" have  been 
included in the Budget Provision. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 

92 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RESTRUCTURING OF HSCL  
 
Recommendation Serial No.14 
 
The Committee note that the issue of restructuring of  HSCL has been 
under consideration of the Government since long. The Committee in their 26th 
Report of DFG (2012 -13), (15th Lok Sabha) had urged the Government to 
approve the restructuring proposal of the company without any further loss of 
time and implem ent it in the right perspective to derive maximum benefits. As 
regards the present status of restructuring, the Committee find that a meeting of 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS), scheduled for 1.6.2012 was rescheduled on 
various occasions. Now Cabinet Secret ariat has conveyed that since CoS has 
already been held on 19.10.2011, the Ministry of Steel has been asked to bring a 
note for consideration by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). 
Further, Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (B RPSE) has 
reviewed the status on implementation of the Restructuring Package of HSCL on 
22.2.2013 and has suggested certain changes in the earlier restructuring 
package. The Board advised Ministry of Steel to make suitable changes while 
seeking approval of  the CCEA. The Committee are surprised to note the 
lackadaisical attitude of the Government in taking a decision in the matter and 
feel that the Government is not serious in resolving the issue and are of the view 
that such an important issue which needs u rgent and sensitive handling, is being 
delayed for one reason or other. While appreciating the financial results of the 
company which are improving with an operating profit of Rs. 86.64 crore during 
(2011-12), the Committee desire an early settlement of th e matter. The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the restructuring proposal of the company 
be accorded top priority and approved accordingly.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprise (BRPSE) reviewed 
the status on Implementatio n of the Restructuring Package of HSCL on 
22.2.2013.  BRPSE has now suggested certain changes in the earlier 
restructuring package.  The Board advised Ministry of Steel to make suitable 
changes while seeking approval of the CCEA. On the basis of updated fi nancial 
figures of HSCL upto 31.03.2013, the Note for Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) is under preparation by the M/o Steel in consultation with HSCL 
and Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry.  
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
 

93 
 
RAW MATERIAL  
Recommendation Serial No.18 
 
The Committee have time and again expressed their concern over the 
matter of availability of raw material and have emphasized on prudent utilization 
of critical raw material in their 18 th Report on DFG 2011 -12, (15th Lok Sabha). 
The Committee note that the Government have contended that overall there is no 
shortage of iron ore at present for the domestic iron and steel industry and the 
production of iron ore in the country is higher in c omparison to domestic 
consumption as against 116 Million Tonnes of estimated domestic consumption 
during 2011-12, the domestic production of iron ore was 167 MT during 2011 -12. 
But the Committee would like to draw attention of the Government to the draft 
National Steel Policy 2012 (NSP -2012) according to which the recent 
developments in India‟s mining sector have given rise to uncertainties in regard 
to adequate supply of raw material potential, especially of iron ore, and have 
brought the issue of long ter m raw material security for India‟s burgeoning steel 
industry to the centre stage. The Committee feel that sustaining the competitive 
advantage for the Indian steel industry rests crucially on devising appropriate 
strategies to ensure uninterrupted supply of the steel making raw materials to the 
Indian Steel Industry over the next few decades. Despite the country having a 
total resources of over 28 billion tonnes of iron ore and the fact that the quantum 
of resources can rise with greater efforts towards ex ploration, the currently 
assessed reserves for iron ore seem inadequate if the steel industry capacity 
expansion and production potential are to be fully realized.  
 
The Committee also note that the Government have entered into long 
term agreements for sup ply of iron ore with Japan and South Korea whereby 
about 2.1 MT of iron ore having 64% Fe content or high grade lumps will be 
exported to Japan and South Korea from NMDC‟s Chhattisgarh mines this year. 
According to the draft NSP-2012, if export of iron ore is not restricted, the country 
may have to import iron in large quantities in future with the present rate of 
growth of the steel industry. The Committee feel that export of Iron Ore may 
jeopardize the long term competitiveness of Indian steel industry. G iven the 
possibility of early exhaustion of iron ore, the Committee desire the Government 
to constitute an Inter Ministerial Committee to draw up a road map of phased 
reduction of iron ore exports to a moderate level. The Committee are dismayed 
to note tha t though they in their 26th Report on DFG 2012 -13 of the Ministry of 
Coal have recommended the Government to formulate the policy keeping in view 
all relevant factors including the futuristic needs of the steel sector, the Ministry 
have yet to finalize the  same even after one year. The Committee therefore, 
strongly recommend that Ministry of Steel should give due consideration to the 
recommendations of the Committee in a right perspective and implement the 
same without any further delay to facilitate the gr owth of steel sector in the 
country as well as preserving the natural resources for future use. The 
Committee expect that the new National Steel Policy, which is reported to be 
under various stages of formulation, will be announced by the Government within  
next three months time.  

94 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Ministry of Steel is of the view that iron ore, being a non -renewable natural 
resource, should be conserved for long term utilization of domestic steel industry.  
Therefore, the policy should aim at value addition o f iron ore within the country 
instead of exporting iron ore.  The Government has decided that though 
conservation of iron ore resources of the country is of paramount importance, the 
same may not be achieved by banning or capping the export of iron ore but  by 
taking recourse to appropriate fiscal measures.  Accordingly, Ministry of Steel 
has been taking up matter regularly with Department of Revenue for levying an 
appropriate export duty on iron ore to discourage its unabated export.  The 
export duty on iro n ore of all grades and varieties has been increased from 20% 
ad valorem to 30% ad valorem with effect from 30 th December, 2011 as a result 
of efforts of Ministry of Steel.  Further, to encourage optimum utilization of iron 
ore resources of the country and to improve domestic utilization of low grade iron 
ore and fines through beneficiation and pelletization, import duty on plants and 
equipments used for initial setting up and substantial expansion of beneficiation 
and pelletization plants has been reduced from 7.5% to 2.5% in the General 
Budget for year 2012-13. 
 
 The Ministry of Steel is in the process of finalization of New National Steel 
Policy.  Long term resource security and development plan for the Indian Steel 
industry is one of the core issues to b e addressed by the Policy framework.  
Although no specific time frame may be fixed for the finalization of the new Policy 
as it involves time taking consultation/discussions with the concerned 
stakeholders, efforts are being made to finalize the same at the earliest. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
 
INTERNATIONAL COAL VENTURES LIMITED  
 
Recommendation Serial No.19 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that ICVL, a joint venture of SAIL, 
CIL, RINL, NMDC & NTPC, which was in corporated on 20.5.2009 to acquire raw 
material assets in various countries has failed to come up with a single concrete 
acquisition even after 3½ years of its inception. The Committee are informed that 
MoU was signed between ICVL & Government of Kalimanta n (GOCK), Indonesia 
on 25th January, 2011 and senior officials of ICVL made a number of visits to 
Jakarta/Palangkya Raya including posting a Resident officer in Indonesia for four 
months. A suitable site for proposed steel plant had been identified and joi nt 
report for the project prepared. The Committee are however surprised to note 
that even after 2 years and after completion of adequate groundwork in the 
matter, issues regarding allocation of suitable coking and thermal coal 
concessions to ICVL on nomina tion basis, etc. have cropped up at this juncture. 
The Committee feel that this is a lapse on the part of the Ministry and the joint 
venture company. The Committee fail to understand as to why these issues were 

95 
 
not properly addressed before signing of MoU.  The Committee feel that ICVL 
should pursue the matter with the GoCK and amicably settle all the disputes and 
ensure that work begin on the proposed project in right earnest. Regarding 
acquiring of coal assets in other target countries, the Committee would  again 
stress that Government/ICVL should continue with sustained efforts till success is 
achieved in the matter.  
 
Action Taken 
Issue No. 1: 
 
MOU between the Government of Central Kalimantan (GoCK) & 
International Coal Ventures (P) Limited (ICVL) 
 
Background: This MoU was signed as a result of ICVL‟s letter dated 6 th 
December, 2010, addressed to H.E. Mr. Gita Wirjawan, Chairman, Indonesia 
Investment Coordinating Board (BKPM), in reference to his meeting with 
Mr.Virbhadra Singh, the then Hon‟ble Minister of Steel, Government of India. This 
letter contained a proposal for grant of coking coal and thermal coal concessions 
for ICVL, and setting up of a mineral processing facility/ steel plant in Indonesia.  
 
It was proposed that a steel plant with an initial ca pacity of 3 million tons 
per annum in phase -1, with a provision for expansion up to 5 million tons per 
annum in phase-2, could be considered.  
 
An investment of US $ 3 billion for phase -1 and an additional investment 
of US $ 1.5 billion for expansion in phase-2 was envisaged.  
 
The project was mooted with the idea that it would address concerns of 
Indonesian Government for job creation and also potentially usher in large scale 
economic activity and the development of the entire region including creation of 
direct and indirect employment opportunities for a large section of population. 
 
The MOU was subsequently signed on January 25, 2011, during the visit 
of Indonesian President to India, and was subsequently extended for a period of 
one year until January 24, 2013. 
 
Rationale for the investment & major initiatives taken: The financial and 
economic viability of such a large investment directly hinges upon the grant of 
coking and thermal coal concessions with sufficient reserves.  The coal reserve 
should be large enough to meet the requirements of the proposed steel plant as 
well as for imports to India for use by the promoter companies of ICVL.  Huge 
investments would also be required for developing requisite infrastructure to 
make the proposed steel plant oper ational.  The investments required for 
infrastructure has not been assessed as yet.  
 
Substantial ground work has been done by the working teams on both the 
sides. Several visits have been made by senior level ICVL officials to Jakarta and 

96 
 
Palangka Raya, the capital city of Central Kalimantan province. A blue print was 
prepared identifying suitable locations for the proposed steel plant as well as for 
coking & thermal coal concessions, the prospective iron ore and lime stone 
deposits in Central Kalimantan.  
 
ICVL even opened an office in Jakarta to routinely follow up on matters 
both with BKPM (The Investment Board of the Government of Indonesia) and the 
provincial Government of Central Kalimantan. But, this was closed as no positive 
outcome seemed to be emanating. 
 
During the course of interactions with Government agencies, it appeared 
then that the Governor and his senior functionaries were keen and appreciative 
of ICVL‟s efforts, and realize the need for grant of mining concessions, on a 
nomination basis.  Apparently, the Governor has not been able to convince the 
Heads of Regencies (Bhupatis) who function under the Governor, for the grant of 
mining concessions. The Bhupatis of the two important Regencies of Murung 
Raya & Barito Utara in particular, are est ensibly unable to visualize the benefits 
that can be derived from a steel plant and are unwilling to consider grant of 
mining concessions. 
 
With a view to successfully implement the MOU, ICVL engaged reputed 
consultant on success fee basis to influence the  Bhupatis.  However, even this 
effort did not yield any success. The consultant also identified suitable coking 
coal assets with other existing owners who could sell or partner with ICVL for 
their properties. The expectations/ valuations of mine owners wer e however, on 
the higher side, thereby making the steel plant project unviable. 
 
The senior level Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia headed by the 
Ambassador H.E. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) Andi M. Ghalib, was apprised of these 
developments in the first week of  June 2012. The issues were also raised during 
a Ministerial Level delegation of the Republic of Indonesia in August 2012.  No 
positive response has as yet been received from the Indonesian side thereafter. 
 
Current Efforts/ Way forward: ICVL‟s efforts for  extension of the current MOU 
which was valid till January 24, 2013, have not elicited any response from GoCK 
despite repeated requests. 
 
Recently, H.E. Mr. Gurjit Singh, Ambassador of India to Indonesia, in his 
letter dated June 21, 2013, addressed to the  Chairman, SAIL & ICVL made 
certain suggestions. ICVL has expressed its‟ willingness to re -look at the 
proposal subject to the condition that the Government of Central Kalimantan is 
ready to play the role of an active facilitator for identifying the partne rs with coal 
concession of the right quality required for steel making and is agreeable to grant 
of iron ore and limestone concessions on nomination basis including allocation of 
land for the steel plant and associated facilities.  Further action will be i nitiated on 
the basis of the response, which is still awaited. 
 

97 
 
Issue No. 2: 
 
Acquisition efforts by ICVL: 
 
ICVL is currently examining a number of proposals for suitability, in 
countries such as Australia, USA & Mozambique. In some cases, ICVL is in fairl y 
advanced stage of due diligence, and expects to achieve positive results, 
provided valuations are consistent with market conditions which are currently at a 
reasonable level.  The issue that invariably arises is that the Sellers expect much 
higher valuat ions than what is consistent with current and forecasted market 
prices of coal.   
 
ICVL has also participated in several global bidding processes and has in 
some cases been the highest bidder.  However, some of these processes were 
not taken forward by the  sellers themselves.  A few assets have again come to 
the market in recent months.  The sellers‟ expectations are however, much 
higher than reasonable valuations. It is note worthy that the transactions which 
took place at a time when market prices of coal were at their peak i.e. in 2010-11, 
have fallen steeply during the last one year and are now at a level which is about 
half of what was paid at that time.  Many companies which made transactions at 
that time have had to write down their asset values to be  consistent with current 
market conditions. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(2)/2013-Parl. dated 08.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                      KALYAN BANERJEE 
18 December, 2013                                                           Chairman 
27 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

98 
 
 
 ANNEXURE-VI  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made       21    
           
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16,  
17 and 21)                                                                                   12 
       
Percentage of total               57% 
            
       
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. Nil)  00 
Percentage of total                       0% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee     
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 7, 11, 12 and 20)   06 
        
Percentage of total                 29% 
               
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 14, 18 and 19)    03 
           
 Percentage of total                  14% 
      

99 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
HELD ON 17 DECEMBER, 2013 IN ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR ,  PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
    LOK SABHA  
 
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
 
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
6.    Shri Babu Lal Marandi  
7.    Shri  Govind Prasad Mishra  
8.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
9.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
10.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11.  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
12.  Shri Jugul Kishore 
13.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
14.  Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
15.  Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:- 
(i)        **   **   **   **  
 

100 
 
(ii)    Draft Action Taken Report on “Demands for Grants(2013 -14)” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Steel; 
 
(iii)        **   **   **   **  
 
(iv)       **   **   **   **  
 
(v)       **   **   **   **  
 
4. The C ommittee adopted the Reports with  some minor changes/modifications. 
The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the basis of 
factual verification from the concerned Ministry and present the same to both the Houses 
of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 