 
 
47 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"PROMOTION OF STEEL USAGE" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth   Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2013/AGRAHAYANA, 1935(Saka) 
 


 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"PROMOTION OF STEEL USAGE" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   17.12.2013 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2013/Agrahayana 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
CC&S No. 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v) 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
 
29 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
30 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
 
34 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 10.12.2013…………………………………………... 
 
       37 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
     39 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Additional Director 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government 
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Promotion of 
Steel Usage" pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Thirty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2013. Replies of 
the Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 13th November, 2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and ado pted this 
Report at their sitting held on  10.12.2013.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I  
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
      16 December, 2013                                                                           Chairman 
      25 Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on "Promotion of St eel Usage" relating to 
the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha on 29.08.2013 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.08.2013. 
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry  of 
Steel in respect of all the 12 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 13th November, 201 3. These have been categorised as 
follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12 
         Total – 8 
                (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. No. Nil 
Total – 00  
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 4, 6 and 9 
Total – 03 
                         (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. No. 3 
                       Total – 01 
     (Chapter V) 
 
 

 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given 
to implementation  of the Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for 
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to  the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
on some of their observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-Ninth 
Report.  
     
WORKING GROUP ON STEEL FOR 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
 
Recommendation Serial No.3. 
 
5. The Committee noted that the Working Group on Steel for 12th Five 
Year Plan had indicated that in order to achieve double digit growth rate of 
domestic steel consumption investments of 1 billion dollar in infrastructure 
and setting up of the national manufacturing and invest ment zones are 
required as integral part to accelerate the pace of implementation of 
infrastructure projects i n the country. The Committee had  been apprised 
that steps were being taken by the Government/Steel Companies to 
improve the cement to steel ratio in construction, deeper penetration into 
rural markets, diversification strategies etc. as pointed out by the Working 
Group. Further, Institute for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) 
had been continuously propagating various ways and means to improve 
steel to cement ratio in construction, preparation and dissemination of 
various reports / guidebooks / manuals / Codes & Standards, continuous 
education to professionals, faculties and students through various 
classrooms trainings / seminars / competitions, representation to various 
implementing authorities for steel / steel-concrete composite construction, 
etc. The Committee had  been informed that one prominent example in 
this regard was extensive and exclusive use of structural steel in airport 

 
 
modernization across the country. Taking note of the huge investments 
required in manufacturing and infrastructure projects, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the investments made by Steel PSUs for 
undertaking modernisation programme and product diversificati on 
strategy so far with focus on value added products.  
 
6. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnished as 
follows:- 
"Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) has undertaken Modernisation & 
Expansion plan at its integrated steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, 
Rourkela, Durgapur & ISP and special steel plant at Salem. SAIL 
envisages increase in its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 
Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in the current phase. 
Besides capacity enhancemen t, the growth plan adequately 
addresses enriching product mix with introducing customer centric 
processes. The product mix envisaged plant –wise are given below; 
Facility Product mix 
Universal 
Section Mill at 
ISP 
 Beams with Parallel Flange (IPE –I Beam 
Equal Parallel Flange) 
 H-beams (HE-H Section Equal Flange) 
 Channels 
 Equal Angles 
 Special Sections 
 (Sheet Piles, Z-Sections etc.) 
Wire rod mill at 
ISP 
For producing various grades for different 
applications 
Bar mill at ISP For producing various grades for  different 
applications 
Universal Rail 
Mill at BSP  
State-of-the-art Mill along with rail welding 
facility for catering to demand of Indian 
Railways and producing up to 260m long rails 
Bar & Rod Mill at 
BSP 
For producing various grades and quality of 
bars and wire rods for different applications 
New CRM 
complex at BSL  
State-of-the-art facility to produce a wide 
range of CR/ galvanised products for catering 
to different customers/ segments (auto body 
industry, white goods industry, appliance 
industry, etc) 

 
 
New Plate Mill at 
RSP  
For producing wider plates (4.3 m) 
New Medium 
Structural Mill at 
DSP 
Modern facility for producing universal beams 
and other structural for different applications 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
As per the Detailed Project Report of 3.0 Mtpa, the plant was 
designed to manufacture mild steel products. However, over a 
period of time, expertise has been developed to manufacture value 
added steel products. Currently, about 80% of the steel products 
produced and marketed are value added steel products. For 
meeting construction sector requirements rebars in various grades 
like Fe 500, Fe 550, Fe 500 D, CRM, HSCRM etc. have been 
developed. These products help in reducing the cost per unit of 
construction. 
 
RINL prepared its long term directional plan for enhancing its 
capacity in line with the increasing demand for steel in the country. 
RINL is on the verge of completing its expansion from 3.0 Mtpa to 
6.3 Mtpa at a cost of about Rs 12,300 cr. In this expan sion, 
secondary refining facilities like Ladle Furnace, RH Degasser, Electro 
Magnetic Stirrer (EMS) are set up to facilitate manufacturing value 
added steel products suiting to the requirement of automobile and 
manufacturing sectors. The production capacit ies of much needed 
TMT Bars and Structurals required for Infrastructure Sector are 
going to be enhanced substantially in this expansion. Further, jobs 
related to the next phase of expansion to 7.3 Mtpa through up -
gradation and modernization and addition of new facilities have also 
started. RINL is investing about Rs 4000 cr. for modernization and 
up-gradation. Besides this, about Rs 5,000 cr. worth projects are 
undertaken / being undertaken for value addition viz. Seamless 
Tube Mill, Wheel Plant, Axle Plant  etc. RINL commenced plans to 
diversify into flat product segment and the capacity is going to be 
increased to 11/12 Mtpa at an estimated cost of Rs 22,000 cr. 
Ultimately the capacity is going to be enhanced to 20 Mtpa, making 
RINL the largest capacity sin gle location Integrated Steel Plant in 
the country.  
 
The capital expenditure is not only going to enhance production 
capacity but also help in widening the product range through 
production of high end value added steel products, enhancing 
generation capacity of electricity, productivity enhancement, etc."  
 
7. According to Working Group on Steel for 12th Five year Plan, 
investments of 1 billion dollar in infrastructure and in setting up of 
national manufacturing and investment zones are required as 

 
 
integral part to achieve double digit growth rate of domestic steel 
consumption. In view of huge investment required in 
manufacturing and infrastructure projects, the Committee had 
desired to be apprised of the modernisation programme and 
product diversifi cation strategy along with investments made by 
Steel PSUs to  focus on value added products.  In this regard, the 
Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply have informed the 
Committee that RINL plans to invest about Rs. 4,000 crore for 
modernization an d upgradation.  Besides this , about Rs. 5,000 
crore worth projects are undertaken for value addition viz. 
Seamless Tube Mill, Wheel Plant, Axle Plant, etc.  As regards SAIL, 
the Committee have been informed that the company has 
undertaken modernization and  expansion plan at  its integrated 
steel plans at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur and ISP and 
special steel plants at Salem.  It also envisages increase in its 
crude steel production capacity from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in the 
current phase.  In view of the fact that the reply of the Ministry is 
silent on the investments made so far by SAIL in modernization 
programme, the Committee would like a detailed note  of the 
approved outlays for undertaking modernisation and expansion 
plan of SAIL  units during the 11th and 12th Five Year Plans  with 
time and cost overrun.  
 
Recommendation Serial No.4. 
 
8. The Committee noted that the Working Group on Steel for the 12th 
Five Year Plan Period ha d stressed on the need for projects like Bharat 
Nirman, Pradhan Mantri  Gram Sadak Yojana and Rajiv Gandhi Awas 
Yojana to increase the per capita steel consumption. The Committee ha d 

 
 
been given to understand that INSDAG had developed comprehensive 
design and construction manual for small span bridges & culverts for 
National R ural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) under Ministry of 
Rural Development and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
(MORTH) for implementation of the same in rural areas. These steel based 
designs of rural bridges & culverts are presently being implement ed in 
various parts of the countr y. While observing that INSDAG wa s 
constructing two prototype buildings in Tripura for exposure to rural 
masses and one such building had been constructed at a remote village in 
West Bengal, the Committee recommend ed that this concept be followed 
in more and more States to create greater awareness for use of steel to 
help the rural people. The Committee also desire d that Border Road 
Organisation and National Highways Authority of India should also be 
pursued by Ministry of S teel to develop comprehensive design and 
construction manual for their use as developed by INSDAG for NRRDA.  
 
9. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnished as 
follows:- 
"INSDAG 
INSDAG has developed Design Manual similar to the one pr epared 
for National Rural Road Development Agency (NRRDA) for 4 
different spans (25m, 30m, 35m and 40m) with or without footpath 
and submitted the same to Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. This is pending with M/o RTH more than a year and it is 
understood that M/o RTH is looking for proof checking of the design 
submitted by INSDAG who is regularly following up with M/o RTH 
for finalization of the manual." 
10. As regards construction of rural bridges and culverts, the 
Committee were informed that thes e were being implemented in 
various parts of the country based on the design and construc tion 
manual developed by INSDAG.   The Committee had recommended 
that the concept of constructing prototype buildings in Tripura and 
West Bengal should be taken to more and more States to create 
greater awareness for use of steel to help the rural people.  The 

 
 
Committee are, however, unhappy to note that th ough the 
Working Group on Steel for 12th Five Year Plan Period has 
stressed on the need for projects like Bharat Nirman, Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana and Rajiv Gandhi Awas Yojana to 
increase the per capita steel consumption especially in the rural 
areas, the reply of the Government is silent on the steps taken for 
covering more States and to create awareness to boost steel 
consumption.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the Committee to popularize the 
comprehensive design and construction manual developed by 
INSDAG by constructing prototype buildings  in more and more 
States and would like  that Government should come with a 
comprehensive plan to ensure that all the States and Union 
Territories  are covered in a time bound manner.  
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
11. As regards the thrust given to design product developments and 
capacity building in fabrication of steel articles needed by the rural 
economy for houses for villages, community halls, culverts and bridges 
etc., the Committee observe d that RINL had  planned to set up Steel 
Processing Units to manufacture 'Made to Order' steel products on various 
locations in the country. The shapes and sizes required by the customers 
from rural areas were planned to be manufa ctured from these Special 
Processing Units. The Committee note d that SAIL has taken up 
comprehensive development of 79 model Steel villages spanning over 8 
States and development wor k undertaken in these villages wa s likely to 
result in generation of steel demand. Further, as per designs developed by 
INSDAG, RINL had built a steel village with some houses, school building 
and community centre in the vicinity of the Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant. 
While appreciating RINL plan to set up Steel Processing Units at various 

 
 
locations in the country, the Committee desire d that Government should 
come out with a plan where all steel producing units, be  in public or 
private sectors, we re directed to set up such 'Made to Order' Special 
Processing Units at various locations in the country to boost the per capita 
steel consumption in rural areas.  
 
12. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnished as 
follows:- 
 
"Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
SAIL is in process of setting up service centre at some  locations in 
the country.  Marketing circular has already in place for setting up 
Long product service centre at Mumbai and Ghaziabad. BSO, Jaipur 
is in process for publication of tender document for setting up 
service centre at Bhiwadi for processing of Flat product.  
SAIL has also prepared study report for setting up service centre for  
Flat product and currently under process  for making feasibility 
report  for setting up own service centre for Flat product at Chennai 
and  Pune warehouses  
In order to i ncrease the consumption of steel in rural areas, SAIL 
launched a new “Rural Dealership Scheme” during August 2011 in 
addition to its existing Dealership Scheme.    Under this scheme, 
rural dealers have been appointed at Talukas / Blocks / Panchayat 
levels. As on 1 st Sept, 2013, 700 rural dealers were appointed in 
addition to 2216 SAIL Dealers.    Products primarily covered under 
this scheme are TMT Bars, Light Structurals , GP and GC Sheets.  
The logistics part of delivering the materials at the dealers’ 
premises is undertaken by SAIL free of cost to the dealers.  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
RINL has initiated action for taking Steel Processing Units (SPUs) 
for conversion of semis produced in the Plant into economy grade 
rebars and structurals suiting to the construction requirements. Till 
now, RINL finalised two SPUs, one each at Ambedkar Nagar and 
Gonda in UP. These two SPUs shall come in to production within two 
years and have a capacity of 72000 tonnes per annum each, with 
all latest quality parameters.  
 
In addition to these, two more SPUs are in Tendering stage, one at 
Bhilwara and another at Patna. These 4 SPUs will have a capacity 
for producing about 2.8 lakh  tonnes of Rebars and Structurals per 
annum. 
 

 
 
RINL plans to set up Service Centres at major Metros in the country 
to facilitate manufacturing of steel products of different shapes and 
sizes as per the customers’ requirements. This concept helps in 
minimizing wastage of steel at the customers’ premises. The 
customers can order the products in different shapes and sizes 
suiting to their construction requirements." 
 
13. The Committee had observed that RINL has planned to set 
up two steel processing units to manufacture 'Made to Order' steel 
products on various locations in the country to meet the 
requirement by the consumers in rural areas.  Similarly, SAIL is 
reported to  have taken up comprehensive development of 79 
model steel villages spanning over 8 States.  What has perturbed 
the Committee is that despite the ir recommendation to the 
Government to come out with a plan directing all steel producers, 
be in public or priv ate sectors to set up such 'Made to Order' 
special processing units at various locations in the country to 
boost the   per capita steel consumption in rural areas, the 
Government have failed to issue necessary instructions in this 
regard and have merely forwarded the action taken by the Steel 
PSUs viz. SAIL and RINL.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that 
Government should issue necessary direction to all major steel 
producers in the country to set up special processing units at 
various locations particularly in rural areas to boost the per capita 
steel consumption.  
MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS  
 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
14. The Committee note d that in 1997, the Government had decided 
that an amount of Rs. 5 crore per annum be spent on projects intended to 
develop the market for steel. These market development projects were 

 
 
meant for popularizing steel houses in the country through innovative 
applications/use of steel in different areas. The Committee were dismayed 
to note that only four projects with total grants amounting to Rs. 38.12 
lakh were taken up for these marketing development projects in the last 5 
years. The projects included skill -cum-entrepreneurs development 
programme in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, design manual for steel 
structurals and hand book on architectural and const ruction in steel. The 
Committee could not but deplore the inaction on the part of the 
Government and Institu te for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) 
for their utter failure to implement the project in right spirit which was set 
up more than a decade ago for promotion of steel use in Indian 
construction and infrastructural sectors. The Committee fel t that INSDAG 
has failed to achieve its objectives of promotion of steel use by not 
providing requisite thrust to increase steel consumption particularly in 
rural areas as it was unable to come up with market development 
projects. What ha d further pained the Committ ee wa s that despite the 
existence of various agencies like JPC, INSDAG, Evaluation Committee for 
monitoring and implementation of MDP, Steel PSUs and private 
companies, no concrete steps were made to increase consu mption of 
steel. The Committee  strongly re commended that necessary steps be 
taken by the Government to ensure that more and more market 
development projects were taken up and the grants of Rs. 5 crore per 
year be fully and gainfully utilized for resultant increase in per capita 
consumption of steel.  
 
 
15. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have furnished as 
follows:- 
"Joint Plant Committee (JPC) and INSDAG  
 
Joint Plant Committee (JPC) has been organising the Evaluation 
Committee Meeting for screening project proposals under Market 
Development Projects (MDP). To ensure appropriate coverage and 
submission of projects, the following institutions were approached 
to submit proposals under MDP. 
 Steel Authority of India Ltd (SAIL) 
 Tata Steel Ltd (TSL) 

 
 
 Rashtriya  Ispat Nigam Ltd (RINL) 
 Essar Steel Ltd 
 JSW Steel Ltd 
 Jindal Steel and Power Ltd (JSPL) 
 MECON Ltd 
 SAIL-RDCIS 
 The Indian Institute of Metals (IIM) 
 National Institute of Secondary Steel Technology (NISST) 
 Economic Research Unit / Joint Plant Committee 
 
However, it is only SAIL, JPC, NISST and INSDAG who have 
submitted project proposals for consideration under MDP so far.   
 
a. The specific activities undertaken by INSDAG for promotion of 
steel usage in construction and infrastructure sectors have been 
elaborated under point no. 4 and point nos. 7 and 8. 
 
b. INSDAG has undertaken Entrepreneurship and Skill Development 
Programme (ESDP) training programme for rural entrepreneurs 
to make them steel fabricators under MDP scheme and has 
already conducted progra mmes each spanning over 21 -days at 
Kolkata, Kanpur,   Bhubaneswar and Bokaro and is shortly going 
to conduct training programme at Patna, Agartala and other 
places. 
 
c. The list of projects submitted to MDP during 2013-14 : 
Name of the Project Value of the 
Project 
Development of E-Course / Training Module on 
Structural Steel Design for Civil Engineering 
Students 
Rs.69.00 lakhs 
Project to Increase Steel Consumption in rural 
Sector 
Rs.56.80 lakhs 
Entrepreneurship and Skill Development 
Programme at Tripura  
Rs.26.82 lakhs 
d. The steel-concrete composite methodology adopted by INSDAG has 
become extremely popular in construction sector. This design of 
INSDAG was implemented in the following structures:- 
 Handloom House Complex at Janpath New Delhi during 2012 
 Indira Paryavaran Bhawan at Jorbagh New Delhi during 2012 
 Office Complex at Metro Vally Project at Special Economic Zone 
(SEZ) Delhi, Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology 
(SVNIT), Surat."  
 

 
 
16. The Committee were concerned to note that though the 
Government had decided to spend Rs. 5 crore per annum on 
Market Development Projects  (MDPs) intended to develop the 
market for steel, the Ministry of Steel and Institute for Steel 
Development and Growth had failed to implement the project in 
right perspective.  Although in their action taken reply, the 
Ministry of Steel have informed the Committee that various 
institutions viz. Steel Authority of India Ltd.; Tata Steel Ltd.; 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.; Essar Steel Ltd.; JSW Steel Ltd.; Jindal 
Steel and Power Ltd.; MECON Ltd.; SAIL -RDCIS, etc.  were 
approached to submit proposals under Market Development 
Projects, the Committee find that even during 2013 -14, only 3 
MDP namely Development of E -Course /Training Module on 
Structural Steel Design for Ci vil Engineering Students; Project to 
Increase Steel Consumption in rural Sector; and Entrepreneurship 
and Skill Development Programme at Tripura have been submitted 
with a total budget amount of Rs. 152.62/ - lakh.  As Joint Plant 
Committee who is organizin g the Evaluation Committee Meeting 
for screening project proposals under MDP have failed to come up 
with the projects intended to develop and popularize utilization of 
steel,  the Committee feel that necessary steps ought to be taken 
by the Government to p opularize the utilization of steel .  At the 
same time, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire that the Government should ensure allocation and 
utilization of Rs.5 crore per year for Market Development Projects. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No.1. 
 
The per capita consumption of steel is considered as an important 
index for the socio -economic development and living standard of the 
people of any country. The Committee are concerned to note that though 
India ranked 4th in the world steel production with annual production of 
steel at 73.6 million tonne after China (716.5 million tonne) Japan (107.2 
million tonne) and USA (86.4 million tonne), the per cap ita consumption 
of finished steel in the country stood awefully at 60 kg against the world 
average of 216.9 kg. during 2012 which is also much below the per capita 
finished steel used in South Korea (1114.1 kg.) Japan (506 kg.), China 
(477.4 kg.). The Comm ittee also note that per capita consumption in the 
country have risen from 39.6 kg. in 2006 to 59.8 kg. in 2012. Although, 
the Committee note that after their recommendation [25th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2007 -08)] to the Ministry to achieve the huge 
growth potential and to create required infrastructure for steel industry as 
well as increase per capita consumption of steel, there has been increase 
of about 16.6 kg of per capita consumption of steel in the country, they, 
however, are of the view that w ith the present rate of increase in per 
capita consumption of steel, it may take centuries to catch up with the 
developed countries like South Korea, Japan and even China in per capita 
consumption of steel in the country. Though SAIL has formulated a new 
SAIL Rural Dealership Policy only during 2011 -12, RINL does not have 
such policy to increase growth of steel usage in rural areas. The 
Committee strongly believe that India being a developing country, there is 
a huge scope for increase in steel consumption in infrastructure sector like 
roads, railway network, sea ports, airports, large scale housing projects, 
industries including capacity addition in power generation and distribution, 
oil and gas, steel communication, manufacturing sectors, agricultural 
sector, construction of dams and bridges, interlinking of rivers, 
mechanization of farming, tapping potential of steel consumption in rural 
area, fencing of country borders, etc. The Committee would like the 
Ministry of Steel/Steel PSUs to formulate a comprehe nsive policy for 
promotion of steel usage since the consumption of steel has a direct 
bearing on the production of steel keeping in view the manifold increase in 
the steel production in the coming years. 
  
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
Apart from Brand promotion at Corporate level, SAIL has a policy of 
promotion of steel (SAIL products) through its dealer network. The 
promotional activities undertaken in Retail group are primarily at the level 
of individual dealers, as per SAIL Dealershi p Policy. The expenditure is a 

 
 
function of the total off -take of Dealers. The efforts of the dealers are 
supplemented by organising different activities at the Branch/ Regional 
level like conducting Mason Meets, Dealer Meets; Architects Meet, 
participation in exhibitions, sponsoring different programmes etc. In 
addition, promotion of steel usage is carried out by means of putting up 
stalls in trade fairs and exhibitions, printing of pamphlets for dealers and 
installation of hoardings in major cities. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
Rural Dealership Scheme of RINL 
 
RINL implemented District Level Dealership Policy in 2004 -05 to 
ensure availability of steel in the rural areas. As per this Scheme, Dealers 
are appointed in second level towns in the districts. Subsequently, with a 
view to give a boost to steel consumptio n in the rural areas, RINL 
introduced the Rural Dealership Scheme (RINL -RDS) in January 2011. As 
per this Scheme, Rural Dealers are appointed at Block Level and 
Panchayat Level locations. Over a period of time, Rural Dealership Scheme 
is gaining popularity  and entrepreneurs are coming forward for taking 
Rural Dealership of RINL.   
 
The Schemes envisage availability of steel to the rural consumer 
and also provide gainful engagement to rural entrepreneurs. The scheme 
focuses on inclusive growth and has no res trictions on enrolment. The 
process of appointment of dealers under Rural Dealership Scheme is 
simple and appointment is continuous. Preference is given to SC/ST/OBC 
and Women categories in allotment of Dealership. 
 
In addition to these RINL appoints of Re tailers in urban and semi -
urban areas, who also supply steel products to the Rural Customers.   
 
Salient features of Rural Dealership Scheme (RINL-RDS) 
 
a) To create a spot market and a future market for RINL steel 
products in rural areas. 
b) To promote the imag e of the Company as a responsible corporate 
citizen that makes its products available in rural areas - Block / 
Panchayat Levels for development. 
c) To promote inclusive growth. 
d) To have an additional avenue for product promotion in the vast 
rural market. 
 
With a view to giving wide publicity to the Rural Dealership Scheme 
initially, RINL Rural Dealership Scheme was launched at Bhubaneswar, 
Bengaluru, Lucknow and Jaipur during 2011-12.  
 
During July 2012, advertisements were released by various 
Branches of RINL for appointment of Rural Dealers in their respective 
areas. During Sept/Oct 2012, advertisement were released by various 
Branches of RINL for appointment of Rural Dealers from the S tates / 
Union Territories like North Eastern States, J&K, HP, Pondicherry, 

 
 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu, Jharkand, etc. 
where RINL does not have a sales outlet or presence is meager.  
 
Advertisement / Notice for appointment of Rural Dealers is on 
continuous display at the RINL Web Portal “ www.vizagsteel.com” in 
Marketing Department Page from 20.01.2013.   
 
As a result of concerted efforts for widening Rural Dealership 
Network, the number of Deal ers has almost doubled in 2012 -13, 
compared to the previous year. Status of Rural Dealers at the end of H1 of 
2013-14 is as under: 
 
Financial Year No. Rural 
Dealers 
10 - 11 229 
11 - 12 318 
12 - 13 606 
13 -14 (upto 
Sept’13) 
631 
 
Capacity enhancement of RINL to cater to increasing demand of 
steel 
 
RINL is in agreement with the suggestions / recommendations of 
the Committee on potential for growth in various sectors resulting in 
increasing steel consumption in the country. In order to meet the 
increasing demand for steel, RINL took up enhancement of capacity of the 
plant to 6.3 million tonnes (Mt) from the initial capacity of 3 Mt. This 
expansion is on the verge of completion. Further, it is planned to increase 
the capacity to 7.3 Mtpa, the works of this expansion have commenced.  
 
In due course, RINL plans to diversify into flat product segment and 
the capacity is planned to be expanded from 7.3 Mt to 11/12 Mt and 
ultimately to 20.0 Mt in phases. 
 
For promotion of steel, RINL enhanced the budget to Rs 15 per 
tonne of steel and taking up various activities as per details given below: - 
 
 Conducting workshops of Architects, Designers, Builder, Consultants 
etc. at Major Metros (New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai 
Hyderabad, Bangalore, Ahmadabad, Patna, Bhubaneswar, 
Kanpur/Agra) 
 Meet on Rural Marketing to p romote “Steel consumption in Rural 
Areas” was undertaken in association with CII and ASSOCHAM. 
 Regular Rural Dealers Meets are being conducted in the Branch 
Sales Offices. 
 Advertisements during important Sports Events, Seminars etc.  
 Making a Product Film in local languages and telecast through local 
Cable Network  
 Making a CD consisting of Product Features and Contact Persons  
 Advertisements on Buses, Hoardings at Bus Stands, Airports, 
Railway Stations and vantage points 

 
 
 Glow Sign Boards at Stock Yards, Retailers, DLDs and RDs locations 
 Product Campaign through News papers, Magazines etc. 
 Product Campaign in Airlines In-flight Magazines  
 Hoardings on RINL’s Products in Tier II Cities & Rural Areas 
 Projections of video clips on RINL Products in Cinema Halls  
 Participation in Exhibitions for displaying RINL’s Products  
 Printing of Product Brochures for Circulation amongst customers 
 RINL along with INSDAG has also taken up steel product promotion 
campaign for improving steel consumption in the country. 
 
With combined efforts of advertisement, customer satisfaction, new 
products, rural dealership scheme etc. RINL has been registering growth 
in sales of steel products in major states over the years. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2. 
 
 The Committee observe that consumption of steel has not grown 
relatively in the rural areas which comes out to 9.78 kg. What has further 
perturbed the Committee is that despite huge potential in rural India 
where 72% of 1 billion plus population of the country live, the Joint Plant 
Committee (JPC) has assessed, only around 12 kg per capita consumption 
by the end of the year 2020. Although, the Government have admitted 
that it is not the target and is just a s tatistical project, the Committee are 
of the view that increasing affluence and impact of urbanization, rural 
populace can afford even more steel consumption and with various 
promotional measures, the rural steel consumption can grow beyond the 
perceived levels. The Committee feel that for enhancing the consumption 
of steel in rural India, it is necessary to make rural consumers aware of 
the advantages of steel usage over the traditional materials like wood and 
plastic in terms of inherent strength, design flexibility, the fire resistance, 
durability and life cycle cost advantage besides the eco -friendliness of 
using steel in construction, storage and other household items. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that rural campaign of the 
Ministry/Steel PSUs fo r promotion of steel should aim to achieve these 
ends.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 After on -going Modernisation &  Expansion plan of SAIL, the 
availability of steel especially for rural consumption viz. TMT Bars, GP/GC 
sheets, lower dia Wire -rods etc. will improve. As SAIL has already put in 
place a large Dealers & Rural Dealers net-work and the same is expanding 
every year. The additional availability for SAIL will ensure more steel 
being sold in rural and semi-urban areas through this large net work. 
SAIL recognizes the potential for increasing consumption of steel in 
the hinterland and has accordingly taken steps to appoint Rural Dealers at 

 
 
the Block / Taluka level. Presently there are about 700 Rural Dealers and 
this is expected to increase to a level of 1000 by the end of the financial 
year 2013 -14. Depending on the increase in availability as well as the 
success o f the Rural Dealership Scheme, more Rural Dealers will be 
appointed in the subsequent years. 
 
 In keeping with the recommendations to increase consumption in 
the rural areas, these aspects will be highlighted through various 
advertisements to be released by SAIL for itself as well as for the Ministry 
of Steel. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
As brought out in the observations mentioned above,  RINL gives 
thrust for improving steel consumption in rural areas. Workshops to 
various customer groups including rural artisans like masons, bar benders, 
welders etc. are held. In these Workshops, participants are made aware of 
the advantages of steel over other products like wood and plastic in terms 
of inherent strength, flexibility, weldability, fire resistance, durability, eco-
friendliness, lifecycle cost savings etc.  
 
The Marketing Network of RINL for supplying steel to rural areas 
and the quantity of steel products sold in the rural areas in the last 3 
years and the current year are as under: 
  
Year No. of 
Dealers/Retailers 
Quantity of steel sold 
(‘000t) 
2010-11 389 153 
2011-12 468 174 
2012-13 739 200 
2013-14 
(H1) 
745 100 
 
 Product promotion campaigns are carried out in rural areas through 
advertisements in bus stations, rural buses etc. Rural Dealership Scheme 
are launched at major metros for giving wide publicity. In order to 
strengthen Product Promotion, a special group has been constituted with a 
Deputy General Manager heading the group.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.5. 
 
The Committee also note that Working Group on Steel for 12th Five 
Year Plan has also recommended that subsidies for purchasing agri -
implements/machinery through effective targeting by UID scheme should 
be implemented. Although, the Ministry of Steel has in formed the 
Committee that there is no proposal for providing subsidy by them for 
agri-implements/machinery, the Committee feel that the government 

 
 
should come out with such a proposal to ensure deeper penetration into 
rural markets where demand remains untapped.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
Steel is supplied to SSI Corporations by steel companies including 
SAIL against allocation by the Ministry of Steel. Such supplies to SSICs 
are eligible for JPC rebate ranging from Rs.370 to R s.550 per metric 
tonne. SSICs are required to meet steel demands of Small Scale Industry. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
 
The Committee are given to understand that fabrication is 
considered one of the major bottlenecks of enhanced steel usage in rural / 
semi-urban areas and INSDAG is reported to be trying to improve the 
scenario by imparting hand -holding support to the prosp ective rural 
entrepreneurs to set up their own fabrication units at their chosen 
locations. The Committee are, however, perturbed to note that the 
Government and PSUs like SAIL and RINL have failed to take desired 
steps to increase the demand of steel in r ural market by supporting the 
prospective rural entrepreneurs to set up their own fabrication units. 
Further, though RINL has reported to have developed earth quake 
resistant and corrosion resistant rebars for usage in construction and has 
claimed that these new grades of steel products help in reducing damage 
during natural calamities like earth quakes, floods, tsunamis etc. in rural, 
hilly and coastal areas and increases the life of structures constructed, the 
Committee observe that the company has failed  to promote these 
products in hilly areas which are prone to natural calamities like 
earthquakes, floods, etc. Unhappy to note that the steel companies and 
INSDAG have failed to promote these steel products in rural and hilly 
areas, the Committee strongly recommend that the Government should 
come up with a plan not only to support the prospective rural 
entrepreneurs to setup their fabrication units but SAIL and RINL should 
also setup the same at their chosen locations with focus on value added 
products.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 Rural entrepreneurs can access the SAIL Dealer Network for 
procurement of TMT and GP/GC. In order to increase volumes, other 
products like Black Pipes, CR Products etc. are under consideration for 
sale through Retail channel.  Greater efforts would be made  to promote 

 
 
higher quality TMT like earthquake resistance (EQR) in hilly areas and 
Corrosion Resistant (HCR) in the coastal areas through the Retail channel.  
To improve consumption of steel in rural areas and support 
prospective rural enterprises, SAIL has initiated the following steps- 
a. To improve availability of TMT bars in 8-20mm range (mainly 
used in construction of smaller houses) by appointment of 
conversion & wet leasing agents throughout the country as 
well as being in the process of commissionin g a new Bar Mill 
at ISP. 
b. SAIL has set up a network of District Dealers & Rural Dealers 
throughout the country, to improve availability of good 
quality steel in the hinterland. 
c. SAIL is in the process of appointing SPUs & SPU CAs at 
various locations i n order to not only increase availability of 
TMT Bars but also to start fabrication of crash barriers and 
manufacturing of roofing/colour coated sheets which find 
greater uses in Rural/Hilly areas. 
d. SAIL is considering proposals for converting TMT into f ixed 
shapes/lengths/stirrups for ready use by the Construction 
Industry. 
e.  Through the support of SAIL, INSDAG is making efforts to 
improve steel consumption in rural areas. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
RINL manufactures rebars in Fe 500, Fe 500  D, Fe 550 in grades 
like Corrosion Resistant Material (CRM), High Strength Corrosion Resistant 
Material (HSCRM) and Earth Quake Resistant Material. Product Promotion 
Campaigns of these products are taken up regularly. Product Brochures 
are printed and distributed to the customers.  
 
With the help of INSDAG, RINL has been conducting Workshops to 
the Architects, Builders, Structural Engineers, Designers etc. for 
promotion of steel consumption. Workshops for rural artisans like Masons, 
Bar Benders, Welders et c. are also held to promote usage of steel. It is 
planned to take the help of external agency for imparting training to Rural 
Artisans in these Trades. 
 
INSDAG 
a. Besides construction of a model Rural House at Bardhaman  
following innovative technology developed by INSDAG, it has 
received encouragement from Govt. of West Bengal to construct 
one “Steel Village” at one ST village at Tapan AC in South Dinajpur. 
The units to be constructed include 55 steel intensive houses, s teel 

 
 
intensive community toilets, overhead steel reservoir and elevated 
circular steel reservoirs. Discussion has already been held with the 
concerned authorities. Necessary data are being collected to 
prepare the DPR. 
 
b. Apart from Govt. of Tripura, M/s JSW has come forward to 
construct one model rural house following the design of INSDAG at 
a village near Pune. If successful, they are contemplating to go in 
for mass housing. 
 
c. The steel -concrete composite design developed by INSDAG has 
been implemented in some of the hilly areas like the following:- 
  
 Indoor Stadium at UCC college in Shillong 
 Indoor Stadium at Lady Keane college in Shillong 
 Indoor Stadium at Shillong college 
 Roof of Sokhymphor Church in Meghalaya 
 Roof of Ummulong Church in Meghalaya 
 G+2 storeyed Guest House of Ras Mahotsav at Howly, lower 
Assam 
 Butterfly Reserve Park at Rangrang, Sikkim 
 Supporting structure of 36’ high Sri Janga statue at Namchi, 
Sikkim 
 Sri Krishna Pranami temple at Singtam, Sikkim 
   
d. The Entrepreneurship and Skill De velopment Programme (ESDP) 
containing 21 -days training for the rural entrepreneurs to make 
them steel fabricators as designed and developed by INSDAG has 
become very popular in the rural areas of West Bengal, Uttar 
Pradesh, Odisha and Jharkhand. INSDAG is planning to conduct this 
training programme in the rural areas of the country to promote 
fabrication of steel based items (chairs, tables, furniture, racks, 
window grills, roofs, storage bins, etc.) as required by the rural 
households. 
 
e. Based on the experience of prototype model house constructed at 
Bardhaman, West Bengal, INSDAG has undertaken to popularize 
the concept through its publication. One publication is being 
prepared to highlight various steel intensive rural structures like 
Rural house, Health Centre, School Building and Meeting hall with 
construction methodology and quantity estimation. The study report 
on School Building, Panchayat Hall, Health Centre, Bridges & 
Culverts and units working under Indira Awas Yojana has been 
prepared by October 31, 2013 and has gone for printing. This 
document will be sent to most of the panchayat bodies across the 
country for actual implementation after printing. 
 
  Moreover, all major steel producers have also been requested with 
detailed cost estimates to implement at least some prototype 
structure within rural areas under their jurisdiction for general 
public viewing and subsequent adoption later on. Departments of 

 
 
Panchayat and Rural Development of each state were also 
approached with similar requests. 
 
INSDAG is also actively involved in implementation of quality and 
health safety trainings during construction in rural / semi rural 
areas is association with major steel producers, through training 
programme on bar bending and steel fixing, tra ining programme in 
quality in fabrication etc. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.8. 
 
The committee observe that INSDAG has been pursuing various 
programmes for development of steel usage such as development of 
steel- concrete composite construction and its propagation, development 
of efficient and economical structural sections like parall el flange beams 
and columns, development of high grade reinforcement bars like 500 and 
550 grades through TMT route, maximizing use of colour coated roof and 
wall sheets, development and popularizing of light weight structures using 
Square Hollow Sections,  Rectangle Hollow Section and Circular Hollow 
Section. As the Ministry of Steel has informed the Committee that all 
these developments have been taking shape predominantly during last 5 
years and due to their various advantages, are being used extensively in 
difficult terrain like Uttarakhand, the Committee would like to be apprised 
of the utilization and adoption of the above technologies in different parts 
of the country.  
 
 
Action Taken 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
During last 5 years SAIL has shifted almost entire production of 
TMT Bars at its Bhilai, Durgapur and ISP, Burnpur Plants to IS 1786 Fe -
500, IS 1786 Fe 500D, and superior grades viz. HCR (High Corrosion 
Resistant) and SAILTMT Fe600. TMT Bars are extensively sold through 
SAIL’s dealer network which is spread over 611 districts of the country 
and includes 700 rural dealers at Block/Taluka levels. 
INSDAG 
(i) Development of Design Guidebook for plain profile sheets:- 
 
This guide book was published in 2005. This deals with use of plain 
profiled sheets in roof structures and also as side cladding for 
industrial/commercial buildings. These types of sheets are in use in 
mass scale now-a-days. 
 
  (ii) Study report on Development of Light Weight load bearing wall by 
cold formed sections:- 

 
 
 
This project has just been completed in September 2013. It will be 
useful for usage in the rural sector. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
RURAL DEALERSHIP 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10. 
 
The Committee observe that the rural retail dealership of SAIL and 
RINL has increased from NIL and 240 in 2010-11 to 678 and 606 in 2012-
13 respectively. As regards the sale of steel materials through retail rural 
network by SAIL during 2010-11 and 2011-12, the Committee note that it 
was nil and has increased to the level of 12990 tonnes during the year 
2012-13. The steel supply by RINL to rural dealers from 1.53 lakh tonne 
during 2010-11 and 1.74 lakh tonne during 2011 -12 has risen to 2 lakh 
tonne during 2012-13. From the data furnished by the Government/SAIL, 
the Committee cannot but deplore the way the SAIL has failed to supply 
steel materials to rural areas during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 and has 
entered in rural market only after appointment of rural retail dealers 
during 2012-13. The Committee also observe that the increase in quantity 
sold by RINL during 2012-13 with 606 dealers at 2 lakh tonne has also not 
risen sufficiently in proportion to 366 new dealers appointed during 2011 -
12 and 2012 -13. The Committ ee, therefore, recommend that more and 
more dealers should be appointed in villages, semi -towns and municipal 
areas. The future of increased use of domestic steel products rests with 
the people of rural, semi -towns and municipal areas. Public sector 
undertakings like SAIL, RINL etc. should take steps to educate the rural 
people regarding utilisation of domestic steel products. Sometimes, they 
should hold 'steel melas' in rural areas. Massive advertisements in 
regional languages should be made in rural areas , so that people become 
aware of utilisation of steel products. Time has ripen that Nationalized 
Steel Industry must open their respective publicity department engaging 
professional experts for publicizing use of steel products in entire India. 
Public Sector Undertakings(PSUs) must give more time and energy to sell 
domestic steel products and market development projects in the country.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
SAIL presently has 700 Rural Dealers and is planning to add 
another 300 such Dealers by 31.03.14. Depending on the success of the 
scheme as well as enhanced availability from ISP Bar Mill and  Galvanising 
line at Bokaro, more Rural Dealers would be taken up for appointment.  
During the year 2012 -13(when the first Rural Dealers were 
appointed), SAIL has supplied 12,990 tonnes of steel to Rural Dealers. 
During the year 2013-14, SAIL plans to supply a minimum of 6% (37,000 
tonnes) of the total retail sales thr ough the Rural Dealer Network. So far 
upto August 2013, 12,300 tonnes of steel materials have already been 

 
 
supplied.  As suggested, more promotional activities like Steel Melas, 
advertisements in regional languages etc. would be undertaken in the 
hinterland / rural areas, greater awareness campaigns through Mason 
Meets, Architect Meets would be organised. 
 SAIL, a pioneer in steel industry has been engaging professional 
experts for publicizing use of steel products in entire India.  SAIL have 
some professional advertising agencies on their panel who design the 
creative advertisements for promotion of SAIL and steel usage.  SAIL 
have also a leading agency for planning of the media and releasing of the 
advertisements. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL gives utmost importance for promotion of steel consumption 
in rural areas. Special efforts like issuing advertisements for appointment 
of rural dealers in different regions are carried out. RINL also issued 
advertisement in its website www.vizagsteel.com for appointment of Rural 
Dealers. Interested entrepreneurs can approach the Branch Sales Office of 
RINL in the respective area for appointment as Rural Dealers. The 
procedure for appointment of Rural dealers is also very simple.  
 
At the end of Sept. 2013, the number of Rural Dealers stood at 
631. It is planned to increase the number of Dealers to 1000 by the end of 
the current year.  
 
Considering the availability of much higher volume of steel from 
expansion units, RINL’s expenditure on sales promotion is getting 
increased in stages. Keeping in view the need and the initiatives required 
to be taken for product campaigns, Board of RINL enhanced the budget 
for product promotion to Rs 15 per tonne of steel sales . Steel promotion 
activities being taken includes: 
 
 Conducting workshops of Architects, Designers, Builder, Consultants 
etc. at Major Metros (New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai 
Hyderabad, Bangalore, Ahmadabad, Patna, Bhubaneswar, 
Kanpur/Agra) 
 Meet on Rura l Marketing to promote “Steel consumption in Rural 
Areas” was undertaken in association with CII and ASSOCHAM. 
 Regular Rural Dealers Meets are being conducted in the Branch 
Sales Offices. 
 Advertisements during important Sports Events, Seminars etc.  
 Making a Product Film in local languages and telecast through local 
Cable Network  
 Making a CD consisting of Product Features and Contact Persons  
 Advertisements on Buses, Hoardings at Bus Stands, Airports, 
Railway Stations and vantage points 
 Glow Sign Boards at Stock Yards, Retailers, DLDs and RDs locations 
 Product Campaign through News papers, Magazines etc. 
 Product Campaign in Airlines In-flight Magazines  

 
 
 Hoardings on RINL’s Products in Tier II Cities & Rural Areas 
 Projections of video clips on RINL Products in Cinema Halls  
 Participation in Exhibitions for displaying RINL’s Products  
 Printing of Product Brochures for Circulation amongst customers 
 RINL along with INSDAG has also taken up steel product promotion 
campaign for improving steel consumption in the country. 
 
With combined efforts of advertisement, customer satisfaction, new 
products, rural dealership scheme etc. RINL has been registering growth 
in sales of steel products in major states over the years. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
SECTOR-WISE DEMAND OF STEEL 
 
Recommendation Serial No.11. 
 
From the data furnished by the Ministry of Steel on trends in 
production for sale, import, export, real consumption of key items of non -
alloy steel and overall alloy/stainless steel and finished steel, the 
Committee observe that among the non -flat category  against the 
production of 3,45,99,000 tonne, the imports and export were 6,24,000 
tonne and 4,76,000 tonne respectively. The major products imported in 
the non flat category were bar and roads. As regards the flat items, the 
Committee observe that HR coils and HR sheets are equally imported and 
exported. As per the India Steel Vision 2020, the utilization of steel by 
infrastructure and construction sector will be 63% i.e. 45 million tonnes of 
steel, whereas engineering and fabrication is the another major steel 
consumption sector which will consume 22% of the steel production (16 
million tonne). The Committee note that some of the sectors like CRGO 
Steel required for transformers in power sector are not produced by any 
domestic steel producer. Further, Bake  Hardenable steels, Dual Phase 
Steel etc. in auto sector, power sector and boiler quality plates for boilers, 
HR coils/plates for oil and gas sector etc. are also required to be imported. 
In view of the emerging demand of these products in power, steel, au to, 
oil and gas sectors, the Committee feel that the steel companies should 
focus on their production also so as to become self reliant and to save 
foreign exchange reserves.  
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
The on-going Modernisation & Expansion plan includes investment 
towards downstream facilities like, Hot Strip Mill, Cold Rolling Mill, Plate 
Mill, Rail Mill, Section Mill, Bar Mill and Wire Rod Mill etc.  These facilities 
are envisaged with the latest state of the art technologies, energy efficient 
and environmental friendly processes with the aim to meet the customer 
requirements. 

 
 
The incremental production after current phase of modernization & 
expansion of SAIL shall be consisting of value added products such as:-  
 Plates/ Pipes to meet up to API 100 Grade specification. 
 Universal Beams/ Heavy Beams in the sizes up to 1100 mm to 
support increasing Infrastructural requirements. 
 Rails for Metro-Railways. 
 Increased production of Rails and wheels to meet the increasing 
requirements of Indian Railways. 
 Quantum jump in Rounds and Structural production, a step towards 
reduction of semi-finished steel. 
 Wider Plates upto the size of 4300 mm. 
 Cold Rolling Mill to produce Auto grade CR Products, Galvanized 
Coils/Sheets. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
India being a developing nation, requirement of steel for 
infrastructure building is higher. In view of this, the percentage of non-flat 
steel i.e. longs consumption in India is more compared to that of flat steel 
products. In the long product segment India is more or less self sufficient. 
Imports of longs in total imports are in the order of 12%.  
 
Realising the need for manufacturing Import substitution items, 
RINL plans to manufacture the following products in its expansion. 
 
 Continuous Cast Rounds : To produce rounds upto 500 mm dia. first 
time in India to meet the requirement of tube manufacturers, forgings 
sector etc.  
 
 Forged wheels  : To supply wheels to Railways to meet the 
requirement of High Speed Trains and others. Biggest Plant in India. 
Installation of this unit will reduce  import and also encourage export. 
 
 Axle Plant : To supply Axles to Railways to meet the requirement of 
higher wagon loads. This will be the 2nd Biggest Plant in India. The unit 
will reduce import and encourage export and also meet the 
requirement of special forging.  
 
 Seamless Tubes: To supply Seamless Tubes upto 18” dia. of higher 
grades. The unit is going to the 1st in India. This will meet the growing 
requirement of power, oil & gas sector.  
 
 TLT Grade Structurals  : All items at one place. This unit is going to 
be the 1st of its kind in India. 
 
 Electrical Sheets in CRGO/CRNO Grades  : For development of 
CRGO/CRNO sheets indigenously, Ministry of Steel along with RINL, 
Tata Steel and National Metallurgical Laboratory (NML)  are taking up 
an R&D Project for which approvals of GOI are under process. 
 

 
 
 Flat Products : RINL plans to diversify into flat products seg ment in 
the expansion from 7.3 Mt to 11.5 Mt capacity. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR PROMOTION OF STEEL USAGE 
  
Recommendation Serial No.12. 
 
 In order to tap the potential of steel usage, promotional activities 
like mason meets and dealer meets are being held by the steel PSUs to 
create greater awareness for use of steel in various constructions 
including individual houses during 2012-13. A total no. of 17 mason meets 
and 107 dealer meets were conducted by SAIL. The Committee have been 
informed that Steel PSUs has also adopted a three pronged action plan for 
improving steel usage by widening marketing, distribution network, 
development of new products and advertisement campaign to bring 
awareness amongst largest section of people by conducting workshop of 
architects, designers builders, advertisement during sports events, 
seminars, hoardings, product campaign through newspaper, printing of 
product brochures etc. The Committee note that the actual expenditure on 
product promotion by SAIL during 2012-13 was Rs. Rs.3.78 crore and the 
outlays for 2013 -14 for promotion of steel by SAIL has been kept at Rs. 
4.25 crore. As regards funds earmarked by RINL for product promotion in 
2013-14, the Committe e observe that these have been decreased to Rs. 
2.5 crore against the actual expenditure of Rs. 3.05 crore during 2012-13. 
The Committee are unhappy to observe that though the installed capacity 
of SAIL which is 12.84 million tonne is much more than that of RINL which 
is 2.90 million tonne per year, the expenditure incurred by both the 
companies during 2012 -13 on promotion of steel usage is almost the 
same. The Committee desire that SAIL should increase the outlays for 
promotion of steel usage. Taking note of the likely crude steel capacity of 
SAIL to be increased to 20.75 million tonne and that of RINL to 7 million 
tonne by 2016 -17, the Committee recommend that both the companies 
should spend more amount on promotion of steel usage and the 
Committee be apprised of the same. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 As suggested by the Committee the following points are being 
taken note of:- 
 Widening of Distribution Network (to be achieved through 
appointment of more number of Dealers at various locations at 
the Block and Taluka level throughout the country); 
 Inclusion of new products in the Dealer network- Black Pipes, CR 
products, Stainless Steel items are being considered for addition 
through Retail channel. 

 
 
 Advertisement / Awareness campaigns - As suggested, 
workshops/ seminars, products campaigns through newspapers, 
printing of product brochures etc. will be taken up for inculcating 
greater awareness. Efforts will be made to increase promotional 
activities supported by higher outlays.  
It may be mentioned here that SAIL has been promoting steel 
usage primarily through its Dealership Scheme/Retail, and thus the 
expenditure of Rs.3.78 crores d uring 2012-13 as mentioned above is the 
promotional expenditure incurred by SAIL-CMO, in retail. 
However, in additional, SAIL  Corporate office has been extensively 
using various forms of media to get brand exposure and visibility.  
 Publicity and promotion of the SAIL brand is carried out by SAIL CO 
though various publicity media, including Paid media like newspapers, 
magazines, TV, radio, outdoor etc. which are used on a sustained basis to 
reach the target audience. These include print advertisements, good will 
advertisements, participation in exhibitions, sponsoring events and 
featuring special stories in media.  
 Publication and distribution of various printed material as well as 
taking up of s ponsorships of and/or participation in various national / 
international events and exhibitions, were also done in this direction. 
Efforts were made to maximise the reach of the communications by using 
optimum media mix.  
 The expenditure on corporate branding, publicity and promotion at 
Corporate office in the last 3 years (viz FYs 2010 -11, 11-12 and 12 -13) 
was around Rs.90 crore. The money spent was used to promote brand 
SAIL and increase visibility of SAIL steel products.  
 Owned media like SAIL websites and intranet have been used 
extensively to reach the masses. SA IL website www.sail.co.in has been 
getting on an average 5 lakh hits every month from all over India and 
abroad. This will go a long way in increasing steel usage over time. The 
website has also been redesig ned recently with new features and 
functionalities to make it user -friendly. The website also includes details 
about steel products as well as the flow of the steel making process. This 
platform is also being used to highlight advantages of steel vis -a-vis 
competing products. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
It is a fact that RINL’s expenditure on advertisement was lower 
earlier, considering Plant’s limited capacity, most of the steel sold in 
Southern Region. But now, considering the fact that the capacity 
expansion is being taken up in stages and the availabi lity of much higher 
volume of steel from expansion units, RINL’s expenditure on sales 

 
 
promotion is getting increased in stages. Board of RINL enhanced the 
budget for product promotion to Rs 15 per tonne of steel sales. As 
brought out several steel promotion activities are taken up.  
 
 Conducting workshops of Architects, Designers, Builder, Consultants 
etc. at Major Metros (New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai 
Hyderabad, Bangalore, Ahmadabad, Patna, Bhubaneswar, 
Kanpur/Agra) 
 Meet on Rural Marketing to promote “Steel consumption in Rural 
Areas” was undertaken in association with CII and ASSOCHAM. 
 Regular Rural Dealers Meets are being conducted in the Branch 
Sales Offices. 
 Advertisements during important Sports Events, Seminars etc.  
 Making a Product Film in loca l languages and telecast through local 
Cable Network  
 Making a CD consisting of Product Features and Contact Persons  
 Advertisements on Buses, Hoardings at Bus Stands, Airports, 
Railway Stations and vantage points 
 Glow Sign Boards at Stock Yards, Retailers, DLDs and RDs locations 
 Product Campaign through News papers, Magazines etc. 
 Product Campaign in Airlines In-flight Magazines  
 Hoardings on RINL’s Products in Tier II Cities & Rural Areas 
 Projections of video clips on RINL Products in Cinema Halls  
 Participation in Exhibitions for displaying RINL’s Products  
 Printing of Product Brochures for Circulation amongst customers 
 RINL along with INSDAG has also taken up steel product promotion 
campaign for improving steel consumption in the country. 
 
With combined efforts of advertisement, customer satisfaction, new 
products, rural dealership scheme etc. RINL has been registering growth 
in sales of steel products in major states over the years.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
Recommendation Serial No.4 
 
The Committee note that the Working Group on Steel for the 12th 
Five Year Plan Period has stressed on the need for projects like Bharat 
Nirman, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana and Rajiv Gandhi Awas 
Yojana to increase the per capita steel consumption. The Committee have 
been given to understand that INSDAG had developed comprehensive 
design and construction manual for small span bridges & culverts for 
National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) under Mi nistry of 
Rural Development and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
(MORTH) for implementation of the same in rural areas. These steel based 
designs of rural bridges & culverts are presently being implemented in 
various parts of the country. While obse rving that INSDAG is constructing 
two prototype buildings in Tripura for exposure to rural masses and one 
such building has been constructed at a remote village in West Bengal, 
the Committee recommend that this concept be followed in more and 
more States to create greater awareness for use of steel to help the rural 
people. The Committee also desire that Border Road Organisation and 
National Highways Authority of India should also be pursued by Ministry of 
Steel to develop comprehensive design and construct ion manual for their 
use as developed by INSDAG for NRRDA.  
 
Action Taken 
INSDAG 
INSDAG has developed Design Manual similar to the one prepared 
for National Rural Road Development Agency (NRRDA) for 4 different 
spans (25m, 30m, 35m and 40m) with or without  footpath and submitted 
the same to Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. This is pending 
with M/o RTH more than a year and it is understood that M/o RTH is 
looking for proof checking of the design submitted by INSDAG who is 
regularly following up with M/o RTH for finalization of the manual. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6. 
As regards the thrust given to design product developments and 
capacity building in fabrication of steel articles needed by the rural 
economy for houses for villages, community halls, culverts and bridges 
etc., the Committee observe that RINL has planned t o set up Steel 
Processing Units to manufacture 'Made to Order' steel products on various 
locations in the country. The shapes and sizes required by the customers 

 
 
from rural areas are planned to be manufactured from these Special 
Processing Units. The Commi ttee note that SAIL has taken up 
comprehensive development of 79 model Steel villages spanning over 8 
States and development work undertaken in these villages is likely to 
result in generation of steel demand. Further, as per designs developed by 
INSDAG, RINL has built a steel village with some houses, school building 
and community centre in the vicinity of the Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant. 
While appreciating RINL plan to set up Steel Processing Units at various 
locations in the country, the Committee desire that Government should 
come out with a plan where all steel producing units, be in public or 
private sectors, are directed to set up such 'Made to Order' Special 
Processing Units at various locations in the country to boost the per capita 
steel consumption in rural areas.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
SAIL is in process of setting up service centre at some locations in 
the country.  Marketing circular has already in place for setting up Long 
product service centre at Mumbai and Gha ziabad. BSO, Jaipur is in 
process for publication of tender document for setting up service centre at 
Bhiwadi for processing of Flat product.  
SAIL has also prepared study report for setting up service centre for  
Flat product and currently under process  for making feasibility report  for 
setting up own service centre for Flat product at Chennai and  Pune 
warehouses  
In order to increase the consumption of steel in rural areas, SAIL 
launched a new “Rural Dealership Scheme” during August 2011 in addition 
to its existing Dealership Scheme.    Under this scheme, rural dealers 
have been appointed at Talukas / Blocks / Panchayat levels. As on 1 st 
Sept, 2013, 700 rural dealers were appointed in addition to 2216 SAIL 
Dealers.    Products primarily covered under this scheme are TMT Bars, 
Light Structurals, GP and GC Sheets.  The logistics part of delivering the 
materials at the dealers’ premises is u ndertaken by SAIL free of cost to 
the dealers.  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
RINL has initiated action for taking Steel Processing Units (SPUs) 
for conversion of semis produced in the Plant into economy grade rebars 
and structurals suiting to the construction requirements. Till now, RINL 
finalised two SPUs, one each at Ambedkar Nagar and Gonda in UP. These 
two SPUs shall come in to production within two years and have a capacity 
of 72000 tonnes per annum each, with all latest quality parameters.  
 
In addition to these, two more SPUs are in Tendering stage, one at 
Bhilwara and another at Patna. These 4 SPUs will have a capacity for 
producing about 2.8 lakh tonnes of Rebars and Structurals per annum. 

 
 
RINL plans to set up Service Centres at major Metros in the country 
to facilitate manufacturing of steel products of different shapes and sizes 
as per the customers’ requirements. This concept helps in minimizing 
wastage of steel at the customers’ premises. The customers can order the 
products in different shapes and sizes suiting to their construction 
requirements.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS  
 
Recommendation Serial No.9. 
 
The Committee note that in 1997, the Government had decided 
that an amount of Rs. 5 crore per annum be spent on projects intended to 
develop the market for steel. These market development projects were 
meant for popularizing st eel houses in the country through innovative 
applications/use of steel in different areas. The Committee are, however, 
dismayed to note that only four projects with total grants amounting to 
Rs. 38.12 lakh were taken up for these marketing development projects in 
the last 5 years. The projects included skill -cum-entrepreneurs 
development programme in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, design 
manual for steel structurals and hand book on architectural and 
construction in steel. The Committee, therefore, cannot b ut deplore the 
inaction on the part of the Government and Institute for Steel 
Development and Growth (INSDAG) for their utter failure to implement 
the project in right spirit which was set up more than a decade ago for 
promotion of steel use in Indian cons truction and infrastructural sectors. 
The Committee feel that INSDAG has failed to achieve its objectives of 
promotion of steel use by not providing requisite thrust to increase steel 
consumption particularly in rural areas as it was unable to come up with  
market development projects. What has further pained the Committee is 
that despite the existence of various agencies like JPC, INSDAG, 
Evaluation Committee for monitoring and implementation of MDP, Steel 
PSUs and private companies, no concrete steps were made to increase 
consumption of steel. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
necessary steps be taken by the Government to ensure that more and 
more market development projects are taken up and the grants of Rs. 5 
crore per year be fully and ga infully utilized for resultant increase in per 
capita consumption of steel.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Joint Plant Committee (JPC) and INSDAG  
Joint Plant Committee (JPC) has been organising the Evaluation 
Committee Meeting for screening project proposals under Market 
Development Projects (MDP). To ensure appropriate coverage and 
submission of projects, the following institutions were approached to 
submit proposals under MDP. 

 
 
 Steel Authority of India Ltd (SAIL) 
 Tata Steel Ltd (TSL) 
 Rashtriya  Ispat Nigam Ltd (RINL) 
 Essar Steel Ltd 
 JSW Steel Ltd 
 Jindal Steel and Power Ltd (JSPL) 
 MECON Ltd 
 SAIL-RDCIS 
 The Indian Institute of Metals (IIM) 
 National Institute of Secondary Steel Technology (NISST) 
 Economic Research Unit / Joint Plant Committee 
However, it is only SAIL, JPC, NISST and INSDAG who have 
submitted project proposals for consideration under MDP so far.   
a. The specific activities undertaken by INSDAG for promotion of steel 
usage in construction and infrastructure sectors have been 
elaborated under point no. 4 and point nos. 7 and 8. 
 
b. INSDAG has undertaken Entrepreneurship and Skill Development 
Programme (ESDP) training programme for rural entrepreneurs to 
make them steel fabricators under MDP scheme and has already 
conducted program mes each spanning over 21 -days at Kolkata, 
Kanpur,   Bhubaneswar and Bokaro and is shortly going to conduct 
training programme at Patna, Agartala and other places. 
 
c. The list of projects submitted to MDP during 2013-14 : 
Name of the Project Value of the 
Project 
Development of E-Course / Training Module on 
Structural Steel Design for Civil Engineering 
Students 
Rs.69.00 lakhs 
Project to Increase Steel Consumption in rural 
Sector 
Rs.56.80 lakhs 
Entrepreneurship and Skill Development 
Programme at Tripura  
Rs.26.82 lakhs 
d. The steel-concrete composite methodology adopted by INSDAG has 
become extremely popular in construction sector. This design of 
INSDAG was implemented in the following structures:- 
 Handloom House Complex at Janpath New Delhi during 2012 
 Indira Paryavaran Bhawan at Jorbagh New Delhi during 2012 
 Office Complex at Metro Vally Project at Special Economic Zone 
(SEZ) Delhi, Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology 
(SVNIT), Surat  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Working Group on Steel for 12th Five Year Plan  
 
Recommendation Serial No.3. 
 
 The Committee note that the Working Group on Steel for 12th Five 
Year Plan had indicated that in order to achieve double digit growth rate of 
domestic steel consumption investments of 1 billion dollar in infrastructure 
and setting up of the national manufacturing and investment zones are 
required as integral part to accelerate the pace of implementation of 
infrastructure projects in the country. The Committee have been apprised 
that steps are being taken by the Government/Steel  Companies to 
improve the cement to steel ratio in construction, deeper penetration into 
rural markets, diversification strategies etc. as pointed out by the Working 
Group. Further, Institute for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) has 
been continuously propagating various ways and means to improve steel 
to cement ratio in construction, preparation and dissemination of various 
reports / guidebooks / manuals / Codes & Standards, continuous 
education to professionals, faculties and students through various 
classrooms trainings / seminars / competitions, representation to various 
implementing authorities for steel / steel-concrete composite construction, 
etc. The Committee have been informed that one prominent example in 
this regard is extensive and exclusive  use of structural steel in airport 
modernization across the country. Taking note of the huge investments 
required in manufacturing and infrastructure projects, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the investments made by Steel PSUs for 
undertaking m odernisation programme and product diversification 
strategy so far with focus on value added products.  
 
Action Taken 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) has undertaken Modernisation & 
Expansion plan at its integrated steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, 
Durgapur & ISP and special steel plant at Salem. SAIL envisages increase 
in its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in the 
current phase. 
Besides capacity e nhancement, the growth plan adequately 
addresses enriching product mix with introducing customer centric 
processes. The product mix envisaged plant –wise are given below; 
Facility Product mix 
Universal Section Mill 
at ISP 
 Beams with Parallel Flange (IPE –I Beam Equal 
Parallel Flange) 
 H-beams (HE-H Section Equal Flange) 
 Channels 

 
 
 Equal Angles 
 Special Sections 
 (Sheet Piles, Z-Sections etc.) 
Wire rod mill at ISP For producing various grades for different applications 
Bar mill at ISP For producing various grades for different applications 
Universal Rail Mill at 
BSP  
State-of-the-art Mill along with rail welding facility for 
catering to demand of Indian Railways and producing 
up to 260m long rails 
Bar & Rod Mill at BSP For producing various grades and quality of bars and 
wire rods for different applications 
New CRM complex at 
BSL  
State-of-the-art facility to produce a wide range of 
CR/ galvanised products for catering to different 
customers/ segments (auto body industry, white 
goods industry, appliance industry, etc) 
New Plate Mill at RSP  For producing wider plates (4.3 m) 
New Medium 
Structural Mill at DSP 
Modern facility for producing universal beams and 
other structural for different applications 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
As per the D etailed Project Report of 3.0 Mtpa, the plant was 
designed to manufacture mild steel products. However, over a period of 
time, expertise has been developed to manufacture value added steel 
products. Currently, about 80% of the steel products produced and 
marketed are value added steel products. For meeting construction sector 
requirements rebars in various grades like Fe 500, Fe 550, Fe 500 D, 
CRM, HSCRM etc. have been developed. These products help in reducing 
the cost per unit of construction. 
 
RINL prepared its long term directional plan for enhancing its 
capacity in line with the increasing demand for steel in the country. RINL 
is on the verge of completing its expansion from 3.0 Mtpa to 6.3 Mtpa at a 
cost of about Rs 12,300 cr. In this expansi on, secondary refining facilities 
like Ladle Furnace, RH Degasser, Electro Magnetic Stirrer (EMS) are set up 
to facilitate manufacturing value added steel products suiting to the 
requirement of automobile and manufacturing sectors. The production 
capacities of much needed TMT Bars and Structurals required for 
Infrastructure Sector are going to be enhanced substantially in this 
expansion. Further, jobs related to the next phase of expansion to 7.3 
Mtpa through up -gradation and modernization and addition of n ew 
facilities have also started. RINL is investing about Rs 4000 cr. for 
modernization and up -gradation. Besides this, about Rs 5,000 cr. worth 
projects are undertaken / being undertaken for value addition viz. 
Seamless Tube Mill, Wheel Plant, Axle Plant etc. RINL commenced plans to 
diversify into flat product segment and the capacity is going to be 
increased to 11/12 Mtpa at an estimated cost of Rs 22,000 cr. Ultimately 
the capacity is going to be enhanced to 20 Mtpa, making RINL the largest 
capacity single location Integrated Steel Plant in the country.  
 

 
 
The capital expenditure is not only going to enhance production 
capacity but also help in widening the product range through production of 
high end value added steel products, enhancing generation capacit y of 
electricity, productivity enhancement, etc.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(3)/2013 dated 13th November, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                              KALYAN BANERJEE 
__ December, 2013                                                           Chairman           
__ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL  AND 
STEEL HELD ON 10 DECEMBER, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
    LOK SABHA  
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar  
5.    Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri  
6.    Shri  Pakauri Lal  
7.    Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
8.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
9.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
10.  Shri T. Rathinavel 
11.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Arvind Sharma -  Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports:- 
(i)        **   **   **   **  
 
(ii)      Draft Action Taken Report on “Promotion of Steel usage” relating to the   
Ministry of Steel 

 
 
 
(iii)     **   **   **   **  
 
(iv)     **   **   **   **  
 
(v)      **   **   **   **  
 
 (vi)    **   **   **   **  
 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the basis of 
factual verification from the concerned Ministry  and present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 
  

 
 
 ANNEXURE-II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-NINTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made       12   
            
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12)           08
        
Percentage of total               67%
           
         
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. Nil) 00 
Percentage of total                      0% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos.4,6 and 9)    03
         
Percentage of total                25%
                
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. No.3)                         01
            
 Percentage of total                 8%
       