1 
 
 
49 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
COAL PRICING AND ISSUES RELATING TO COAL ROYALTY 
       
  
                                 FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA 1935(Saka) 
 

2 
 
FORTY-NINTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
COAL PRICING AND ISSUES RELATING TO COAL ROAYLTY 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  06.02.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   06.02.2014 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA 1935(Saka) 

3 
 
CC&S No. 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

5 
 
 CONTENTS 
                     PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2009-10)………………………………………………… (iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2011-12)……….………………………………………. (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2012-13)….…………………………………………… (v) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2013-14)….…………………………………………… (vi) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………………….... (viii) 
Introductory ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….1 
 
  PART-A 
 
COAL PRICING  
 
CHAPTER –I    Deregulation of Coal Pricing by Government…………………………………….5 
 
CHAPTER-II    Factors and Principles for determining Coal Prices…………………………...8 
 
CHAPTER-III   Revision of Coal Prices ……………………………………………………………………..17 
 
CHAPTER- IV  Coal Pricing from UHV to GCV grading system…………………………………22 
 
CHAPTER –V  New Coal Pricing Policy - Supply of Imported Coal on  
   Cost-Plus basis …………………………………………………………………………………29 
 
CHAPTER-VI   Coal  Regulatory Authority  ………………………………………………………………32 

6 
 
 
 PART-B  
 
     COAL ROYALTY  
 
CHAPTER –VII   Legal Provisions and Methodology for fixing Royalty Rates………….33 
 
CHAPTER-VIII  Royalty Rates on Coal ……………………………………………………………………..35 
 
CHAPTER-IX Recommendations by Sarkaria Commission, Finance Commission  
and  Study Group  set-up by Government ………………………………………43 
 
CHAPTER-X   Cess Levied on Coal in different States……………………………………………..46 
 
CHAPTER-XI  Demand for increasing Royalty on Coal by States……………..…………….55 
  
 
PART-C 
 
Observation/Recommendations of the Committee………………………………………. 60 
  
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
 
Details of Royalty paid to States during 2001 -02 to 2011 -12 by 
Coal India Limited and Singareni Collieries Company Limited ...... 
 
 
73 
II. Details of Cess and Royalty paid by the coal companies to the State 
Government of West Bengal along with royalty to be payable @ 
 

7 
 
 14% ad-valorem for the period 2009-10 to 2011-12…………………..  
 
 
74 
III. Details of Royalty and Cess paid to the various  State Governments 
during the last three years by the Coal India Limited (CIL) and its 
subsidiary Companies…………………………………………………………………………  
 
 
75 
 
IV. Details of Royalty and Cess paid to the various State Governments 
during the last three years by Neyveli Lignite Corporation and 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited ……………………………………………. 
 
 
76 
 
V Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2009-10) held on 16.7.2010………….……………………………………………… 
 
77 
 
VI Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2009-10)  held on 16.08.2010……………………………………………………… 
 
79 
 
VII Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2009-10) held on 26.08.2010…………………………………………………………… 
 
 
81 
VIII Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2011-12) held on 20.01.2012…………………………………………………………… 
 
83 
 
IX Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2012-13) held on 14.06.2013………………………………………………………… 
 
85 
 

8 
 
X Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2012-13) held on 08.07.2013………………………………………………………… 
 
87 
 
XI Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
(2013-14) held on 17.12.2013………………………………………………………… 
 
89 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2009-10) 
               Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Adhi Sankar  
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Jaywant G. Awale* 
5. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
6. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury 
7. Shri Ismail Hussain   
8. Shri Chandrakant B.Khaire 
9. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
11. Shri Narahari Mahato 
12. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
13. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Ramesh Rathod 
16. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
20. Shri Shibu Soren 
21. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
  
 Rajya Sabha 
22. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
23. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao 
24. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
25. Shri Mohammed Amin# 
26. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
27. Shri R.C. Singh 
28. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty  
29. Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
30. Vacant^ 
31. Vacant$ 
 
  #  Nominated  w.e.f. 23.12.2009 vice Shri A. Vijayaraghavan 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 11.01.2010 
^ Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 07.07.2010 
$ Shri Nand Kumar Sai ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.06.2010 
 
 
(iii)

10 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2011-12) 
      Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
    Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Udyanraje Bhonsle 
5. Shri A.H. Khan Choudhury 
6. Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
8. Adv.Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
9. Shri Ismail Hussain 
10. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
11. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel 
14. Shri Kalyan Singh 
15. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
16. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
17. Shri K. Sugumar 
18. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
19. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
20.  Shri Pakauri Lal# 
21. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh$ 
              Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Jugul Kishore 
23. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
24. Shri Nand Kumar Sai 
25. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
26. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani* 
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh@ 
28. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari@ 
29. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu% 
30. Shri Dilip Kumar  Tirkey% 
31. Vacant 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 17.09.2011 
# Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 03.01.2012 
     @ Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04.05.2012 
     % Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15.05.2012 
     $  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.06.2012 
(iv) 

11 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2012-13) 
   
            Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
6. Shri Sabbam Hari 
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
8. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
9. Shri Pakauri Lal 
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
12. Shri Rajaram Pal 
13. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
15. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
16. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri O  
21.     Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary* 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27. Shri  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30.  
31.  
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012 
 (v) 

12 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
 
(vi)

13 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Balsekhar     - Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh    - Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Amrish Kumar    - Executive Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii)

14 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Forty -Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Coal Pricing and Issues relating to Coal Royalty"  pertaining to the 
Ministry of Coal. 
 
2. The Standing Committee on Co al and Steel(2013 -14) had selected the subject for 
detailed examination and report to the Parliament.  The Committee (2009 -10) were briefed 
by the representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Companies on 16.07.2010 and took 
oral evidence on 16.08.2010  and 26.08.2010. The Committee(2011 -12) and (2012 -13) 
decided to continue the examination of the subject.  The Committee (2011 -12) and (2012-
13) took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Companies on 
20.01.12, 14.06.2013 and 08.07.2013 respectively.  
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Coal 
and Coal Companies for placing before them and in furnishing material/information from 
time to time as desired by the Committee.  
4. The Co mmittee also wish to express their sincere thanks to their predecessor 
Committees for the significant contribution made by them in the examination of the subject. 
The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
17.12.2013.   
5.  The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-C of the Report.   
 
NEW DELHI;                                                      KALYAN BANERJEE 
         18 December, 2013                                                                              Chairman 
         27 Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)                   Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
(viii) 

15 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
The issue of coal pricing and coal royalty have grabbed a lot of public 
attention of late and has become significant  today, not only form economic , but 
social and political point of view  also. The coal pricing takes social overtones 
because i t affect s a huge number  of end -users, customers and stakeholders, 
including prime industries.  The coal prices take economic overtones because of 
profit margin considerations of coal companies and coal supply to power companies 
which  indirectly affects electricity tariffs also. And, it often takes political overtones 
because of coal royalty issue between the Centre-States regarding demand of 
higher royalty rates and levy of other cess by states. The issue therefore affects the 
fiscal federalism too.  
2. The coal price fixation is a complex mechanism involving several factors, 
principles and parameters. In general . After deregulation of coal pricing by the 
Government, it is the Coal companies themselves which now fix the coal prices. In 
general, the coal pric es are fixed based upon input cost for coal production, 
demand-supply equation, inflationary pressures, wage costs, market capacity to 
absorb the coal prices, the acceptance and rejection level of the consumers, landed 
cost of imported coal and financial viability of the new coal projects. But, the crucial 
and significant aspect is that coal pricing should strike a balance between inflation, 
market prices and interests of the end -consumers. In this context the end users of 
coal were broadly categorized into two – Consumers of coal in the regulated sector 
(Power Utilities, Fertilizer and Defence) and those in the non -regulated sector 
(Cement, Sponge iron, Paper, Rubber, Engineering industry etc.). Steel sector is 
also a deregulated sector but prices of washed  coking coal supplied to integrated 
steel plant is decided based on negotiation between CIL and SAIL on import parity 
basis. Since the price of end products of the coal consuming industries in the non -
regulated sector are driven by demand and supply scenar io, prices of coal for 
supply to the consumers in the non -regulated sector were kept at 30% higher than 
the price of coal for supply to the consumer in regulated sector. 

16 
 
3. As regards coal pricing, the coal companies have switched over from Useful 
Heat Val ue(UHV) to Gross Calorific Value(GCV)  with effe ct from 01.01.12. 
Accordingly, there are different grades of coal depending on their calorific value and 
different prices for each grade. But, there is  lack of a common National Policy  for 
Coal Prices for th e coal co mpanies. Earlier, when UHV grading system was 
prevalent, there were different prices  for the same grade of coal across different 
companies. Even today,  under GCV grading system, the c oal prices are not fully 
uniform for all the coal companies of C oal India Limited.  There are various other 
issues also, like E-auction under New Coal Distribution Policy, coal -theft and illegal 
mining, coal linkages, New Coal Pricing mechanism for  supply of imported coal on 
cost-plus basis under which price burden of i mported co al is passed onto the 
consumers and coal royalty from captive mines given to private parties which need 
to be properly  addressed as these issues have a direct or indirect bearing on coal 
price determination. The freight rates also impact the coal  prices. It  is necessary 
that rail freight rates for coal transport are rationalized and  other modes of 
transport may also  be explored  so as to ensure speedy and cost effective 
movement of coal. 
4. Coal royalty is a consideration  or charge for exploitat ion of coal, a  non-
renewable natural resource. The power of granting coal mining lease lies  with the 
State Government. With the enactment of the Mines and Minerals (Regula tion & 
Development) Act in 1957, the system of fixing the rates of royalty and its 
collection were redefined. In the modern times, royalty came to be known as a 
charge by the owner of the minerals from those who are given the concession to 
remove them. For fixing the rate of royalty on coal/lignite, t he Ministry of Coal 
constitutes a study group headed by the Additional Secretary for fixing the rate of 
royalty on coal. The Study Group takes the views of all the stakeholders like the 
coal producing and consuming states and the major consumer sectors such as 
power, iron and steel, cement etc. The royalty rates were last revised in 2012. 
 
5. It is pertinent to note that non -revision of royalty rates for many years has 
led to decline in the royalty income of the States . The Coal producing States of 
Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have repeatedly 

17 
 
expressed that except coal royalty the other sources of their revenue collection are 
inadequate and, therefore, they will have problems in financing their developmental 
expenditure if coal royalt y rates are not revised upwa rd. It is therefore expected 
from Gover nment  to bring out a clear cut policy on royalty acceptable to coal 
producing states which could be revised at periodical intervals. 
  
6. The issue of levy of other cess by the states also continues to remain a cause 
of concern for the coal industry and a major point of dispute for fiscal 
administration between centre and states.   
 
7. Today, a need is also felt to  determine a methodology for calculation of 
royalty, chargeable on co al produced from captive mines given  to private parties . 
The new royalty rates should be announced only after the s uggestions and views 
from different stakeholders are taken into consideration and a balance should be 
maintained as far as securing the interests of the various stakeholders is 
concerned. 
8. All earlier Commissi ons/Committees on Coal , namely, the Committee on 
Integrated Energy Policy, the Working Group of Coal for 11 th Plan, the Sankar 
Committee on coal sector and the Tariff Commission had recommended creation of 
an independent C oal Regulatory Authority, which would have powers to 
comprehensively handle coal resource development, regulation on extraction, end 
use etc. including pricing and mining safety issues, within the policies formulated 
by the Government.  Recently, taking int o consideration the earlier 
recommendations of the Committees, t he Union Cabinet in June, 2013 gave its 
approval to the proposal for setting up of an independent regulatory authority for 
the coal sector and also approved the introduction of the Coal Regulatory Authority 
Bill, 2013 in Parliament. The setting up of an independent regulatory body for the 
coal sector shall help in the regulation and conservation of coal resources and will 
benefit all stakeholders; that is coal companies, coal consuming industri es such as 
power, steel, cement and coal bearing States and people, directly or indirectly 
associated with the coal industry. The Authority shall specify methods of testing 
for declaration of grades or quality of coal, monitor and enforce closure of mines,  

18 
 
specify principles and methodologies for price determination of raw coal and 
washed coal and any other by -produce generated during the process of coal 
washing, adjudicate upon disputes between parties and discharge  other functions 
as the Government may entrust to it.  
 
9. The Committee have examined the above issues in detail in subsequent 
chapters of the Report and made their observations and recommendations.  
 
 

19 
 
PART-A 
COAL PRICING 
CHAPTER-1 
 
DEREGULATION OF COAL PRICING BY GOVERNMENT 
 
The Central Government was empowered by the Colliery Control Order, 1945 
to fix the grade-wise and colliery-wise prices of coal.   The pricing of coal was fully 
deregulated after the Colliery Control Order, 2000 was notified with effect from   
1st January, 2000 in supersess ion of the Colliery Control Order, 1945. Under the 
Colliery Control Order, 2000 the Central Government has no power to fix the prices 
of coal. Coal has also been removed from the list of essential commodities through 
an amendment of the Essential Commoditi es Act, 1955. The Coal Companies 
themselves fix the coal price based on input costs, installation index, market 
trends etc. and notify the same periodically.  
 
1.2 According to the Ministry of Coal, the price of coal produced and sold by Coal 
India Limited  and its subsidiary companies was under complete control of the 
Government till 21.03.1996. Price was decided based on normative cost as per the 
formula developed by the Bureau of Industrial Cost & Pricing (BICP) and notified by 
Ministry of coal. The proce ss of Decontrol of Price of coal was started from 
22.3.1996 and continued in phases under the provisions of the Colliery Control 
Order 1945. The prices of all grades of coking coal, semi coking coal and non -
coking coal of grades A, B & C were decontrolled w.e.f. 22.03.1996.  The price of 
non-coking coal of grade D was decontrolled w.e.f 12.3.1997.  The prices of non -
coking coal of grades E, F & G were partially decontrolled (not to be more than 
BICP norms) w.e.f. 12.3.1997.  The process of price decontrol was finally completed 
on 01.01.2000 with Govt. Notification of new Colliery Control Order 2000 in 
supersession of CCO 1945. 
 
 

20 
 
1.3 The Committee were informed that in a deregulated regime, the basic 
objective of coal companies is to ensure generation of suff icient surplus after 
meeting its revenue requirement to facilitate financing fresh investments with 
reasonable return. The coal price is to remain within general level of inflation and is 
also to be guided by the market forces coupled with the need for gen erating 
internal resources to enable sustainable growth. The price of coal should also 
ensure that the landed cost of domestic coal at different consuming points remains 
competitive vis-à-vis landed cost of imported coal at the same place.  
1.4 During evid ence the Committee when enquired about the reasons for 
deregulation of the pricing of coal, the CMD, BCCL informed the Committee as 
under:-  
“The pricing of coal was regulated till December, 1999. It was fully regulated 
till January, 1996; thereafter, it w as partially deregulated; and ultimately, it 
was fully deregulated in January, 2000. At that point of time when it was 
deregulated, the Indian coal in terms of prices expressed in rupees per 
million calorie were actually priced out in some of the coastal r egions, 
particularly far off coastal places like Tuticorin, Gujarat or Mumbai. So, when 
the deregulation came, we decided to be very careful because if we do not 
apply restraint and responsive behaviour towards the consumers, we would 
lose market. Actually , 1998-99 was one of those years because the import 
duties prior to 1993 used to be 85 per cent and that had practically come 
down to about 25 to 30 per cent during 1999 -2000 and the international 
prices of coal also had fallen. This is the reason we becam e priced out. At 
that time, we were very cautious, how to increase the prices. Normally, the 
whole approach has been that we did not look at pricing unless there was a 
major cost push factor, which we could not absorb by production increase or 
capacity utilization improvement or productivity improvement. As a result, in 
these 10 years, there have been four major price revisions. The first price 
revision was in February, 2001; the second price revision was in June, 2004; 
and third price revision was in December, 2007; and the fourth price revision 
was in October, 2009. Most of the time, it has been caused because of the 
wage revisions. We are basically employee -oriented company; and for the 
large number of people who work, 50 per cent of the cost is roughly w age 
cost. In fact, in the last 10 years, there have been two major wage revisions. 
The National Coal Wage Agreement 7 and the National Coal Wage Agreement 
8. There has always been an interim relief first and then the final wage 
revision. Basically, this ha s been the major driver for price revisions. But I 
am happy to share with you that over this 10 year period, the average 
compound annual rate of growth, the annualized price revision has been only 
4.9 per cent, which is distinctly less than the inflation during this period. I am 
also happy to say that coal is possibly the only core commodity, which has 
demonstrated this kind of a price behavior. As a result of this and also as a 

21 
 
result of the fact that international coal prices have firmed up quite 
substantially during this period,  despite the fact that import duties are falling 
further, and now, it is actually zero in most of the cases. There is five per 
cent in case of cocking coal. There is all the import duty is. There is hardly 
any import duty. Even th e kind of a protection being taken way, our coal is 
competitively priced at all destinations in the country. In fact, at some places 
we are cheaper by 45 to 60 per cent as compared to imported prices even 
when prices are expressed in rupees per million calorie. So, this has been the 
price behavior generally. Prices have never been considered to be adding to 
inflation. Prices have been less than inflation in all cases.”  
 
1.5 When the Committee asked the Ministry of Coal about their statutory power 
for having control over the Coal companies, the Ministry submitted  the following 
reply: 
"For their operational day to day management, the coal companies are free 
to work on their own as per rules and regulations and their Memorandum of 
Association. As far as certai n policy directions are concerned, there are 
occasions when the Government of India can give them either Presidential 
directives or specific directions or guidelines which is approved by the 
Government of India. Under the guidelines of the DPE, there is a clause 
about acceptance of Presidential Directives which all the Government 
companies have incorporated in their Memorandum of Association and so has 
the CIL done. It is in accordance with that the Government of India can give 
them the Presidential Directi ves. Under the Companies Act, every company 
which has incorporated this is bound to have a Memorandum of Association 
and there are certain guidelines about incorporating certain provisions."  
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
FACTORS AND PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING COAL PRICES  
 
The Ministry of Coal/CIL in a presentation before the Committee have 
submitted the objective of coal pricing as follows:- 
a) In a deregulated regime, the basic objective of CIL is to supply coal at 
a reasonable price covering the fixed and variable cost in cluding 
concurrent and future investments required for sustained operations. 
b) The coal price to remain within general level of inflation and also to be 
guided by the market forces coupled with the need for generating 
internal resources to enable sustainable growth. 
c) To ensure that the landed cost of domestic coal at different consuming 
points remains competitive vis -à-vis landed cost of imported coal at 
the same place. 
d) Integrated Energy Policy(IEP) provides for selling high quality coal at a 
15% discount on the import parity price.  
2.2 The Ministry of Coal have informed the Committee that as under the Colliery 
Control Order, 2000 the Central Government has no power, to fix the prices of coal, 
Coal companies are fixing the price of coal by themselves. The Comm ittee were 
apprised of the followings factors that are taken into consideration while fixing the 
coal price are as under:-   
i) "General increase in price of commodities in the market 
leading to increase in the cost of input in the production of 
coal as reflected in WPI and AICPI. 
ii) Demand and supply scenario 
ii)      Capacity of the company to absorb the increase in cost.   
iii) Landed cost of imported coal. 
iv) Impact of revision in wages of non -executive employees 
and revision in pay of executives as per Govt. gu idelines as 
and when such revision takes place. 
v) Requirement of additional resources mobilization for fresh 
investments in new projects to augment coal production to 
achieve planned production target. 
vi) Need for capital investment in new projects and 
modernization of existing mines to augment coal 
production to bridge the demand supply gap." 
 

23 
 
 
2.3 According to Ministry of Coal, any upward revision in the coal price to bring it 
closer to the market price will have some inflationary pressure on the national 
economy. Therefore, coal pricing has to strike a balance between two conflicting 
interests. In this context, the end users of coal were broadly categorized into two – 
Consumers of coal in the regulated sector (Power Utilities, Fertilizer and Defence) 
and those  in the non -regulated sector (Cement, Sponge iron, Paper, Rubber, 
Engineering industry etc.). Steel sector is also a deregulated sector but prices of 
washed coking coal supplied to integrated steel plant is decided based on 
negotiation between CIL and SAIL on import parity basis. 
 
2.4 The Committee were informed that the issue of striking a balance between 
conflicting interest of the Coal Companies and end users was kept in view while 
revising the notified price with effect from 27.02.2011, in which the con cept of dual 
pricing has been introduced; one for consumers in the regulated sector (i.e. Power 
Utilities (including IPPs), fertilizer and Defence) and another for consumers in the 
non-regulated sector (i.e. sectors other than Power (Utilities (including I PPs), 
fertilizer and defence). Since the price of end products of the coal consuming 
industries in the non -regulated sector are driven by demand and supply scenario, 
prices of coal for supply to the consumers in the non -regulated sector were kept at 
30% higher than the price of coal for supply to the consumer in regulated sector. 
Further prices of Grade A and Grade B of coal were fixed on import parity basis for 
supply to all the coal consuming sectors. Also the prices of coal produced by 
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. (MCL) for grades other than A & B were brought to the 
level of prices of equivalent grades of coal produced by Korba and Raigarh field of 
South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (SECL).  
 
2.5 After introduction of New Coal Distribution Policy (NCDP) during Oc tober, 
2007,  Ministry of Coal issued guidelines for supply of Coal on Cost plus basis. 
Under the cost plus agreement the price of coal to be supplied shall cover cost of 
production and reasonable return on investment and from such sources which 
otherwise would have been non -viable at CIL notified price. The price is fixed at 
85% capacity utilisation at a return not less than 12% Internal Rate of Return(IRR).  

24 
 
 
2.6 During evidence, when enquired about  fixing of prices of coal, the CMD, 
BCCL informed the Committee as under:- 
“The Coal India Board fixes the prices. Every time what happens is that if 
there is a cost push factor, which cannot be taken into account, which cannot 
be absorbed through efficiency improvement, like we entered into National 
Coal Wage Agreement which had a very big impact. The overall impact of 
that has to be seen like what is the impact of the wage revision and how 
much I can absorb through efficiency improvement. Rest I have to pass it on 
to the consumer by way of price increase. The price of coal has been 
increased only because of the wage revision.” 
 
2.7 On being asked about  the basis upon which the Ministry of Coal /Coal PSU’s 
have  fixed up the coal prices last time and the formula for that,  the CMD BCCL 
stated: 
“The overall impact of that has to be seen like what is the impact of the wage 
revision and how much I can absorb through efficiency improvement. Rest I 
have to pass it on to the consumer by way of price increase. If there is any 
major increase, let us say, in the coal pri ces, leading to stores cost or other 
cost, it is actually cost driven. Whatever we cannot absorb, that has been the 
thing. That is why, the average period has been two -and-a-half years. The 
average period of price revision has been two-and-a-half years. We never did 
it annually. We did it as less frequently as possible.” 
 
2.8 On being asked, as to why ‘the requirement of fund for investment in 
upcoming projects and modernization of existing mines for augmentation of 
production…’ is added as a factor in the coal price fixation, the Ministry of Coal  
submitted before the Committee as under- 
“ ..today our most common grade price is Rs.700.  Now, when we have to 
decide investment in a new project, very logically the Government of India 
rules are that unless 12 p er cent return on investment is there, we cannot 
really invest.  So, there can be some extreme cases where the cost of 
production in some of the projects is more than Rs.700.  Therefore, we have 
to keep that also in mind, otherwise the project will not be viable.” 
2.9 To a specific query that after coal blocks  been given to the private parties, 
how the Ministry of Coal/Coal PSUs determin e the coal price, t he Ministry of Coal  
has informed the Committee that for the coal blocks  given for captive use , priva te 
parties are not free to sell that coal in the open market. That  is, for their own 

25 
 
consumption and CIL prices are taken into consideration for the purpose of 
calculation for royalty and other things on that.  
2.10 Regarding measures taken/proposed to be taken to bring down the cost of 
production of coal and lignite so as to moderate the coal prices, the Ministry of Coal 
has informed the Committee as under :- 
“The cost control is primarily done through the budgetary control system. 
Cost analysis is done an d different cost statements showing therein variance 
analysis are prepared on regular basis. These are submitted to different 
forums of CIL and subsidiary companies for taking necessary action by the 
management for cost reduction and cost control. 
About 81% of the total cost of production is fixed in nature and the balance 
19% is variable. Controllable items are mainly the costs incurred on account 
of over time, under loading/over loading, demurrage and power. 
Cost of production of coal increases mainly bec ause of increase in (a) 
Dearness Allowance (linked with AICPI), (b) pay revision of executives and 
Wage Board employees (through Wage Agreement), (c) POL rates and (d) 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI).  Cost also increases for adverse variation in 
ratio of Coal  and Overburden.  Practically CIL has no control over these 
factors for adverse variance. However, CIL is trying to control the cost by 
increasing production and productivity by rationalizing machine utilization 
and deployment of manpower." 
 
2.11 The Ministry of Coal have apprised the Committee that Energy Coordination 
Committee (ECC) decided that the Planning Commission  in consultation with 
Ministry of Coal and Ministry of Power, would prepare a transition  path in order to 
operationalize the coal pricing  mechanism .  A Committee was constituted under 
the chairmanship of Principal Advisor (Energy), Planning Commission to suggest 
the modalities in this regard.  The Expert Committee of the Planning Commission 
on Integrated Energy Policy has made the following observations :- 
“Decontrolling price in a monopolistic situation is adversely affecting the 
interest of consumers. In the absence of a coal market with competing 
supplies, there is a need to develop a transparent mechanism for pricing 
domestic coal. Currently there is no competition in the coal sector and the 
public sector monopoly continues. No regulatory framework is available and 
in such a situation grievance redressal for consumers, particularly, in regard 
to price/quality disputes, is difficult. To raise the commercial performance of 
the industry to meet international standards and to sustain the projected 
growth of energy sector, it is important to address these issues……." 

26 
 
 
2.12 The Integrated Energy Policy Committee has suggested a number of options  
to deal with lacunae in the present policies in the coal sector. The main 
recommendations of the Committee are policies requiring legislative amendments 
so that coal blocks can be offered to potential entrepreneurs through competitive 
bidding, growth of infrastructure for movement of coal to load centers to be aligned 
with the growth of coal industry, dress and prepare coal to reduce cost of transport 
as Indian coal contains lot of ash. and formation of an independent coal regulator to 
regulate upstream allotment and exploitation of available coal, to approve coal price 
revisions, ensure supply of coal to the power sector under long -term Fuel Supply 
and Transport Agreements (FSTAs), facilitate the development of formulae/indices 
for resetting coal prices un der long term FSTAs, monitoring e -auctions, ensure the 
price discovery through e -auctions is free of distortions, regulate trading margins, 
develop a mechanism for adequate quantities of coal imports under long -term 
contracts to bridge the gap between supp ly and demand and finally create the 
environment for a competitive coal market to operate etc. 
 
2.13 The Committee were informed that the primary objective of Coal India 
Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries  is to secure the requirement of coal for the  fast  
growing power and other sectors by taking effective measures to evolve a long 
term production strategy,  which would ensure proper  planning  of mines, 
investments  in opening coal fields ahead of the need  for  additional coal 
production. The extent of u nder pricing of domestic coal, as notified by CIL, could 
be measured from the premium fetched over and above the notified price of coal 
offered under e-auction by different subsidiary companies of CIL. In fact e -auction 
of coal is fetching a substantial pr emium over the notified price and was giving a 
clear indication that market could still absorb a price higher than the notified price.  
 
2.14 Asked about determining coal price in a competitive market, the Ministry of 
Coal has informed the Committee that i t is not possible as long as the number of 
suppliers are limited and as long as for the largest coal consuming sector, i.e. 
power, coal cost is passed through and fully compensated in determining 
electricity tariff.  However, since other users of coal are numerous and consume 

27 
 
substantial quantities of coal, a strategy for competitive price discovery is possible.  
In this regard, the Expert Committee on Integrated Energy Policy had 
recommended as under:- 
(i) High quality coking and non -coking coals which are  exportable may 
be sold at export parity prices as determined by import price at the 
nearest port minus 15%. This practice is currently being adopted 
satisfactory for supply of good quality coking coal to the steel 
industry.   
(ii) 20% of the total coal produced should be sold through e-auctions. For 
e-auctions to be successful, CIL should, directly or otherwise, ensure 
availability of coal and offer it for sale to meet the total demand. 
Quantities to be sold through e -auction from different mines must be 
determined annually with a monthly mine -wise schedule to be 
independently monitored and enforced by a coal regulator. 
(iii)  Remaining coal should be sold under long -term Fuel Supply and 
Transport Agreements (FSTAs). Regulated utilities should be allowed 
upto 100 % of their certified requirements through FSTAs .  Other 
bulk consumers may be allowed partial FSTAs based on coal 
availability. Any shortfalls in requirements not covered by FSTAs 
should be met through e-auction supplies or imports.  
(iv) Pithead price of coal  under FSTAs should be revised annually by a 
coal regulator on a basis that inter -alia take into account prices 
obtained through e -auction, FOB price of imported coal (both 
adjusted for quality) and domestic production cost, inclusive of return 
based on efficiency standards.   
(v)  Replace the practice of grading coal under wide bands of the   
empirically determined UHV by the international practice of grading 
coal based on GCV. This is expected to encourage efficient use of coal 
and promote use of washed coal.  Coal prices should be made 
fully variable based on Gross Calorific Value (GCV) and other quality 
parameters. 
 
2.15 According to the Ministry of Coal, the issue of pricing of coal was also 
discussed in a meeting at the Prime Minister’s Office and after deliberations it was 
decided that  'the matter might be referred to the Tariff Commission to 
recommend the price of coal for the power sector and to suggest modalities for 
pricing of coal for other sector'.   The Tariff Commission took up the study on 
02/08/2005 and submitted its report. A copy of its report was sent to Planning 
Commission.   

28 
 
2.16 The main recommendations of the Tariff Commission, with regard to issue of 
pricing of coal are as under: 
 
(a) "The fair price of a commodity is determined by the ope ration of 
market forces under conditions of perfect or near perfect competition. 
However, under conditions of monopoly or monopolistic competition, 
the market determined prices do not tend to be always fair. Under 
these conditions the operation of market f orces alone is not expected 
to lead to the determination of a fair price of coal for the consumers. 
The market conditions prevailing in the coal sector provide a typical 
case where public intervention in pricing policy can be justified. 
 
(b). The import pa rity provides an alternative basis for fixing the price of 
coal. This, as the Expert Committee on Road Map for Coal Sector 
Reforms (Shanker Committee) has observed, could increase 
dependence on imported coal, as many Indian consumers may prefer 
imported coal. This may aggravate India's energy security concerns. 
 
(c). Power plays an extremely important role in the process of socio -
economic transformation of a country as also towards enriching the 
quality of life of the people. The supply of power at reasonab le and 
affordable prices is, therefore, a desirable objective. As the coal based 
power plants produce about 66 per cent of the total power generated, 
the supply of coal at a reasonable price will have a salutary effect on 
the price of power to keep it at a reasonable level. 
(d) Similarly, fertilizer sector is important from the point of ensuring 
adequate production of food -grains and other crops for ensuring food 
security. Realizing this aspect the Government of India has been 
subsidizing the supply of fert ilizer to the agriculture sector. With a 
view to reduce the cost of production of fertilizer which will also have 
an indirect impact on the subsidy burden, it is desirable that this 
sector is also supplied coal at a reasonable price. 
 
(e) Considering the p osition explained in para three and four above, the 
Commission is of the view that the price of coal for the power and 
fertilizer sectors should be determined cost -plus basis and reviewed 
periodically.  
(f)  As regards the price of coal for other important  sectors of the 
economy, viz. cement and steel, the Commission is of the view that 
these being infrastructure sectors, any increase in prices of end 
products of these sectors is likely to result in inflationary pressures in 
the economy. Hence, it is desirable that prices of cement and steel are 
maintained at reasonable levels.  
 

29 
 
(g) In order to improve the financial and operational management of Coal 
India Limited as a whole it is recommended that the Ministry of Coal 
may examine the feasibility of merger of various subsidiary companies 
of Coal India Limited. 
The Planning Commission have not supported the recommendations of the 
Tariff Commission."   
 
2.17 When asked about the main reasons for non-acceptance of recommendations 
of the Tariff Commission by the Planning Commission and how Government 
proposes to put in place a mechanism for fixation of coal price, the Ministry of Coal 
in a written reply stated as under:- 
 
“(i)     Single price structure for coal recommended by Tariff Commission has 
been arrived by studying cost of production from sampled mines. Effect of 
any  change in share of production from underground mine, stripping ratio 
in opencast mines, degree of mechanization, number of small/medium/ 
large capacity opencast mines, impact of outsourcing an d other 
unforeseen circumstances have not been accommodated in the pricing  
system.   
(ii)     The merger of different subsidiaries companies would have to take many 
other important considerations into account. At the same time no 
compensatory arrangement has been suggested for SCCL. 
(iii)     The uniform delivered price is much higher than the notified price and 
varies widely for different load centers across the country due to 
associated cost of rail freight. The recommended pricing system has not 
taken into account this aspect. 
(iv)    Dependence on imported non -coking coal is likely to increase in future. 
The recommended price structure has not considered the impact of price 
of imported coal on regulated utilities or competing utilities consuming 
domestic and imported coal. 
v)      The recommended price structure has little or no incentive for 
economizing cost of production. Operational inefficiencies can be easily 
camouflaged by the management of those coal mines which incur higher 
cost of production due  to geo-technical reasons and profit margin in low -
cost mines would get eroded due to complacency. 
vi)      The recommendations of the Tariff Commission are consumer -centric and 
are likely to reduce generation internal resource of the company. In 
addition to commissioning of new projects and augmentation of existing 
production capacities of its mines, Coal India Ltd. has initiated action for 
acquiring coal properties abroad. This would put pressure on the 
resources. Interest of the producers needs to be acc ommodated in the 
pricing system. 
vii)  The recommended pricing system based on cost plus approach is not in 
line with the Planning Commission’s approach of market driven pricing 

30 
 
system where it is advocated that only a competitive free market can do 
an efficient job of price determination. 
iii)     The Planning Commission has presented a strategy for competitive price 
discovery before the Energy Coordination Committee and the same has 
been recommended by the Committee for implementation.” 
 
E-auction of Coal 
2.18 During evidence, the Committee raised serious concerns over the issues of e-
auction of coal despite coal shortage in the country for domestic industries and 
manipulation of e -auction system by big traders and influential parties thus 
depriving genuin e end -users from participating  in it. The queries were also 
addressed as regards rampant coal theft, coal linkages and diversion of coal from 
end-users, all these affecting in some way or other the coal pricing issue directly or 
indirectly. In reply, the Ministry  of Coal submitted as under:- 
“..  there is a demand, but, unfortunately, we are not able to meet even the 
demand for the existing linkage holders itself. Though, we should be giving 
more linkage if coal is available, but our current level of grow th of coal is not 
permitting us to give any more additional linkage to anybody. This is our 
limitation.  It is a fact that we do sometimes get complaints of misuse of coal 
by the end-users. But kindly appreciate that we have a limitation because the 
coal users are all over the country whereas we are located only in the coal 
producing areas. Sometimes, it is also difficult for us to go and monitor on a 
continuous basis. Whenever there are complaints, we take action. We 
appreciate your point. Basically, there  are two irregularities, which we have 
to keep vigilance on. One is the theft of coal, and the second is coal being 
diverted from end-users.... 
As far as theft of coal is concerned, it is basically the responsibility of the 
State enforcement authorities be cause once the coal leaves the mine area, 
then the coalfield managers do not have control over that coal, and within 
the coalfield area we are setting up a very integrated GPRS / RFID CCTV 
mechanism. We are going to start it in Central Coalfields very shor tly. By 
December, we intend to operationalize it, and in other coalfields also it is 
progressing in different stages.   We take note of it, and this is a priority area 
both for the Coal India as well as for the Ministry and we are working on it. 
....As far as end-user is concerned, basically, the problem is with the small -
scale sector. In the major users, we are able to keep some mechanism. 
Therefore, we are in touch with the State authorities because the State 
authorities are the nodal distribution agencie s. So, this joint responsibility 
has been given to the coalfield managers as well as the State enforcement 
authorities to ensure that there is end -use verification, and whenever 
irregularity is found, action, as per law, is being taken.” 

31 
 
CHAPTER-III 
REVISION OF COAL PRICES 
During the period of de -regulation since 01.01.2000,  General Revision in Coal 
Price had taken place on 7 occasions: 
Dates  % increase WPI movement w.r.t. pervious revision 
 
 01-02-2001   (8.5%)   13.68% 
 16.06.2004    (16.2%)            12.67% 
 12.12.2007            (10.0%)            22.32% 
 16.10.2009            (11.0%)           12.25% 
 27.02.2011           (12.0%)           13.01% 
 01.01.2012               switch over from UHV to GCV system 
28.05.2013                price revision GCV based 
 
3.2 From the above it is observed that an annualized rise of coal price is 4.64% 
as against the average inflation rate of 5.89% during this period from 01.01.2000 
to 01.01.2012. As regards the periodicity of increase in coal price, the Com mittee 
have been informed by Ministry of Coal/CIL that there is no fixed periodicity and the 
coal price is increased when such increase is an absolute necessity to offset the 
impact of increase in input cost.  
Highlights of Price Revision w.e.f. 27.02.2011 
3.3 The salient features of pri ce revision applicable w.e.f. 27 .02.2011 as 
furnished by Ministry of Coal in a written reply to the Committee are as under: 
a) "Concept of dual pricing introduced: - One for consumers in the regulated 
sector [i.e. power utilitie s (including IPP), fertilizer and defence] and 
another for consumers in the non-regulated sector [i.e. sectors other than 
power utilities (including IPP), fertilizer and defence]. 
b) 30% increase in coal price across all the grades of coal other than Grade 
A&B in respect of all the subsidiary companies of CIL applicable for supply 
to the consumers in the deregulated sector i.e. other than power utilities 
(including IPPs), fertilizers and defence. 
c) No increase in price of coal for power utilities (including IPPs ), fertilizers 
and defence except for Grade A&B.  

32 
 
d) Notified prices of Grade A& B coal produced by all the coal companies of 
CIL including NEC fixed in line with the recommendation of the Integrated 
Energy Policy of Government of India which provides: 
 "High quality coking and non -coking coal which is exportable should be 
sold at export parity prices as determined by import price at the nearest 
port minus 15%." 
e) Prices for Grade A&B coal for non -long flame fixed at 10% discount on 
prices of Grade A&B for other  than non-long flame applicable to both the 
sectors. 
f) The prices of coal produced by MCL for grades other than A&B reset at the 
level of prices of equivalent grades of coal produced by Korba and Raigarh 
field of SECL."  
3.4 The prices of coal for supply to the consumers in the non -regulated sector 
were kept 30% higher than the price of coal for supply to the consumer in regulate 
sector. When asked as if it is not discriminatory against the non-regulated sector to 
keep the price of coal 30% higher for this se ctor, the Ministry of Coal submitted 
before the Committee as under:- 
"While  the end prices   in case of   Power  and Fertilizer sectors   fall  within 
the purview   of  the  respective regulators,   the prices of   the end 
products  in other sectors are determined by  the market forces.   It is in this 
context that the e -auction prices  and the international prices of 
coal become relevant.    The average e -auction prices of coal  in the 
year   2012-13 have been about 50% higher than the notified prices  and the 
international prices  have been  even higher.    In such a scenario, prices 
charged for    the non -regulated sectors  cannot be     compared with 
the notified prices   of coal being charged from the regulated sector.” 
 
3.5 During the conversion from UHV to GCV w.e. f. 01.01.2012 the new prices 
were determined on the basis of weighted average price of erstwhile UHV grade 
applicable across the subsidiaries keeping the overall revenue of CIL revenue 
neutral to the extent possible and the difference between the prices ap plicable for 
regulated and non-regulated sectors were increased to 35%.   
 
3.5 CIL accordingly notified the prices of non -coking coal based on GCV vide its 
price notification dated 31.12.2011 applicable w.e.f. 01.01.2012.  7 grades of non -
coking coal under  UHV classified into 17 grades under GCV.  The top end of the 
GCV range taken at 7000 kCal/Kg and the bottom end at 2200 kCal/Kg.  The GCV 

33 
 
band width for the purpose of pricing considered to be 300 kCal/Kg meaning that 
the price will remain same within a particular bandwidth.  
 
Highlights of Recent Price Revision w.e.f. 28.05.2013.  
3.6 The salient features of the GCV based recent price revision applicable w.e.f. 
28.05.2013 as furnished by Ministry of Coal in a written reply to the Committee are 
as under:- 
i.  "The prices of the higher grades of non -coking coal i.e. GCV band G1, 
G2 and G5 are kept same for all the Subsidiary Companies including NEC as 
it is applicable under the price notification dated 31.01.2012 applicable 
w.e.f. 01.01.2012. 
 
ii. The prices of the  non-coking coal i.e. GCV band G3 and G4 have been 
decreased by 12%. 
 
iii.  The prices of the non -coking coal i.e. GCV band G6 to G17 have been 
increased by 10%. 
 
iv.  For WCL an 10% add -on over and above the prices applicable for both 
regulated and non-regulated sector for GCV bands of G6 to G17. 
 
v. The prices applicable for consumers in the non -regulated sector for G6 to 
G17 grades of non -coking coals are increased by 35% over and above the 
price applicable for regulated sector as in vogue. 
 
vi. An additional price of R s. 300.00 extra per tonne over and above the 
notified price in respect of the coal produced from Rajmahal mine of 
Eastern coalfields Limited. 
 
vii. The price of NLW coal of BCCL applicable for consumers in the regulated 
sector is increased by 10%. For non -regulated sector the price has been 
increased by 30% over the price applicable for regulated sector as in 
vogue. 
 
viii. The rebate of 5% for supply to NLW coal to power houses other than CPPs 
as applicable at present to be continued. 
 
ix. For G6 to G17 grades of WCL – 10% add-on over and above the prices 
applicable for both regulated and non-regulated sector."  
 
Special dispensation to WCL and ECL 
 
3.7 The Ministry of Coal provided the following information:- 

34 
 
 
a) An additional price of Rs. 300.00 extra per tonne over and abo ve the 
notified price in respect of the coal produced from Rajmahal mine of 
Eastern Coalfields Ltd. as the prices of higher grades of non -coking coal 
are being reduced and the lower grades which are very low priced as 
compared to the international market. 
 During migration from UHV to GCV based grading and pricing 
system for non -coking coal w.e.f. 01.01.2012, the price of 
Rajmahal coal was slotted at a lower price range to about 26% less 
than the then prevailing price on UHV based system.  Such 
downward pric ing had an adverse impact on the operational 
bottom-line of the project. 
 
b) 10% add-on over and above the prices applicable for both regulated and 
non-regulated sector for GCV bands of G6 to G17 Grades of WCL. 
 
 All other charges as are being presently levied  over and above the 
Notified Basic Price shall remain continue to be levied.  
 
Impact of Price Revision on Consuming Sectors 
 
3.8 The Ministry of Coal provided the following information:- 
Impact in relation to imported coal price 
 At proposed price the discount of higher grades of non-coking coal i.e. 
GCV 6500, on imported coal price will be to the extent of 14% for 
Raniganj field and 21% in case of other subsidiaries. 
Overall impact on Revenue 
 The overall average increase for CIL in the coal price of non -coking 
coal including Rajmahal coal and BCCL NLW coal based on the above 
proposal shall be around 4.77%.  
 
Sector-wise Impact 
 
3.9 The Ministry of Coal has informed the Committee as follows:- 
i) Power Sector: 
Impact of revision in coal price for non -coking coal (for regulated sector) 
on power sector shall have an impact on power generation to the extent 
of around 4 paisa per unit of KWH. 
ii) Cement Sector: 
Impact works out to around Rs. 53 per tonne or less than around Rs. 0.45 
per bag for 50 kg. 
 
 

35 
 
iii) WPI: 
The weightage for coal in WPI is 2.09419 (base: 2004 -05 series). 4.77 
increase in coal prices of CIL shall have direct impact on inflation to the 
extent of 0.08% only.  
3.10 On being asked about the existence of any national policy to sell coal at same 
rate by different subsidiaries of CIL,  the Ministry of Coal/CIL  during evidence  
submitted as under- 
“…before 01.01.2011 there was different price for different companies. After 
that the prices have been made common to all. Additional price was done for 
WCL and Rajmahal.  The price of the given grade of coal is same for all 
companies except two -Rajmahal and WCL.  Earlier in UHV system, it was 
different for different subsidiaries. Now, we have all maintained this…” 
 
3.11 There have been complaints from the industry after ch anging the pricing and 
grading system specifically with regard to the quality of coal  that the ash content 
of the coal procured is so high that  more coal has to be used to produce the same 
amount of energy thereby impacting the output.   The Committee, during evidence, 
asked  the Ministry of Coal  about the reasons for  changing pricing and grading 
system of coal from UHV to GCV system  and increasing the price of one grade of 
coal while decreasing that of other. The Ministry, in response, submitted as under- 
“…Our situation is different. Internationally, by and large, there is only one 
grade of coal. What they sell in the international market has 6,000 kilo 
calories energy capacity whereas in India we have a range from as low as 
2,000 kilo calories. So, o ur coal is not comparable to the international coal. 
For our lowest grade coal, 2,200 kilo calories, our notified price today, after 
the increase of ten per cent, is Rs. 400 per tonne. All taxes including at the 
pit head lever, it would come to Rs. 650. Bu t this coal in energy terms is 
around one-third of the international quality. Therefore, even if you equate in 
the energy sense, our lower grade coal is roughly 60 per cent cheaper than 
the international price. In the case of high grade coal earlier we peg ged it to 
the international prices. When the international prices have come down, the 
price of our high grade coal had to be reduced. Otherwise, there were no 
takers. So, we reduced the price of the high grade coal accordingly by 12 per 
cent. Since there was a loss of certain amount of money the Board’s decision 
was it should maintain neutrality as far as possible. So, Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 
6000 crore loss was there due to reduction in the price of high grade coal 
and we have increased the price of the lower gra de coal. Even at the current 
level of increased price, it is still around 15 per cent cheaper than the 
international prices. So, our coal is spread over 17 grades. But internationally 
you have just one or two grades, which are very high grade coal.”  

36 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
COAL PRICING FROM UHV TO GCV GRADING SYSTEM 
In the early stages of post-independence industrialization i.e. in sixties and in 
early seventies, most of the coal burning equipments used in the Country were of 
imported origin, designed for use of low ash coal.  Use of high ash indigenous coal 
in such equipments resulted in loss of heat and loss of un -burnt coal with ash etc. 
Due to easy availability of low ash coal and low price of oil, consumers were not 
inclined to use high ash coal. However, fast de pletion of low ash coal necessitated 
the Government to promote use of high ash coal as a long -term strategy to ensure 
energy security of the Country, for which suitable price compensation mechanism 
was required to be developed. The  Committee were informed that the concept of 
‘Useful Heat Value’ (UHV), unique in India was accordingly conceived by Central 
Fuel Research Institute (CFRI - presently known as CIMFR). On the basis of various 
UHV ranges, non-coking coal was graded.  
 
4.2 Over the years there has be en considerable improvement in the coal 
combustion technologies. Chain -grate/stocker boilers are now mostly replaced by 
pulverized coal injection system in fluidized Bed Boiler, extending the scope for use 
of high ash and low GCV coal. Whereas, as per the empirical formula for UHV, a 
coal containing 55% ash plus moisture is to be considered as ungraded and coal 
containing ash plus moisture percentage of 65% and above would be of negative 
heat value, now technology is available for gainful use of such coal. Currently, there 
are number of proposals in the pipeline to install power generating units, using solid 
fuels including washery rejects of ash content of more than 66%.  
4.3 As regards the UHV based grading and pricing, the Committee were informed 
that the price for same grades of coal in different subsidiaries of CIL and even 
within the same subsidiary used to be different whereas under GCV based system 
uniform price has been kept across all the subsidiary coal companies except WCL 
and the prices are fixed in such a way so that there is minimum over -all impact on 
the revenue generated from sale of coal for CIL as a whole as compared to UHV 
system. 

37 
 
4.4 In the early nineties, Bureau of Industrial Costs & Pricing (BICP) invited 
several organizations and expert s to consider the normative grading of coal. In 
their presentation and conclusion, BICP stressed that the Gross Calorific Value 
(GCV) be obtained as the parameter for coal grading. Internationally , all coals are 
classified and marketed on the basis of GCV.  In reality the GCV of coal is the 
composite variable of the coal rank and coaly matter and has its inherent value of 
its own, which can be experimentally determined. Analytically, GCV is computed 
from the heat value released by coaly matter present in coa l and therefore, can be 
ascertained for all varieties of coal, irrespective of high ash and high moisture or 
low ash and low moisture. On the contrary, UHV is computed by applying penalties 
on Ash & Moisture on to the Heat Value of the coaly matter and can not be 
determined analytically. Even, Power Utilities analyzed the coal for its GCV to 
evaluate the performance of the Boiler. Conversion to GCV system would provide a 
uniform platform to ascertain the coal quality and boiler efficiency at power stations 
and therefore, would improve the accountability parameters. It is noteworthy to 
mention that in general Indian coal contains moisture of about 7 % at the higher 
side, which as per international standard is not considered as high moisture coal.   
4.5 The Committee were informed that the Ministry of Coal, vide letter ref. no. 
22021/1/2008-CRC-II dated 18th Oct. 2011, intimated the decision of the Govt. of 
India to coal companies to switch over from the existing Useful Heat Value (UHV) 
based  grading and pricing  system to Gross Calorific Value (GCV) based 
classifications of non-coking coal. It was therefore imperative that CIL changed over 
to the GCV based coal pricing in place of the earlier followed UHV based coal pricing 
for different grades of non -coking coal. Such change -over in the pricing structure 
had to take effect concurrently with the Gazette notification issued by the Govt. of 
India for switching over from the existing UHV based grading and pricing system to 
GCV based classifications of non -coking coal  to be effective on and from 01 st 
January 2012. 
4.6 CIL accordingly notified the prices of Non -coking coal based on GCV w.e.f. 
01.01.2012. While notifying the prices, the top end of the GCV range has been 
taken at 7000 kCal/Kg and the bottom end at 2200 kC al/kg. The GCV band width 

38 
 
for the purpose of pricing has been considered to be 300 Kcal/Kg, meaning that the 
price will remain same within a particular bandwidth.  
4.7 Based on the study carried out by CFRI (presently named as CIMFR) in the 
year 2003 for finding a correlation between UHV and GCV, it is seen that 2200 GCV 
corresponds to around 100 UHV. With the improvement in the coal burning 
technology nowadays, low UHV coals are gainfully utilized for generating 
heat/steam and demand for such coal is build ing up. The idea behind reducing the 
band width to 300 Kcal/Kg is to incentivize the improvement in supply quality, 
resulting in better quality of coal to the consumer and commensurate realization for 
the coal company. 
4.8 Pursuant to the Government of Ind ia Gazette notification dated 30.12.2011 
for switch over from the existing Useful Heat Value based on grading and pricing of 
non-coking coal to fully variable Gross Calorific Value based system w.e.f. 
01.01.2012, CIL revised the price of non -coking coal on 31.01.2012 to be effective 
retrospectively from 01.01.2012 and made applicable uniformly across all the 
subsidiary companies of CIL including NEC except, Western Coalfields Ltd. (WCL) 
for which an add-on of 10% has been kept over and above the price menti oned for 
GCV bands not exceeding 5800 Kcal/Kg and below.  
4.9 While working out the GCV based coal prices, unload port price of imported 
coal from Indonesia has been considered as the benchmark price and the basic 
pithead ROM coal price has been derived ac cordingly, after providing discount 
ranging from 25% to 77%  for consumers in the Power utilities (including IPPs), 
Fertilizer and Defence sector and from 25% to 62%  for consumers in other 
sectors (i.e., sectors other than Power utilities (including IPPs), Fertilizer and 
Defence. 
 
4.10 The ROM (Run of Mine) pithead price for various GCV bandwidths (each of 
300 GCV) are made applicable uniformly across all the subsidiary companies of CIL 
including NEC except, ECL for which an add -on of 6% has been kept over a nd 
above the price applicable for other subsidiary companies of CIL including NEC. 

39 
 
 The prices of non coking coal based on GCV applicable w.e.f.01.01.2012 is 
given as under:- 
GCV Bands 
(Kcal/Kg) 
Pithead Run of mine price for Non -Coking 
coal 
Power Utilities 
(including IPPs), 
Fertilizer & Defence 
sector (Rs./Te) 
Sectors other than 
Power Utilities 
(including IPPs), 
Fertilizer & Defence 
(Rs./Te) 
   
Exceeding 7000  * * 
Exceeding 6700 and not 
exceeding 7000 4870 4870 
Exceeding 6400 and not 
exceeding 6700 4420 4420 
Exceeding 6100 and not 
exceeding 6400 3970 3970 
Exceeding 5800 and not 
exceeding 6100 2800 2800 
Exceeding 5500 and not 
exceeding 5800 1450 1960 
Exceeding 5200 and not 
exceeding 5500 1270 1720 
Exceeding 4900 and not 
exceeding 5200 1140 1540 
Exceeding 4600 and not 
exceeding 4900 880 1180 
Exceeding 4300 and not 
exceeding 4600 780 1050 
Exceeding 4000 and not 
exceeding 4300 640 870 
Exceeding 3700 and not 
exceeding 4000 600 810 
Exceeding 3400 and not 
exceeding 3700 550 740 
Exceeding 3100 and no t 
exceeding 3400 500 680 
Exceeding 2800 and not 
exceeding 3100 460 620 
Exceeding 2500 and not 
exceeding 2800 410 550 
Exceeding 2200 and not 
exceeding 2500 360 490 
*For GCV exceeding 7000 Kcal/Kg, the price shall be increase by Rs. 150/ - 
per tonne over and above the price applicable for GCV band exceeding 6700 

40 
 
but not exceeding 7000 Kcal/kg, for increase in GCV by every 100 Kcal/kg or 
part thereof. 
For WCL, there shall be a 10% add on over and above the price mentioned 
above for GCV bands not exceeding 5800 Kcal/kg and below.  
Pit head ROM price of non coking coal applicable for all coal 
producing subsidiary companies applicable w.e.f. 28.05.2013 is given 
as under:- 
GCV Bands 
(Kcal/Kg) 
Pithead Run of mine price for Non -Coking 
coal 
Power Utilities 
(including IPPs), 
Fertilizer & Defence 
sector (Rs./Te) 
Sectors other than 
Power Utilities 
(including IPPs), 
Fertilizer & Defence 
(Rs./Te) 
   
Exceeding 7000  * * 
Exceeding 6700 and not 
exceeding 7000 4870 4870 
Exceeding 6400 and not 
exceeding 6700 3890 3890 
Exceeding 6100 and not 
exceeding 6400 3490 3490 
Exceeding 5800 and not 
exceeding 6100 2800 2800 
Exceeding 5500 and not 
exceeding 5800 1600 2150 
Exceeding 5200 and not 
exceeding 5500 1400 1890 
Exceeding 4900 and not 
exceeding 5200 1250 1690 
Exceeding 4 600 and not 
exceeding 4900 970 1310 
Exceeding 4300 and not 
exceeding 4600 860 1160 
Exceeding 4000 and not 
exceeding 4300 700 950 
Exceeding 3700 and not 
exceeding 4000 660 890 
Exceeding 3400 and not 
exceeding 3700 610 820 
Exceeding 3100 and not 
exceeding 3400 550 740 
Exceeding 2800 and not 
exceeding 3100 510 680 

41 
 
Exceeding 2500 and not 
exceeding 2800 450 610 
Exceeding 2200 and not 
exceeding 2500 400 540 
Ministry of Coal # for WCL, an add on price of 10% for G6 to G17 Grades.  
4.11 When asked about details and significant features of GCV based system,  the 
Ministry of Coal furnished the following information to the Committee:- 
 i) "In order to ensure switch -over to GCV based pricing results in price 
rationalization for non-coking coal across all the coa l companies of CIL, an 
exercise was carried out to fix the coal price along the GCV scale in such a 
way so that there is minimum over -all impact on the revenue generated 
from sale of coal for each of the coal companies and for CIL as a whole. 
ii)    In the GCV based classification the entire range of coal grades produced by 
CIL are classified into 17 number of bands of 300 Kcal/kg between the 
minimum of 2200 Kcal /Kg to 7000 Kcal/kg and beyond. Earlier, in the UHV 
based grading and pricing, the price for same g rades of coal in different 
subsidiaries of CIL and even within the same subsidiary used to be different 
due to various considerations like market demand of coal from particular 
sources, some inherent special characteristics of coal like long -flame and 
non-long-flame etc. In the GCV based pricing the challenge was to 
determine a uniform price for all such types of coal and yet endeavo uring 
for overall revenue neutrality Subsidiaries as far as practicable. 
iii)   In the above GCV based pricing exercise, the prices  of different grades of 
non-coking coal imported from Indonesia, were considered as reference for 
the import parity price of the equivalent domestic non coking coal at the pit 
head and after appropriate discounting, the prices for each of the 
seventeen bands were determined. 
iv)   The most important feature of the exercise was to offer overall revenue 
neutral price structure as far as possible, keeping in mind that major part 
of the lower grades of coal are being consumed by power sector. Therefore, 
the discounting pattern in respect to benchmark Indonesian price was more 
on lower grades in comparison to the higher grades of coal. The coal prices 
so arrived were notified by CIL vide price notification dated 31.12.2012 to 
be applicable w.e.f 01.01.2012. 
v)   After introduction of the above mentioned new set of prices on GCV basis, 
resentments were expressed at various fora. Major coal consuming 
segments represented to the Government alleging sharp increase in price 
for certain GCV bands.  
vi)   On perusal of the data sent by the subsidiary coal companies, prima facie, it 
was observed that the initial estimate of revenue by CIL was less due to the 
reason that the GCV bands notified by the Coal Companies were in higher 
bands in comparison to the projections made by CIL on t he basis of the 
conversion formulae of CIMFR. 
vii)   Secretary (Coal), MOC vide his letter No:38011/1/2012 -CA-11 dated 
25.1.12 addressed to Chairman, CIL informed that many complaints were 

42 
 
received from MPs, Secretaries of user ministries and various consumers’  
associations pertaining to the unreasonable price increase by CIL 
consequent to the migration from UHV based grading to GCV based coal 
grading. In the light of the meetings held with MOC and also in the 
Standing Committee of Coal and Steel on 20.01.12 CIL  was advised to 
review/revise the above referred price notification latest by 31st January 
2012. 
viii)   In view of such observations, the GCV based pricing were reworked 
endeavouring for overall revenue neutrality for CIL as a whole only instead 
of overall neutrality of each of the subsidiaries as followed earlier as far as 
practicable.  This time the pricing was done on the basis of weighted 
average price of each erstwhile grade of coal under UHV system. The earlier 
Price notification dated 31.12.2011 was cancelled and the new set of prices 
based on the revised method became applicable vide price notification 
dated 31.01.2012 applicable retrospectively w.e.f. 01.01.2012. 
ix)   On review of GCV based pricing of coal after 3 months, it was seen that 
though CIL succeeded to a great extent in its endeavour for overall revenue 
neutrality for CIL as a whole, WCL was incurring loss beyond the acceptable 
level. As such the price for WCL was revised on 20.06.2012 to make the 
WCL revenue neutral. In such price revision for WCL  the price was 
increased by around 20% over and above the price applicable for other 
subsidiaries for GCV bands not exceeding 5800 Kcal/Kg and below." 
 
4.12 On being asked as to what extent revenue neutrality has been maintained for 
Coal India Limited (CIL ) as a whole, under the new  system(GCV), the Ministry  of 
Coal in a written reply informed the Committee as under: 
"The price revision applicable w.e.f. 01.01.2012 was primarily for conversion 
from UHV to GCV based system of grading and pricing of coal. T herefore, 
under the new system it was kept revenue neutral to the extent possible for 
CIL as a whole. Further, under the UHV syst em of grading and pricing, the 
prices for a particular grade were different  for different subsidiary coal 
companies of CIL and under the GCV regime w.e.f. 01.01.2012 a uniform 
price were kept for a particular GCV band across all the subsidiary coal 
companies of CIL. It was seen that about 4% overall revenue impact was 
there for this change of pricing system." 
4.13 The Committee was keenly interested to know whether the switch over to the 
GCV based system has any cost related impact on the consumers including the 
common man and when a specific query was addressed to Ministry of Coal in this 
regard, the Ministry of Coal replied as under:- 
"Since the price revision applicable w.e.f. 01.01.2012 was for conversion of 
price from UHV based system to GCV based system, it had been kept 
revenue neutral to the extent possible for CIL as a whole and thus it hardly 
has any remarkable impact on the consumers including the common man”. 

43 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
NEW COAL PRICING POLICY – SUPPLY OF IMPORTED COAL  
ON COST PLUS BASIS 
  
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has recently approved 
the following mechanism for supply of coal to power producers: 
  
“Coal India Limited (CIL) to sign Fuel Supply Agreements (FSA) for a total 
capacity of 78000 MW including cases of tapering linage, which are likely to 
be commissioned by 31.3.2015.  To meet its balance FSA obligations, CIL 
may import coal and supply th e same to the willing Thermal  Power Plants 
(TPPS) on cost plus basis.  TPPS may also import coal themselves.  Ministry 
of Coal to issue suitable instructions.  Higher cost of imported coal to be 
considered for pass through as per modalities suggested by C ERC.  Ministry 
of Coal to issue suitable orders supplementing the New Coal Distribution 
Policy.” 
 
5.2 When asked as if the decision of CCEA was in favour of Power Companies 
securing the interest of enhancing power production in the country but meting out 
injustice and burden upon the end -users/ consumers, the Ministry of Coal in a 
written reply informed the Committee as under:-  
 
"The decision of CCEA for proposed import of coal and supplying the same to 
the identified power plants on the cost plus basis wa s made for bridging the 
gap between requirement and availability of coal, for meeting the FSA 
commitments of CIL and not improve the overall power generation capacity 
to meet the power deficit in the country.  Since the imported component of 
coal is very s mall therefore it would not impact largely on the cost of power 
generation, which is to be borne by the consumers." 
 
5.3 On being enquired about the other alternatives/ options which were 
considered on coal price pooling mechanism before final decision of CCEA in this 
regard, the Ministry of Coal informed the Committee as under:- 
"The following alternative/options were considered on coal price pooling 
mechanism before final decision of CCEA:- 
(i)      Pooling for pre 2009 and post 2009 plants 

44 
 
(ii)     Pooling only for post 2009 plants 
(iii)    Pooling for all plants excluding pre 2009 State plants but including pre 
2009 NTPC and DVC plants and IPPs. 
(iv)    Supply of imported coal on cost plus basis will be allowed as a pass 
 through in respect of post 2009 plants." 
 5.4 When asked if the Government has approved the mechanism to allow power  
companies pass on the burden of expensive imported coal to electricity consumers, 
thus paving way for higher electricity tariffs in near future and whether the decision 
of CCEA has ignored the interests of the consumers , Ministry of Coal apprised the 
Committee as under:- 
"Import of coal to bridge the gap between requirement and availability in 
inevitable.  In order to maximize availability of coal for power sector, 
dispatch plan for sectors other than power is kept static at the level of 2012 -
13 for the entire XII Plan period.  Further diversion would in turn have 
cascading effect on the power demand as well as economic growth of the 
Country.  Unlike the pooling price mechan ism, where the state DISCOMs 
have n o option but to incur burden of higher price of coal across the board, 
the present decision of CCEA would enable individual State/DISCOMs to take 
the decision in respect of use of imported coal in light of the demand of 
power in their region/area of operations and therefore, it should have better 
acceptability." 
 
5.5 The Committee had some apprehensions regarding the CCEA move, being  
reflective of powerful pressure lobby of big private power companies who were the 
main beneficiaries of the decision.  When a specific query was put in this context, 
the following reply was submitted by the Ministry of Coal:- 
"The decision of CCEA for proposed import of coal and supplying the same to 
the identified power plants on the cost pl us basis include both State PSUs 
and Private power companies in an equal proportion. The supply of imported 
coal on cost plus basis will be allowed as a pass through and  therefore it 
would not result any benefits to the power companies at all, however  it  
would  improve the overall power generation capacity to meet the power 
deficit in the country." 
5.6 Under the proposed pass -through mechanism, the entire additional cost of 
import would be passed on the consumers as against the averaging of prices of 
imported and domestic coal under the earlier planned price -pooling mechanism.  
The government had buried a proposal to pool prices of imported and domestic coal 
to make the fuel affordable to new power plants, owing to sharp opposition to the 

45 
 
scheme.  The gove rnment is mulling import of the fuel as coal India Limited (CIL) 
will supply 65 percent of the requirement from domestic sources and another 15 
percent can be provided from overseas market. The Ministry of Coal, when asked 
about the reasons behind rejection/ non-consideration of the proposal for averaging 
of prices of imported and domestic coal which were planned earlier under price pool 
mechanism, informed the Committee in a written reply as follows:- 
"The main reasons behind rejection/non -consideration of  the proposal  for 
averaging  the price of imported and domestic  coal which were  planned 
earlier under price pool mechanism, are as under:- 
i) Reservations were being expressed by some State Governments 
primarily on the ground that their existing State U tilities would be over 
burdened with high fuel cost to benefit private players which have come 
up post 31.3.2009. In the meeting taken by CEA in November, 2012 
only 5 power utilities agreed to price pooling whereas 10 were opposed 
to it.  Even Central PSUs  like DVC and NTPC had expressed their 
reservations. 
ii) More than 90% of the power plants commissioned prior to 31.3.2009 
belong to the public sector and the total coal supply to these plants was 
98%.  In respect of power plants commissioned after 31.3. 2 009, the 
share of public and private sector is almost equal.  Reservations have 
been expressed with regard to the apprehensions or possibilities of 
undue benefit being passed on to the private sector through the price 
pooling mechanism. 
iii) There could be  logistic constraints while acting upon the pooling 
mechanism. 
iv) Due to technological constraints in blending in coal of old State utilities, 
it might not be possible to further substitute domestic coal with 
imported coal for them. 
v) Some old State Util ities might not be able to bear the burden of price 
increase because of pooling owing to their poor financial health.  There 
was already huge outstanding dues payable by State Utilities to the coal 
companies." 

46 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
COAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
   
  The Ministry of Coal has apprised the Committee that all earlier 
Commissions/Committees, namely, the Committee on Integrated Energy Policy, 
the Working Group of Coal for 11 th Plan, the Sankar Committee on coal sector and 
the Tariff Commission had recommended  creation of an independent Coal 
Regulatory Authority, which would have powers to comprehensively handle coal 
resource development, regulation on extraction, end use etc. including pricing and 
mining safety issues, within the policies formulated by the Government.  
6.2 According to Ministry of Coal, t he Union Cabinet in June, 2013 gave its 
approval to the proposal for setting up of an independent regulatory authority for 
the coal sector and also approved the introduction of the Coal Regulatory Authority 
Bill, 2013 in Parliament  aiming to help in the regulation and conservation of coal 
resources and to  benefit all stakeholders; that is coal companies, coal consuming 
industries such as power, steel, cement and coal bearing States and people, 
directly or indir ectly associated with the coal industry. The Cabinet  has also 
approved that pending enactment of the legislation, the regulator will be set up 
through an executive order. 
6.3 The Authority shall specify methods of testing for declaration of grades or 
quality of coal, monitor and enforce closure of mines, specify principles and 
methodologies for price determination of raw coal and washed coal and any other 
by-produce generated during the process of coal washing, adjudicate upon 
disputes between parties and discharge other functions as the Central Government 
may entrust to it. 
6.4 A fund called ‘The Coal Regulatory Authority Fund ' would be created and all 
grants, fee and charges received by the Authority shall be credited to this fund. 
After passing of the Bil l, details would be worked out and submitted to the 
Government for appropriate financial sanction for the initial start-up funding. 

47 
 
PART-B 
COAL ROYALTY 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
LEGAL PROVISIONS  AND METHODOLOGY FOR FIXING ROYALTY RATES  
 
Royalty is an amount payable by a lessee to the lessor for removing or 
consuming a mineral Section 9 (1) of the Mines and Minerals (Development & 
Regulation) Act requires the holder of a mining lease or his agent, manager, 
employee, contractor or sub -lessee to pay royalty in respect o f any mineral 
removed or consumed from the leased area at the rate specified in the Second 
Schedule of the Action Section 9(3) of the MMDR Act, which empowers the Central 
Government to enhance or reduce the royalty rates in respect of any mineral by 
notification in the notification.  This revision is done by amending the particular 
entry of the royalty rate for the respective mineral in the Second Schedule of the 
Act.  The proviso to Section 9(3) of the Act prevents the Central Government from 
enhancing the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral more than once during any 
period of three years.  However, the Act does not mandate that royalty on coal 
should be revised after every three years.  
 
7.2 For fixing the rate of royalty on coal/lignite, The Ministry of Coal constitutes a 
study group headed by the Additional Secretary for fixing the rate of royalty on 
coal. The Study Group takes the views of all the stakeholders like the coal 
producing and consuming states and the major consumer sectors such as power , 
iron and steel, cement etc. After taking the views of all the stakeholders and other 
relevant factors, the study group makes its recommendation to the Ministry. After 
considering the recommendations, the Ministry moves a proposal for Government 
decision. The consequent decision is then notified and the new rates of royalty 
come effect from the date of such notification. 

48 
 
7.3 When enquired about the what is the logic of each component in the formula   
adopted for fixation of royalty rates of coal and lignite w.e.f. 01.08.2007, the Ministry 
of Coal in their replies stated as under:- 
“The formula on fixation of royalty rates was recommended by Economic 
Advisory Council to the Prime Minister on 1.9.2005 after consultation with the 
officials of the Ministry of C oal and Planning Commission and observed that 
there is merit in the demand of coal producing States on shifting to ad valorem 
basis, especially in view of the infrastructure,  the States have to provide to 
facilitate mining activities and the mounting nega tive externalities on account 
of environmental degradation consequent to mining.  At the same time, there 
is need to ensure that the rate of increase in royalty as a function of increasing 
prices is restrained in order to protect the consuming sectors.  Th is can be 
taken care of by calibrating the royalty as a combination of specific and ad 
valorem levies with a fixed and a variable component as follows:  
 
  R = a + bP 
  Where R = Royalty (Rs./Ton). 
   a = Specific (Fixed) component (Rs./Ton). 
   b =  ad valorem (variable) component (Rate of royalty).  
   P =  Price of Coal (Rs./Ton).  
 
The above formula provided a certain minimum royalty under the specific 
component plus a share in the price as a variable component." 
 
The new Mines and Minerals (Development  & Regulation) MMDR Bill, 2011 
also proposes the same formula.  
 
7.4 As a need was felt for quite some time, to determine a methodology for 
calculation of royalty, chargeable on coal produced from captive mines/blocks, the 
Government also included another term of reference viz: “To determine the basis of 
fixation of royalty on the coal produced from captive blocks”. As regards the royalty 
calculation in captive coal mines given to private party, the Ministry of Coal replied 
that it would be based upon royalty rate in the nearest CIL mine.   
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
 
ROYALTY RATES ON COAL 
 
The coal royalty rates fixed in 1971 ranged from Rs. 1.50 per tonne for low 
quality coal to Rs. 2 per tonne for high quality coal. The royalty rates on coal were 
subsequently revised in July, 1975; February, 1981; August, 19 91; October, 1994, 
August, 2002, August, 2007 and May, 2012. 
Royalty Rates on Different Grades of Coal 
                                                                                            (Rs. per Tonne) 
*  Plus 5% of basic pithead price of Run-Of-Mine 
8.2 However, the above rates were not applicable to the State Govt. of West 
Bengal, where rates of 1981 are still continuing on the ground that the Government 
of West Bengal is continuing to levy cesses on coal, which had been withdrawn by 
other State Governments. The Govt. of West Bengal is collecting cess @25%, 
Coal Group COAL ROYALTY IN INDIA  
w.e.f. 
13.2.81 
w.e.f. 
01.08.91 
w.e.f. 
11.10.94 
w.e.f. 
16.08.02 
w.e.f. 
01.08.07 
Group-I 
Coking Coal SG-I, II 
WG-I 
7.00 150.00 195.00 250.00 180 
Group-II 
Coking Coal WG-II, 
III, Non- coking, 
A,B Semi-coking 
Gr.-I Semi-coking 
Gr.-II 
6.50 120.00 135.00 165.00 130* 
Group-III 
Coking Coal WG-IV, 
Non-coking-C 
5.50 75.00 95.00 115.00 90* 
Group-IV 
Non-coking D,E 
4.50 45.00 70.00 85.00 70* 
Group-V 
Non-coking F,G 
2.50 25.00 50.00 65.00 55* 
Group – VI Coal 
produced in Andhra 
Pradesh 
5.00 70.00 75.00 90.00 w.e.f. 
01.08.07 

50 
 
whereas the royalty as per the revised rates for various grades of coal/lignite is in 
the range of 11.08%  to 18.84%, which is much less than the cess collected by 
Govt. of West Bengal. 
 
Constitution of Study Groups to revise royalty rates  
8.3 First Study Group was set up in Nov, 1984 to revise rates of royalty. 
However no increase affected till 1991.Second S tudy group was set up in Feb, 
1991. Revised rates notified on 01.08.1991, except for West Bengal. Third study 
group was set up in Jan, 1994. Revised rates notified on 1.8.1994 except for West 
Bengal. Fourth Study Group was in 1997. No revision effected. Fi fth Study Group in 
July’2000. Revised rates notified on 16.02.2002 except for West Bengal. The 
royalty rates on coal were  revised on 16.8.02 except for West Bengal.  The Sixth 
Study Group was constituted in 2005 and Seventh Study Group in 2010  
 
Sixth Study Group on Royalty 
8.4 6th Study Group was constituted in 2005 under the Chairmanship of Addl. 
Secretary (Coal) with the representatives of Ministries of Mines, Power, Coal 
Companies, CMPDIL and Federations of industries like FICCI and FIMI to decide the 
rates of royalty. Considering complexities involved in the issue of payment or 
royalty on ad -valorem basis vs tonnage basis, the issue referred to the Economic 
Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EAC).  Based on the recommendations of 
Economic Advisory Council of the Prime Minister the rates of royalty on coal and 
lignite have been revised with effect from 01.08.2007. These are being calculated 
as a combination of specific and ad valorem rates of royalty i.e. R(Royalty 
Rupees/tone)= a+bP where `P’ (pric e) shall mean basic pithead price of ROM(rum 
–of-mine) coal and lignite as reflected in the invoice, excluding taxes, levies and 
other charges; `a’ represents the fixed component and `b’ represents the variable 
or ad-valorem component. The value of `b’ has  been fixed as 5% and the value of 
`a’ fixed for different grades of coal.    
 

51 
 
Revision of royalty rates in 2007 
 
8.5 Many State Governments from time to time had raised the issue of 
determination of royalty on coal on ad -valorem basis, rather than on spec ified rate 
basis.  In view of the complexities involved, the Prime Minister desired that the 
issue of payment of royalty on coal on ad -valorem basis vs tonnage basis be 
examined by the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EAC to PM).  The 
report submitted by EAC to PM was discussed and agreed on the following specific 
recommendations of EAC to PM: 
(i) The royalty may be shifted from specified levy to a combination of 
specific and ad-valorem levies. 
(ii) It was noticed that our royalty rates are already high compared to 
those in other countries.  This should be kept in view in fixing the 
royalty rate. 
(iii) The formula for determining royalty may have a fixed and a variable 
component (R=a+bp). 
(iv) The parameters ‘a’ and ‘b’ have to be set so as to keep the overall rate 
at appropriate level while allowing for moderate variation in royalty on 
account of changes in price. 
(v) The price (P) for determination of royalty may be the actual invoice 
price. 
(vi) Any revision in royalty should not be made ap plicable automatically to 
States which levy cesses.  The royalty to be allowed to such States 
should be adjusted for the local cesses so as to limit the overall 
revenue to the formula based yield. 
It was also decided that the study group on royalty set up by the Ministry of 
Coal would take into account the recommendations of the EAC to PM.  
  
8.6 The report submitted by the Study Group had dealt in detail the issues 
relating to ad-valorem vs.  specific rates of royalty; incidence of royalty in India vis-
à-vis international trends; impact of fiscal regimes on the overall competitiveness of 
economy; impact of royalty regime on domestic production and imports; concerns 

52 
 
of the States to ensure buoyancy in revenue accruals; need to balance the 
seemingly conflicti ng interests of all stakeholders etc. The Study group had 
concluded that since it is not the right time to switch over to full -fledged ad -
valorem regime of royalty and recommended for adaptation of a formula, which has 
a combination of specific and ad -valorem rate of royalty. Accordingly, royalty rates 
on coal and lignite were  revised w.e.f. 01.08.2007, based on a combination of fixed 
and ad -valorem rates of royalty . According to the above notification dated 
1.8.2007, the coal group -wise rate of royalty pe r tonne as on 1.8.2007, is as 
follows: 
 Coal Group  -  I  : Rs. 346.88, 
 Coal Group  -  II  :  Rs. 204.89, 
 Coal Group  -  III  :  Rs. 146.03, 
 Coal Group  -  IV  : Rs. 111.49, 
 Coal Group  -  V  :  Rs. 81.25. 
 
The amount of royalty paid to States during 2 001-02 to 2011 -12 by Coal 
India Limited and Singareni Collieries Company Limited is given at 
Annexure-I. 
 
Revision of Royalty Rates in 2012 
 
8.7 As the royalty rates on coal and lignite were last revised in 2007, the 
coal/lignite producing States had deman ded for an enhancement in the royalty 
rates. Though the coal companies had revised the prices the royalty rates, being 
fixed based on hybrid formula and having only one component linked to the coal 
price, the benefit of higher prices was not shared fully w ith the coal producing 
States.  The value of rupee had also depreciated substantially since the last revision 
of royalty rates. Consequently, the share of royalty as a percentage of coal prices 
had declined.  It was further argued that royalty constitutes only a small fraction of 
the landed coal price and the impact on the major consuming sectors such as 
power, steel and cement etc. would be only nominal.   
 

53 
 
8.8 In the light of these developments, the Ministry of Coal constituted a Study 
Group on 04.02.2010 under the Chairmanship of the then Addl. Secretary (Coal), to 
examine the issue of revision of royalty rates on coal and lignite.  The Committee 
held extensive deliberations on the issues involved and also held consultations with 
all the stakeholders. The Study Group observed that it would be prudent to 
introduce ad-valorem royalty regime in coal and lignite sectors, without any steep 
increase in royalty rates on coal and lignite and that the rate could be 
recommended at the level of the existing royalty i .e. 13.84 % (Rounding off to 
14%) of the maximum produced grade of coal i.e. “E” & “F” of CIL. Accordingly, the 
Study Group recommended 14% ad -valorem royalty on price of coal. The price 
should be the actual invoice price (excluding taxes and other levies)  which will also 
be applicable for quantity of coal sold through e -auction and forward e -auction.  
The rates of royalty in respect of Coal, including lignite were last revised w.e.f. 
10.05.2012 by the Ministry of Coal.  
Royalty on coal from Captive mines  
 
8.9 The need was felt for quite some time, to determine a methodology for 
calculation of royalty, chargeable on coal produced from captive mines/blocks. As 
far as price of coal from CIL and its subsidiaries are concerned, CIL is notifying the 
mine-wise/Grade-wise price for royalty calculation. However, in case of captive 
mines, where the coal block allottee company is mining coal for their own 
use/consumption, don’t generate an invoice, as there is no sale and no pithead 
price. Any methodology on determini ng transfer price of captive mines is more 
complex and is yet to be evolved.  
 
8.10 The Study Group, after detailed deliberations decided to propose a 
calculation methodology, which could prove as an easily implementable solution for 
assessing royalty on c oal and lignite of captive mines, where the price of coal (P) 
shall mean basic pithead price of ROM (Run of Mine) coal and lignite, as reflected in 
the invoice, excluding taxes, levies and other charges of CIL/SCCL/NLC for similar 
grades of coal/lignite in the mines nearest to that captive mine.   
 

54 
 
8.11 The Committee were keenly interested to know whether government have 
suitably compensated the coal bearing States for delay in revision of coal royalty 
rates. When a specific query in this regard was made to  the Ministry of Coal, the 
Committee were informed as under: 
“The Act does not mandate that royalty on coal should be revised after 
every three years. The revision in royalty rate is affected only after taking 
into consideration the overall state of the ec onomy. As such the question of 
payment of compensation to the coal bearing States for delay in the revision 
of coal royalty rates does not arise. 
However, a new Study Group under the Chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary (Coal) has been constituted on 04.2. 2010 for recommending 
revision of royalty rates on coal and lignite. The view/comments of various 
coal consumers/producers, other stakeholders and organizations are being 
obtained.” 
State-wise revenue collection (royalty)  from 2005-06 to 2012-13 of coal  
(Rs. in Crore) 
States 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08  2008-09  2009-10  2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
West Bengal*  10.68 10.42 9.56  9.53 9.2 9.66 
(royalty) 
783.85 
(cess) 
9.48 
(royalty) 
1346.62 
(cess) 
11.11 
(royalty) 
1378.86 
(cess) 
Jharkhand  781.32 766.45 886.36 1062.44 1152.41 1273.64 1430.54 1921.29 
Orissa  503.86 511.45 624.51 762.14 881.08 932.44 1027.77 1260.06 
Maharashtra  307.42 310.52 410.25 503.06 512.71 499.82 526.30 702.61 
Madhya 
Pradesh  
564.21 604.21 808.45 961.31 1022.77 863.65 1012.79 1488.34 
Chhattisgarh  555.36 597.91 747.92 887.50 939.56 1024.26 1100.8 1622.99 
Uttar Pradesh  173.83 110.90 111.80 93.40 149.09 167.72 181.94 236.97 
Assam  14.87 19.54 22.60 21.59 30.86 28.33 25.52 43.50 
Andhra Pradesh  324.00 313.50 479.00 560.69 637.13 665.59 785.47 1239.97 
Tamil Nadu -- -- -- -- -- 158.42 171.88 216.20 
Rajasthan -- -- -- -- -- 2.50 5.56 7.70 
 
*  In case of West Bengal the details of Cess collection are as under :-  
 

55 
 
CESS Collection 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08  2008-09  2009-10  
West Bengal*  614.54 651.32 629.56 661.33 621.64 
 
       Trends in Coal Prices & Royalty from 2002-03 to 2009-10  
                                                                                   Rs./Tonne 
 2002-03 2004-05 2007-08 2009-10 
 Av 
Price 
Royalty Av 
Price 
Royalty Av Price Royalty Av 
Price 
Royalty 
Group I 1755 250 2635 250 2898 324.93 3337 346.88 
Group II 1050 165 1238 165 1362 198.08 1498 204.89 
Group 
III 
772 115 926 115 1018 140.94 1121 146.03 
Group 
IV 
596 85 686 85 754 107.72 830 111.49 
Group V 377 65 434 65 477 78.87 525 81.25 
 
Comparative chart showing company-wise comparison of coal royalty charged 
by the countries such as South Africa, Australia, Indonesia :-  
 
Sl. No. COUNTRIES ROYALTY RATES 
 
1. Australia 5 to 8.2 % 
 
2. India 11 to 13 % 
 
3. Indonesia Up to 13.5 % 
 
4. South Africa 1 to 3 % 
 
 
8.12 Regarding existing system of royalty rates in vogue in other coal/lignite 
producing countries in the world, the Ministry of Coal have forwarded the following 
information as provided to them by the Federation of Indian Mineral Industries:- 
Royalty Rates of coal in selected countries 
S.No Country Royalty Rates 
1. Australia New South 
Wales (NSW) 
6.2% Ad valorem of Deep Underground Mines 

56 
 
   7.2%  Ad valorem of Underground Mines 
   8.2%  Ad valorem for Open Cast Mines 
  Queensland  7% + (Average Price-100/Average Price) x 3%  
  Victoria Brown Coal 
$ 0.0588 per GJ, adjusted in accordance with 
the consumer price index (Ad valorem with 
quantum rate for brown coal). 
 
Other than Brown Coal 2.75%  
  Western 
Australia 
If exported 7.5% Ad valorem  
   If not exported $ 1/tonne (adjusted each year 
at 30 th June in accordance with comparative 
price increases.  
  South Australia 3.5% Ad valorem  
2. Botswana  5% Ad valorem on adjusted gross market 
value 
3. Canada  0.4% Ad valorem  
4. Indonesia  13.5% FOB or of sales revenue 
5. Mangolia   2.5% Ad valorem  
6. Mozambiq
ue  
 3% Ad valorem  
7. Namibia   5% Ad valorem, on market value 
8. People 
Republic 
of China 
 1% Ad valorem + 0.3 – 5.0 Yuan/Tonne 
9. Tanzania  4% Ad valorem 
10. United 
State of 
America 
 12.23% Ad valorem  
11. Zambia   2% Ad valorem on net back value 
 
8.13 When asked about the reasons for switching over to a combination of specific 
and ad valorem rate of royalty in 2007 from tonnage based royalty in  2002, the 
Ministry of Coal informed the Committee as under::- 
“The argument for the shift from specific to ad -valorem basis is made by the 
coal producing State Governments on the ground that they would be 
deprived of the benefit of increasing prices of co al. On the other hand the 
demand of coal producing States had to be weighed against the potential 
adverse impact of increase and frequently rising price of coal under a 
putative ad-valorem regime.  Given that nearly 75% of the coal produced is 
consumed in the power sector, the burden of increased royalty would also fall 
largely on the power sector both at the Centre and in the States.  There 
would also be significant adverse impact on the cement and small scale 
industries.      
 

57 
 
CHAPTER-IX 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS BY SARKARIA COMMISSION, FINANCE COMMISSION 
AND STUDY GROUP BY GOVERNMENT ON ROYALTY 
Hon’ble Prime Minister had desired that the issue of payment of royalty on 
coal on ad -valorem basis versus tonnage basis be examined by the Economic 
Advisory Council (EAC) to PM. After wide ranging consultations, EAC submitted its 
report to the Prime Minister, recommending inter-alia as follows:- 
 
(i)  The royalty on coal has to be determined so as to take care in a 
balanced way of the interests of both the producers and the 
consumers.  Accordingly, the royalty may be shifted from specific levy 
to a combination of specific and ad valorem levies. 
 
(ii)   It should be noted that our royalty rates are already high relative to 
those in other countries.  We should keep this in view in fixi ng the 
royalty rates.  
 
(iii) The formula (R= a+bP) for determining royalty may have a fixed and a 
variable component as indicated in first para.  The parameters ‘a’ and 
‘b’ have to be set so as to keep the overall rate at the appropriate level 
while allowing for moderate variation in royalty on account of charges 
in price.  In view of this, EAC to PM recommend that ‘b’ be kept at 5% 
for all grades of coal. 
 
(iv)  The price (P) for determination of royalty may be the actual invoice 
price.   
 
(v) Any revision in royalty sh ould not be made applicable automatically to 
states which levy their own cesses.  The royalty to be allowed to such 
states should be adjusted for the local cesses so as to limit the overall 
revenue to the formula based yield.  
 
9.2 The recommendations of t he EAC to the Prime Minister were taken into 
account by the Committee on Royalty setup by the Ministry of Coal and based on 
the committee’s recommendations, the rates of royalty have been finalised in 2007. 
 
9.3 Keeping in view the views/comments expressed  by the various stakeholders 
the royalty Committee proposed the calculation of royalty as per the formula 
suggested by the Committee and the value of ‘a’ and ‘b’ are as follows: 

58 
 
 
 
Group Grade of Coal Recommended values 
of ‘a’ & ‘b’ 
Group-I Steel Gr. -I & I I 
washery-I 
a = Rs. 180.00 
b = 5% 
Group-II Washery-II & III 
Semi-Coking Gr. I & II 
Grade A 
Grade B 
 
a = Rs. 130.00 
b = 5% 
Group-III Washery-IV 
Grade C 
a = Rs. 90.00 
b = 5% 
Group-IV Grade D 
Grade E 
a = Rs. 70.00 
b = 5% 
Group - V Grade F 
Grade G 
a = Rs. 55.00 
b = 5% 
 
  
Recommendations of Sarkaria Commission  
 
(i) The Sarkaria Commission recommended amendment of section 9 of 
the MMDR Act to reduce the period specified therein for revision of 
royalty rates from four years to two years. The Standing Committee of 
the Inter State Council modified the recommendation to the effect that 
the Government will endeavour revision of royalty rates every three 
years with a programme to shift towards a fully ad valorem based 
royalty regime in accordance with the existing  provisions of the MMDR 
Act.  
 
Recommendations of Finance Commission  
 
(ii) The Eleventh Finance Commission (2000)  
 
              Royalty rates on minerals be revised regularly and the decision about the 
revision of the rates of royalty be taken well befo re the date on which the 
revision falls due so that it can be notified immediately after the completion 
of every three years period as provided under the law.  In case the process 
of revision is not completed by the date the new revision is due, the States  
should be entitled to compensation.’ 
 
 
(iii) The Twelfth Finance Commission (2005)  
 
          Royalty from minerals, coal and petroleum has been considered.  We took 
note of the fact that the power to revise the rates of royalty in most of the 
cases vests in the central government.  Government of India has not been 
revising the royalty rates as regularly as provided for. This is particularly true 
of coal and lignite. We recommend that since royalty is an important source 

59 
 
of revenue for some of the states,  the rates of royalty should be fixed on an 
ad valorem basis.  
 
9.4 When asked about details of recommendations made by the Study Group set 
up by the Government on royalty related issue and the action taken by the 
Government to implement those recommendati ons, the Ministry of Coal replied as 
under:- 
 
           "(i)   Royalty on Coal:    The Study Group recommended 14% ad-valorem 
royalty on price of coal. The price should be the actual invoice price 
(excluding taxes and other levies) which will also be appl icable for quantity 
of coal sold through e-auction and forward e-auction.  
 
(ii)     Royalty on Lignite:   The Study Group decided to introduce ad -
valorem royalty regime in the lignite sector also, without any steep increase 
in royalty revenues on lignite and hence decided that the rate recommended 
at the level of the existing royalty i.e. 5.93% (rounded to 6%). 
 
(iii)  Royalty on coal from Captive mines:  The Study Group after 
detailed deliberations decided to propose a calculation methodology, which 
could  prove as an easily implementable solution for assessing royalty on coal 
and lignite for captive mines, where the price of coal (P) shall mean basic 
pithead  price of ROM (run of Mine) coal and lignite, as reflected in the 
invoice, excluding taxes, levies  and other charges of CIL/SCCL/NLC for 
similar grade  of coal/lignite in the mines nearest to that captive mine. 
  
(iv) Cess:     During the previous revision of royalty the Government had 
taken a view that any revision in royalty should not be made applic able 
automatically to States which levy own cesses. The royalty to be allowed to 
such States should be adjusted for the local cesses so as to limit the overall 
revenue to the formula based yield. 
 
The Study Group recommended that as the situation has not c hanged the 
status-quo be maintained in this regard." 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
CHAPTER X 
 
CESS LEVIED IN DIFFERENT STATES 
      
  The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that  the issue of levy of 
cess on coal continues to remain a cause of concern for the coal indus try. The 
coal royalty is being paid by the coal companies to coal producing states except 
West Bengal which continues to levy cess on coal. A number of States have re -
introduced cess or other statutory levies on mineral bearing land. Taking note of 
different cess levied by the State Governments together with the enhanced 
royalty rates that have cascading affect on the coal consuming sector and causing 
disparity across the States, t he Committee set up by Ministry of Coal and 
Economic Advisory Council to the PM had recommended for royalty to be 
adjusted against local cess, so as to limit overall revenues to the formula based 
yield. 
 
10.2 As regards the Cess & Other Taxes Levied by State Governments, the 
Ministry of Coal apprised the Committee as under:- 
 All co al producing States except Maharashtra, Assam and Meghalaya were 
levying Cess in mid 80s. 
 Rates of Cess levied varied widely. 
 Levy was challenged before several Courts. 
 In October, 1989 in the case of India Cements Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and in 
1991 in th e case of Orissa Cements Limited Vs. State of Orissa, the Apex 
Court held that State governments have no competence to levy such cess. 
 Subsequently several High Courts struck down State enactments on levy. 
10.3 The Committee were also apprised of the follo wing Developments relating to 
cess in different States:-  
 

61 
 
(i) Development relating to West Bengal 
 Under the Bengal Cess Act, 1880, there was a provision to levy Road Cess 
and Public Work Cess. 
 Under this Act, levies were imposed inter -alia in respect of all m ines and 
quarries on the annual dispatches. 
 Two other legislations under which Government of West Bengal imposed 
levies are: 
West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 
West Bengal Rural Employment and Production Act, 1976. 
 In  1992 Government of West Bengal a mended these two Acts by West 
Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992 primarily changing the words 
“coal mines” to “coal bearing land”. 
 In November, 1992 in the Kesoram India Vs. CIL the Division Bench on 
Calcutta High Court struck down certain levies b y way of Cess on coal as 
unconstitutional on the grounds that cess prescribed is not on land but is 
directly related to the value of coal produced. 
 In an appeal filed by Government of West Bengal before the Supreme Court, 
the Constitutional Bench by majori ty of 4:1, vide their judgment dated 
15.01.2004 set aside judgment of Calcuta High Court in Kesoram case and 
upheld constitutional validity of West Bengal Taxation law. 
 The 2004 Court Judgment held that  
The royalty is not a tax and cess cannot be called a tax on tax 
Royalty is rent of the land on which mine is situated. 
Cess is a levy on mineral rights with effect on the land and quantified by a 
reference to the quantum of minerals produced. 
 Cess collected by Government of West Bengal in last 5 years from  
2005-06 to 2009-10 
Year 
 
 
Avg. Production  
in 
 Million tonnes 
 
Cess Paid 
(Rs. Crs.) 
 
2005-06 16.190 614.54 
2006-07 17.050 651.62 
2007-08 17.410 629.56 
2008-09 16.229 661.33 
2009-10 15.323 621.64 
 
 

62 
 
(ii) Development relating to Orissa 
 Government of Orissa enacted Orissa Rural Infrastructure and Socio -
economic Development Act, 2004 and started collecting levy @ 15% of the 
annual value of coal bearing land. 
 The Act and Rules framed therein have been struck down by Orissa High 
Court. 
 The Division Bench of High  Court held that the State Legislature is not 
competent to enact such an Act. 
 Orissa Govt. filed SLP before Supreme Court. 
(iii) Details regarding other State Govts. 
Madhya Pradesh 
 Collects Forest cess @ Rs. 7 per tonne 
 Under MP Gramin Adosancharana and Sadak Up kar Tax Act @ 5% on basic 
coal price. 
 Challenged by coal companies and the matter is pending before Supreme 
Court. 
Chhattisgarh 
 Development and Environmental cess each at Rs. 5 per tonne 
 High Court in its interim order in October, 2007 has permitted Chhat tisgarh 
Government to collect cess. Case still pending. 
Uttar Pradesh 
 Under SSADA (Shaktinagar Special Area Development Authority) Rules – Rs. 
10 per tonne 
 Being adjusted with the royalty. 
10.4 When asked as to how the State Governments  were spending the r oyalty 
revenues and for what purposes, the Ministry of Coal in their replies, have stated as 
under: 

63 
 
“The revenue accruing from royalty on coal gets credited into the 
Consolidated Fund of the State Government concerned, therefore, it is upto 
the State Gover nment to utilize the royalty receipts in accordance with its 
priorities. It is not possible to determine any direct relation between the 
revenue accruals from royalty and the budgetary support to local area 
development activities as these are funded through the annual budget of the 
concerned State Governments.” 
 
10.5 The Committee were informed that cess, levied by many State Governments 
on minerals or mining rights as well as other taxes of the State Governments are in 
the nature of royalty on minerals. The Cess Acts of the Government of West Bengal 
were challenged in a petition of M/s Kesoram Industries Ltd. before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Calcutta. The Hon’ble High Court passed an order on 25.11.1992 
holding the provisions relating to levy and collection  of cesses under the Cess Act, 
1880, as ultra-vires of the constitution. Against this order, the Government of West 
Bengal filed an SLP in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. However, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India, while upholding the legislation of State of West Bengal inter alia held 
that the State is competent to levy cess on coal bearing land in as much as the levy 
of said cess is not on coal but on coal bearing land. West Bengal Government at 
present collects cess on coal ad -valorem @ 25%. Amount of cess a nd royalty paid 
by the coal companies for the period 2009-10 to 2011-12 is given at Annexure II.  
 
10.6 In the meantime, in the wake of the aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court, 
many other State Governments such as Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, Assam and Andhra Pradesh have introduced new levies in the form 
of infrastructure development tax, special area development tax, land tax etc. on 
mineral bearing areas to generate additional resources. However, the Orissa State 
enactment, imposing a levy on mineral bearing land has since been struck down by 
the High Court of Orissa, stating that the state legislature is not competent to enact 
the same. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgement, the State of Orissa has filed 
a Special Leave Petition before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.  
 

64 
 
10.7 Considering the same, during the royalty revision in 1991, it was decided by 
the Government that the enhanced rates could be extended to those States only 
where the State Governments withdraw the cess levied by them or the cess is 
otherwise struck down by the Courts of Law. This was done in view of the 
consideration that the incidence of cess  levied by them together with the enhanced 
royalty rates would have created cascading effect on coal prices.  Accordingly, the 
benefits of 1991, 1994, 2002 and 2007 royalty revisions were not extended to West 
Bengal, in view of the cess being levied by them.  
       
10.8 The Committee were interested to know whether the States were also being 
paid royalty in addition to new levies collected by them in the form of infrastructure 
development tax, special area development tax, land tax etc., and if so, was it is 
not affecting consumers. When a specific query was asked in this regard as to how 
the Government propose to a ddress this issue in right perspective, the Ministry of 
Coal apprised the Committee as follows :- 
“Some of the State Government such as West Bengal are collecting various 
levies under various heads and it is bound to affect the consumer. 
Accordingly, considering the same the royalty Committee set up by the Govt. 
had endorsed the view taken by EAC to PM that revision in the royalty should 
not be made applicable automatically to States which levy their own cess. 
The royalty to be allowed to such States should  be adjusted for the local 
cess, so as to limit the overall revenue to the formula based yield.  
Inspite of the above provision with regard to royalty on coal, some of the 
State Governments have imposed other levies over and above Royalty on 
coal like Madh ya Pradesh Gramin Avasanrachana Tatha Sadak Vikas 
Adhiniyan tax, transit fee on road dispatch by Madhya Pradesh Govt., 
Terminal Tax by Municipal corporation in Madhya Pradesh, SSADA cess by 
UP Government, Land Tax by Assam Govt. etc. Imposition of most of the 
above mentioned levies has been contested by the coal companies and in 
one case by a consumer, in the courts of law and the matter is sub-judice."  
10.9 Mines and Mineral Development and Regulation Bill, 2011 (Royalty payable in 
respect of minerals.) Clause 41 of the Bill reads as under:- 
 
41(1) The holder of a mining lease, whether granted before or after the 
commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything in the instrument 

65 
 
of lease or in any other law for the time being in force, pay royalty in respect 
of any mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, 
employee or contractor from the leased area. 
 
41(2) The rate of royalty in respect of major minerals shall be such as 
specified in the Second Schedule to this Act: 
Provided that concessional rates of royalty may be specified for such 
cases where the lessee beneficiates the mineral at the ore stage. 
 
10.10  During examination of the Bill referred to the Committee t he State of 
West Bengal has strongly opposed the differential treat ment meted out to  the 
State in matters of royalty etc.  The State Government of West Bengal has made 
following presentation before the Committee:- 
"The provisions relating to royalty, compensation and cess have been dealt 
with in Chapter VIII of the draft  bill. The rates of royalty on major minerals 
have been specified in the Second Schedule to the draft bill. In the Draft bill 
rates of royalty proposed for different  grades of coal produced in West 
Bengal is different from other States.  While the rates o f royalty for West 
Bengal are specific, the rates of other states are a combination of specific 
and ad valorem rates of royalty and much higher than the rates proposed for 
West Bengal.  The State of West Bengal has been treated differently from 
other State s since the year 1991 in the matter of rate of royalty to be 
charged on coal because the State of West Bengal imposes cess on coal. We 
have been, over the years, repeatedly urging the Government of India that 
this differential treatment in the matter of fixation of rates of royalty vis-à-vis 
those States, who do not impose cess, is unjustified, as the State 
Government is empowered under the Constitution to impose cess on coal.  It 
may be mentioned here that royalty on coal and cess on coal bearing land 
are levied and collected on the basis of powers assigned to the States under 
two different entries, namely, Entry no. 49 – Taxes on lands and buildings 
and Entry No. 50 – Taxes on mineral rights, subject to any limitations 
imposed by Parliament by law relating  to mineral development. The 
Parliament has not imposed any limitation on the taxing power on the 
mineral rights which the State can impose under entry No. 50 of the State 
List. It needs to be mentioned that the issue of propriety of imposition of 
cess on coal bearing land by the Government of West Bengal has been 
settled by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in favour of the State in Civil Appeal 
Nos. 1532 -33/93 in the matter of State of West Bengal -versus-Kesoram 

66 
 
Industries and Others in January, 2004.  While pass ing order, the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court observed that “The impugned cess is a tax on coal bearing 
and mineral bearing land.  It can at the most be construed to be a tax on 
mineral rights. In earlier case, the impugned cess is covered by the Entries 
49 and 50 of List II of the Constitution of India. The West Bengal Taxation 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992 must be and is held to be intravires the 
Constitution.  Thus, in terms of the judgment of the Apex Court denying a 
particular State of royalty on coal at the revis ed rate of royalty which is 
different from other states on the grounds that the state is charging cess is a 
challenge to our constitutional authority to levy cess or tax on coal bearing 
lands.  Hence, we strongly oppose this differential treatment in the matter of 
fixation of rate of royalty on coal for West Bengal vis -à-vis other coal 
producing States." 
10.11 The Ministry of Mines have not commented on this, saying that this issue 
pertains to the Ministry of Coal.  However, according to the Ministry of Min es, the 
rates of royalty in respect of major minerals (excluding coal, lignite and sand for 
stowing) were last revised vide gazette notification number G.S.R. 574(E) dated 
13.8.2009. The rates of royalty in respect of Coal including Lignite were revised 
vide notification number G.S.R. 349 (E), dated the 10th May, 2012 by the Ministry 
of Coal are as under:- 
“Royalty for Coal (including Lignite) 
A.  Coal produced in all the States and Union territories except  the State of 
West Bengal.  
 
(1) Royalty on Coal: 
The rate of royalty on coal shall be @ 14% (Fourteen percent) ad-valorem 
on price of coal, as reflected in the invoice, excluding taxes, levies and 
other charges. 
(2) Royalty on Lignite 
The rate of royalty on lignite shall be @ 6% (Six percent) ad -valorem on 
transfer price of lignite, as ratified by the Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) and for lignite sold to other consumers, the royalty 
shall be @ 6% (Six percent) ad valorem on the price of lignite as reflected 
in the invoice, excluding taxes, levies and other charges. 
(3) Royalty on coal and lignite produced from captive mines: 
For calculating royalty on coal and lignite produced from captive mines, 
the price of coal and lignite shall mean the basic pithead price of Run of 
Mine (ROM) coal and lignite, as notified by the Coal India Ltd./Singareni 

67 
 
Collieries Company Ltd./ Neyveli Lignite Corporation, for similar Gross 
Calorific Value (GCV) of coal or lignite for the mines, nearest to that 
captive mine; 
Provided that for the coal and lignite produced from the  coal and lignite 
blocks, allocated under the Government dispensation route for 
commercial use, the respective ad -valorem royalty shall be applicable on 
the price notified by the respective State Governments.  
(4) Adjustment of royalty against levying of cess: 
For the States other than West Bengal, for the levy of cess or other taxes 
specific to coal bearing lands, the royalty allowed shall be adjusted for the 
local cesses or such taxes, so as to limit the overall revenue yield.  
 
B. Coal produced in the State of West Bengal: 
 
Group Quality of Coal Royalty on 
coal in Rs. 
per tonne 
I Steel Gr-I 7.00 
Steel Gr.-II 
Washery-I 
Direct Feed 
II Washery-II 6.50 
Washery-III 
Semi Coking Gr.-I 
Semi Coking Gr.-II 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of  6701 and 
above 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 6401-6700 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 6101-6400 
III Washery-IV 5.50 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 5801-6100 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 5501-5800 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 5201-5500 
IV Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4901-5200 4.30 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4601-4900 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4301-4600 
V Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 4001-4300 2.50 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 3701-4000 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 3401-3700 
Non-Coking Coal having GCV(Kcal/kg) range of 3101-3400 
 Non-Coking Coal having GCV=<3100 
 
   

68 
 
10.12 As regards Levy and collection of cess by State Government, Clause 45 of the 
Bill reads as under:- 
45(1):The State Government may, by notification specify, that there shall be 
levied and collected a cess on major minerals and minor minerals extracted 
at a rate not exceeding ten per cent. of the royalty in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government: 
 
Provided that the rate shall not be increased more than once during 
any period of five years. 
 
45(2): The cess shall be pa id by the person holding the mining lease for 
major minerals or minor minerals, as the case may be: 
 
Provided that where the minerals vest in a person other than the 
Government, and the holder of the mining lease fails to pay the cess, 
the person in whom t he minerals vest shall, on demand, pay the 
amount of the cess." 
 
10.13 The Ministry of Mines has informed the Committee that under section 45(1) it 
is clearly stated the cess will be levied on the ‘mineral extracted at a rate not 
exceeding ten per cent of the royalty.  Levy of cess on land and building lies 
exclusively within the ambit of Entry 49 of List II of Seventh Schedule of 
Constitution of India, and this power is not being affected by the present legislation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

69 
 
 CHAPTER-XI 
 
DEMAND FOR INCREASING ROYALTY ON COAL BY STATES 
The Mines and Minerals Development and Regulation Act and specifies that 
royalty rates have to be revised in every 3 years, but the same  had not been done 
in the past, thus resulting in loss of thousands of crores to the co al producing 
States. The Ministry of Coal when asked about the reason for revising the rates 
submitted as under:-  
“Section 9(3) of the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 
1957 empowers the Central Government to enhance or reduce the royalty  
rates in respect of any mineral by ‘notification in the official Gazette with 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification. The proviso to 
the aforesaid Section prevents the Central Government from enhancing the 
rate of royalty on coal an d lignite more than once during any period of three 
years. It is not mandatory to revise the rate of royalty on coal and lignite 
after every three years. However, the rates of royalty are revised  by the 
Central Government after taking into consideration t he interests of all stake 
holders and the overall economic scenario in the country. After every royalty 
rate revision the royalty revenue from the coal producing States increases as 
may be seen in the statement given below for the last ten years . In view of 
the above the question of loss of revenue to the coal producing States does 
not arise. 
                                                                                                                            
(Royalty paid - Rs. in Lakhs) 
Year West  
Bengal 
Jharkhand Orissa Madhya 
Pradesh 
Maha 
rashtra 
Chhattis 
garh 
Uttar  
Pradesh 
2000-01 997.41 58713.67 25848.59 37818.51 21040.76 31897.80 13462.04 
2001-02 1067.61 55647.86 26299.72 38996.21 23136.54 33859.62 12221.85 
2002-03 1008.19 65171.48 31698.71 46655.03 26222.60 42213.43 14278.35 
2003-04 931.86 72359.81 41689.80 53762.38 28650.46 47921.87 13618.03 
2004-05 976.48 69671.98 46573.36 57324.76 29491.09 53464.40 13225.90 
2005-06 1051.14 72752.05 50637.50 59765.41 30546.54 55404.67 11795.76 
2006-07 1045.76 75596.42 51524.09 63275.81 31090.63 58959.62 8940.11 
2007-08 900.95 90966.08 64536.75 83176.26 42676.13 76052.61 10436.87 
2008-09 943.96 106721.67 77307.39 95017.68 50179.87 89418.70 11494.77 
2009-10 959.55 114234.46 85962.81 98123.75 51407.58 94307.17 14929.16 

70 
 
11.2 To a query on how enhanced royalty on coal for coal producing States will 
affect the coal consuming State, the Ministry of Coal in a post evidence reply 
informed the Committee as under:-  
 
“The major coal producing States are only se ven i.e. State of Jharkhand, 
Orissa, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,  Uttar Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh,  whereas all the States in the country are coal consuming 
States, directly or indirectly. The cost of coal is a major input in the energy 
cost. As the royalty is paid by the consumers directly to the coal producing 
States, an upward revision in royalty rates would affect all the coal 
consuming States in terms of increase in cost of power.”  
 
11.3 The State Governments, like Jharkhand, Orissa, Bihar, M.P. and Chhattisgarh 
have demanded that coal royalty to be fixed on ad valorem basis, The Ministry of 
Coal on being asked whether the same has been considered, submits their reply as 
under:- 
“While the Royalty Committee was seeking the views and commen ts of all 
the stakeholders, the Hon,ble Prime Minister desired that in view of the 
complexities involved, the issue of payment of royalty on coal on ad valorem  
basis vs tonnage basis may be examined by the Economic Advisory Council 
(EAC) to the PM and tha t recommendations of the EAC to the PM may be 
awaited before taking a final view in the matter. 
Taking into consideration the submission made by all the stakeholders, and 
the interests of the coal producing States, the consumers and the economy 
as a whole as discussed in various meetings it was felt that it was not the 
right time for switching over to a full fledged ad valorem regime of royalty 
due to the various reasons. EAC to PM while examining the issue of royalty 
on coal recommended a royalty system which is a combination of specific and 
ad valorem levies with a fixed and a variable component. There was merit in 
the demand of coal producing States on shifting to ad valorem basis 
especially in view of the infrastructure the States have to provide to faci litate 
mining activity and the mounting negative externalities on account of 
environmental degradation consequent to mining.  At the same time, there is 
need to ensure that the rate of increase in royalty as a function of increasing 
prices is restrained in  order to protect the consuming sectors.  This was 
taken care of by calibrating the royalty as a combination of specific and ad 
valorem levies with a fixed and a variable component as follows: 
The Committee held extensive deliberations on the issues involv ed and also 
held consultations with all the stakeholders, which included the State 

71 
 
Government (both coal/lignite producing as well as consuming States), the 
concerned Ministries/Departments/Organizations of the Central Government, 
major coal consumers and coal companies.  Consequently the rates of royalty 
on coal and lignite was revised in August, 2007 vide notification dated 
01.08.2007.” 
 
11.4 When the Committee sought the views of the Ministry whether frequent 
revision in coal price is commensurate with i ncrease in the rate of royalty, the 
Ministry in a written reply informed that the pricing of coal has been fully 
deregulated after the Colliery Control Order,    2000 was notified with effect from 
1st January, 2000 in supersession of the Colliery Control O rder, 1945. Under the 
Colliery Control Order, 2000 the Central Government has no power, to fix the prices 
of coal. Coal companies are fixing the price of coal by themselves, on the basis of 
market forces like the demand of coal, increase in input cost for producing the coal, 
the change in landed prices of imported coal, acceptability of coal price in the 
market, need for capital investment in new projects and modernization of existing 
mines to augment coal production to bridge the demand supply gap.  On the  other 
hand, revision of royalty more than once in a period of three years is not permitted 
under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulations) Act, 1957. However, 
the revision of price does have an affect on the royalty rates as the price of coal is a 
major factor in the existing hybrid formula of arriving at the amount of royalty. 
 
11.5 On being asked as to whether the Union Government is considering 
increasing the royalty on Coal  to the States for enhancing the security and 
productivity of coal mines, the Ministry of Coal replied as under:- 
 
 "The Ministry of Coal, Govt. of India has already revised the rates of royalty 
on coal and lignite vide its Gazette Notification dated 10.05.2012 to be 
applicable w.e.f. 10th May, 2012. The Section 9(3) of th e MMRD Act 1957,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
provides that the Central Gove rnment shall not enhance the rate of royalty 
in respect of any mineral more than once during any period of three years." 
 
11.6 When asked whether the Union Government has received requests from 
some States to increase the amount of royalty, details thereof  and the response of 
the Union Government thereon, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:- 

72 
 
"The major coal producing States have proposed for fixation of royalty rates 
@ 20% ad -valorem basis, in place of hybrid formula based royalty rates on 
coal and lignite.  The proposal was considered by a Study Group, constituted 
by the Government to examine the issue of revision of royalty rate on coal 
and lignite.  The Study Group held extensive deliberations on the issues 
involved and also held consultations w ith all the stake holders.  On the basis 
of the recommendations of the Study Group, the Union Government has 
finalized and accepted the proposal of the coal bearing States, for shifting to 
ad-valorem based system of royalty rates.  However, keeping in view  the 
interest of consumer States and the Power Sector, the Government has 
approved for 14% ad-valorem royalty on Coal and 6%ad -valorem royalty on 
Lignite, which has come into force with effect from 10.05.2012. 
State Government of Assam, Jharkhand, Madhya P radesh, Meghalaya and 
Orissa suggested to shift from the hybrid formula of royalty to ad -valorem 
regime of royalty @ 20% of the sale price. State Government of Andhra 
Pradesh requested for increase to 30% and the State of Gujarat demanded 
on up -gradation o f Rs. 100/ - per tonne of rate of royalty on lignite. 
Rajasthan Govt. requested for royalty on lignite on tonnage basis.  The Uttar 
Pradesh Government stated that in composite formula, value of fixed 
component should be doubled in each grade of coal for the  assessment of 
royalty rates. Govt. of West Bengal stated that fixation of royalty should be 
on ad-valorem basis." 
 
11.7 In a specific query as to the difference of opinion between the Union and the 
State  Governments regarding amendment in the royalty on coal, the main 
objections raised by the States and the action being taken by the Union 
Government to resolve the matter, the Ministry of Coal replied as follows:- 
 
"Some of the coal bearing States have demanded for shifting to ad -valorem 
based system of royalty in place of hybrid formula royalty on coal and lignite.  
The Union Government has accepted the demand of the coal bearing States 
for shifting to ad -valorem based system of royalty rates.  However, keeping 
in view the interest of consumer States and t he Power Sector, the 
Government has approved ad-valorem 14% royalty on coal and 6% on lignite 
w.e.f.10.5.2012." 
 
11.8 When asked about  details of the amount of royalty paid to the various State 
Governments by the Coal India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiar ies during the last 

73 
 
three years and the total amount of royalty outstanding at present, subsidiary -wise 
and State-wise, the Ministry replied as under:- 
"Details of Royalty and Cess paid to the various State Governments during 
the last three years by the Co al India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiary 
Companies is enclosed as Annexure-III and Neyveli Lignite Corporation and 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited are given at Annexure-IV." 

74 
 
PART - C 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
COAL PRICING 
1) The Committee note that the Central Government was empowered by 
the Colliery Control Order, 1945 to fix the grade -wise and colliery -wise 
prices of coal. The pricing of coal was fully deregulated after the Colliery 
Control Order, 2000 was notified with effect from  1st January, 2000 in 
supersession of the Colliery Control Order, 1945. Under the Colliery Control 
Order, 2000 the Central Government has no power to fix the prices of coal.  
Further, coal has also been removed from the list of essential commodities 
through an amendment in the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. While 
fixing the prices of coal, the coal companies take into consideration 
general increase in price of commodities in the market leading to increase 
in the cost of input in the production of coal as reflected in Wholesale Price 
Index (WPI) and All India Consumer Price Index (AICPI), capacity of the 
company to absorb the increase in cost, landed cost of imported coal, 
impact of revision in wages of non -executive employees and revision in 
pay of executives as per Govt. guidelines as and when such revision takes 
place, requirement of additional resources mobilization for fresh 
investments in  new projects to augment coal production to achieve 
planned production target. The Committee have been given to und erstand 
that coal prices were  revised w.e.f. 16.10.2009 by Coal India Limited when 
the basic prices of F&G grades of coal  (ROM -Run of Mine) were increased 
by 8% to 10% over the previous revision. While Coal India subsidiaries 
except ECL & BCCL have incre ased the coal price by 10%, the increase in 
coal price by ECL & BCCL was 15%. Further, Grade A and B coal of 
underground mines of ECL is being supplied to specific consumers i.e. 
National Thermal Power Corporation, Damodar Valley Corporation and 
state powe r utilities  at negotiated prices.  Singareni Colliery Company 
Limited (SCCL), has revised the prices of coal of various grades in 2004 for 
F&G grade coal and in 2009 for B,C,D & E grade coal.  The coal prices were 

75 
 
again revised on 01.01.2012 and 28.05.201 3. The Committee feel that the 
increase in the price of  different grades of coal adversely affect the end 
users including power sector and the impact of coal price increase has to 
be passed on to the consumers. The Committee, therefore, expect the coal 
companies to go in for a minimum coal price increase so that a balance 
could be struck between the coal price and proposed capital investment 
but certainly not with a view to achieving maximum profit for the 
organization.  
 
2) The Committee note that the requir ement of fund s for additional 
resource mobilization for fresh investments in new coal projects and 
modernization of existing mines for augmentation of production  to 
achieve planned  production target, is also added as a factor for 
determining the coal pri ces by the Coal PSU s. The Committee are not 
convinced with the argument put forw ard by the Government/CIL that 
investment in the new projects is one of the  factors in coal price fixation. 
The Committee fail to understand as to how CIL and its subsidiaries can 
add estimated cost of a future project which has not yet started and may 
take years together to complete in fixing   coal prices which ultimately put 
extra burden on consumers . The Committee feel that considering 
investments in future projects as one o f the factors for determining coal 
price is against the sound principles of logic and economics.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that such cost estimations for 
new projects be kept out for fixation of  coal price so as to secure the 
interest of common consumers. 
 
3) The Committee are of the view that the philosophy behind 
nationalisation of coal sector was to ensure the availability of coal to 
power sector and other end -users to boost the national economy rather 
than making huge profits by coal c ompanies by frequent revisions in coal 
rate.  The Committee understand that while meeting the coal demand from 
different sectors, CIL and its subsidiaries have to make profit for its 

76 
 
sustainability.  Therefore, there is need to strike a  balance between co al 
production and coal price. The Committee strongly recommend that while 
calculating the coal prices or going in for revision of coal prices, CIL and its 
subsidiaries should endeavour for revenue neutrality as far as possible so 
as to put minimum burden o n coal consumers thus securing their interest 
and welfare. 
   
4) The Committee note that though the regulated sector including 
power and fertilizers have largely been spared from price hike, the 
rationale behind price hike for non -regulated sector is beyond 
comprehension and rather discriminat ory to this sector and to the end -
consumers in particular. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
principled parity may be established as far as the coal price fixation is 
considered for regulated and non -regulated sectors. The Committee would 
like to be informed of the precise reasons and justification for having 
different price for different sectors, i.e regulated and non -regulated in this 
regard. 
   
5) The Committee note that in a de -regulated regime of coal prices, th e 
coal companies are free to revise the rates  at will without having any 
consultation with different stakeholders, particularly, the consumers.   The 
latest revision in coal rates by Coal India Limited is bound to impact steel 
and cement industries which h ave been put under non -regulated sector. 
Steel companies which uses sponge iron as raw material are also likely to 
be affected as 30% increase in non -coking coal price will adversely affect 
the profitability of sponge iron producers.  Since the Government has no 
control over coal price, the need for having a regulatory mechanism for 
coal sector has been felt since long.  The Committee observe that the 
Planning Commission had also recommended creation of an independent 
coal regulatory authority which would h ave power to comprehensive ly 
handle coal resource development, regulation on extraction, end use,  etc. 
including pricing and mine safety issues.  In any event Central Government 

77 
 
must constitute one coal pricing Regulatory Committee consisting of 
representatives of Coal companies, Central Government, each State which 
produces coal, representatives of c ustomer,  power generation and a n 
expert.  The expert should head the Commi ttee. The Committee have been 
apprised that creation of a permanent Coal Regulator A uthority has been 
approved by the Cabinet and a Bill is going to be introduced soon in 
Parliament in this regard to give it a statutory status. The Committee 
desire the Ministry  of Coal to bring in the much needed coal regulator for 
coal sector atleast coal pricing regulatory committee  expeditiously in the 
interest of all stakeholders. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry within three months. 
   
6) The Committee observe that the freight rates also impact the coal 
prices. It  is necessary that rail freight rates for coal transport are 
rationalized and for this the Ministry of Coal / Coal companies should have 
proper coordination at sufficiently higher level in the Ministry of Railways. 
In this regard, the Committee would l ike the Ministry of Coal and CIL to 
explore other modes of transport also so as to ensure speedy and cost 
effective movement of coal. 
 
7) As regards production cost of coal, the Ministry of Coal have 
informed the Committee that about 81% of the total cost of production is 
fixed and the balance 19% is variable. Controllable items are mainly the 
expenditure incurred on account of over time paid to the workers, under 
loading/over loading, demurrage and power. Though the coal companies 
have taken measures to bring  down the cost of production of coal and 
lignite by increasing production and productivity by rationalizing machine 
utilization and deployment of manpower, the Committee feel that the  
result in terms of cost reduction is not forthcoming.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that more concrete measures including austerity 
measures by Coal Companies need to be taken not only to bring down the 
cost of production but also to enhance the reserves  and profitability of the 
coal companies.   

78 
 
 
8) The Committee observe that due to lower coal production against the 
targeted production there is shortage of coal in the country. The small 
scale industries as well as mega industries including the power companies 
are heavily dependent on coal for their survival. Demand of th e coal 
outstrips the supply. The coal demand in the country during year 2012 -13 
was estimated at 772.84 million tonnes as against domestic production of 
574 million tonnes leaving a gap of 198.44 million tonnes of the targeted 
demand. Coal India Limited has failed time and again to meet the domestic 
demand for coal, and to meet the same, it imports the coal. The Committee 
are surprised to note what exactly prompts CIL to go for  e -auction of coal 
despite the coal shortage in the country and that too nearly 10% of the 
total coal produced in the country  is sold through e -auction. The 
Committee find that E -auction by CIL does not give a fair chance of 
participation to the end -users  and benefits only the  big traders and 
influential parties. The big traders may  purchase through e -auction at 
comparatively cheaper rates by forming cartel  and make small scale 
industries to purchase  coal from them at higher rates. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the whole procedure of e -auction should be 
made more transparent which can also subserve the interest of small scale 
industries. The Ministry of Coal and CIL should ensure that small  scale 
industries, small traders and end -users are not put at a disadvantage  
position in the process of e -auctioning under the New Coal  Distribution 
Policy. The monopoly of big traders which deprives the small traders and 
users of a fair chance of participation in coal e -auction need to be checked 
through a more transparent regulatory  and monitoring mechanism. The 
Committee recommend tha t the process of e -auction which though 
generates good revenue for Coal India Limited is also a big tool f or 
manipulation and therefore, should be checked immediately. While 
reiterating their earlier recommendations (24 th & 33 rd Reports, 15 th Lok 
Sabha) to review the present p olicy of e-auction to safeguard the interest 
of end-users, the Committee also desire that the extent of quantity of coal 

79 
 
reserved for e-auction should be kept at a bare minimum so as to meet the 
domestic demand of coal of the end-users, and small scale industries in the 
country. 
 
9) The information and data provided by Ministry of Coal and Coal India 
Limited and its subsidiaries to the Committee clearly reveal that there have 
been different coal rates for different coal grades across diffe rent 
subsidiaries of CIL earlier in Useful Heat Value (UHV) based system of 
pricing of coal. Though, CIL has submitted before the Committee that now 
the prices of the given grade of coal is same for most of the companies, it 
is really ironical that the sam e grade of coal is being sold at different 
prices even today in Gross Calorific Value (GCV) based system for 
Rajmahal of Eastern Coalfields Ltd.(ECL) and  Western Coal Fields Limited 
(WCL). The Committee observe that there is no Common Policy for fixation 
of Coal prices in the country like the petroleum companies which sell petrol 
and diesel at  almost same rates across different petroleum companies. 
Also, this ambiguity regarding different coal prices  across different coal 
companies is a reason for dissati sfaction and unfairness to end -users. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that having uniform prices across 
all grades of coal by all the coal companies is essential not only from point 
of marketing and linkages, but also for protecting the intere sts of the end-
users. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that CIL should 
come up with a National Policy for Coal Prices applicable to all Coal 
Companies and the Committee be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. 
 
10) The Committee have been app rised by the Ministry of Coal and CIL 
that international prices are also one of the factors in coal price fixation 
and therefore domestic coal prices are increased or decreased accordingly 
as per increase or decrease in international coal prices, now and t hen. But, 
Committee notice that there is no clarity, rules or guidelines regarding 
immediate calling of Board Meeting of CIL so as to quickly catch up with 

80 
 
the trends in international market and commensurate it with the domestic 
market in case of sudden in crease or decrease in international coal prices. 
The Committee also observe that though the Ministry of Coal/CIL are very 
prompt to review or revise the domestic coal prices in case of any increase 
in international price of coal but the same exercise of di scretionary powers 
for short term period review of coal prices are hardy practiced so far as the 
issue of decreasing domestic coal price in tune with decreasing 
international coal prices are concerned. The Committee, therefore,  
recommend that CIL Board should have meetings for immediate review of 
domestic coal prices in tune with trends in international market, both in 
cases of increase and decrease in international coal prices as it has a direct 
bearing on the consumers and other stakeholders. The Committ ee desire 
that CIL should  lay down clear guidelines in this regard. 
 
11) The Committee have been apprised that the new coal price policy 
approved by the Government allows power companies to pass on burden of 
expensive imported coal on to the consumers. To mee t its balance Fuel 
Supply Agreements(FSA) with power companies, CIL may import coal and 
supply the same to the willing Thermal Power Plants on cost plus basis. 
Under the proposed pass -through mechanism, approved by Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs(CCE A), the entire additional cost of 
imported coal would be passed on to consumers as against averaging of 
prices of imported and domestic coal under the earlier planned price -
pooling mechanism. The Committee feel that this decision of the 
Government is likel y to increase electricity tariffs further. The Committee 
are perturbed to note that the decision will only help the power companies, 
especially in private sector, who will be the main beneficiary of the 
decision as they will not pass  on the benefits to the  consumers. The 
interests of the consumers have thus been ignored and an additional 
burden of higher coal price subsequently resulting in higher ele ctricity 
tariffs have been put on them. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 

81 
 
Government to review this ne w coal price policy in the interest of 
consumers so as not to pass this additional burden on to them. 
COAL ROYALTY  
 
12) Royalty is an amount payable by a lessee to the lessor for removing 
or consuming a mineral . Section 9 (1) of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development & Regulation) Act requires the holder of a mining lease or 
his agent, manager, employee, contractor or sub -lessee to pay royalty in 
respect of any mineral removed or consumed from the leased area at the 
rate specified in the Second Schedule of the Act.  Section 9(3) of the MMDR 
Act, empowers the Central Government to enhance or reduce the royalty 
rates in respect of any mineral by notification.  For fixing the rate of 
royalty on coal/lignite, The Ministry of Coal constitutes a study group 
headed by th e Additional Secretary for fixing the rate of royalty on coal. 
The Study Group takes the views of all the stakeholders like the coal 
producing and consuming states and the major consumer sectors such as 
power, iron and steel, cement etc. After taking the v iews of all the 
stakeholders and other relevant factors, the study group makes its 
recommendation to the Ministry. The Ministry have informed the 
Committee that a Study Group was constituted in 2005 under the 
Chairmanship of Addl. Secretary(Coal) with the representatives of 
Ministries of Mines, Power, Coal Companies, CMPDIL and Federations of 
industries like FICCI and FIMI to decide the rates of royalty. Considering 
complexities involved in the issue of payment of royalty on ad -valorem 
basis vs tonnage basi s, the issue was referred to the Economic Advisory 
Council to the Prime Minister(EAC). Based on the recommendations of 
Economic Advisory Council of the Prime Minister the rates of royalty on 
coal and lignite have been revised with effect from 01.08.2007. The royalty 
rates were last revised w.e.f. 10.05.2012. These are being calculated as a 
combination of specific and ad valorem rates of royalty i.e. R(Royalty 
Rupees/tone)= a+bP where `P’ (price) shall mean basic pithead price of 
ROM(rum –of-mine) coal and l ignite as reflected in the invoice, excluding 

82 
 
taxes, levies and other charges; `a’ represents the fixed component and 
`b’ represents the variable or ad -valorem component. The value of `b’ has 
been fixed as 5% and the value of `a’ fixed for different grades  of coal.  
The representative of the Ministry of Coal tried to explain the formula 
worked out by the Economic Advisory Committee of the Prime Minister on 
Payment of Royalty to the Committee during the course of evidence but 
failed to convince the Committee  the justification for having such a 
formula.  According to the Committee, the formula evolved is not only 
ambiguous but has been worked out without any sound basis. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to have a relook at this cumbersome 
formula and come  out with a simpler and workable formula. The 
Committee observe that EAC to Prime Minister had also recommended that 
the parameters of `a’ and `b’ in the suggested formula have to be set so  
as to moderate the variation in the royalty on account of variati on in price.  
It was also suggested that `b’ be kept at 5% for all grades of coal.  The 
Committee have failed to understand the justification for keeping `b’ at 
5% for all grades of coal.   The fact remains that the formula suggested is 
devoid of clarity. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
rationale for keeping `b’ at 5% for all grade of coal.      
  
13) The Committee note that State of West Bengal has strongly opposed 
the differential treatment meted out to  the State in matters of royalty, etc.  
In the Mines and Minerals Development and Regulation Bill, 2011(MMDR), 
the rates of royalty on major minerals have been specified in the Second 
Schedule to the bill. In the Bill, rates of royalty proposed for different  
grades of coal produced in West Be ngal are different from other States.  
While the rates of royalty for West Bengal are specific, the rates of other 
states are a combination of specific and ad valorem rates of royalty and 
much higher than the rates proposed for West Bengal.  The State of W est 
Bengal has been treated differently from other States since the year 1991 
in the matter of rate of royalty to be charged on coal because the State of 

83 
 
West Bengal imposes cess on coal. The Committee in their Report on MMDR 
Bill, 2011 submitted to Parlia ment on 8.5.2013 have observed that this 
differential treatment to West Bengal  in the matter of fixation of rates of 
royalty vis -à-vis other States, who do not impose cess, is unjustified, as 
the State Government is empowered under the Constitution to impose cess 
on coal.  The royalty on coal and cess on coal bearing land are levied and 
collected on the basis of powers assigned to the States under two different 
entries in Constitution, namely, Entry no. 49 – Taxes on lands and 
buildings and Entry No. 50 – Taxes on mineral rights, subject to any 
limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development. 
The Parliament has not imposed any limitation on the taxing power on the 
mineral rights which the State can impose under entry No. 50 of the S tate 
List. The Committee are also apprised that the issue of propriety of 
imposition of cess on coal bearing land by the Government of West Bengal 
has been settled by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in favour of the State in 
Civil Appeal Nos. 1532 -33/93 in the m atter of State of West Bengal -
versus-Kesoram Industries and Others in January, 2004.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation (36 th Report on MMDR 
Bill, 2011) and desire  that the royalty for different grades of coal should 
be kept same in all States including State of West Bengal in all fairness and 
the government in this regard may  take appropriate action to amend 
schedule-II of the MMDR Bill, 2011 by fixing rate of royalty same to all 
States. 
 
14) The Committee observe that the issu e of levy of cess on coal by 
different States continues to remain a bone of contention between Centre 
and States and remain a cause of concern for the coal industry.  The 
Committee feel that excepting coal mines and lignite, State Government is 
the owner of the mines. Therefore, free hands should be given to the State 
Government for imposing Cess.  The Committee while reiterating their 
earlier recommendation regarding collection of cess by States in 36 th 
Report ("The Mines and Mineral (Development & Regulat ion) Bill, 2011") 

84 
 
recommend that  the State government may by notification specify the rate 
of Cess to be levied in case of major minerals  and minor minerals 
excepting coal and lignite and minor mineral according to the State 
Governments' wisdom and in ca se of coal and lignite at a rate not 
exceeding fifty percent by introducing appropriate legislation in States.  
The Committee would like the Ministry to come out with a permanent 
solution to the issue of levying cess by different States after having due 
consultations with all the concerned States.  Irrespective of charging cess 
by different States, the Committee feel that royalty of each State should be 
equal and on the basis of grades of coal.  The Committee feel that share of 
royalty which states be entit led to be paid to them immediately after 
receiving it by the coal companies from the Central Government. 
 
15) The Committee note that low royalty rates and their infrequent 
revision has become an important irritant in the realm of Centre -State 
Financial Relations.  The Committee are constrained to observe that one of 
the major factors for the downward trend of royalty is the absence of a 
clear cut policy on the subject.  The system of royalty as prevailing in the 
country is riddled with complications. The Commi ttee have been informed 
that though coal and lignite minerals belong to states, the royalty rates are 
fixed by the Central Government and the grievances of the concerned 
States are not adequately addressed by the Central Government before 
taking a final decision in this regard.   There are several  grades of coal and 
royalty rates differ from one category to another.  Sometimes, rates differ 
from one company to another. The lignite rates also differ from coal rates. 
Since the issue of royalty is riddled wit h complexities, the committee feel 
that there is a greater need that the issue be looked at in a larger 
perspective keeping in view the growing needs of the States. The 
rationalization of royalty rates and the timely revision will not only help 
the backwar d mineral rich states to improve their non -tax revenues but 
will also  go a long way in improving Central -State financial relations. The 
Ministry of Coal ought to adopt a  holistic approach of the problem and 

85 
 
work out a plausible solution. It is pertinent t o note that non -revision of 
royalty rates for many years has led to decline in the royalty income of the 
States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
bring out a clear cut policy on royalty acceptable to coal producing states 
which could be revised at periodical intervals. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry of Coal to address the grievances of affected States by 
having frequent interactions with the concerned states at the appropriate 
level. 
 
16) The Committee observe that whil e the prices of coal have been 
revised quite frequently, (nearly 7 times since deregulation) the rates of 
royalty have not been revised simultaneously. The plea of the coal 
producing states for an upward revision of the rate of royalty merits 
consideration on the ground that they lose heavily if the rates of royalty 
are not commensurate with revision in the administered price of coal and 
lignite. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that in case royalty cannot 
be revised for some reasons, the Centre should compensate the states 
through an equivalent matching grant.   
 
 
17) The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that a need was 
felt for quite some time, to determine a methodology for calculation of 
royalty, chargeable on coal produced from captive mines / blocks. The 
Government also included another term of reference viz ”to determine the 
basis of fixation of royalty on the coal produced from captive blocks”.  The 
Ministry are reported to have sought the views of stakeholders, coal 
producers, consumers an d coal bearing States. The replies on the 
questionnaire from the concerned stakeholders were examined in detail by 
a Study Group who has submitted its report to the Government. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to announce new royalty rates only 
after the suggestions/views from different stakeholders are taken into 

86 
 
consideration and a balance should be maintained as far as securing the 
interests of the various stakeholders is concerned. 
 
18) The Committee take a serious note of the rampant incidents of coal  
theft in coal mining areas.  There are also complaints regarding misuse of 
coal and diversion of coal from end -users.  The Committee feel that coal 
thefts and black marketing of coal has a direct bearing on the coal 
distribution in the country and is also  responsible in some way for coal 
shortage in country.  Coal theft, directly or indirectly, disturbs the demand-
supply equation of coal in the country which is reflected in coal price 
dynamics also in a subtle and latent manner.  The Ministry of Coal and C IL 
have submitted before the Committee about their limitation and difficulty 
to check and monitor the same. The Committee observe that the actions 
are taken only when there are complaints.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that there is an urgent need to k eep strong  vigilance and  there 
should be a monitoring mechanism put in place as f ar as this issue is 
concerned.  The end -user verification and checking on coal theft from coal 
mines is a joint responsibility of coal field managers and state enforcement 
authorities.  The Committee feel that coal field managers should have  
better coordination with the State enforcement authorities in this regard 
and  wherever irregularities are found, strict action must be taken as per 
law.  The Committee strongly recommend  that Ministry of Coal and Coal 
PSUs should set up a sophisticated and integrated Global Positioning 
System (GPS)/General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)/Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) & Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) Camera 
mechanism in all their coal fields so as to monitor and check the coal theft 
from coal mines and end -user verification on continuous basis and more 
effectively.  
 
NEW DELHI;                                             KALYAN BANERJEE 
__ December, 2013                                                               Chairman                
__ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

87 
 

88 
 

89 
 

90 
 

91 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
HELD ON 16  JULY, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAME NT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1515 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Ismail Hussain 
5.   Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
6. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8. Shri Narahari Mahato 
9. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
10. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
11. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
12.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13.   Ms. Mabel Rebello 
14. Shri Mohd Amin 
15.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
16. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
2. Smt. Sunita  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
1. Shri  D.K. Sikri, Secretary (Coal) 
2. Shri Alok Perti, AS(Coal) 
3. Shri R.K. Mahajan, Join Secretary 
4. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Sanjiv Mittal, JS&FA 

92 
 
6. Shri P.R. Mandal, Adv (Project) 
7. Shri Anil Kapoor, Director (finance 
8. Shri Sharad Ghodke, Director 
  
   
COAL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
1. Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD, NLC 
2. Shri T.K. Lahiry, CMD, BCCL 
3. Shri P.S. Bhattacharya, CMD, Coal India Limited 
4. Shri V.K. Singh CMD, Northern Coalfields Limited 
5. Shri R.K. Saha, CMD, Central Coalfields Limited 
6. Shri A.K. Singh, CMD, Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd. 
7. Shri S. Chakravarty, CMD, Eastern Coal Fields Limited 
8. Shri S. Narshingh Rao, CMD, SCCL 
9. Shri K. Sekar, Dir (Finance), Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. 
10.Shri Shakeel Ahmad, Manager, NLC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Ministry of Coal and Coal Public Sector Undertakings to the sitting of Committee and 
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. The Chairman mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to 
take oral evidence of the representativ es of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Public Sector 
Undertakings on “Coal Pricing and Issues related to Coal Royalty”.   
 
3. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry of Coal gave a visual presentation 
on “Coal Pricing and issues relating to Royalty” of  the Ministry of Coal followed by 
briefing by the Coal Secretary on PSUs, focus areas and initiatives taken by coal 
companies and key policies concerns.  The points discussed during the sitting broadly 
related to the issues such as total production of coal , coal off-take and  royalty collected 
from production of coal and the procedure to fix the royalty rates.  
 
4.  The Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of Coal to furnish the 
replies to the queries raised by the Members which could not be responded to. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
 

93 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
HELD ON 16  AUGUST, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3.     Shri Jaywant G. Awale 
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
6. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.   Ms. Mebel  Rebello 
12.  Shri Mohd Amin 
13.   Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma -  Director 
2. Smt. Sunita   -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Md. Aftab Alam   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
1. Shri  C. Balakrishnan, Secretary  
2. Shri Alok Perti, AS 
3. Shri R.K. Mahajan, Join Secretary 
4. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Sanjiv Mittal, JS&FA 
6. Shri P.R. Mandal, Adv (Project) 
7. Shri Sharad Ghodke, Director 
  

94 
 
 COAL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
1. Shri P.S. Bhattacharya, CMD, Coal India Limited 
2. Shri S. Chakraborty, CMD, Eastern Coal Fields Limited 
3. Shri T.K. Lahiry, CMD, BCCL 
4. Shri R.K. Saha, CMD, Central Coalfields Limited 
5. Shri V.K. Singh CMD, Northern Coalfields Limited 
6. Shri N.C. Jha, CMD, South Eastern Coalfields Limited 
7. Shri S.R. Upadhyay, CMD, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited 
8. Shri A.K. Singh, CMD, Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd. 
9. Shri S. Narsingh Rao, CMD, SCCL 
10.Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. (NLC) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Ministry of Coal and Coal Public Sector Undertakings to the sitting of Committee and 
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. The Chairman mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to 
take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Public Sector 
Undertakings on “Coal Pricing and Issues related to Coal Royalty”.   
 
3. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry of Coal briefed the Committee on 
the issue relating to the subject under examination especially procedure to fix the 
royalty rates. The witnesses also attended to the other quer ies raised by the Members 
during evidence.   
 
4.  The Chairman further directed the representatives of the Ministry of Coal to 
furnish the material on the issue of fixing the royalty, which could not be clarified by 
them during evidence. 
5. The evidence remained inconclusive. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

95 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
HELD ON 26  AUGUST, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3.     Shri Jaywant G. Awale 
4. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
5. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Shri Narahari Mahato 
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
9. Km. Saroj Pandey 
10. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
11. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.   Ms. Mebel  Rebello 
15.   Shri R.C. Singh  
16.   Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ashok  Sarin   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  -  Director 
3. Smt. Sunita    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Md. Aftab Alam    - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
1.   Shri P.K. Misra, Secretary  
2. Shri S. Machendranathan, AS&FA 
3. Dr. Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary    
4. Shri G. Elias, Joint Secretary    

96 
 
5. Shri Udai Pratap Singh, Joint Secretary   
6. Shri J.P. Shukla, Joint Secretary 
 
 
 
STEEL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
1. Shri C.S. Verma, Chairman,  SAIL 
2. Shri Soiles Bhattacharya, Director,  SAIL 
3. Shri B.B. Singh, Director (Personnel),  SAIL 
4. Shri Shoeb Ahmed, Director,  SAIL 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Ministry of Steel  and Steel Public Sector Undertaking s to the sitting of the 
Committee and mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to have 
briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Steel and Steel Public Sector 
Undertakings on “CSR Activities of the Steel Authority of India Ltd .”  He also reminded 
them about the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Steel briefed the Committee, 
about the CSR Activities of the Steel Authority of India Ltd.  C onstitution of Economic 
Advisory Council to the PM and other Committees for fixation of royalty and 
implementation of their recommendation. The Members also enquired about the 
methodology followed by the Ministry/Coal India Ltd. for fixation of coal prices and other 
related issues. The Secretary, Ministry of Coal also responded to various other queries 
raised by the Members.   
 
4.  The Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of Coal to furnish the 
material on the issue of fixing the royalty, w hich could not be satisfactorily clarified by 
them. 
 
5. The evidence remained inconclusive. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

97 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
HELD ON 20  JANUARY, 2012 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1500 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
        LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury  
4. Shri Ismail Hussain  
5. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar  
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
8. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel 
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
10. Shri K. Sugumar 
11. Shri Manohar Tirkey  
12. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
 
 
       RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13.   Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
14. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
15. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
16. Shri Nand Kumar Sai  
17. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
18. Shri R.C. Singh 
19.  Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
 
 

98 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
1. Shri Alok Perti, Secretary     
2. Ms.Zohra Chatterjee, Additional Secretary   
3. Smt. Anjali Anand Shrivastava,  (JS & FA)  
4. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary    
5. Shri S.K. Singh, Joint Secretary    
 
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
1. Shri N.C. Jha, CMD, Coal India Ltd. 
2. Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. 
3. Shri Narsing Rao, CMD, Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd 
4. Shri T.K. Lahiri, CMD, Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. 
5. Shri Rakesh Sinha, CMD, Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 
6. Shri R.K. Saha, CMD, Central Coalfields Ltd. 
7. Shri V.K. Singh, CMD, Northern Coalfields Ltd. 
8. Shri D.C. Garg, CMD, Western Coalfields Ltd. 
9. Shri A.N. Sahay, CMD, Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. 
10.Shri A.K. Singh, CMD, CMPDIL 
11.Shri A.K. Sinha, Director (Finance), Coal India Ltd. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of 
the Ministry of Coal and Public Sector Undertakings to the sitting of Committee and 
apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. The Chairman mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened in 
connection with the further oral evidence  by the Ministry of Coal on the subject "Coal 
Pricing and issues related to Royalty".   
3. The Chairman informed the Committee that H on'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha has 
referred the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011, introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 12 th December, 2011 to the Departmentally  Related Standing Committee 
on Coal & Steel for examination and report within a peri od of three months.  He also 
informed the Committee since the proposed bill seeks to replace the existing Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Committee would like to seek the 
views/comments from individuals/institutions/stakeholders experts etc. on the provision 
of the Bill by giving advertisements in print/electronic media 
4. The points discussed during the sitting broadly related to the shifting of pricing  
mechanism of coal from useful Heat value (UHV) system to Gross Calorific  Value (GCV) 
based system, effect of price rise on coal pricing and royalty, revision of prices of 
different grades of coal, grading system adopted by coal companies etc. 
5.  The Members raised various issues and sought clarifications from Ministry of 
Coal/PSUs on the subject. Some of the points were clarified by the representatives of 
Ministry of Coal. Further, the Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Coal to apprise the Committee about the decision taken by the Government on the issue 
of revision of pricing of various grades of coal. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
                             The Committee then adjourned. 

99 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 14  JUNE, 2013 IN CO MMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
     LOK SABHA  
2.    Shri Sabbam Hari 
3.    Shri  Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
4.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
5.    Shri Govind Prasad Mishra  
6.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
7.    Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
8.    Shri K.R. G. Reddy  
9.  Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
10.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
11.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani 
13.  Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri S. Bal Shekar  -  Secretary 
2.  Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
3.  Shri Arvind Sharma -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
               MINISTRY OF COAL AND ITS PSU's 
1. Dr. A.K. Dubey Addl. Secretary 
2. Shri  A. K. Bhalla  Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh  Joint Secretary  
4. Smt.  Sujata Prasad  Joint Secretary and FA 
5. Shri D. N. Prasad Advisor(P) 
6. Shri S. Narsingh Rao Chairman, Coal India Ltd. 
7. Shri V. K. Singh CMD, NCL 
8. Shri B. Surender Mohan  CMD, NLC 
9. Shri A. K. Debnath  CMD, CMPDIL 
10. Shri T. K. Lahiry CMD, BCCL  
11. Shri D. C Garg CMD, WCL 
12. Shri Gopal Singh  CMD, CCL 
13. Shri N. Kumar CMD, SECL 

100 
 
14. Shri Rakesh Kumar Sinha CMD, ECL 
15. Shri A.N. Sahay MCL 
16. Shri R. Kandasamy Director (Project & Planning), NLC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the  Additional Secretary and other 
officers of the Ministry of Coal and Public Sector Undertakings to the sitting of 
Committee convened to take their oral evidence on the subject, “Coal Pricing and Issues 
relating  to the Royalty”. The Chairman then apprised them of the provisions of Direction 
58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
3. Thereafter, a visual presentation on “Coal Pricing and issues relating to Roy alty” 
was  made before the Committee by the representative of the Ministry of Coal.  The 
points discussed during the sitting broadly related to the issues such as methodology for 
fixation of coal prices, production of coal, coal off take, royalty collected from production 
of coal, impact of price revision on consumers, etc.  
 
4.  The Chairman then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Coal to furnish a 
copies  of the Minutes  of all the Meetings of CIL Board held in connection with revision 
of price of coal. The Committee also decided to have further evidence on the subject 
after the  receipt of copies of the Minutes from Ministry of Coal/CIL.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 8 JULY, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1545 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
     LOK SABHA  
 
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3.    Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
4.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
5.    Shri  Sabbam Hari 
6.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
7.    Shri Govind Prasad Mishra  
8.    Kumari Saroj Pandey 
9.    Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
10.  Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
11.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
12.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
13.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
15.  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
16.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri S. Bal Shekar  -  Secretary 
2.  Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
3.  Shri Arvind Sharma -  Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
               MINISTRY OF COAL AND ITS PSU's 
1. Shri S. K. Srivastava Secretary,  Ministry of Coal 
2. Shri A. K. Dubey Additional Secretary,  Ministry of Coal 
3. Shri  A. K. Bhalla  Joint Secretary, Ministry of Coal 
4. Smt. Sujata Prasad,  Joint Secretary & Finance Adviser  
5. Shri S. Narsingh Rao Chairman, Coal India Ltd. 
6. Shri N. Kumar Director(Technical) &I/C CMD, SECL 
7. Shri B.K. Saxena  Director (Marketing), CIL 
8. Shri B. Surender Mohan CMD, NLC 
9. Shri T. K. Lahiry CMD, BCCL  
10. Shri R. Sinha  CMD, ECL 

102 
 
11. Shri Gopal Singh  CMD, CCL 
12. Shri S. Bhattacharya CDM, SCCL 
13. Shri D. C Garg CMD, WCL 
14. Shri A. N. Sahay  CMD,, MCL 
15. Shri A. K. Debnath  CMD, CMPDIL 
16. Shri R. Mohan Das  Director, CIL 
17. Shri S. Vivekanand  Director, SCCL 
18. Shri B. Nagya Exe. Director, SCCL 
19. Shri Rakesh Kumar Director (Finance) NLC 
20. Shri R. Kandasamy Director (Project & Planning), NLC 
 
1. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry of Coal and  PSUs to the sitting of Committee 
convened to take further evidence on the subject "Coal Pricing and issues relating 
to the royalty". 
 
2. The Committee, thereafter raised  several points regarding import price of 
different grades of  coal, comparison between domestically produced coal  vis-à-vis 
prices of coal in international market, factors included in calculation for coal prices, 
revenue neutrality as regards pricing of coal produced by different subsidiaries of 
Coal India Limited, linkages of coal and royalty on  coal, lack of uniform national 
policy for price fixation of same grade of coal, issues of e -auction despite coal 
shortage in the country,  need for e -auction on ly to end users, installation of 
GPRS, CCTV to check coal theft, rationale behind  passing of price burden of 
imported coal to common consumers, Role of Coal Regulator in deciding  
methodology for coal price as well as regulating coal sector, etc. 
3. The M embers raised their concerns on the above issues and sought 
clarifications from the Ministry of Steel. Some of the points were clarified by the 
representatives of Ministry of Coal. The Chairman directed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Coal to furnis h written replies to the queries raised by the Members 
which could not be responded to.   
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
              The Committee then adjourned 
 

103 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL H ELD 
ON 17 DECEMBER, 2013 IN ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
    LOK SABHA  
 
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
6.    Shri Babu Lal Marandi  
7.    Shri  Govind Prasad Mishra  
8.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
9.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
10.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11.  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
12.  Shri Jugul Kishore 
13.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
14.  Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
15.  Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Shiv Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Additional Director 
 

104 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:- 
(i)        **   **   **   ** 
 
(ii)       **   **   **   ** 
 
(iii)        Draft Report on “Coal Pricing and Issues relating to Royalty” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Coal; 
 
(iv)      **   **   **   ** 
 
(v)      **   **   **   ** 
 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports with some minor changes/modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the ba sis of factual 
verification from the concerned Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________ 
** Do not pertain to this Report.  