 
1 
 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 Steel is key to the development of any country and is considered to be the 
mainstay of the human civilization.  The level of per capita consumption of steel is 
treated as economic indicator of a country.  All major industrial economie s are 
characterized by the existence of a strong steel industry and the growth of many of 
these economies has been largely shaped by the strength of their steel industries in 
this initial stages of development.   
 
 India has been one of the major producers  of steel in the world.  Prior to the 
economic reforms of the early 1990s, the Steel Industry of India was r egulated and 
controlled by the Government P olicies.  After liberalization the Indian Steel Industry 
evolved significantly to conform to  internation al standards. The India Steel Industry 
is expected to play a significant role in India‟s economic development in the years to 
come.  Availability of iron ore in the country and well furnished facilities for steel 
productions are the major aspects which wil l play a major role in the growth of the 
steel industry in India.  The domestic steel industry has a tremendous growth 
potential and likely to register significant growth in the coming years in view of the 
rising demand of steel in infrastructure and realt y sectors.  However, one of the 
major initiatives that need to be taken is to focus on increasing consumption of steel 
in the rural areas.   
 
 In order to realize the growth potential in the steel sector, it is imperative that 
the steel industry remain com petitive. The availability of critical inputs such as iron 
ore and coke is equally important for sustainable growth of the industry.  India has a 
number of iron ores.  Thus, the industry has plenty of resources to draw its raw 
material from.  However, Indi an Steel Industry has to grapple with the problem of 
inadequate reserves of coking coal.   
  
 Notwithstanding the above, there are certain challenges before the steel 
industry of India.  The condition of infrastructural facilities of the steel industry is not 
so conducive for a healthy growth and development of the steel industry in India.  
The Indian Steel Industry has also not been able to draw the best professionals.  

 
2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Brief Background 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAIL) 
 
In the pre -liberalization era, besides TISCO (Tata Iron and Steel Company 
now renamed as TATA steel) and secondary steel producers, SAIL was the only 
major steel producer in India. However, post liberalization and globalization, a 
number of private players like Essar, Jindal, Isp at etc. set up steel plants in India. 
According to the Ministry, t his resulted in increased competition. Subsequently, all 
these domestic producers have enhanced or are in the process of enhancing their 
capacities. Further, many foreign steel majors like POSCO, Arcelor Mittal announced 
their plans to set up new steel plants in India. This would have further eroded the 
market share of SAIL.  
1.2 It has been stated that i n order to maintain predominance in the steel sector 
and to face global competitiveness, SAIL had drawn up a Modernisation & 
Expansion Plan for its five integrated steel plants and special steels plants including 
raw material resources and other related facilities. Apart from increasing the 
production capacity, the plan addresses the vital iss ues of elimination of 
technological obsolescence, installing energy efficient & environment friendly 
technologies, value addition/ product –mix improvement/ sustenance of existing 
assets of the plants and introduction of customer –centric processes such as 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and Manufacturing Execution System (MES). 
The upgradation of existing facilities at steel plants is necessary to meet the stringent 
quality requirements of the customers and to remain cost competitive. 
 
1.3 In reply to a q uery, the Ministry informed the Committee that SAIL has 
planned a capital expenditure of about Rs.70,000 crore for modernization/expansion 
and sustenance schemes of existing Plants/Units, including Rs.10,000 crore for 
development of raw material facilities . The source of funding of modernization & 
expansion of SAIL will be through a combination of debt & equity (including internal 
resources) while maintaining debt-equity ratio of 1:1. 
 

 
3 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
1.4 According to the Ministry, RINL has excellent layout, infrastructure including 
land and large skilled workforce making it suitable to expand capacity upto 20 million 
tonnes of liquid steel per annum. The plant has well connected logistic infrastructure 
facilities like two main port s at close proximity, National H ighway and railway lines 
adjacent to the plant. Based on the fund availability and advantageous position with 
respect to layout and infrastructure, RINL has utilised this opportunity to encash on 
the growth opportunity in the c ountry and has undertaken expansion to double it‟s 
capacity to 6.3 Mt of liquid steel, which is currently in progress.  
 
1.5 The Committee have been further informed that t he production of Hot Metal, 
Liquid steel and Saleable steel at VSP, crossed rated ca pacities in the year 2001-02 
and have consistently remained above 100% since then. As a result of consistently 
operating at high levels of capacity utilization and the plant being in continuous 
operation for nearly 20 years, many critical equipment in the plant have outlived their 
economic service life and therefore require major revamps / capital repairs to bring 
them back to earlier reliability and efficiency levels. In this endeavour, RINL -VSP has 
undertaken several modernisation/ upgradation projects, w hich are at various stages 
of conceptualization / market survey / order placement / implementation and 
commissioning.  In addition to the above reasons, strategically, expansion is also 
necessitated to reduce overhead cost per tonne of steel produced, as R INL does not 
have captive Iron ore and Coking coal mines and for these reasons, RINL‟s variable 
cost is much higher than those Integrated Steel Plants having captive  mines for 
these raw materials. 
 
1.6 RINL has envisaged meeting its plan expenditure toward s modernization and 
expansion schemes entirely out of internal accruals and external borrowings without 
seeking any budgetary support from Government of India. In respect of its major 
ongoing Expansion project, it is envisaged that the entire project cost would be 
funded by way of 50% from internal accruals and 50% from external borrowings that 
would be raised by the Company depending on the requirement. Being a Zero debt 
high Net worth company, the company is confidant to raise resources from capital 
market as and when required. 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Modernisation – Elimination of Technological Obsolescence, Energy Efficiency 
and Environment Friendly Technology  
 
 Steel Authority of India (SAIL) 
 
SAIL is in the process of modernizing and expanding its production  units, raw 
material resources and other facilities to maintain its dominant position in the Indian 
steel market. Besides capacity enhancement, the modernization & expansion plan 
adequately addresses the need of SAIL Plants towards eliminating technologica l 
obsolescence, energy saving, enriching product mix, pollution control, developing 
mines & collieries to meet higher requirement of key inputs, introduce customer 
centric processes and have matching infrastructure facilities in the Plant to support 
higher production volumes. 
 
 Plant-wise status: 
 
 IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) 
 
 The Modernisation & Expansion Plan of ISP was approved „in -principle‟ by 
SAIL Board in July‟06. The final approval was also accorded for placement of order 
of major packages by SAIL Board progressively from Sep‟07 to Feb‟08. 
 
The plan envisages: 
 
 The Major Facilities include a New 7 metre tall Coke Oven Battery; Sinter 
Machines; a new Blast Furnace of 4060 m 3 volume with Top Pressure 
Recovery Turbine; 3 Nos. of 150 T Basic Oxygen Furnace Converters; 2 Nos. 
of 6-strand Billet Casters and one 4-strand Beam Blank/ Bloom Caster; Heavy 
Section Mill; Wire Rod & Bar Mill with necessary auxiliary and service 
facilities.  
 
 Continued operation of existing Finishing Mills with feed stock from new 
Casters. Saleable steel is envisaged at 2.37 Mtpa from both existing and new 
mills. 
 
The status of implementation is as follows: 
 
 Orders for all the major packages viz. Coke Oven Battery (COB), Sinter 
Plant, Blast Furnace, Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) Shop, Con tinuous 
Casters, Heavy Section Mill, Wire Rod & Bar Mill etc. have been 
placed. 
 
 Design and engineering jobs are in advanced stage of completion. Civil 
& structural works and equipment supply & erection are in progress. 
The commissioning of various facilit ies has been synchronized with the 

 
5 
 
schedule of BOF shop.  
 
 Salem Steel Plant (SSP) 
 
The Modernisation & Expansion Plan of Salem Steel Plant was approved „in -
principle‟ by SAIL  Board in June‟06. The final approval for placement of order of 
major packages was accorded  by SAIL Board on Sep‟07/Jan‟08. 
 
The plan envisages: 
 
 Installation of new steel making and continuous casting facilities to 
produce 180,000 tonnes per annum (tpa) of stainless steel slabs and 
expansion of cold rolling complex to produce 146,0 00 tpa of cold rolled 
stainless steel. 
 
The status is as follows: 
 Orders for all the packages viz. New Steel Melting Shop, New Cold 
Rolling Mill Complex, Up -gradation of Existing Cold Rolling Mill, Roll 
grinder for Hot Rolling Mill etc. have been placed.  
 
 Design & engineering work and major civil & structural works have 
been completed. Major equipment supply & erection jobs have also 
been completed. Some units have already been commissioned and are 
under regular use. Steel making facilities are likely to b e completed by 
Aug‟10 subject to availability of uninterrupted Power supply from 
TNEB.  
 
 Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) 
 
 The Modernization & Expansion Plan of BSL was approved „in -principle‟ by 
SAIL Board in Dec‟06. Final approval had also been accorded by SAI L Board for 
placement of orders for major stand alone packages which includes New CRM 
Complex, Up-gradation of BF-2,  Augmentation of SMS -II, Power distribution & 
Transmission Packages and Hot Metal  Desulphurization packages. 
 
 The Major Facilities include the following: 
 
• Installation of a new cold rolling mill complex of 1.2 Mtpa capacity  
• Up-gradation of one Blast furnace 
• Rebuilding of coke oven batteries compliant with statutory environmental 
norms  
• Modernization & up-gradation of SMS-II 
• Augmentation of Infrastructure Facilities 
 
The status is as follows: 
 
 Orders for major schemes have been placed which include New CRM 
complex, Upgradation of BF -2, upgradation of SMS -II for its capacity 
expansion and CHSGP for BF 1,2&3 along with associated auxiliary 
packages. Execution of all these packages is in progress. 
 
  

 
6 
 
Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) 
 
The Modernization & Expansion Plan of Bhilai Steel Plant was approved „in -
principle‟ by SAIL Board in Apr‟07. Final approval had also been accorded by 
SAIL Board for place ment of orders for major packages which includes BOF 
shop, CC Shop, Coal & Ore handling system, New COB etc. 
 
The Plan envisages: 
• Phasing out of low yield and energy intensive units viz. twin hearth 
furnace, ingot casting, soaking pits and blooming and billet mill  
• Reduction of semis by enhancing finished steel production;  
• Broadening and value addition in product -mix for higher flexibility and 
profitability;  
• Meeting requirement of Indian Railways of class A heavier rails 
 
 The Major Facilities include the following: 
 Installation of a new 7 metre tall coke oven battery No. 11,  
 New blast furnace, having a volume of 4060 m3 
 Second sinter machine in Sinter Plant-3,  
 New Steel Melting Shop (SMS -3) with complete secondary refining 
facilities,  
 New Billet Casters/ Billet-cum-Bloom Caster, Beam Blank Caster,  
 Bar & Rod Mill,  
 Universal Rail Mill,  
 New Oxygen Plant  
 
The status is as follows: 
 
 Orders for some major packages have been placed which includes BOF 
shop, Continuous Casting (CC) Shop, Coal & Ore handling system, New 
COB, New Lime Plant etc. and are under implementation. Balance 
packages to be ordered include Sinter Plant, Blast Furnace, Bar & Rod 
Mill, Universal Rail Mill etc. which are under various stages of tendering.  
 
 Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) 
 
 The Modernization & Expansion Plan of Rourkela Steel Plant  was approved 
„in-principle‟ by SAIL Board in May‟07.  Final approval had been accorded by SAIL 
Board for placement of orders for the major packages except BOF & Plate Mill. 
 
The Plan envisages: 
 
• Increase in production of crude steel through state -of-the-art technology 
meeting the productivity levels of international standards; 
• Improvement in quality of products; Production of more value -added 
products; 
• Improvement in energy consumption; Improvement of e nvironment; and 
Reduction in cost of production and thereby increase in NSR. 
 
 The Major Facilities include the following: 
• New 7.0 m tall COB No.6  
• New Sinter Plant-3  

 
7 
 
• New Blast Furnace -5 (4060m3). 
• New 3rd BOF convertor, LF, RH -OB and 3 rd single strand Slab Caster with 
balancing facilities for operation and increased production in SMS-II.  
• New 4.3 m wide Plate Mill  
• New Oxygen Plant on built-own-operate (BOO) basis.  
 
The status is as follows: 
 
 Orders for major packages have been placed which includes New Blast 
Furnace, Continuous Caster, New Sinter Plant, 3rd BOF Converter, Coal 
Handling Plant, Ore Handling Plant & Lime Calcination Plant and are 
under implementation. Major balance package to be ordered includes New 
Plate Mill which is under various stages of tendering. 
 
 Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP) 
 
The Modernization & Expansion Plan of Durgapur Steel Plant was approved 
„in-principle‟ by  SAIL Board in Jul‟07.  
 
 Orders have been placed for major packages such as Bloom -cum-round 
caster, Medium Structural Mill  & Reheating Furnace for MSM and 
standalone packages which include additional equipment in Raw Material 
Handling System (RMHS) etc. Execution of all these packages is in 
progress. 
 
2.2 The Committee  during the course of examination of modernisation and 
expansion of steel sector  undertook, inter -alia, a vis it to IISCO Steel Plant(ISP), 
Burnpur on 29.06.2010 to oversee the progress of the modernisation and expansion 
programme of the Plant.   
 
2.2.1 When the Committee inquired about increasing the height of the boundary 
wall of the IISCO Steel Plant, the Ministry of Steel in their written reply have 
furnished the following information:-  
      “The height of existing plant boundary wall has been raised to 4.0 meters 
where the height was less than 3.0 meters.  Old boundary wall near Coal 
Handling Plant was damaged and same has been restored with height of 4.0 
meters. 
 
 10 km long new boundary wall, having overall height of 4.20 meters (including 
concertina coil), coving the new plant area has been erected excep t for five 
stretches (7 m, 8 m, 4 m, 20 m and 22 m totaling 61 meters).  Work in these 
areas is held up due to protest by local residents of the area.  The matter has 
been taken up with local administration at various levels and is being pursued 
since long time but no support is forthcoming for completing balance work of 
boundary wall.  
 
 Boundary wall near west yard(stretch of 20 mtrs) has  been dismantled to 
facilitate construction of a road bridge.  The boundary wall will be 
reconstructed after completion of the job of Road Bridge.” 

 
8 
 
 
2.3 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL): 
 
  
 As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Steel, t he production of Hot 
Metal, Liquid steel and saleable steel at VSP, crossed rated capacities in the year 
2001-02 and ha ve consistently  remained above 100% since then. As a result of 
consistently operating at high levels of capacity utilization and continuous thrust on   
production    of value added  steel, critical equipment in the plant require major 
revamps / capital repairs to bring them back to earlier reliability and efficiency levels, 
as brought out below:  
 
 Blast Furnaces: BF-1 Godavari & BF-2 Krishna were commissioned in Mar ‟90 
& Mar ‟92 respectively. Since inception, BF -1 & BF-2 have produced 29.8 Mt & 
28.6 Mt ti ll 31.03.09 respectively and have been in continuous production for 
the last 1 9 & 1 7 years respectively.  Normally, the Russian BFs are 
recommended for Category – 1 capital repairs after 18 -20 Mt throughputs & 
after 14 to 16 years of operation.  So, both the furnaces are overdue now for the 
major repairs needing about 4 months shutdown each.  The action for 
revamping and up -gradation of Blast Furnaces have already been taken and 
tender has been re-floated for BF-1. 
 Basic Oxigen Furnace(BOF): The 3 converters have since inception produced 
16.16 Mt, 15.80 Mt & 15.41 Mt respectively of liquid steel till 31.03.09.  These 
BOFs are only furnaces of this design and vintage working in the world today as 
was confirmed by their designer M/s Azovmash, who two years ago  
recommended total revamp. Number of heats in BOFs at VSP have exceeded 
100 thousand in a span of 17 years against accepted service life of 40 to 50 
thousand heats and / or 17 years. The action for revamping of converters has 
already been taken and tender has been re-floated. 
 Sinter Plant: Sinter Machines 1 and 2 were commissioned in Nov‟ 89 and Dec 
‟91 respectively and have produced 41.66 Mt and 41.63 Mt respectively till 
31.03.09. Machines are now due for major repairs to bring back efficiency and 
earlier reliability, more importantly from environmental point of view. The 
process of conceptualization of revamping and up -gradation has already 
commenced. 
 Coke Ovens: The three Coke oven batteries were commissioned progressively 
between Sep ‟89 and Jul ‟92. Cu mulative gross coke produced till 31.03.09 is 
35.5 Mt. Intermittent repairs are being carried out and major repairs are now 
planned from 2012. Rebuilding of each battery is likely to take 30 months. 
 Others: 
 
o Continuous Casting Shop 
 Replacement of outlived Lift & Turn (L&T) housings for 3 out of 6 
machines completed and balance three are planned in 2010 -11 and 2011-
12 for which the procurement process is in progress. 
 Modification of gas cutting machines completed for three out of six 
machines and balance three are planned in 2010-11 and 2011-12. 
o Thermal Power Plant 

 
9 
 
 Up-gradation of Control &Instrumentation systems of power plant is in 
progress after being in operation for more than 20 years. Obsolete 
systems are being replaced with Digital Distributed Control (DDC) 
systems. 
 
 Thus, RINL is in the process of modernizing and upgrading its‟ existing 
facilities to sustain the current production and productivity level and also to 
reduce energy consumption, improve technological parameters, to meet latest 
environmental norms etc. Management has put in place an exclusive 
Department – Modernization and Capital Repairs, for processing of activities 
relating to the modernization and capital repairs of various units in the plant in 
a focused way. 
 
In this endeavour, sever al projects have already been frozen  for 
implementation and some of them are further being identified as per 
requirement. Some of the major projects which have been completed are 
Coke oven Battery -4 (Phase -1), Combined Blowing in all of the 3 LD 
converters, Modernization of Continuous casting Machine -2, Modification of 
gas cutting machine in SMS, Replacement of Lift  & Turn stand housing in 
CCM-4, Up -gradation of ladle furnace PLC & MMI, Up -gradation of Control 
and Instrumentation of 1 Turbo generator, Up -gradation of Control and 
Instrumentation of 1 Boiler, Conversion of binding machine to automatic 
strapping machine in bar mill.   
 
The projects relating to Iron Ore Storage Augmentation, Coke Oven Battery 
4(phase-2), Pulverized Coal Dust Injection System, Co nversion of tying 
machine to strapping machine in Medium Merchant Structural Mill, Up -
gradation of Control and Instrumentation of 2 Turbo generators, Air 
Separation Unit 4 & 5 , Reduction of Ammonical Nitrogen at MBC are under 
implementation. 
 
Later on the projects relating to Stacker -cum-Reclaimer & Dozers, Enhancing 
production in Sinter Machines, Category 1 repairs of BF 1 & BF 2, Pig Iron 
storage augmentation, Modification of Continuous Casting Machine, 
Converter revamping / up -gradation, Up -gradation of slag yard cranes, 
Handling and finishing line – 4, Augmentation of SMS water system for up -
gradation of CCMs, Additional storage facility (EPI) are proposed to be taken 
up for implementation.  
 
2.4 On being asked whether the globally best and proven techno logies available 
in steel industry   are being introduced in the ongoing mode rnisation and expansion 
of SAIL and  RINL, the Ministry of Steel has furnished the following information: 
 
 Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 SAIL‟s modernization & expansi on plan include the state -of-the-art 
technologies prevalent in steel sector globally which include: 
 
 BOF Secondary Refining, LF, RHOB, etc. 
 Continuous casting technology (from current level of 60% to about 93% in 
current phase) 

 
10 
 
 Introduction of pellets charging in Blast Furnaces 
 Coke dry quenching facilities in Coke ovens 
 Top pressure recovery turbine introduced in Blast Furnaces 
 Coal Dust Injection in Blast furnaces. 
 100% desulphurization and addition of VAD, AOD and other degassing 
units for cleaner steel.  
 ERP introduction  
 Level-3 automation 
 Following units of new technology being introduced :  
 Round cum bloom caster at DSP 
 Beam blank caster at ISP  
 Coupled pickling and Tandem Mill at BSL 
 
 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
i) Details of best and proven technologies available in the Steel industry: 
 
 Two main processes which constitute the core of the steel industry are: 
 
a) Iron making and 
b) Steelmaking 
 
a)  Iron Making Technology: 
 
Iron making technology used by the steel industry across the globe, is through 
the following routes: 
1. The Blast Furnace route:  The Coke -oven-Sinter-BF route is the most 
widely used and tested  process used by integrated steel plants across the 
world, that produce steel from iron ore in large volumes. In this process, 
the iron ore is first subjected to a sintering process and the treated iron 
from the sintering plant is fed in to the Blast furnace along with coke. The 
hot metal output from the Blast furnace is either directly fed in to the Basic 
Oxygen Furnace or used for producing „pig iron‟. 
2.  The Direct Reduction Technique: This technique is an alternative to the 
Blast furnace technique and produces 97.0 percent pure iron, which is 
called, solid Sponge Iron or direct reduced iron or hot briquetted iron. It is 
used as substitute for steel scrap in Electric Arc Furnaces. 
3.  Smelting Reduction Technique:   Smelting reduction technique is the 
third technique used for the production of iron from iron ore. COREX 
technique is the latest process used for smelting. Here coal is direct ly 
used in a melter gasifier as an energy carrier & reducing agent, thereby 
eliminating the need for a Blast Furnace, Sinter Plant & Coke Ovens. 
Corex which was introduced two decades ago has not grown significantly.  
It has limitation for production of steel in large volumes.   
The other smelting techniques that have been developed are Hismelt, 
Ausmelt, Romelt, Plasmasmelt and the Direct Iron Smelting Reduction 
(DIOS). 

 
11 
 
4. Finex Technology:  Finex technology is based on use of iron ore fines 
and non coking coal. However, Finex based steel plants so far have only 
been installed in Korea, comparatively of lower capacity and few other 
steel plants are in the process of adopting this technology.   The 
production of steel through this route is less than 5 million  tonnes against 
the global production of over 1200 million tonnes annually through 
conventional technology viz., Blast Furnace, Basic Oxygen Furnace, 
Electrical Arc Furnace route etc.,    
Among all the iron making processes up to now, the Blast furnace iro n 
making route  is the biggest in production scale, the lowest in energy 
consumption and the highest in efficiency. Several developments have 
been made over the years to improve the efficiency by improving the scale 
of operation through increase in the furn ace size, to improve productivity 
through increase in top pressure and blast temperature, intensive size 
control of the burden, improvement in the quality of sinter, burden 
distribution control, usage of pellets and injection of auxiliary fuels like coal 
dust, natural gas, tar injection along with oxygen enrichment.   
b)  The Steel Making Process 
The second stage in iron and steel making is the steel making process. 
Generally two types of techniques are adopted for steel making. They are the 
Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) type and Electric arc furnace (EAF) type. 
Basic Oxygen Furnace Technique (BOF):  The Basic oxygen furnace is 
used for producing steel from the refined iron. Currently about 67% of the 
world steel is produced through BF/BOF route. This route is v ery good for 
volume production. But the process requires high capital cost and substantial 
investments on infrastructure. 
Technologies like Combined blowing in converters have been developed to 
improve productivity of the Basic Oxygen Furnaces or Converter . Use of multi 
hole lances, improved refractory, high levels of automation etc further 
improves the productivity of the converter vessel. Refining technologies like 
Ladle furnace, RH degasser further enhances the quality of steel produced 
from the converters. 
Electric Arc Furnace (EAF):  Steel scrap or Pig iron or Sponge iron is used 
as the raw material in this process. The share of EAF steel making in the 
global output of crude steel stands at around 31 % and is increasing as EAF 
process is an environment friendly and has flexibility to produce variety of 
value added grades of steel 
 
ii)   New technologies being adopted in Modernisation/expansion at RINL-VSP: 
 
RINL-VSP has opted for the latest technology and more efficient equipment in 
it‟s on -going expansi on project. The following are the new features being 
adopted in the new units coming up in the on-going 6.3Mt expansion phase: 
 
a) New Sinter plant-3: 
 

 
12 
 
Deep bed sintering, elimination of hot sinter screen by S.S. segregation 
chute, short ignition furnace, circular cooler, waste heat recovery from 
cooler, lime addition in sinter mix, VVVF drive for energy saving. 
 
b) New Blast Furnace-3: 
 
Soft water closed loop cooling, copper cooling stave in high heat zone, 
high rate of coal dust injection, high top pressu re, flat cast house, 
carbon hearth, silicon carbide stack lining, heat recovery from stove 
flue gas, water cooled bottom, INBA slag granulation, Bell -less-top with 
center coke charging facilities, Level -2 automation, VVVF drive for 
energy saving. 
 
c) New Steel Melt Shop-2: 
 
Secondary emission control, RH de -gassing, round cum billet caster, 
warm charging of billet in WRM, tundish slide gate for liquid steel flow 
control, Level-2 automation, VVVF drives for energy saving. 
 
d) Wire Rod Mill-2: 
 
Low temperature rolling for quality product, hous ing less stands, robot 
in roll shop, warm charging of billet, high speed rolling, VVVF drives for 
energy saving, Condition Monitoring System (CMS) for better 
availability, digital control for reheating furnace, single fam ily roll pass 
design for high campaign life and sizing mill for rolling with high 
tolerance limit. 
 
 
e) Structural Mill: 
 
Housing less stands, robot in roll shop, multi stand straightener, CMS 
for better availability, VVVF drive for energy saving. 
 
f) Special Bar Mill: 
 
Low temperature rolling for quality project, hosing less stands, roll shop 
robot, CMS for better availability, VVVF drive for energy saving, single 
family roll pass design for higher campaign life and sizing mill for rolling 
with high tolerance limit. 
 
g) Auxiliary systems: 
 
- Energen/Argonite based system 
- Solid state based railway-signaling system 
- Gas insulated substation 
- Substation automation system 
- Use of numerical communicable protective relays 
- Use of active front-end control for mills 
- Use of 220 kV cables in substation 
- Waste water recycling using Membrane Technology. 
- Near zero discharge plant 
- Near zero flaring plant 

 
13 
 
- Treated concentrate effluent discharged in to deep sea through 
marine discharge pipe 
- Combined cycle gas turbine proposed for power generation 
-  Full use of TLC in hot metal transfer. 
 
Finex technology based steel plants are comparatively of lower capacity and 
so far have only been installed in Korea and has therefore not been envisaged in the 
current phase of expansion by RINL-VSP.  
 
2.5 In reply to a query as to what extent, the ongoing modernisation and 
expansion programme would make units/plant of SAIL, RINL and NMDC to achieve 
international level techno -economic parameters in blast furnace productivity , coke 
rate and specific energy consumption, the Ministry of steel has submitted as under: 
 
 Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
Under the modernization & expansion plan of SAIL state of the art facilities 
like high capacity  Blast Furnaces, tall Coke  Oven batteries, Continuous casting 
plants, modern finishing mills, etc . are being installed. With these facilities and 
available of  good quality inputs like coking coal and iron ore,   SAIL shall be in a 
position to substantially improve the techno -economic parameters viz. BF 
productivity, Coke rate & energy consumption. 
 
 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
Several parameters of RINL are already at national and international levels. 
Specific water consumption is at international levels, specific energy  consumption is 
one of the best in the Indian steel industry. BF productivity is also amongst the best 
in the country and is in line with  international standards on like to like basis. 
 
Globally in some of the steel plants BF productivity would remain hig h mainly 
due to use of better quality raw material which they have, like iron ore, coking coal 
etc. In absolute terms specific energy consumption of the global steel plants will be 
better because of the nature of  fuels used like natural gas, better qualit y of coal 
etc. On like to like basis, VSP‟s energy  consumption will be comparable to 
international standards. Specific energy consumption at  VSP will further 
improve with the commissioning of energy efficient units coming up in the  expansion 
units, 
 
Coke rate at VSP is also one of the lowest in the country. It will further 
improve with  introduction of latest technology like Pulverised coal dust injection and 
will be then comparable  to international standards for like to like plants, depending 
on usage of quality raw materials, PCI coal etc.  
 
In order to strengthen it‟s technological superiority and further enhance 
efficiency &  productivity, upgradation of the existing equipment / technology is 
being undertaken / planned through expansion and modernisa tion programme as 
elaborated earlier.  With expanded units  opting for latest technology and more 
efficient equipment, techno-economics    would  also vastly  improve. Modern 
technological and energy efficient features  coming up in the current phase of 
expansion of RINL-VSP are:  

 
14 
 
 
Area Major Unit Technology Benefits expected 
Existing units  
Coke 
making 
Coke ovens – 
Battery # 4  Automatic Heating Control system  Reduction in Sp. Energy consumption 
Planned in CO 
Battery #1,2 &3  Automatic Heating Control system  Reduction in Sp. Energy consumption 
Sinter 
making Sinter plant 1 & 2  Waste Heat recovery from sinter cooler Reduction in energy Consumption 
Iron 
making 
Blast Furnace -
1&2 
Category –I capital repairs To improve productivity & efficiency  
Pulverized Coal Injection Reduced coke consumption & 
Improved productivity. 
Steel 
making 
LD Converters  
Combined blowing 
Reduced consumption of Ferro Alloys. 
Improvement in Productivity. 
Better yield and quality. 
Revamping  Modern Technology & Sustainable 
Production 
Fugitive emissions Pollution control measure 
Continuous 
Casting Machines Design Modification of Machines  Reduction in Tundish skull generation 
(waste) & improvement in productivity 
Refractories for 
Ladles / 
Converters 
Development of protective coatings based on 
nano materials 
To increase refractory life & improvement 
in productivity. 
Expansion units 
Sinter 
making 
New Sinter Plant 
– 3 
 
Circular cooler Energy efficiency 
Multi slit burners Energy efficiency 
Waste Heat recovery from sinter cooler Reduction in energy Consumption 
Iron 
making 
New Blast 
Furnace – 3 
 
Profilometer  Improved process control 
Copper staves in high heat zones Better campaign life 
Hearth bottom cooling with water Better campaign life 
Pulverized Coal Injection Reduced coke consumption & 
Improved productivity. 
Steel 
making 
New LD 
Converter  
 
Combined blowing Reduced consumption of Ferro Alloys. 
Better yield and quality. 
Secondary fume extraction system Cleaner environment 
Contour & bath level measurement Measurement of refractory lining 
New Continuous 
casting Machine 
Auto mould level control Reduction in breakouts 
100%  Billet casting Energy saving 
Steel Melt Shop  
LH & RH Electro Magnetic Stirrer Cleaner steel 
Mills 
Wire Rod Mill – 2 
 
High speed WRM (105-110m/s) Increased productivity 
Integration of Furnace control with Mill control Better fuel optimisation 
Special Bar Mill 
 
20-45mm size in straight & coil form Reduced wastage for end user 
Free size rolling 
 
Customized sizes with tolerance of +/-
0.1mm 
Structural Mill 
 
High speed roughing stands to produce 75-175 
mm structurals. Increased productivity 

 
15 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Capacity Utilisation and Post Expansion Capacity Enhancement 
 
 The Committee  have been informed that some of the major pr ivate steel 
companies such as TATA Steel, Essar Steel, Jindal Steel and Power Ltd, Bhushan 
Steel Ltd. etc. have undertaken Greenfield projects which are likely to increase the 
capacity of steel production substantially by 2012. 
 
3.2 When asked about  the re asons as to why SAIL and RINL have not set up 
Greenfield projects which would have further increased t he capacity of steel 
production, the Ministry of Steel in their written replies have stated as follows:- 
“SAIL 
 
“Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) has currently decided on expanding its 
capacities through brown field projects considering the available land and up -
gradation of the existing plants through state of art technology.  
 
SAIL had planned for setting up a steel plant as a green field project in t he 
State of Jharkhand of about 12 million tonnes capacity of crude steel, subject 
to allocation of land, iron ore mining leases and other necessary clearances 
from State Government. On the basis of the viability report prepared by 
Consultant for this proje ct, SAIL had taken up with the State Government of 
Jharkhand in October 2007 for suitable allocation of land and further signing 
of MoU. The response of the State Government is still awaited. 
  
However, SAIL, at present is not considering green field expan sions in its 
current phase of expansion plan, as land and other infrastructure facilities are 
already available at brown field site.  
 
RINL 
 
RINL has excellent layout and other infrastructure facilities at it‟s Vizag uni t to 
expand the capacity up to 20  million tonnes per annum. Based on the fund 
availability and advantageous position with respect to layout and 
infrastructure, RINL utilised this opportunity to en -cash on the growth 
opportunity in the country and has undertaken expansion to almost double it‟ s 
capacity to 6.3 Mt of liquid steel.”   
 
 
3.3 During course of oral evidence, the Committee enquired about the plant -wise 
present capacity utilization of SAIL. Subsequently, the Ministry in their written reply 
has submitted as under: 
 
   

 
16 
 
“SAIL plants capacity utilization during   2008-09 was as follows:  
      
Plant % Capacity utilization   
(2008-09) 
BSP 132 
DSP 105 
RSP 110 
BSL  82 
ISP  83 
SAIL (5 ISP‟s) 105 
 
Capacity utilization at Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) reduced from 95% in 2007 -08 due to 
lower production of hot metal as one blast furnace was under capital repair for 60 
days & another blast furnace was shutdown since December 2008 due to depressed 
market condition.  
 
IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) capacity utilization was low due to less hot metal produ ction 
as two blast furnaces were put down due to adverse techno -economic parameters, 
one in the month of February 2008 & another furnace in October 2008”.  
 
3.4 On being asked about the installed capacity of the products of units/plants of 
SAIL and RINL and the capacity after completion of the first phase of modernisation, 
the Committee have been informed as under: 
 
 “Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
The Modernisation & Expansion Plan envisages increase in capacity of hot metal, 
crude steel & saleable steel as follows: 
(Million Tonnes) 
Items Installed capacity Capacity after implementation of current 
programme 
Hot Metal 13.8 23.46 
Crude Steel 12.8 21.40 
Saleable Steel 11.1 20.23 
 
The plant-wise capacity enhancement details for current phase are given below: 
 (Million Tonnes) 
  BSP DSP RSP BSL ISP ASP SSP VISL Total 
           
Hot Metal Installed 
Capacity 
4.08 2.09 2.00 4.59 0.85 - - 022 13.82 
 After current 
Expansion 
7.50 2.45 4.5 5.77 2.91 - - 0.33 23.46 
           
Crude 
Steel 
Installed 
Capacity 
3.93 1.80 1.90 4.36 0.50 0.23 - 0.12 12.84  
 After current 
Expansion 
7.00 2.20 4.20 4.61 2.50 0.48 0.18 0.23 21.40 
           
Saleable 
Steel 
Installed 
Capacity 
3.15 1.59 1.67 3.78 0.42 0.18 0.18 0.10 11.07 
 After current 
Expansion 
6.56 2.12 3.99 4.18 2.39 0.43 0.34 0.22 20.23 

 
17 
 
 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
The installed capacity of the Existing Units and capacity after first phase of 
on-going expansion to 6.3 Mtpa liquid steel stage are given below: 
 
Description Installed Capacity 
(Existing) 
Capacity after on-going 
expansion 
Hot Metal 3.4 Mtpa 6.5 Mtpa  
Liquid Steel 3.0 Mtpa 6.3 Mtpa 
Saleable Steel 2.656 Mtpa 5.72 Mtpa 
 
The installed capacity of the existing plant will further go up to 7.3 Mtpa of 
liquid steel by 2013, on completion of Modernization, revamping and up-gradation of 
Blast furnaces, revamp of  sinter plant and installation of 3rd converter & 4th Caster.”  
 
 
3.5 When asked about the state of Indian Steel Sector vis -à-vis the global 
scenario, the Ministry have replied as under:-  
“Steel demand and production in India have both grown faster than in the 
world as a whole. Steel consumption in India has recorded an average 
(CAGR) growth of 9.6% during the past 5 years (i.e. between 2003 -04 and 
2008-09). Similarly the average growth in steel production during the past five 
years has been to the tune of 7.02%.  
 
As compared to the steel sector in India, the steel production in all other 
countries, except China, showed a negative growth during the year 2009. 
According to the statistic published by World Steel Association global 
production in calendar year 2009 fell by 8%, from 1326.5 million tones in 2008 
to 1219.7 million tones in 2009. China is the only country in the world, other 
than India, to have registered a positive growth in st eel production by 13.5% 
in 2009.  
 
Steel consumption growth has a factor of elasticity of 1.1 with the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) growth. India's GDP is estimated to register an 
average growth of 8 9% and therefore, steel demand in the country is also 
expected to be average 10%, at least for next ten years. Hence the steel 
industry in India can be expected to outperform most countries in the world in 
terms of both growth rate and absolute volume increase. On the other hand 
the steel industry in the develo ped nations have faced stagnant or reduced 
demand, high cost of production and lower raw materials security in certain 
countries such as Japan and those in Europe. As per worldsteel forecast 
global steel demand will return to growth in 2010 but this is exp ected to be 
moderate. As before the financial crisis, the emerging economies, especially 
China, will be the critical factor in driving world steel demand in the near 
future.” 
 

 
18 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Investment on Modernisation and Expansion 
 
The Committee  enquired a s to h ow mu ch amount has been sanctioned i n 
regard to modernisation and expansion of SAIL and RINL and the fund spent so far 
under each scheme/project. The Ministry of Steel in a written note has submitted as 
under: 
 
 “Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 An amount of Rs.70,169 crore has been sanctioned for modernisation and expansion 
of SAIL including Rs 10264 crore towards modernization & expansion of Mines. Out of this, 
Rs 17352 crore has been spent till Jun‟10. As such there is no shortfall in utilization of funds. 
Plant-wise cost & actual expenditure of Modernisation & Expansion plan is as follows:  
          (Rs. crore) 
Plant Approved Cost Actual expenditure till Jun‟10 
Bhilai Steel Plant 17,266 1229 
Durgapur Steel Plant 2,875 78 
Rourkela Steel Plant 11,812 1801 
Bokaro Steel Plant 6,325 1158 
Iisco Steel Plant 14,443 7995 
Salem Steel Plant 1,902 1592 
RMD including Rowghat mines 10,264 527 
Sustenance Schemes 5,282 2972 
Total 70,169 17,352 
 
 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL has undertaken several initiatives for augmentation/modernization/up gradation 
and Expansion of operating capacities besides total revamp of certain key units like Blast 
Furnaces, Converter Shop, Sinter Plant and other auxiliaries w hich have outlived their 
economic lives. These projects are at various stages of implementation and are planned to 
be completed progressively by 2013. The following table shows details of major schemes - 
Project cost and the expenditure incurred till 30.6.2010.  
               (Rs. Crs.) 
S. 
No Scheme 
Project 
cost 
 
Expendit
ure upto 
June ‘10 
1 Coke Oven Battery – IV , (Phase – I) 380 357 
2 Pulverized coal injection 187 45 
3 Expansion to 6.3 Mtpa  12499(#) 6641 
4 Air Separation unit -IV & V  285 68 
5 20.6 MW Waste heat recovery – Sinter straight line cooler 
of Sinter Machine 1&2 96 0.01 
6 Battery-4 (Ph–II) Coal 143 
72 
7 Battery-4 (Ph–II) BP 169 
8 Supply & Erection of Plant, Machinery for one 330 tph 
Boiler System 350 126 
9 Supply & Erection of Plant, Machinery for one 67.5 MW 
Turbo Generator. 358 164 
10 Iron ore Storage Capacity Augmentation 480 20 

 
19 
 
11 220 KV Switching station & MRS Augmentation 58 15 
# In addition, Rs. 1990 crs is also envisaged for expenditure on Power Plant -2 and 3rd 
converter & 4t h caster of SMS -2 (These are additional units which were not included 
originally). Revised project cost for the same has been prepared. 
 
Besides the above, RINL is continuously carrying out several Additions/Modification & 
 Replacement schemes to maintain productivity/ health of the Plant, to the tune of about Rs. 306 
 crs for the past three years. 
 
RINL has been meeting its‟ Plan expenditure entirely out of its‟ own sources without seeking 
 any Budgetary Support from Government and there is no under utiliz ation of funds by RINL 
 w.r.t overall Revised Plan outlay during the last two years.” 
 
4.2 When asked about the investment proposed by the private steel players in 
modernisation and expansion of brown field and green field projects and their 
capacity addition there fro m, the Ministry in their reply  have furnished the following  
information:- 
 
“The information on the progress of private sector steel units being maintained by the Ministry 
of Steel is based upon the inputs furnished by the concerned companies. These are reviewed 
periodically in the Ministry of Steel regarding the issues affecting these major projects, so that 
these can be further discussed in the Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) meetings, and the 
concerned Ministries I Departments of Union governme nt and the State Governments be 
sensitized on the issues.  
 
The progress of major steel investment projects, in terms of the position furnished by 
respective companies are given below. The estimated costs are only indicative and since the 
project proposals have not been scrutinized or approved in the Ministry of Steel, it would not be 
possible to authenticate the information.  
 
A.  Major Projects which were targeted to be completed by 2011-12 
 
(i) Tata Steel Ltd. Orissa Project 
 
Location : Kalinga Nagar 
Proposed 
Capacity 
: 6.0 MTPA (Phase I - 3.0 MTPA, Phase II – 3.0 MTPA) 
Estimated cost  : Rs. 21,200 crores 
Land : 
 
3040 acres of land is registered in Tata Steel‟s name. Proposal submitted to 
IDCO for 580 acres of land for township and 226  acres for rail corridor. 
Delayed due to law & order issues on land encroachment. Detailed project 
reported is completed. 
Equipment : Rs. 6500 crores equipment order finalized, but supply has not commenced. 
 
Target for 
production 
milestone 
: Financial Year – 2009-10. (A s per Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)). 
Project is delayed 3-4 years. 
(Source: Tata Steel) 
    
(ii) Essar Steel Orissa Ltd. Orissa Project  
 

 
20 
 
Location : Paradeep  
Proposed 
Capacity 
: 12.0 MTPA (Phase I - 6.0 MTPA, Phase II – 6.0 MTPA) 
Estimated cost  : Rs. 22,600 crores (Phase I) 
Land : Total requirement – 2225 acres (at Paradeep – 1925 acres & at Joda – 300 
acres) 271 acres acquired at Paradeep, 80 acres acquired at Dabuna. Balance 
land at Paradeep is under acquisition through IDCO. 
Environmental 
Clearance 
 Environmental clearance obtained and feasibility report completed. 
Original Target 
for completion 
: Phase I : 2010, Phase II – 2012. No target for phase I can be given unless land 
acquisition is completed. 
(Source: Essar Steel) 
 
(iii) Jindal Steel & Power Limited. (JSPL)Orissa Project 
 
Location : Angul 
 
Proposed 
Capacity 
: 6.0 MTPA 
Estimated cost  : 22,500 crores 
Land : Total requirement – 5750 acres.  
Lease /possession obtained – 3100 acres 
Balance land under acquisition. 
Environmental 
Clearance 
: Obtained for 6 mtpa steel plant. 
Total Expnediture 
incurred so far 
: Rs. 2805.15 crores. 
 
Financial closure : Achieved for the steel plant. 
Target dated of 
commissioning of 
the project 
: Phase I of 2 mtpa by June 2011 and Phase II of 4 mtpa by June 2013. 
(Source: JSPL) 
 
 
 (iv) Jindal Steel & Power Limited. Jharkhand Project 
 
Location : Patratu 
Proposed 
Capacity 
: 5.0 MTPA 
Estimated cost  : 22,000 crores 
Land : As per the Government of Jharkhand, the company has  acquired Bihar Alloys 
Steel plan t with 559 acres of land and 500 quarters at Balkudra., Patratu for 
steel plant and further the company has acquire private land of abour 500 
acres. The company has already spend Rs. 650 crores and made financial 
commitment of Rs. 2000 crores for equipment & others. 
Environmental 
Clearance 
: As per the company, Environment clearance obtained for 6 mtpa steel plant 
and target dated of commissioning of 1 st phase of 2 mtpa by June 2011 and 2 nd 
phase of 4 mtpa by June 2013. 
 
B. Projects which were not targeted by 2011-12, but have made sufficient progress. 
 
(i) Electrosteel Castings Limited (ECL), Jharkhand project 
 
Location : Chandankyari block, Bokaro 
Proposed : 2.2 MTPA 

 
21 
 
capacity 
Land : 1136 acres of land have been acquired by the company which meets the f ull 
requirement of proposed steel plant. 
Financial closure  The company has had a financial closure for the project at a cost of Rs. 7262 
crores funded by a debt of Rs. 5447 and equity of Rs. 1815 crores in August 
2009. 
Target dated of 
commissioning 
of the project 
 On site execution of the project is undergoing at present. The project is 
scheduled to be completed by June 2011. 
(Source: ECL) 
 
 C. Major Projects which were targeted beyond 2011-12 
 
(i) Posco India Project, Orissa Project 
 
Location: : Jagatsinghpur 
Proposed 
capacity 
: 12.0 MTPA (Phase I–4 MT, Phase II–4 MT, Phase III– 4 MT) 
Estimated Cost : US$ 11,736 Million (Rs. 53,000 crore at current exchange rate) 
Land : For project – 4004-19 acres out of which 539 acres of non forest Government 
land was leased to Posco on 20.09.2009 and it is pending for transfer to 
POSCO. No physical possession of land by company yet. 
Forest 
Clearance 
 Stage II clearance issued by Ministry of Environment & Forest on 29.12.2009. 
Original target 
date of 
completion 
 Phase I (4 mtpa) by April 2010 (as per the MoU). Target can be furnished, only 
after commencement of land acquisition process. 
(Source: POSCO) 
 
(ii) Arcellor Mittal India Limited, Orissa Project 
 
Location : Patna, Keonjhar 
Proposed 
capacity 
: 12.0 MTPA (Phase I – 6.0 MTPA, Phase II – 6.0 MTPA) 
Land: : Requirement – 8000 acres(As per MoU) and 7770 acres (as per IPICOL), 
Acquired: nil 
6(1) notification for private land measuring 219.640 acres is under process. 
Investment made 
so far 
 Rs. 60.00 crores. 
Target as per 
MoU 
 The first phase will be completed in forty eight (48) months from the completion 
of Detailed Project Report (DPR). The second phase will be completed in fifty 
four (54) months from the completion of phase I).  
  (Source: Govt. of Orissa) 
 (iii) Arcellor Mittal India Limited, Jharkhand Project 
 
Location : Torpa, Karra, Khunti and Kamdara 
Proposed 
capacity 
: 12.0 MTPA (Phase I – 6.0 MTPA, Phase II – 6.0 MTPA) 
Land: : 25000 acres (as per MoU) revised 11325 acres (8845 acres for steel plant & 
captive power plant, 2480 acres for township & resettlement colony). No forest 
land involved. Rs. 12.39 crores paid in March 2009 towards 80% cost of the 
land (1025 acres) as per the demand note. 
Estimated cost  40,000 crores 
Target as per  The first phase will be completed in forty eight (48) months from the completion 

 
22 
 
MoU of Detailed Project Report (DPR). The second phase will be completed in fifty 
four (54) months from the completion of phase I).  (Source: Govt. of Jharkhand) 
 
(iii) Tata Steel Ltd, Chhattisgarh Project 
 
Location:  Bastar 
Proposed 
capacity 
 5.5 MTPA (Phase I – 2.7 MTPA, Phase II – 2.8 MTPA) 
Land:  Requirement - Approx 4000 acres. Land acquisition is in progress and 70% of 
PAP has taken compensation. Detailed project report completed. 
Estimated cost  16,500 crores 
Production 
milestone as per 
MoU 
  FY 13 (2.7 MT). Project is delayed by 2-3 years. 
(Source: Tata Steel) 
 
 
(iv) Tata Steel Ltd, Jharkhand Project 
 
Location : Seraikela 
Proposed 
capacity 
: 12.0 MTPA 
Land: : Notification was awaited for privat e land. Government of Jharkhand 
now asking the company to acquire private land directly. 
Estimated cost  42,000 crores 
Production 
milestone as per 
MoU 
 FY 12 (6.0 MT of phase I). Project is delayed by 2 years.  
(Source: Tata Steel) 
 
(v) JSW Steel Ltd., West Bengal Project 
 
Location : Salboni 
Proposed 
capacity 
: 10.3 MTPA 
Land : Total requirement: 4454 acres, out of which 3800 acres government land is in 
possession of JSW Bengal. 654 acres of land is private land of which 95% has 
been acquired.                                                                             (Source: JSW) 
   
(vii) Jindal Steel & Power Limited, Jharkhand Project 
 
Location:  Asanboni 
Proposed 
capacity 
 5.0 MTPA 
Land:  As per Govt. of Jharkhand, 256.5 acres of land has been purch ased through 
direct negotiation at Asanboni East Singhbhum district. 416 acres of 
Government land has been transferred. 
Estimated cost  18,000 crores 
Target date of 
commissioning 
 December 2014                                                                        (Source: JSPL)” 
 

 
23 
 
Chapter V 
Raw Material 
 
 
Supply of sufficient amount of coking coal is one of the prerequisite of 
expansion and modernization of steel sector. In this context, the Committee enquired 
whether India had  sufficient coking coal ne eded by the steel plants. The Ministry 
have stated in their reply:- 
 
“As on 01.04.2009, India has total coking coal reserves of 33.413 billion 
tonnes, out of which 17.54 billion tonnes is of Proved category. However, 
most of the coking coal reserves are ex tremely difficult to mine leading to low 
productivity. The present production of coking coal (2008 -09) in the country is 
16.84 million tonnes per annum which are being supplied to steel & coke oven 
units. Coal India Limited & other public sector companies produced 9.74 
million tonnes per annum and balance 7.1 million was produced by Tata Steel 
Limited from its captive coking coal mines in Jharkhand. The present level of 
production is not sufficient to meet the demand of the industry and also not of 
best qua lity suitable for blast furnace operation. Therefore, 24.00 million 
tonnes of high grade hard coking coal is imported by steel industry.”  
 
5.2 When asked whether the Indian Steel Industry faced any problem of supply of 
good quality coking coal and the action plan prepared to meet the shortfall of coking 
coal, if any,  the Ministry in their reply have stated as under:- 
 
“Except BCCL collieries, coking coal reserves in India are not of good quality. 
They have high ash content and some of coking coal reserves  are not 
economically mineable. Therefore, the domestic steel industry is highly 
dependent upon import of coking coal to fulfill its requirement.   
 
In the year 2008-09, indigenous coking coal supply to steel & coke oven units 
was about 16.84 million tonne s and 24.0 million tonnes was imported by steel 
units to fulfill their coking coal requirement.  Hence, there is need to enhance 
coking coal production in the country to meet the domestic coking coal 
requirement of public and private sector steel units.  
 
Ten coking coal blocks having Geological Reserves of 1396.37 million tonnes 
have been allotted to different steel producers. After commencement of 
production from the allotted coking coal blocks to steel units, indigenous 
supply of coking coal may improve.” 
 
5.3 The Committee desired to know  whether the raw material bearing States 
insisted on setting up steel plants within its territorial boundary and whether such a 
state-centric Policy stood in the way of healthy growth of steel industry in general 
and dev elopment of laggard states in particular, the Ministry of Steel in a written 
reply have stated as under:- 
 

 
24 
 
“While it has been noticed that various State Governments show tendency of 
promising iron ore mines for setting up steel plants/ value addition indus tries 
within these states, it is mentioned that the Group of Ministers set up to 
discuss National Mineral Policy, had observed that “ India is a single economic 
space and since mineral wealth belongs to India, its use and location should 
be guided factors o f production which has to be decided by entrepreneurs ”.  
The National Mineral Policy, 2008 has been approved by the Government in 
2008.  Ministry of Mines is framing a new Mines and Minerals (Development & 
Regulation), Act to bring into effect the approved  recommendations of the 
Hoda Committee, which were approved along -with the National Mineral 
Policy, 2008. Therefore, the present policy for allocation of iron ore mines 
does not discriminate on the basis of location of the steel plant.” 
 
 
5.4 During the course of oral evidence, the Committee enquired about the present 
and post expansion requirement of raw material of SAIL and steps being taken for its 
raw material security, necessity of Chiria mines to be allotted to SAIL. The Ministry in 
their post evidenc e written reply have given the present as well as post -expansion 
requirement of major raw materials for SAIL as under : 
“(Million Tonnes) 
 2008-09(Actual) After expansion 
Hot Metal 14.44 26.18 
Iron Ore 23.28 43 
Coking Coal 13.83 23 
Lime Stone 3.15 6 
Dolomite 2.93 5 
Thermal Coal 7 11 
 
 Steps being taken for raw material security 
 
 Iron ore  : While existing capacity of mines is largely able to meet entire 
requirement of iron ore for the time being,  enhanced raw material 
requirements would be a critical issue. To address this, efforts are being taken 
by SAIL to expand capacity of existing mines to exploit full potential; 
developing new mines; upgradation/installation of beneficiation plants and 
pelletisation plants.   
 
Coking Coal : Majority of coking c oal requirements to the tune of 70% is met 
through imports with balance from Coal India Limited. In order to enhance 
availability of indigenous coking coal; SAIL is taking action on developing 
captive coking coal blocks namely Tasra and Sitanala;  entering  into JV 
partnerships with companies like BCCL and TATA for revival of old/ 
abandoned mines; for acquisition and development of coal assets in India; 
and installation of coal washeries.  SAIL has also identified two coking coal 
blocks namely Jhirki/ Jhirki  West OC & Rhone -Routpara West for allocation 

 
25 
 
under Govt. dispensation, for which Ministry of Steel has taken up the matter 
with Ministry of Coal.  
 
Thermal Coal : Although SAIL has been continuously applying for allocation 
of thermal coal blocks, no new b lock has allocated to SAIL.   SAIL has 
identified six thermal coal blocks namely Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & Extension, 
Bankhui, Gand Bahera Ujheni, Puta Parogia & Pindrakhi for allocation under 
Govt. dispensation which has again been taken up by Ministry of Steel with 
Ministry of Coal. 
  
As regards other minerals such as limestone & dolomite, SAIL is exploring 
options to increase availability from domestic and through acquisition of new 
deposits.” 
  
5.5 Further, the Committee desired to know the reasons for such a long delay in 
allocation of mines, problems faced and remedial measures taken t o overcome 
them. The Ministry of Steel in their reply have stated as follows:-  
 
“Necessity of Chiria Mines to be allotted to SAIL 
 
SAIL has undertaken massive expansion p lan of its units to meet growing 
needs of infrastructural development of the country.  The expansion plan 
envisages supply of major volume of iron ore from Chiria iron ore mine for 
which investment for large mechanised mine with state-of-art technology have 
been initiated. Chiria is the only large resource which would supply to SAIL 
plants for more than 30 years. Other mines would deplete much earlier. 
 
IISCO, erstwhile subsidiary of SAIL, nurtured Chiria for over 5 decades and 
helped in improving the socio -economic environment of the area. SAIL was 
nursing erstwhile IISCO, the then BIFR Company without any job losses. It is 
only after the world prices for iron ore shot up, other steel players showed 
interest. IISCO was merged with SAIL in February 2006 alon g with its mines 
and SAIL had to absorb loss of over Rs.900 crs. incurred by IISCO. 
Considering the long term requirement of SAIL and in the broader national 
interest, all six leases of Chiria needs to be renewed in favour of SAIL.   
  
Reasons for the delay in the renewal of Chiria leases 
 
Erstwhile IISCO had been operating Chiria iron ore mine in the State of 
Jharkhand with 6 leases for over decades. Out six, none is valid, three are 
under deemed extension and three are under dispute. The applications for 
renewal of all these leases were submitted to State Govt. in time. However, 
State Govt. rejected 3 leases during the year 2004 & 2005. On an application 
by SAIL, Mining Tribunal set aside the rejection orders and directed State 
Govt. to reconsider the matt er.  However, State Govt. did not agree, and the 
matter was under dispute at various levels. To resolve the matter; the issue 
was discussed in PMO thrice during 2006 & 2007, in which following 
decisions were taken:   
   
- State Govt. will renew mining leases for reserves of about 1 Billion Tonne. 

 
26 
 
- The balance reserves of 1 Billion Tonnes will be renewed subject to SAIL 
creating additional steel capacity.  
 
However, Jharkhand Government did not implement the above. In this regard, 
Hon,ble Prime Minister vide his DO letter dated 13.8.07 advised Hon‟ble Chief 
Minister of Jharkhand to favourably consider the renewal of mining leases in 
Chiria & Gua in view of country‟s growing requirements for steel and the need 
to support the SAIL‟s expansion plan. 
  
 
 
Problem being faced for non renewal of Chiria leases 
 
In the absence of renewal of mining leases of Chiria, SAIL is facing the 
difficulty for making a large investment on development of large state -of-art 
mechanized mines at Chiria. Uncertainty on renewal of leases i s delaying the 
development of large mechanized mines at Chiria.  If leases of Chiria are not 
renewed immediately, SAIL will have serious problem in iron ore supply to 
Bokaro Steel Plant and it‟s expansion may get adversely affected. Hence, any 
further delay  in settling this issue may critically affect SAIL‟s corporate 
objective and financial health. 
 
Remedial Measures adopted  
 
 After the constant and concerted efforts by Ministry of Steel, SAIL & PMO 
with the State Government of Jharkhand some positive deve lopment has 
been visible.  The Jharkhand Government has conveyed in -principle approval 
on 23.10.2009 for renewal of one of leases i.e., Budhaburu (McLellan). The 
lease contains about 800 million tons of reserves.  
  
However, there is no further progress on  the formal approvals of the State 
Government on Budhaburu lease of Chiria mines and renewal of balance 
leases of Chiria is awaited.   
 
Status of steps being taken for ensuring security of raw materials is 
given below: 
 
A) Iron Ore 
 
Increased requirement o f iron ore is planned to be met by expansion of 
production capacity of existing mines at Kiriburu, Meghahatuburu, Gua & 
Barsua and development new mines at Chiria, Rowghat, Taldih & Thakurani. 
These developments would ensure availability of better quality iron ore on 
consistent basis. In order to utilize micro fines, low grade ores & slimes, 
pelletisation plants are also proposed to be installed at Bolani & Gua. 
 
However, major bottleneck is being faced in respect of renewal of leases. 
Delay in renewal of l eases is affecting expansion of existing mines and 
development of new mines particularly at Chiria. Out of 26 iron ore mining 
leases in the states of Jharkhand, Orissa and Chhattisgarh, only 6 leases are 
valid.  Status of leases is shown below : 
 

 
27 
 
Details Jharkhand Orissa Chhattisgarh Total 
No. of leases 13 7 6 26 
Valid Nil 1 5 6 
Under deemed ext. 9 5 1 15 
Under dispute 4 1 Nil 5 
 
Status of Chiria Project 
 
a) Renewal of mining leases of Chiria 
  
 Lease Budhaburu Dhobil Ankua Ajitaburu Sukri-Latur Tatiburu 
Status  Deemed 
Extension 
 Deemed 
Extension 
Deemed 
Extension 
Under  
Dispute 
Under 
Dispute 
Under  
Dispute 
 
Lease renewal of three leases namely Budhaburu (McLellan), Dhobil & Ankua 
lease is pending with State Government. The issue of disputed leases of Suk ri-
Latur & Ajitaburu is pending in Hon‟ble Supreme Court.  
  
b) Recent development regarding renewal of mining leases of Chiria 
 
1. Government of Jharkhand vide letter dated 23.10.09, conveyed its in -principle 
approval for renewal of the Budhaburu lease (823.62 ha) of Chiria iron mine.  
2. On 18.11.09, SAIL informed Jharkhand Govt. to renew leases corresponding to 
1000 million tonnes keeping all four leases of Gua & Ajitaburu of Chiria in the 
present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. 
 
c) Other developments 
 
Pending renewal of leases, SAIL has initiated the process of obtaining 
approval for forest and environment clearances. Engagement of consultant for 
preparation of DPR is also in progress.  
 
Status of Rowghat Project 
 
Rowghat „Deposit -F‟ with an area of 2028.797 Ha  and iron ore reserve of 
about 511 Million Tonnes has been allocated to BSP. New mine with a capcity 
of 14 MTPA will be developed at Rowghat.All statutory clearances like 
approval of mine plan, Forestry clearance & Environment clearance have 
been obtained.  Lease deed granting iron ore mining lease for the area has 
been signed by the Govt. of Chhattisgarh on 21.10.09.  
 
Status of mine development is given below: 
 
a) The process of deforestation has been initiated by Chhattisgarh Government. 
 
b) The process of enga ging consultant of global repute for preparation of 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) has been initiated. 
 
c) The construction work of rail link project is being executed by Rail Vikas 
Nirman Limited (RVNL) for length of 95 Km from Dalli -Rajhara to Rowghat. 
Land acquisition work under progress. 
 

 
28 
 
Status of Thakurani  
 
Inspite of continuous efforts by Ministry of Steel and SAIL, the Prospecting 
License (PL) has not been granted to SAIL even though the area is reserved 
for 50 years for SAIL by GoI in Feb‟04. Issue is  pending in Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court as  M/s Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd. has filed SLP in the Apex Court 
for an area including the reserved area of SAIL (277.649 ha). 
  
SAIL had filed I nterlocutory Application (IA) in Hon‟ble Supreme Court on 
16.3.09  for seeking direction that the State Government shall be free to 
consider the SAIL‟s  application for grant of PL for the area for which the 
Notification dated 4.2.04 has  been issued by GoI, irrespective of the 
pendency of SLP filed by Bhushan Power &  Steel Limi ted pending 
consideration before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. 
   
Allocation of iron ore mines to VISL & SSP  
 
In order to ensure security of iron ore availability for VISL & SSP, steps taken is 
given below: 
 
a) Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant (VISL) of SAIL has  applied to Karnataka 
State Govt. for allotment of mining lease in NEB Range, Sandur Taluk, 
Bellary District (area 140 Ha) in January‟2007. Karnataka State Govt. in 
January‟2010 has forwarded the application to Ministry of Mines, GoI 
recommending grant of lease in favour of VISL.  
 
b) Salem Steel Plant (SSP) of SAIL does not have its own iron ore mine. SSP 
has applied to Tamil Nadu State Govt. for 1000 Ha of Kanjamalai mining 
lease in June‟2008.  However, the said area is yet to be allocated to SSP. 
 
B) Coking Coal 
 
Strategy for enhancing the security of coking coal 
 
Due to limited availability from indigenous sources, more than 70% 
requirement of coking coal is being met through imports. To meet the 
enhanced requirement after expansion, SAIL has planned to inc rease 
domestic availability of coking coal to the level of 8 -10 MTPA in next 5 -6 
years. In this regard, SAIL is looking at opportunities for acquiring new coking 
coal blocks for development as well as entering into partnership with 
BCCL/CIL and other strat egic partners for acquisition/ development of new 
coal blocks. Steps taken by SAIL in this regard are as follows: 
 
a) Tasra Coking Coal Block:  
 
All statutory clearances like approval of mine plan, environmental clearances 
etc. have been obtained. Planned min e capcity 4 MTPA (ROM) to produce 
about 2 MTPA of clean coal. Selection of Mine Developer cum Operator 
(MDO) is in progress.  Through tendering process, L -1 bidder has been 
identified and work order will be issued shortly. In the meantime, small scale 
production has been started from November‟2009. 
 

 
29 
 
b) Sitanala Coking Coal Block:  
 
Mine planned for production of 0.3 mtpa (raw)/0.2mtpa (clean). Project report 
has been prepared, mining plan approved and compliance of formalities for 
grant of environment clearance in process.  
 
c) Kapuria Block 
 
In pursuance by SAIL, BCCL Board had given clearance in June‟08 for 
formation of a JVC of SAIL & BCCL for development of Kapuria Coking Coal 
Block. However, CIL is not in favour of such JVC.   
 
d) Partnership with BCCL 
 
SAIL has entered into MOU with BCCL in 2006 for up gradation of Moonidih 
Mine at 16 top seam. Although, BCCL is now not interested to take interest 
bearing loan from SAIL, entire output of about 0.66 MTPA (ROM)/ 0.46 MTPA 
(washed coal) from the mine has been assur ed for SAIL at mutually agreed 
prices.  
 
e) SAIL-Tata Steel Joint Venture 
 
SAIL & Tata Steel Ltd. has formed S & T Mining Company Private Limited, a 
JVC with 50: 50 equity. The company was incorporated in Sep‟08. As a first 
step company has initiated the proc ess for acquisition and development of 
coal assets in India. JVC has been short listed for submission of bid for revival 
of old/ abandoned mines of CIL. JVC is also attempting to develop Bhutgoria 
mine of BCCL. The company has submitted tender to BCCL for construction 
of washery at Dugda for Non Linked Washery (NLW) coal. The company is 
also exploring possibility to install a stand alone NLW coal washery at Malkera   
       
f) Allotment of new coal blocks 
 
 In order to further augment captive coking coal pr oduction, two potential 
coking coal blocks namely, Jhirki/ Jhirki West OC & Rhone -Routpara West in 
Jharkhand have been identified by SAIL and Ministry of Steel has requested 
Ministry of Coal in June‟2009 for allocating the blocks to SAIL under Govt. 
dispensation. However, Coal blocks are yet to be allocated to SAIL.  
 
Recently Hon‟ble Steel Minister has again on 5.2.2010 taken up this issue 
with Hon‟ble Minister of Coal, in which it was requested that Jhjirki/Jhirki West 
OC (East Bokaro Coalfield) and Rohne -Routpara West (North Karanpura 
Coal file) coking coal blocks may be allotted to SAIL through the Government 
dispensation route. 
 
g) Acquisition of coal assets abroad 
 
SAIL along with CIL, NTPC, RINL & NMDC has also formed International 
Coal Ventures Limit ed (ICVL), a joint venture company for acquisition of coal 
assets abroad.  
 
 

 
30 
 
C)  Thermal Coal 
 
 Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is being met by supplies from 
Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability, 
SAIL a long with its power JV Companies had submitted 18 applications in 
2007 for allocation of thermal coal blocks. However, none of the blocks was 
allocated to SAIL. SAIL has further identified six thermal coal blocks namely 
Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & Extension, Bankhui, Gand Bahera Ujheni, Puta 
Parogia & Pindrakhi and Ministry of Steel has requested Ministry of Coal in 
September‟2009 for allocating the blocks to SAIL under Govt. dispensation. 
However, Coal blocks are yet to be allocated to SAIL.  
 
Recently Hon‟bl e Steel Minister has again on 5.2.2010 taken up this issue 
with Hon‟ble Minister of Coal, in which it was inter -alia requested that 2 -3 
thermal coal blocks may be allotted to SAIL through the Government 
dispensation route. 
 
 
D) Limestone & Dolomite 
 
Due to quality constraints, captive mines are able to meet part requirement of 
fluxes and balance have to be purchased. SAIL would require to source low 
silica limestone from Jaisalmer in Rajasthan, Arki in Himachal Pradesh and 
Oman. While capcity of Kuteshwar L imestone mine is planned to be 
enhanced to 4 MTPA in phases and Baraduar Dolomite mine would be 
revived & developed for 3 -4 MTPA capcity in phases to enhance production 
from captive sources. In addition, possibility for acquisition of new deposits is 
also being explored.” 
 
  

 
31 
 
CHAPTER VI 
Completion schedule of the Modernisation & Expansion 
 
6.1  The Committee enquired about the target date(s) for completion of 
modernisation and expansion both original and revised and the reasons for not 
achieving the target envisaged originally  also the action to achieve the revised 
target.  The Ministry of Steel in their written reply have stated as under: 
 
“Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 The plant-wise commissioning schedules for Phase-I are given below: 
 
Plant Original Target Now scheduled Integrated 
Commissioning  
SSP Jun‟10 Aug‟10 
ISP Jun‟11 Jun‟11 
BSP Dec‟12 - Mar‟13* Dec‟12 - Mar‟13* 
RSP Dec‟12 - Mar‟13* Dec‟12 - Mar‟13* 
BSL Dec‟11* Dec‟11* 
DSP Dec‟12* Dec‟12* 
 
*  The above are based on completion sche dules of orders already placed 
and anticipated schedules for balance packages. The commissioning of 
various packages will be synchronised after placement of orders of 
balance packages. 
 
i) Original schedule of completion 
 
The planning for Modernisation & Expa nsion Plan of SAIL was initiated 
in 2003 under its Corporate Plan –2012 which envisaged increase in 
capacity in a phased manner by the year 2012. Corporate Plan was a 
directional road map and needed to be reviewed periodically in line with 
developments such as merger of IISCO, global demand etc 
 
In view of buoyancy of the global steel industry & indications of 
accelerated growth in domestic demand, the growth and investment 
targets were revised upwards in 2006 -07. Further, it was decided to 
implement differe nt packages in a plant together and compress the 
timelines to year 2010 as against year 2012 envisaged earlier in 
Corporate Plan. 
 
ii) Steps being taken to restrict further slippages. 
 
The steps taken/ being taken by SAIL in the line of s ystemic 
improvements i nclude strengthening project monitoring and project 
management organisation, convening pre -bid conferences and 
consultation with technology suppliers & their partners for ensuring 
wider participation/response in the tenders, streamlining project 
manuals, S tandard Bidding Document and procurement procedure, 

 
32 
 
splitting of large value & traditionally turnkey packages into core & non -
core categories and tendering them out separately in order to get wider 
participation, enhancing delegation of powers at various l evels and 
constitution of a intermediary Committee to SAIL Board viz., Board Sub 
Committee for consideration of large value packages.  
 
iii) Reasons for so much delay 
 
SAIL has met the timelines of activities, in areas within its control, which 
inter-alia included appointment of consultants, finalization of Composite 
Project Feasibility Reports(CPFR), getting the CPFR vetted by financial 
institution(s), „in-principle‟ approval by the SAIL Board and issuance of 
tenders etc. Orders for most of ISP & SSP packages &  New CRM 
packages of BSL were placed as per timelines. Orders for many 
packages for RSP, stand -alone packages of BSL viz. upgradation of 
BF-2 & SMS -2 and BSP viz. Ore handling system, New Coke Oven 
Battery, were also placed progressively.  
 
Due to buoyant steel market & seller‟s market condition, order 
placement for some of the major critical technological packages took 
longer time as quoted prices were much higher than the estimates. In 
July 2008, the cost of Modernisation & Expansion plan was reviewed by 
SAIL to optimize the investment. 
 
Further, due to global meltdown conditions from October 2008 onwards, 
Plan was again reviewed during February 2009 -June 2009 wherein it 
was decided to implement the plan in a phase-wise manner. 
 
Constraints faced 
SAIL had faced the following constraints in finalisation of packages 
especially during the buoyant phase prior to economic meltdown (pre 
Oct‟08) when major global equipment suppliers had adequate orders in 
hand: 
 Inadequate response against various tenders; conseque ntly, time 
limit for submission of tenders had to be extended in many cases 
on the request of bidders. 
 Deviations in offers vis-à-vis tender terms & conditions including the 
desired delivery schedules for completing the projects; Bidders 
seeking extension in time limit for submitting clarifications and 
submitting incomplete clarifications/ maintaining deviations, leading 
to several rounds of techno-commercial discussions 
 In many cases, price bids submitted by bidders were higher than 
Consultant‟s estimates. For some of the packages, SAIL had to go 
for retender or engage in several rounds of negotiations on account 
of higher prices. 
 
The above problems resulted in delays in finalisation of orders as well 
as prices being higher and were more acute for high tec hnology areas 
where the vendor base is limited resulting into initial delays.  
 

 
33 
 
iv) Justification of approvals in 2 -stages and for taking such a long 
time? 
 
As per the prevalent guidelines of SAIL in respect of capital projects, 
two stage approval is being  taken for the investment proposals. The 
stage-I (in -principle) approval is taken based on the feasibility report/ 
detailed project report with indicative cost as prepared by the 
Consultants. Stage -II (final) approval is obtained based on the firmed 
up cost after competitive bidding. 
The major reasons for time taken for approval are as follows: 
 Inadequate response against various tenders 
 Deviations in offers vis-à-vis tender terms & conditions  
 Bidders seeking extension in time limit for submitting clarific ations 
and submitting incomplete clarifications/ maintaining deviations, 
leading to several rounds of techno-commercial discussions. 
 In many cases, price bids submitted by bidders were higher than 
Consultant‟s estimates. For some of the packages, SAIL had to go 
for retender or engage in several rounds of negotiations on account 
of higher prices. 
 Further, due to global meltdown conditions from October 2008 
onwards, Plan was reviewed during February 2009 -June 2009 
wherein it was decided to implement the plan in phases. 
 
v). Reasons of implementation (of decision to expand) taking 6 -7 
years to materialize. 
 
The chronological developments for decision to expand the SAIL steel 
plants are given as under: 
 
 The in-principle approvals for Modernisation & Expansion Plan were 
accorded by SAIL Board progressively from June 2006 to July 
2007. 
 
 Due to buoyant steel market & seller‟s market condition, order 
placement for some of the major critical technological packages 
took longer time as quoted prices were much higher tha n the 
estimates. In July 2008, the cost of Modernisation & Expansion plan 
was reviewed by SAIL to optimize the investment. 
 
 Further due to global meltdown since October 2008, SAIL Board felt 
that there was a need to review the expansion plan of SAIL 
including financing pattern. After consultations with the consultants 
and due deliberation (February –June 2009), it was proposed that 
the production build-up be achieved in two phases. 
 
vi)  Estimated escalation in cost on account of delay in the projects. 
 
It may be noted that prior to the melt down when market conditions 
were buoyant, even where prices received were higher than estimates; 

 
34 
 
it was generally not possible to get much reduction through 
negotiations. Only in few cases where tenders were opened prior  to 
melt down and orders were not concluded, it was possible to get 
substantial reduction after melt down as market price situation had 
changed. Post melt down the equipment prices started coming down. 
 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
Target date(s) for completion 
 
Facility 
Original/ 
Contractual 
schedule 
Revised schedule 
 
Stage I (36 Months) 
 New Blast Furnace along with new RMHP and new 
Sinter Plant 
 New SMS along with continuous casters 
 New finishing mill – Wire Rod Mill 
Oct  „08/ 
Feb ‟10 
 
Test tria l of various units has 
already commenced. Balance jobs 
are in progress & commissioning & 
stabilization is planned by Mar „11 
 
Stage II (45/48 Months) 
 New Special Bar Mill & 
    New Structural Mill 
 
Oct  „09/ 
Jun  „11 
 
Jobs at site already in progress & 
units will be commissioned and 
stabilized by 2011-12.  
 
Reasons for not achieving the target envisaged originally are given below: 
 
Pre Ordering Delay 
 
 The delay in completion schedule against original project schedule is broadly due 
to delay in appointment  of consultant, tender process & placement of order - 
mainly attributable to the Bidders. 
 
a) Delay in appointment of Consultant resulted in delay in issue of 
specifications. 
b) More time sought by bidders in submission of offers & PQC clarifications 
was accepted for reasonable competition. 
c) Techno Commercial Deviations & Price negotiations. 
d) Technological Process equipment suppliers asked more completion time. 
e) Commencement date shifted from LOA date to Contract signing date. Also 
changes from LOA conditions were asked before signing of Contract. 
 
 Due to the then prevailing market conditions, bidders quoted high prices over the 
estimated cost. Further price evaluation and subsequent negotiations with eligible 
bidders, delayed finalization of tender. 
 
Post Ordering Delays 
 
a) Delay in engineering and supply & erection of equipment by BHEL & 
MECON 
b) Delay in structural work by HSCL 
c) Delay in structural & equipment erection by Bridge & Roof 
d) Delay in supply of equipment from Chinese sources 

 
35 
 
e) Delay in submission of feed back dat a by equipment suppliers resulted 
in delay in engineering & issue of construction drawings by Consultants 
and subsequent delay in handing over of fronts for equipment erection. 
f) Delay in detailed engineering, procurement and supply of imported and 
indigenous equipment. 
g) Slow progress of civil works due to inadequate mobilization of 
manpower and resources by the contractors.  
h) Slow progress of structural work by contractors due to inadequate 
deployment of erection cranes and manpower.  
i) Delay in handing over of fronts to equipment erection agencies due to 
delay in civil and structural works.  
j) Non-sequential supply of equipment by suppliers and inadequate 
resources deployed by equipment erection agencies. 
 
Actions taken to achieve the revised target 
 
a) Strengthening Project division, adequate empowerment by Board to 
executing level, close monitoring at highest level, including High Power 
Steering Committee of Board of RINL helped in bringing down the 
intermediate delays which had been taking place during execution 
b) Provided labour colony & other infrastructure facilities to get & retain 
large workforce for expansion which touched 19000 Nos. With this, 
attrition could be minimized. 
c) VSP supplied steel which helped in completion of structural jobs on 
time 
d) Cranes got commi ssioned in time for equipment erection, which was 
initially delayed 
e) Steps being taken to improve the performance of Public Sector 
companies like BHEL, MECON, Bridge & Roof and HSCL 
f) Structured meetings are being held with major suppliers at higher 
management level. 
g) Progress of Expansion is reviewed by Board of Directors in its regular 
meetings.  
h) Offloading of jobs from non-performing contractors. 
i) Strengthening of follow up group for expediting balance supplies of 
equipment by taking up the matter with higher  management, visit to 
manufacturing shops etc. 
j) Support by VSP like Cranes etc to contractors wherever needed 
k) Change in methodology of execution to improve progress of work 
suiting site conditions through innovative way of construction. 
l) Curtailing duration of inspection, approval of drawings etc w.r.t what 
was envisaged earlier” 
 
 6.2. When asked about the details of original price in the first tender, price on 
retender, reasons for retender and financial savings, the Ministry , in their post 
evidence reply stated as follows: 
 
 “In most of the packages where retendering was resorted to due to high price, 
repackaging/ rationalization of scope of work has been done. There has been 
savings in most of the cases after re tender post meltdown.  
 
  

 
36 
 
Salem Steel Plant 
 
S.N Package L-1 price after 
1st tender  
L-1 price after  
Re-tendering 
1 EAF & LF 170.00  
 After retendering  142.85 
1a EAF  89.10 
1b SVC(Static Var Compensater), 
Erecetion and Refractories 
 16.43 
1c LF  36.00 
1d LF erection  1.32 
2 AOD 93.44  
 After retendering  76.08 
2a AOD supply  71.88 
2b AOD Erection  4.20 
3 Slitting Line 38.70  
 After retendering  30.44 
3a Slitting Line supply - 29.58 
3b Slitting Line Erection - 0.86 
4 CRM Structural 63.97 59.75 
 
 IISCO Steel Plant 
 
S.N Package L-1 price after 
1st tender 
L-1 price after 
Re-tendering 
1 Raw Material Handling System 1574.00  
 After retendering  1661.40 
1a Ore Handling Plant  534.50 
1b Coal/ Coke Handling, Pipe Conveyor  504.50 
1c Base-Mix Preparation Plant  457.50 
1d Yard Machines - Group I  26.40 
1e Yard Machines - Group II  77.70 
1f Yard Machines - Group III  60.80 
2 BOF 2134.30  
 After retendering  1777.17 
2a BOF Converters  1120.83 
2b Secondary Refining Unit  215.19 
2c Hot Metal desulphurisation  37.26 
2d EOT Cranes for BOF & CCP  186.30 
2e Aux. Pkgs.   217.59 
3 Coke Dry Cooling Plant 304.10  
 After retendering  330.57 
3a Main Package  307.37 
3b CDCP - Civil & Structural   23.20 
4 Civil & Strl Work for BOF & CCP 482.00  
 After retendering  478.54 
4a Civil Work for BOF, CCP & LDCP  199.63 
4b Strl Work for BOF, CCP & LDCP  278.91 
5 Lime Calcining Plant 188.30 105.82 
6 Civil & Strl work for RM & RHF 446.40  
 After retendering  377.49 

 
37 
 
6a Civil Work for RM & RHF  184.61 
6b Strl Work for RM & RHF  192.88 
7 EOT Cranes for BOF & CCP (<120T) 142.80  
 After retendering  125.14 
7a Misc. Cranes for BOF & CCP  
(<120 T) 
 73.13 
7b Rotating Trolley Cranes  52.01 
8 Centralised Compressed Air Station 34.83 41.40 
9 Road Network with  Drain  26.15 28.42 
 
 Bokaro Steel Plant 
 
S.N Package L-1 price after 
1st tender  
L-1 price after  
Re-tendering 
 
1 Tension Leveling, Inspection and Re-
coiling Line 
262.92 93.01 
2 EOT Cranes & Telphers 168  91.30 
3 Cast House Slag Granulation Plant 324.35 207.78 
4 Roll shop 168.6  107.92  
 
 Bhilai Steel Plant 
 
S.N Package L-1 price after 
1st tender  
L-1 price after  
Re-tendering 
1 Structural Work for BOF & CCP 524.5 360.12* 
2 Civil Work for BOF & CCP 132.1 99.94 
3 LDCP at RMP-III 305.2 251.16 
4 OHP Part-B 943.6 519.92 
 
 
 

 
38 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
Issues relating Steel Sector 
 
 
 Infrastructure 
 
7.1 The Committee desired to know about the steps taken or being taken to focus 
on infrastructure and other issues which affect long-term growth of the steel industry. 
The Ministry in their written replies have  stated that “Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) 
during its meetings, has discussed in detail on the critical infrastructure projects 
those are necessary for steel sector, which are either under expansion or for newly 
proposed Greenfield projects. A summary of critical infrastructure projects required 
for steel sector and their current status of approval / extension is given below: - 
(i) “Rail 
A. New Rail Links 
 
 S.No Line / Route / Section Beneficiary Current status 
1 Dalliarajahara-
Rowghat Jagdalpur 
SAIL (Bhi lai), Essar, 
Tata CG Project 
MoU signed between SAIL, Govt. of CG 
and IR in Dec 07. Commencement of 
work is awaiting forest clearance and 
land acquisition. 
2 Haridaspur-Paradeep Posco, Arcellor -Mittal, 
Tata (Orissa Projects) 
Under construction by RVNL und er joint 
participation between IR, GoO, Posco. 
Target: March 2012 
3 Paradeep-Dhamra (62 
Kms) 
Tata, Posco Construction taken up by Dhamra Ports 
company Ltd. (JV between Tata & L&T) 
4 Surat-Baziraport Essar, Gujarat RVNL to construct the line. Land 
alignment not yet finalised. 
5 Banspani-Talcher Steel units located in 
Angul in Orissa (JSPL, 
Monnet, Bhushan) 
Banspani-Bimlagarh-Barsuan sanctioned 
in 2009-10 in Railway Budget 
6 Putter-Attiputu (90 Km) 
to connect Ennore port 
JSW (Karnataka) and 
steel units in Karnataka 
Sanctioned in 2008-09. 
Target : March 2012 
7 Ranchi direct line to 
Ramgarh 
JSPL, JSW and all 
other steel units to 
connect Jharia 
coalfields 
Rajkharswan – Ranchi line sanctioned in 
2009-10. 
 
 
B. Augmentation of important existing Routes 
 
S No Line / Route / 
Section 
Beneficiary Augmentation 
required 
Current status 
1 Banspani-Jakhpara Posco, Arcellor -Mittal, 
Tata, Essar, JSPL, 
RINL, JSW & others in 
Orissa  
Single line to 
double line with 
electrification 
Survey work sanction 
in 2008-09 
2 Jakhpara-Haridaspur All above Third line Survey  sanction in 

 
39 
 
2008-09 
3 Kottavalsa-Kirandul 
(K-K line) 
All of steel industry 
including RINL 
Doubling with 
additional line 
capacity 
Feasibility survey in 
progress 
4 Manoharpur-Asaboni 
with connectivity to 
Chiria 
All steel units in 
Jharkhand. Bokarow, 
Durgapur SAIL plants 
Third line with Y -
connectivity to 
chiria mines 
Partly sanctioned 
(i)Third line 
Manoharpur-Asanboni 
in 2008-09 
5 Chandil-Muri-Patratu JSW(JH), JSPL (JH), 
Tata  
Doubling (Alternate new rail line 
between Rajkharswan-
Ranchi sanctioned in 
2009-10. 
6 Barsuan-Kiriburu-
Bimlagarh-
Bondamunda 
SAIL (Rourkela, Bhilai, 
Bokaro) 
Doubling Damitra-
Champajharan 
sanction in 2008-09 
7 Talcher-Angul-
Sambalpur 
JSPL, Bhushan, Monnet 
(Orissa) 
Doubling  Not yet considered 
 
(ii) Ports 
 
S. 
No 
Ports Beneficiary Current status 
1 Dhamra (Orissa) Private port being 
developed by Tata and 
L&T 
D/o Shipping has issued all clearances. 
Construction work in progress. Target: Phase I 
25 million  ones by 2011. Planned capacity 83 
million tonnes. 
2 Paradeep 
(Orissa) 
Essar: 2 captive berth 
JSPL: 2 captive berths 
2 additional berths have been tendered under 
PPP route for handling coal, iron and container. 
3 Haldia(WB) 1 additional berth each 
for JSW, JSPL, Tata for 
import of coal and 
export of finished goods 
Berth Nos. 2 & 8 (existing has been earmarked 
for augmentation by 3 million tonnes each under 
PPP route, for public use only. These will be 
dedicated for coal and steel handling. 
4 Visakhapatanam 
(AP) 
JSW: Berth No. 7 as 
captive berth 
Berth No. 7 has been earmarked for 
development  under PPP route 
 
 
(iii) Infrastructure for steel sector – Roads / Important road projects linked to Greenfield & 
Brownfield steel projects 
 
SNo. Road Link Project Current Status 
1 NH-42 Cuttack –
Sambalpur (Orissa) 
2 lane to 4 lane Feasibility study of Cuttack -Angul has been 
included in 2008-09. 
2 NH-200 Angul -Jajpur 
Road (Orissa) 
2 lane to 4 lane A section of NH 200 Chandikhol -Duburi-
Talcher (137 km) identified under NHDP 
Phase III. 
3 NH 5 Kolkata – 
Bhubaneshwar (WB, 
Orissa) 
4 lane to 6 lane Balasore to Khurda is already 4 lane. Balance 
portion of 4 laning under progress 
4. Additional 2 lanes in NH 
6 from Kolkata to Bhilai 
(WB, Jharkhand, Orissa, 
CG) 
2 lane to 4 lane 
& 
4 lane to 6 lane 
(i) Feasibility study  for 4 laning of Bahragora -
Kharagpur 
(ii) 88 Km from Sambalpur -Bargarh identified 
for 4 laning under NHDP III. 

 
40 
 
  
 
Demand & Supply 
 
7.3  In response to a query regarding the present Demand & supply scenario of 
Indian steel industry, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
   In thousand tonnes  
 Apr-Jan 2009-10*  Apr.-Jan. 2008-09  % change  
Production for Sale  48814  47275  3.3  
Import  5937  5011  18.5  
Export  2395  3634  -34.1  
Consumption  45939  42592  7.9  
Source: Joint Plant Committee; * = Provisional   
 
 
7.4 When asked about  the projection of Demand supply gap of steel industry in 
India in the next 10 years, the Ministry of Steel have stated as under:- 
 
 “A long term projection for the Indian Steel Sector up to the year 2019-20 was 
made in the National Steel Policy 2005. The projections in the National Steel 
Policy were based on the assumptions of 7.3% average growth in production 
and 6.9% average growth in consumption. However, the statistics of 
production and  consumption for the past 5 years show that the steel 
production and consumptions in the country have risen at rates much faster 
than the initial projections in the National Steel Policy. At this point of time, it is 
apparent that, the steel consumption in  the country will grow at an average 
rate of more than 10%, at least for next five years. Based on this projection of 
consumption growth steel demand in the country would be approximately 68 
million tones in the year 2011 -2012 and approximately 100 million  tones in 
2015-16. 
 
 
Based on the status of various steel projects as in 2007, it was projected that, 
India's steel production capacity would reach 124 million tones by the 
(iii) 322 Km length of NH 6 in Chhattisgarh is 
under 4 laning work 
5 NH-215 Joda -Jajpur 
Road (Orissa) 
Urgent repair and 
4 laning 
Identified for improvement under NHDP Phase 
III. Bids have been invited and are under 
examination 
6 NH 6 Jagdalpur -
Dantweada (CG) 
NH 43 Jagdalpur -Raipur 
(CG) 
2 lane to 4 land 4 laning of NH 43 Khurd -Damtari (23 Km) 
identified under NHDP Phase III 
7 NH 60 Kharagpur -
Bankura (WB) 
4 laning Improvement from Intermediate land to 2 
laning for 144 Km length, has been identified. 
10 Km – completed 
57.5 Km – In progress” 

 
41 
 
financial year 2012. However, the current position of progress of various 
green field steel projects indicates a fresh re-look and a projection on year-by-
year basis for the next 5 years. Ministry of Steel will shortly constitute a 
Committee to examine the status of all proposed major steel projects and 
make a fresh projection of the lik ely steel production capacity on year -wise 
basis for the next 5 years.  
 
A fresh examination of production, consumption, export and import projections 
for the next 10 years have to be conducted, in conjunction with the targeted 
commissioning of major projects, international production projection and trade 
outlook on long term basis.” 
 
Consumption of Steel 
 
7.5 The Committee enquired  about the  current per capita consumption of  steel 
vis-à-vis world average. In reply, the Ministry have stated that “as per the information 
provided by World Steel Association, India's per capita finished steel consumption 
stood at 44.3 kg in the year 2008 against a global average of 190.4 kg in the same 
year. However, based upon the statistics maintained by Joint Plant Committee,  per 
capita consumption of steel in India was 47 Kg' for the year 2008-09.” 
  
7.6 To a further query  about the per capita consumption of steel in India by 2012 
both in rural area and urban area, the Ministry of Steel have stated as under:- 
 
“Per capita ste el consumption in the country for the year 2008 -09 is 47 kg. 
There is no statistics available to demonstrate the sectoral per capita 
consumption. Steel has three distinct areas consumption viz., (i) Infrastructure 
(ii) Urban (iii) Rural. However, in the ab sence of any particular data on rural 
per capita consumption, it has not become possible to maintain steel 
consumption on sectoral basis. 
 
A rough estimate was carried out in 2005, which indicates the per capita steel 
consumption in rural sector to be 2 kg . However, since the year 2005, a 
number of rural development projects have been initiated by government. 
Moreover, in the year 2005, per capita steel consumption in India was 35 kg 
which has now increased to 47 kg. 
 
In order to obtain a full picture of th e pattern of rural steel consumption in the 
country a All India level survey has already been commissioned. The survey is 
coordinated by Joint Plant Committee, Kolkata and the field work is being 
carried out by IMRB International, a leading market research  organization. 
The survey will cover 300 districts and 1500 villages in the country, covering 
all India States and Union Territories. The preliminary findings of the survey 
are expected by October 2010 and after analysis and final computation the 
results of rural steel demand can be available by January 2011. 
 
At the current rate of per capita steel consumption growth, the per capita 
steel consumption in India is expected to be in the range of 60 -62 kg. in 
2012.”  

 
42 
 
 
 
7.7 When asked about the action taken by the Ministry to increase the per capita 
consumption of steel in rural areas, the Ministry of Steel have stated that “per capita 
steel consumption can be increased by increasing the steel consumption base. 
Largely, no specific action is required for that as  steel consumption will grow along 
the growth in the economy. However, intensity of steel consumption (steel 
consumption per unit of GDP) can be raised by popularizing steel intensive 
technologies in construction, transport etc. and popularizing steel inte nsive 
consumer goods among the population. It is believed by the industry that there is a 
good potential for growth in steel consumption in the rural areas. The industry 
believes that lifestyle change in the rural areas can usher in a more steel intensive 
consumption base there. Also, by making the rural population aware of the 
advantages of steel, one can expect them to look for substitution to steel based 
products. To assess the full potential of it, the Joint Plant Committee is undertaking a 
detailed stu dy to this effect. The findings of the study will provide commercial and 
strategic direction to the Indian steel industry to develop market in rural India.” 

 
43 
 
Observations/Recommendations  
 
 
1. In the aftermath of liberalization and globalization, steel PSU s witnessed 
a strong competition from the private steel producers who started building up 
their capacities by setting up new steel plants. Steel PSUs thus faced the 
challenge of retaining their predominant position in steel sector . This 
necessitated them  to draw up a modernization and expansion plan of their 
steel plants not only in terms of capacity building but also technological  
upgradation, introduction of energy efficient and environment friendly 
technology. Availability of proper infrastructure, land , critical inputs and 
skilled workforce would undoubtedly play a major role in the success of 
modernization and expansion of steel PSUs.   
 
2. The Committee note that the modernisation and expansion programme 
of plants of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAI L) viz. IISCO Steel Plant (ISP), 
Salem Steel Plant (SSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) and 
Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) was approved  ‘in principle’ by SAIL Board between 
June, 2006 to July, 2007. The Committee have been informed that t he 
modernisation and expansion plan of the plants of SAIL envisage d installation 
of major facilities such as a new Coke Oven Battery, Sinter Machines, 
installation of new/upgradaion of Blast Furnace, Basic Oxygen Furnace 
Converters, Bloom Casters, continuous casting facilities, New Cold Rolling Mill 
Complex, phasing out of low yield and energy intensive units, new Steel 
Melting Shop and New Billet Casters/Billet -cum-Bloom Casters etc. In the case 
of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), the Committee have been  informed that 
modernisation and expansion was necessitated in view of consistently 
operating at high levels of capacity utilization, critical equipments like Blast 
Furnace, Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF), Sinter Plant and Coke Oven etc. 
required major revamp/ capital repairs to bring them back to earlier reliability 
and efficiency levels.  
 
3. According to the Ministry, the original target for completion of 
modernization and expansion of plants of SAIL was between June, 2010 to 
March, 2013. Owing to buoyancy in  the steel industry, the timeline for 
implementation of different packages was initially compressed to 2010. 
However, as per the further revised target s, the plants of SAIL are to be 

 
44 
 
commissioned between August, 2010 to December, 2012. Similarly in the cas e 
of RINL, the original schedule for completion of stage -I of modernisation and 
expansion was between October, 2008 to February, 2010 which has been 
subsequently revised to March, 2011.  
 
4. As regards, progress of the modernisation and expansion programme of 
SAIL and RINL, the Committee regret to note that major packages such as 
Coke Oven Battery, Blast Furnace, Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF), Bloom 
Caster, Continuous Casting facilities, Steel Melt ing Shop (SMS-II) etc. are yet 
to be received. Due to delay in receipt of requisite packages, the installation of 
the aforesaid facilities is likely to miss the laid down targets . Further, the 
design, engineering, civil and structural work s are also likely to take 
considerable time for their completion  which would fur ther hamper timely 
installation of various facilities which have been ordered. The Committee need 
hardly emphasise that phasing out  of obsolete technology and introduction of 
energy efficiency and en vironment friendly technology would assume critical 
importance in the  modernization of steel PSUs . The y expect that with the 
introduction of state of the art technology in units/plants of Steel Authority of 
India Ltd. (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), their techno -economic 
parameters such as Coke Ov en Rate and energy consumption would 
substantially improve. Accordingly, it is essential that immediate remedial 
steps need to be taken to ensure early delivery of packages , orders for which 
have been placed. Further, to facilitate the e rection/installation of 
technological facilities, civil and engineering works of the plant s should be 
completed well before the receipt of packages .  During the course of their 
study visit to IISCO Steel Plant(ISP), Burnpur in June, 2010, the Committee 
found that civil engin eering works relating to modernisation and expansion of 
the ISP have been undertaken by SAIL. The Committee were given to 
understand that both management and the workers were putting in their best 
efforts for making the modernisation programme of ISP succe ssful. The 
Committee are satisfied with the performance of all labourers/employees/ 
officers of ISP for building up such a big project relating to modernisation and 
expansion of the plant.  However, the Committee are surprised to note that 
boundary wall of  certain stretches of the new plant area ha s not been erected 
due to protests by the local residents of the area  and boundary wall of the old 

 
45 
 
plant area is too low. The Committee desire that the matter may be so rted out 
with the help of local administratio n and the bound ary wall of the entire plant 
may be constructed/height of the boundary wall be raised appropriately within 
a reasonable time frame.  The Committee would like to be informed of the 
action taken in the matter.   The Committee also trust that uni ts of SAIL and 
RINL would make optimum utilization of the facilities as a result of 
implementation of modernization programme. 
 
5. The Committee have been given to understand that during the course of 
implementation of modernization and expansion plan, SAI L had faced certain 
problems/constraints such as inadequate response to tenders, price bids 
submitted by the bidders being higher than the consultant’s estimates, etc. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that had SAIL adhered to the 
timeline of 2010 for completion of modernization programme, despite the th en 
meltdown, its financial performance would now have been far better given the 
present stability in the steel market. In this connection, it is pertinent to note 
that SAIL had also resorted to ret endering due to high price quoted by the 
vendors. The Committee are of the view that what SAIL saved financially on 
account of retendering would be much less than the profit it could have earned 
on account of completion of modernization programme in 2010 itself. 
 
6. The Committee regret to point out that SAIL having compressed the 
target for modernisation and expansion from 2013 to 2010 to encash the 
buoyancy in the steel industry failed to meet the revised target. However,  SAIL  
is stated to have taken several corrective steps such as strengthening project 
monitoring and project management organization, convening pre bid 
conferences and consultations with technology suppliers and their partners 
for ensuring wider participation/response in the tenders, stre amlining project 
manuals etc. With these measure, the Committee expect the SAIL to complete 
its modernization and expansion within the revised target (August 2010 to 
December, 2012) . The Committee would like to be informed of the present 
position in this regard. 
 
7. The Committee find that the pre -ordering delay in completion of 
schedule of RINL against the original schedule has been mainly attributed to 

 
46 
 
delay in appointment of consultants, tender process and placement order. The 
post ordering delays includ e engineering and supply and erections of 
equipment by BHEL and MECON, structural work by HSCL, structural and 
equipment erections by Bridge and Roof, supply of equipments from Chinese 
sources etc. The Committee feel that the pre and post ordering delays c ould 
have been avoided had there been stringent monitoring mechanism in place. 
The Committee recommend that Ministry of Steel/RINL should chalk out a 
strategy to make up for the loss due to time over -run and ensure that the 
modernization and expansion programme of RINL is monitored at highest level 
so as to ensure there is no further time and cost overrun. 
 
 
8. The Committee find that current installed capacity of Hot Metal, Crude 
Steel and Saleable Steel in respect of SAIL is 13.8, 12.8 and 11.1 million to nnes 
respectively which is stated to go up to 23.46, 21.40 and 20.23 million tonnes 
respectively after implementation of modernisation and expansion programme. 
Similarly, in the case of RINL their current installed capacity of Hot Metal, 
Liquid Steel and S aleable Steel which is presently 3.4, 3.0 and 2.656 Million 
Tonnes respectively is stated to go up to 6.5, 6.3 and 5.72 Million Tonnes 
respectively after the on -going expansion programme. The Committee are 
surprised to find that though SAIL and RINL have c urrently undertaken 
Brownfield projects to expand the capacities of their existing plants during 
2008-09, Bokaro Steel Plant and IISCO Steel Plant could not fully utilize their 
installed capacity as their capacity utilization was only 82% and 83% in      
2008-09 respectively. The Ministry attributed the reason for underutilization of 
these capacities  to the snags in the blast furnaces. The Committee are not 
convinced with  the reason putforth by the Ministry as the problem should 
have been envisaged well in  advance and fixed without much delay.  The 
Committee urge upon the Ministry of Steel/SAIL to undertake  capital 
repair/replacement of the worn out equipment as a part of their current 
modernization programme so that the bottlenecks in the full capacity 
utilization of these plants are removed. It should be endeavour of the 
SAIL/RINL to fully utilize the existing capacities as only then the increase in 
the capacities could be justified. 
 

 
47 
 
9. According to the Ministry of Steel, post completion of current 
modernization and expansion  programme, the capacity of hot metal, crude 
steel and saleable steel in respect of SAIL will go up to about 75% of the 
present installed capacity. Similarly, in the case of RINL, after completion of 
the ongoing expansion, their capa city will be twice of the existing installed 
capacity. The Committee find that private steel players have proposed huge 
investments for setting up Greenfield projects in order to enhance their 
production capacities. Major private players such as Tata Steel , Essar Steel, 
Jindal Steel & Power Ltd., Electro Steel Casting Ltd., Posco, Arcelor Mittal 
India, JSW Steel have embarked upon major Greenfield projects in Orissa, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal and Chhattisgarh for which process of land 
acquisition  is already i n progress. Some of these projects are likely to be 
completed by 2011 -12. The Committee desire that as in the case of private 
sector, public sector steel companies should also consider the feasibility of 
setting up of Greenfield projects after completion o f first phase of current 
modernization and expansion programme so as to remain competitive and 
keep pace with the private sector steel companies.  
 
10. The Committee note that steel PSUs would meet the expenditure on their 
modernization and expansion from out of their internal accruals and exter nal 
borrowings without seeking  budgetary support from Government of India . A 
sum of Rs. 70,169 crore and Rs. 15005 crore respectively have been 
sanctioned on account of various schemes of modernization and expansion  of 
SAIL and RINL.  SAIL could utilize only Rs. 17,352 crore upto June, 2010 on 
various schemes of its plant which works out to about 25% of the approved 
cost. Expenditure  trend of RINL in respect of its modernization is relatively 
better as they have spe nt Rs. 7,508 crore upto June, 2010 which is about 50% 
of the approved cost of the project. The Committee are not satisfied with the 
progress of utilization of funds earmarked for the purpose of modernisation 
and expansion. The Committee recommend that SAIL  and RINL should take 
suitable steps so as to fully utilize the allocated fund for timely completion of 
the projects/schemes related to modernization and expansion of their 
respective units/plants.  
 

 
48 
 
11. Availability of critical inputs such as iron ore and  coking coal is one of 
the pre -requisites of modernisation and expansion of Indian Steel Industry. 
The Committee observe that although India has total coking coal reserves of 
33.413 billion tonnes, it is difficult to mine most of the reserves. The 
Committee find that except BCCL Collieries, coking coal reserves in India are 
having high ash content. Thus, the domestic steel industry is highly dependent 
upon import of coking coal to fulfill its requirement.  The Committee observe 
that post modernisation and expansion, raw material requirement of India Steel 
Industry would increase substantially. Thus, there is an urgent need for having 
raw material security. The Committee desire that SAIL should step up efforts to 
expand the mining capacity of their existing i ron ore mines and develop 
captive coking coal blocks namely Tasra and Sitanala. The Ministry of 
Steel/SAIL should make all out efforts and take up the matter with the Ministry 
of Coal at the highest level for acquisition of coal blocks of Jhirki, Jhirki We st 
OC and Rhone- Routpara West.  
 
12. The Committee recommend that the thermal coal mines identified by 
SAIL should be allotted to it for captive use from the Government dispensation 
besides according top priority to the renewal of Chiria mines. The Minist ry of 
Steel should also take up the matter with Government of Jharkhand with 
regard to renewal of leases viz. Budhaburu, Dhobil and Ankua keeping in view 
the fact that Government of Jharkhand has already given its in -principle 
approval. With regard to other leases which are pending for want of forest and 
environment clearances, the concerns of the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest/State Government may be addressed to enable them to grant necessary 
statutory clearances  expeditiously. The Committee further r ecommend that 
Ministry of Steel should provide all possible help to Visvesvarya Iron & Steel 
Plan (VISL) and Salem Steel Plant (SSP) in grant of iron ore leases keeping in 
view that they have already applied for grant of leases and SSP and does not 
have th eir own iron ore mines. They also recommend that coal blocks 
identified by S AIL viz. Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli  & extension, Bankhui, Gand 
Bahera, Ujheni, Puta Parogia and Pindrakhi should be allotted to it to ensure 
raw material security in respect of thermal coal.  
 

 
49 
 
13. The Committee find that SAIL and Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) 
intend to form a Joint Venture Company for development of captive coking 
coal block for which Coal India Ltd is not giving its nod. The Committee urge 
upon Ministry of Steel to pe rsuade Ministry of Coal/CIL to give their approval 
for development of captive coking coal block. The Committee also recommend 
that more such JVCs may be formed with CIL and its subsidiaries mutually 
agreed to by them as the same would be beneficial to both of them.  
 
14. The Committee note that critical infrastructure projects such as new rail 
links, augmentation of important existing routes, ports and road connectivity 
projects etc. are vital for growth of the country and are dependent to a certain 
extent on the steel sector. Keeping in view the critical importance of 
development of infrastructure, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Steel 
expeditiously complete their modernisation and expansion programme so that 
such projects do not feel shortage of good quality of steel. 
 
15. The Committee note that in the current economic scenario, there is huge 
growth potential for Indian steel industry. The Committee have been given to 
understand that steel consumption in the country will grow at an average rate 
of more than 10% for the next 5 years. On the basis of this projection of 
consumption growth, steel demand in the country would be approximately 68 
million tonnes for the year 2011-12 and it may rise to approximately 100 million 
tonnes by 2015-16. The Committee agree with the view of the Ministry of Steel 
that a fresh examination of production, consumption, export and import 
projections for the next 10 years is required for which Ministry propose to 
constitute a committee. The Committee desire that since var ious Greenfield 
and Brownfield projects are going to be commissioned in next 2 -3 years, the 
proposed committee may be constituted on priority basis to look into the 
projections of steel consumption etc. on year -by-year basis for the next 10 
years  so as to  plan and suggest measures to boost the requisite output of 
steel. As regards consumption of steel in India, the Committee find that per 
capita consumption of steel was 47 kg in 2008 -09 which was much less 
compared to global average of 190.4 kg. The Commit tee, therefore, 
recommend that Government should take initiative to focus on increasing the 
consumption of steel in the rural areas given the growth potential of 

 
50 
 
consumption of steel in the rural areas for purposes like rural housing, rural 
infrastructure etc. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              KALYAN BANERJEE 
23 November, 2010                                                                Chairman 
02 Agrahayana, 1932(Saka)                      Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

 
51 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 1st   FEBRUARY, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM  ‘B’, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1545 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2      Shri Adhi Sankar 
3       Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4       Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
5       Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
6       Shri Narahari  Mahato 
7       Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
8       Kumari Saroj Pandey 
9       Shri Ramesh Rathod 
10       Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
11       Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
12       Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
13       Ms. Mabel Rebello       
14       Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
15       Shri Mohd. Amin 
16       Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
17       Shri R.C. Singh 
18       Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty 
19       Shri Swapan Sadhan Bose 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
      MINISTRY OF STEEL 
1. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, Secretary      
2. Shri B.S. Meena, Special Secretary and Financial Adviser  
3. Shri G. Elias, Joint Secretary      
 
   STEEL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
4.    Shri S.K. Roongta, Chairman   - SAIL 
5.    Shri P.K. Bishnoi, CMD   - RINL 
 

 
52 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Steel and Steel Public Sector Undertak ings to the sitting of Committee. The 
Chairman mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to hear 
the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Steel regarding  “Modernisation 
and Expansion of Steel Sector”.   
3. Thereafter, the Se cretary, Ministry of Steel, briefed the Committee on 
“Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sector” .  The points discussed during the 
sitting broadly related to the issues such as progress of implementation of ongoing 
modernization and expansion of steel pl ants; reasons for delay in execution of 
expansion plans, steps being taken/to be taken by the Ministry of Steel to face 
challenges of economic melt down; demand & supply of steel and availability of iron 
ore and coking coal.   
4.  The Chairman directed tha t the replies to some of the queries raised by the 
Committee which could not be replied by the representatives of the Ministry may be 
furnished well before the next sitting of the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee decided to further hear the views of the repres entatives of the 
Ministry at their sitting to be held on 19th February, 2010. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
53 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 19 FEBRUARY, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM  NO. ‘139’, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1630hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Jayawant G. Awale 
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury 
6. Shri Ismail Hussain 
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
8. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
9. Shri Narahari  Mahato 
10. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
11. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
12. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
14. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
16. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu       
17. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
18. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
19. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ashok Sarin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh -  Director 
3. Smt. Sunita  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Md. Aftab Alam -  Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
       MINISTRY OF STEEL  
1. Shri Atul Chaturvedi, Secretary    
2. Shri B.S. Meena, Special Secretary & Financial Adviser    
3. Dr. Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary    
4. Shri G. Elias, Joint Secretary    
5. Shri Udai Pratap Singh, Joint Secretary   
 

 
54 
 
STEEL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
1. Shri S.K. Roongta, Chairman,  SAIL 
2. Shri P.K. Bishnoi, CMD, RINL 
3. Shri Rana Som, CMD, NMDC 
4. Shri K.J. Singh, CMD,  MOIL 
    
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Steel 
and Steel Publi c Sector Undertakings to the sitting of Committee. The Chairman 
mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to discuss the various 
issues and queries raised by the Committee regarding the subject “Expansion and 
Modernisation of Steel Sector” at their sitting held on 01.02.2010.   
3. Thereafter, the Committee sought clarifications on the various issues related to 
“Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sector ”, some of which were replied to by the 
representatives of the Ministry. The issues d iscussed during the sitting broadly related to 
acquisition of land and payment of compensation to the land owners by NMDC in 
Chhattisgarh, Modernisation of many old units of RINL; delay in expansion programme of 
SAIL problem of environment and forest clearance etc. 
4.  The Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of Steel to furnish the 
replies to the queries raised by the Members which could not be responded to by them.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
55 
 
ANNEXURE- III 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL (2010-11) HELD ON 29.10.2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. G-074, 
PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee- Chairman 
 
      MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
2. Sanjay Bhoi 
3. Ismail Hussain 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
6. Shri Adhi Sankar 
7. Shri Pashupathi Nath Singh 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
11. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
12. Shri Jai Prakash Narain Singh 
13. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma   - Director 
2. Smt. Sunita    - Deputy Secretary  
3. Md. Aftab Alam   - Under Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Mem bers to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the following Draft Reports 
subject to some minor modifications:- 
(i) **  **  **  **  ** 
 
(ii) **  **  **  **  ** 
(iii) **  **  **  **  ** 
(iv) Modernisation and Expansion of Steel Sector. 

 
56 
 
 
4.   **  **  **  **  **  **  
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports after making 
consequential changes arising out of factual verifications by the concerned Ministries 
or otherwise and to present these Reports to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 
 