STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
“THE COAL MINES (CONSERV ATION AND
DEVELOPMENT) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2012”
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
37


THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COAL
“THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND
DEVELOPMENT) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2012”
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.5.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.5.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

CC&S No. 76
Price : Rs. 38.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
PART I
A. Introductory ..................................................................................... 1
B. Objective of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Amendment Bill, 2012 ................................................................... 2
C. Coal Conservation and Development Advisory Committee ... 7
D. Status of Implementation of Master Plan in Jharia and
Raniganj ............................................................................................ 9
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ................ 16
ANNEXURES
I. Statement showing the details of Stowing Excise Duty
collection vis-à-vis  CCDAC assistance released during
2007-2012 .......................................................................................... 20
II Statement of CCDA assistance (ST&PW) in Raniganj and
Jharia coalfields released by Ministry of Coal during
2007-2012 .......................................................................................... 21
III Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2012-13) held on 11.01.2013 ....................................... 22
IV Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2012-13) held on 17.04.2013 ....................................... 24
V Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (2012-13) held on 06.05.2013 ....................................... 27
VI The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Amendment Bill, 2012 ................................................................... 29

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL  (2012-2013)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Sabbam Hari
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
8. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
9. Shri Pakauri Lal
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Rajaram Pal
13. Kumari Saroj Pandey
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
15. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
16. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
21. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary*
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Sanjay Raut
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
30. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “The Coal
Mines (Conservation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2012” relating
to the Ministry of Coal.
2. The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Amendment
Bill, 2012 as introduced in Lok Sabha on 22nd November, 2012 was referred
by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331(E) (i) (b) of the Rules
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha on 21st December,
2012 to the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel for examination and
report.
3. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the
Ministry of Coal and coal companies on 11th January, 2013. The Committee
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Coal on
17th April, 2013.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Coal and Coal Companies for placing before them and
in furnishing material/information from time to time as desired by the
Committee.
5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 06.05.2013.
6. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for
the valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
6 May, 2013 Chairman,
16 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

REPORT
PART I
A. INTRODUCTORY
The provisions of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Act, 1974 [CM (C and D) Act, 1974] mandate the need for extending
assistance to the coal companies for encouraging coal production from
depillaring panels of underground mines in conjunction with sand
stowing for filling the voids created and for taking up various
protective measures for extraction and conservation of coal. The Act also
mandates the offer of assistance towards Research and Development
activities and encouraging Transport Infrastructure Development in
coalfield areas.
2. As regards the fields of assistance provided in the Coal Mines
(Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 and Rules, 1975 as amended
in 2011, the Committee were informed as under:—
I. Conservation and safety
(i) Stowing operation
(ii) Protective works including:
(a) Blanketing with incombustible materials
(b) Filling up of subsidence
(c) Cutting of Branch trenches
(iii) Surface protection measures
(iv) Installation of stowing plants
(v) Schemes for recovery and transportation of sand
II. Research and development
III. Development of road and creation of rail infrastructure
3. The Committee were informed that Section 6 of the Act provides
that the Central Government shall levy and collect such duty of excise

2
not exceeding rupees ten per tonne on all coal raised and despatched
and on all coke manufactured and dispatched as may be fixed from time
to time by notification. The Central Government, by notification No. S.O.
727 (E), dated the 25th June, 2003, enhanced the rate of excise duty from
rupees three and paisa fifty to rupees ten per tonne for coking or non-
coking coal.
4. As regards the disbursement of Stowing Excise Duty, the
Committee were informed that out of the total collection of excise
duty, only thirty five per cent. is being utilized for two schemes framed
by the Central Government, namely, (i) the Conservation and
Safety in Coal mines, and (ii) the Development of Transportation
Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas and the remaining sixty five per cent
is reserved for the Jharia—Raniganj Master Plan to enable partial funding
for implementation of Jharia-Raniganj Master Plan which is addressing
the issues of fires and land subsidence in the old mined out areas in
Jharia and Raniganj coalfields which were taken over at the time of
nationalization.
B. OBJECTIVE OF THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND
DEVELOPMENT) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
5. According to the Ministry of Coal in August, 2009, the Central
Government approved the master plan dealing with fires, subsidence
and rehabilitation in the Jharia and Raniganj coalfields at a total outlay
of rupees 9773 crores. It is to be implemented over a period of 10 years.
The annual requirement of funds would be about rupees 977 crores.
6. Asked about the Objective of the Coal Mines (Conservation and
Development) Amendment Bill, 2012 and Justification thereof, the
Committee were informed as under:—
“Objective
To increase the maximum amount of excise duty to Rs. 50/- per
tonne of coal in Section 6 of the CM (C&D) Act, 1974
Justification
(i) Out of the total collection of excise duty, 35% is utilized for
Conservation and Safety in coal mines and Development of
transportation infrastructure in coalfields 65% is reserved for
implementation of the Jharia-Raniganj Master Plan which is
addressing the issues of fires and land subsidence in the old
mined out areas.

3
(ii) The Master plan for Jharia and Raniganj was approved by
the Government envisaging funding of Rs. 350 crore per year
from the internal resources of Coal India Limited and Rs. 350
crore per year from the collection of excise duty at the current
rate of Rs. 10/tonne.
(iii) The gap of Rs. 277 crore per year is proposed to be met by
enhancing the current rate of excise duty after enhancing the
maximum ceiling to Rs. 50 per tonne.
(iv) P resently only partial reimbursement is made to coal
companies i.e. 90% for protective work, 75% for sand stowing
and 70% for rail/roads infrastructure and the amount available
is not adequate.
(v) A number of new coal projects are coming up as a result of
new coal block allotment for captive purposes which need
to be provided with road and rail infrastructure connecting
to the main lines for coal evacuation.”
7. Regarding objectives to be achieved from the proposed
Amendment Bill, The Secretary, Coal while deposing before the Committee
during evidence on 17.04.2013 submitted as under:—
“The main objective of the Coal Mines (Conservation and
Development) Act, 1974 is to provide some subsidy for carrying
out the stowing of voids in underground mines, and various
protective measures for conservation of coal and safety. The Act
also offers some assistance for development of roads and Railway
infrastructure in coalfield areas. These assistances are provided from
funds obtained from collection of excise duty from all coal
producing companies for all coal dispatched at rates fixed from
time to time by notification. The current rate is Rs. 10 per tonne
of coal, which was effective from 26 June 2003. This is the existing
maximum ceiling as per Section 6 of the Act. Through this
Amendment Bill, it is proposed to increase the maximum amount
of excise duty to Rs. 50 per tonne of coal.”
8. Asked about the rationale of increasing the amount of excise
duty five times from Rs. 10 to Rs. 50 per tonne for all types of coal, the
Ministry of Coal informed the Committee in a written reply as under:—
“Out of SED of Rs. 10 per tonne, Rs. 6.5 is for implementation of
Master Plan of Jharia and Raniganj coalfields and Rs. 3.5 per tonne

4
for reimbursement of expenditure incurred by coal companies for
the two plan schemes of CM (C&D) Act.
The master plan dealing with fires, subsidence and rehabilitation
in Jharia and Raniganj coalfields was approved by the Government
at a total outlay of Rs. 9773 crore which is to be implemented over
a period of 10 years. The annual requirement of funds for Master
Plan is therefore Rs. 977 crore out of which Rs. 350 crore would
be provided by CIL from its Internal Resources (IR) and Rs. 357
crore (at 550 MT of coal production) would be available from SED
collection. To bridge the gap of Rs. 270 crore it was proposed to
increase the current rate of SED.
However, this is based on the approved cost of the Master Plan
of Rs. 9773 crore. This cost is being revised and is expected to be
at least 20-30% more or about Rs. 12700 crore which implies an
annual outgo of Rs. 1270 crore on an average. After accounting for
IR of Rs. 350 crore from CIL there exists a gap of Rs. 920 crore
which implies an SED rate of Rs. 16.72/tonne for funding Master
Plan alone. Including Rs. 3.5 for other plan schemes at the current
rate, the total SED works out to be Rs. 20.22/tonne (Rs. 16.72 +
Rs. 3.5).
Hence, the immediate increase in the SED is proposed to be
Rs. 20/tonne.”
9. The Ministry of Coal have further clarified the Committee that
since the existing upper limit of SED is only Rs. 10/tonne , it is proposed
to enhance the upper limit to Rs. 50 per tonne so that Ministry of Coal
can suitably enhance the rate of collection from time to time within the
approved limit through Gazette Notification. The upper limit of Rs. 10/tonne
was fixed when the Act came into force i.e in 1974.
10. The Committee have desired to know the increase in generation
of total excise duty by increasing its rate from Rs. 10 to Rs. 50 per tonne.
In this regard, the Committee were apprised as under:—
“Present collection of Excise Duty for the year 2012-13 is
Rs. 556.617 crore.
With the following coal production programme as per the Annual
Plan of 2012-13 of Ministry of Coal, the estimated collection at the
current rate of SED of Rs. 10/tonne and the estimated collection

5
at the proposed immediate enhancement of SED to Rs. 20 per tonne
are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Projected Coal Production Estimated Estimated Increase in
 SED SED SED
Collection at Collection at Collection
Year Quantity in the current the rate of
Million rate of Rs. 20/tonne
Tonnes Rs. 10/tonne
2013-14 605 605 1210.0 605
2014-15 635 635 1270.0 635
2015-16 673 673 1346.0 673
2016-17 795 795 1590.0 795
It may be seen from the above table, that SED collection would
increase by Rs. 605 crore on increasing SED from Rs. 10 to
Rs. 20 which may be used for the implementation of Master Plan.”
11. As regards proposed increased in Stowing Excise Duty, the
Secretary, Coal submitted as under:—
“In this connection, as we have given in the answers to the
questionnaire, this Master Plan was prepared in 2009, and we will
be going in for a revision of the Master Plan after the State
Governments of Jharkhand and West Bengal have completed their
exercise with regard to land acquisition and demographic survey.
After the demographic survey and land acquisition has been done,
we will be going in for a revision of the Master Plan as per the
current rates. We are quite certain that there will be an increase
in the Master Plan outlay by about 20 per cent.”
12. As per the proviso to Section 6 (1) the Central Government
may, by general or special order, exempt any special grade or grades or
description of coal or coke from the levy of such duty of excise. Asked
about the different excise duty levied, the Committee were informed in
a written reply that the Ministry had levied the following rate of SED
since 1974 for coking and Non-Coking coal:—
Period Rate of SED (Rs. per tonne)
Coking coal Non-coking coal
01-04-1975 to 8-02-1983 2.50 1.65
08-02-1983 to 25-06-2003 4.25 3.50
27-06-2003 to till date* 10.00 10.00
* This was done keeping in view the fund requirement for the Master Plan.

6
Statement showing the details of Stowing Excise Duty collection
vis-à-vis CCDAC assistance released during 2007-2012 and statement
of CCDA assistance (ST&PW) in Raniganj and Jharia coalfields
released by Ministry of Coal during 2007-2012 are placed at
Annexures-I and II.”
13. When asked about who will bear the burden of increased duty,
the Committee were apprised that it is proposed to raise the rate of
stowing excise duty at the first instance to Rs. 20/Tonne from the existing
rate of Rs. 10/Tonne. This implies an impact of 0.7 paisa/unit of electricity
at the average specific coal consumption of 0.7 Kg./Kwh which will be
passed on to the consumer. Hence the same will not have a significant
impact.
14. Section 8 of the Act provides that the duties of excise levied
under Section 6 shall be collected by such agencies and in which manner
as may be prescribed. The Committee have desired to know the agencies
responsible for collection of excise duty and how the same is being
administered. In this regard, the Ministry of Coal apprised the Committee
as under:—
“Rule 8 of CM (C&D) Rules, 1975 amended in 2011, specifies the
manner in which collection and assessment of excise duty are to
be done. As per the rules, the Coal Controller is mandated for
collection of Stowing Excise Duty.
Every Owner/Agent/Manager of a coal maintain a register in Form
‘A’ showing quantities of coal or coke actually dispatched during
a month, particular of the parties to whom these were dispatched
and the prices charged therefore, and the amount of excise duty
payable during a month at the rate fixed thereof.
Every owner is deemed to have provisionally assessed to an amount
calculated and recorded (as mentioned above) as payable during
a month and he shall pay the same into the bank, the remittance
being creditable to the Central Government in a special account.
The payment shall be made within a period of ninety days from
the close of the month during which dispatches were effected.
The payment shall be made by means of Challans Electronic transfer,
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) National Electronic Fund
Transfer (NEFT) to the accredited bank. The accredited bank shall
return one copy of the Challan to the depositor and one copy to
the Coal Controller.

7
As soon as may be after the date of payment of excise duty in the
manner provided above and in any case not later than thirty days
from such payment, every coal company shall submit to the Coal
Controller a return in Form ‘B’ showing the quantities of raw coal
dispatch for which payment of excise duty has been made.
If any Coal Co. fails to deposit the excise duty within the stipulated
period then Penal Interest is to be charged @ 8% as per Office
Memorandum No. S-11012/3/2003-04/Pt.III/RBD/1059
dated 16.11.2004 issued from the Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of
Expenditure, Controller General of Accounts, New Delhi.
Coal Controller is the Statutory Authority to issue Final Assessment
Order who can even depute an officer to inspect the account books
of coal companies before issuing the order.”
C. COAL CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY
COMMITTEE
15. According to the Ministry of Coal an Advisory Committee called
“Coal Conservation and Development Advisory Committee” (CCDAC)
constituted under the provisions of the CM (C&D) Act, 1974 and CM
(C&D) Rules, 1974 under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Coal)
advises the Government regarding the formulation and implementation
of National policy in relation to “Coal Conservation and Development
Activity” and scientific utilisation of coal seams of the country, rates of
SED, disbursement of SED proceeds to different coal companies etc. The
CCDAC has the power to regulate its own procedure and thus is a
statutory body with powers conferred on it for implementing related
activities under the CM (C&D) Act, 1974.
16. Section 9 of the Act provides that the net proceeds of the duty
of excise and customs levied and collected under Sections 6 and 7 shall
be disbursed by the Central Government in accordance with such
procedure as may be prescribed to the owners, agents and managers of
coal mines or to any other person.
17. When asked to furnish the list of owners, agents or managers
of coal mines who have been disbursed excise duty during the last three
years and is the mechanism in place to ensure the proper utilization of
funds disbursed to owners, agents or managers of coal mines, the Ministry
of Coal informed the Committee in written reply as under:—
“ As per the present procedure, the expenses incurred by the coal
mines/companies for stowing, protective works, infrastructural

8
works like rail and road construction, R&D etc. are being reimbursed
to the extent of 60% to 100% of the admissible claims on detailed
scrutiny and approval by CCDAC
On approval by CCDAC the amount is reimbursed to CIL
subsidiaries (Mines of ECL, BCCL, WCL, MCL, NEC) SCCL , TISCO,
SAIL-IISCO. The names of mines which have been extended the
assistance under the schemes during the last three years are
mentioned below:—
Coal Name of Mines
Company
ECL Madhaipur, Manderboni, Pandaveswar, Dalurbad, New
Kenda, Siduli, C.L.Jambad, Real Jambad, Pure Jambad,
North Jambad, Lower Kenda, Chora 7 and 9 Pit, Chora 10
Pit, Bankolka, Jambad UG, Khas Kajora, Parascole, Sodepur
3A Pit, Mouthdih, J.K. Nagar, Lachipur, J.K. Nagar,
Chinakuri Mine, Nimcha, Kuardih, Bansra, Belbaid,
Haripur, Mithapur
BCCL Simlabahal, Begunia, Joyrampur, Sudamdih, Pathardih,
Bhagaband, Gopalichuck
CCL Swang Colliery, Jarandih Colliery, Govindpur, Sirka
Colliery, Urimari
WCL New Majri Colliery, Silwara Colliery, Pipla Colliery,
Patansongi AB Incline, Hindustan Lalpeth-1, Nandgaon,
Durgapur Rayatwari, Mahakali, Manna, Ballarpur, Sasti
Colliery
MCL Talcher Colliery, Deulbera Colliery, Nandira Colliery
SCCL GDK 10 INC, GDK 11 Inc, GDK 8 Inc, Vakipalli Mine,
KK-2 Incline, VK-7, GDK-5, GDK No. 2 and 2A
TISCO Jamadoba, 6 and 7 Pit, Digwadi, Bhellatand, Sijua Colliery
IISCO Chasnala Colliery, Jitpur Colliery, Ramnagar Colliery."
As regards consideration and approval of proposals/claims of the
coal companies by CCDAC for reimbursement, the Committee were
apprised of the following multilevel examination:—
• “ All the proposals are checked at mine/area/headquarters level
of coal companies.
• Approval of the proposal by competent authority, i.e.
concerned Director or CMD/Board of CIL, SCCL or Technical
Head of other companies are submitted to Coal Controller
to approve various schemes of the proposal.

9
• It is further checked by OSD of Field Offices of Coal Controller
Organisation and by inspection of stowing districts, protective
works, and road works.
• Then it is checked by OSD of Coal Controller Organisation
(HQ), The Quantity of sand is assessed by following
3 methods:
(A) On the basis of trips (sand transportation).
(B) On the basis of coal/sand ratio.
(C) On the basis of Survey offset plan and MB.
• Then the claims for disbursement are reviewed by technical
committee (Pre-Sub committee meeting).
• CCDA Sub-Committee then examines the proposals and
recommends the proposals for reimbursement to the
CCDAC.
• The CCDAC finally recommends the proposals for
reimbursement.
18. The Committee were further informed that inspections are
carried by OSD of CCO field offices from time to time. The claims of
the coal companies are for the work already carried out by them which
are scrutinized by the CCDAC and recommended for reimbursement of
the same within the budget allocation. Hence there is proper utilization
of funds by the coal companies.
19. In a background note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry
of Coal have informed that presently only partial reimbursement to coal
companies i.e. 90% for protective work, 70% for sand stowing and 70%
for rail/roads infrastructure is taking place and the amount available is
also not adequate. Moreover, a number of new coal projects are coming
up as a result of new coal block allotment for captive purposes which
need to be provided with road and rail infrastructure connecting to the
main lines for coal evacuation.
D. STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF MASTER PLAN IN JHARIA
AND RANIGANJ
20. The Committee were apprised of the Minutes of the High
Powered Central Committee held on 19.12.2012 under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Coal) to monitor the implementation of Jharia and Raniganj

10
Master Plan. The important points discussed during the meeting about
the affected areas under BCCL and ECL are as under:—
(i) CMD, BCCL made a brief presentation on the progress of
implementation of the decisions. Regarding rehabilitation of
the BCCL families, he mentioned that against the provision
of 25,000 houses in Master Plan for rehabilitation of BCCL
families, now projected requirement of houses is about 15,000
only due to natural wastage and action has already been
taken for construction of the same. It was further mentioned
that work has been awarded for construction of 5232 houses
out of which 1152 houses will be finally handed over by
31st March 2013 and the construction of 4080 houses which
is under progress is expected to be completed by 6.11.2014.
For 4020 houses, tender has been floated and award of work
is expected to be completed by 31st January, 2013. About
6000 houses including three Area Offices and Mines Rescue
Station, town planning is being done by CMPDI and tender
is expected to be floated within 6 months.
(ii) Secretary (Coal) desired to know how the status and progress
of extinguishing the fires is being monitored with respect to
base line information. CMD, BCCL mentioned that based on
2006 NRSA survey, the status was assessed at that point of
time and BCCL has been digging out a number of fire areas.
However, no fresh survey has been held in the meanwhile.
Secretary (Coal) directed BCCL to institute Thermal Infra-red
Survey in fire affected area in cluding the area where fire is
known to be extinguished either through NRSA or through
NGRI within next three months. He further directed that such
surveys should be conducted at least once in six months
interval to assess the effectiveness of the efforts being made
for fire extinguishing in the affected areas and to understand
the spread of the same to other areas.
(iii) CMD, BCCL further mentioned that fire is being dealt through
engaging hired HEMM and coal thus released is being mined
and sold. As such audit has not permitted to utilize the outlays
provided in the Master Plan for fighting the fires and the
expenditure is being booked under revenue account. Secretary
(Coal) mentioned that latest technologies for dealing with
fires should be considered under Master Plan. BCCL and CIL
should explore the same on an emergent basis which will be
reviewed in the next HPCC Meeting.

11
(iv) The decisions taken in the meeting of Chief Secretary,
Government of Jharkhand in regard to the issues related to
Master Plan were also discussed. Regarding the land
acquisition near Lipania by JRDA, Chairman, JRDA/
Commissioner, North Chhottanagpur assured that possession
will be taken up shortly. CMD, BCCL mentioned that
possession of 849 acres of BCCL land in non-coal bearing
area and 86 acres of land in Bhuli township which was offered
to JRDA after obtaining NOC from Ministry of Coal,
possession by JRDA is awaited. He further mentioned that
as a temporary measure, for shifting the affected persons
from most endangered areas, BCCL has identified reclaimed
sites with land area of about 24 Acres for immediate
rehabilitation. However, State Government representatives
stated that shifting people to reclaimed mine sites will not
be a desirable alternative being an unskilled reclaimed
overburden area.
(v) Addl. Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand mentioned
that unless some issues such as extending employment are
resolved, possession of land may not be possible. He further
mentioned that land losers are demanding for CIL’s R&R
policy. However, it was clarified that, the rehabilitation under
the Master Plan is one of its kind to address the shifting of
people from the endangered areas both from Jharia and
Raniganj coalfields and the rehabilitation package as approved
by Government of India was adopted after consulting the
concerned State Governments. The R&R policy of CIL as
applicable for coal mining projects cannot be considered in
this case. State Government was requested to expedite the
taking over of possession of land as the same has been very
much delayed.
(vi) Chairm an, JRDA mentioned that shifting away from areas of
economic activity is also one of the reasons for reluctance in
the minds of the affected people for shifting. He further
mentioned about the need for training of displaced persons
by BCCL for improving the skills for employment potential.
CMD, BCCL mentioned that BCCL can extend all facilities
including infrastructure creation, if skill development is taken
care by JRDA/State Government. BCCL would facilitate use
of such skills for employment of trained persons by
contractors in outsourced operations. State Government and
BCCL will follow up on the same which will be reviewed
in the next HPCC Meeting.

12
(vii) Regarding handing over and the work for development of
alternate road in lieu  of fire affected part of NH-32, it was
mentioned that State Government has already started the work
in August, 2012 and the same will be completed in 18 months.
(viii) Secretary (Coal) desired to know about integrated planning
of rehabilitation sites and their layouts. Chairman, JRDA
mentioned that due to non-availability of large tracts of land
holdings for rehabilitation development of large townships
does not appear to be feasible. Further any such large tract
of land will only be available at a far off distance from the
existing site and this will remove the affected people from
the basic economic activity for sustainable livelihood. This
will not be an acceptable alternative for the State Government.
(ix) Representative of DGMS mentioned that spread of fire beyond
RSP College needs to be contained failing which it may affect
Jharia township. CMD, BCCL mentioned that as decided in
the previous meetings, BCCL has taken action for trench
cutting but the same was to be stopped due to MADA lines.
Unless DGMS and JRDA/State Government of Jharkhand
address the issue BCCL is not in a position to proceed in the
matter.
(x) Secretary (Coal) desired that the demographic survey of
balance 35% of families should be completed on priority.
Chairman, JRDA assured that survey will be completed within
6 months time.
(xi) Regarding strengthening of JRDA, Chairman, JRDA
mentioned that the existing manpower is adequate to take
care of the current activities and additional manpower will
be recruited as per the needs and it should not be a constraint.
(xii) Regarding Raniganj Master Plan, Secretary (Coal) requested
CMD, ECL and Advisor (Industries), Government of
West Bengal to present the status of progress on the decisions
made in the previous meeting.
(xiii) Advisor (Industries), Government of West Bengal and CEO,
ADDA mentioned that demographic survey work has been
awarded for all the 141 sites and assured that the survey
work will be completed by March, 2013. They raised the
issue of increasing the rate of valuation work of superstructure
as no government approved valuer is willing to work for an

13
amount of Rs. 125/- per superstructure. They pointed out
that the matter of increasing the rate of valuation from
Rs. 125/- to Rs. 300/- per superstructure has already been
approved by the Industries and Principal Secretary Commerce
and Industries Department and requested the HPC to consider
the same. In view of this, HPCC agreed for enhancement of
the rate of valuation from Rs. 125/- to Rs. 300/-. Regarding
non participation by some persons in the demographic
surveys it was proposed to issue legal notice by ADDA saying
that non-participation will forfeit them from the benefits of
rehabilitation.
(xiv) Advisor (Industries), Government of West Bengal mentioned
that the earlier WB Cabinet approval for land acquisition
obtained on 18/08/2010 needs to be revalidated as per the
decision taken in the meeting of Chief Secretary, Government
of West Bengal on 06/07/2011 and in the District Level
Monitoring Committee Meeting on 14/01/2012. A fresh
proposal in this regard has been sent to C&I Deptt.,
Government of West Bengal on 19/01/2012. However, Advisor
(Industry) sought time till 31st January, 2013 from the
Committee to prepare and submit a proposal for possible
alternatives, along with cost indications, after getting
appropriate decisions from the Chief Secretary who heads
the Review Committee for the rehabilitation project at the
State level.
(xv) He further mentioned that ADDA has pro cessed the land
acquisition proposal to L.A. Collector, Burdwan for 1043 acres
of land for all 9 mouzas of Bonjemehari site and 678.67 acres
of land for 3 out of 5 mouzas of Gourangdih site. Adviser
further suggested that the ways and means of reducing the
requirement of land can be considered by going for vertical
construction of houses at rehabilitation sites in view of the
fact that availability of land is a major constraint. State
Government was advised to explore this possibility.
(xvi) CMD, ECL, informed that two (2) new locations are proposed
to be included in the Master Plan of Raniganj Coalfield as
additional unstable locations, viz. diversion of District Board
Road (approx. 550m) and rehabilitation of 64 nos. of ECL
quarters and 50 nos. of non-ECL hutments occurring on both
sides of the road from Ratibati Agent Office to Ratibati MTI.
These sites have been identified and declared as unstable by
DGMS. The no. of unstable sites will thus increase to

14
142 from 141 and diversion of infrastructure will increase to
8 from 7. He requested HPC to consider including the same
in the Master Plan for Raniganj. HPCC agreed for inclusion
of these two new sites in the Master Plan.
(xvii) Regarding diversion of railway lines at Pandaveshwar, CMD,
ECL pointed out that CIMFR, Dhanbad has been awarded
the job of ascertaining the stability of Andal-Sainthia railway
line which is likely to be started by 10th January 2013 and
for diversion of Andal-Sitarampur railway line of Salanpur
Area, it was pointed out that the job has been entrusted to
M/s. RITES Ltd. who has confirmed their formal acceptance
on 13.10.2012 for taking up the job.
(xviii)Secretary (Coal) desired that ECL should send the report on
their discussions with railways to MoC so that railways could
be requested to supervise the works. A copy of the same is
also proposed to be endorsed to Ministry of Labour and
DGMS. Secretary (Coal) stated that this is an extremely critical
issue and the issue should be immediately taken up with the
Ministry of Railways. Ministry of Railways should also be
invited for the next meeting of HPCC.
(xix) CMD, ECL further mentioned that Indian Oil Corporation
Ltd. has awarded the work of carrying out survey and stability
test of the alignment of existing pipe line to NIRM, Bangalore
which is likely to start the work by December end.
(xx) Secretary (Coal) mentioned that like in the case of IOCL which
has engaged agency for undertaking the stability study,
Railways should also do the same. The Ministry of Railways
in the meantime should be asked to supervise the job of
stability study of railway lines wherever it has been affected
as per the Master Plan of Raniganj Coalfield.
(xxi) Secretary (Coal) further mentioned that activities which need
to be covered in the next six months should be identified and
monitored properly. Further whenever any job is awarded,
the time period and date of award of tender should also be
mentioned. The next meeting should be held within six
months.
21. In view of the non-utilization of funds available for Master
Plan for Jharia and Raniganj during the 11th Plan Period, the Committee
have desired to know the reasons for bringing the present Amendment

15
Bill for enhancing the rate of Stowing Excise Duty. In this connection,
the Secretary, Coal while deposing before the Committee submitted that
the expenditure is going to pick up.
22. The witness further added:—
“With regard to Jharkhand, a lot of action has already been initiated
with regard to taking over the possession of land. We are
anticipating that as soon we go in for a review of the Master Plan,
we will have to release a lot of money. We cannot wait because
it is a very risky and vulnerable area, and we never know when
the subsidence may take place. As soon as this exercise by the State
Governments is completed, as soon as the Master Plan is ready, we
cannot wait and we will have to rehabilitate these people
immediately. In fact, the J harkhand Government was floating the
idea, which we did not accept in the High Level Task Force Meeting,
of having some sort of intermediate camp, temporary camp, for
these people because the risk of subsidence is very much there. So,
we will need the money immediately. As you know, the legislative
process takes time. Then, at that time, if we go in for the legislative
process, we cannot say how much time it will take. It may be done
in three months or in one year.”

16
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. The Committee have examined in detail The Coal Mines
(Conservation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2012 referred to
them by Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. Although the Committee endorse
the present increase in upper limit for collecting Stowing Excise Duty
from Rs. 10 per tonne to Rs. 50 per tonne on all coal raised and
dispatched and on all coke manufactured and dispatched as may be
fixed from time to time by notification only on the assurance given
by the Coal Secretary that expenditure is going to pick up and they
will fully utilize the fund although they have miserably failed to utilize
the fund collected earlier under Stowing Excise Duty. The Committee
recommend the Government to consider their observations/
recommendations in subsequent paras while enhancing the stowing
excise duty.
2. The Committee note that the Coal Mines (Conservation and
Development) Act, 1974 [CM (C&D) Act, 1974] has mandated the need
for extending assistance to the coal companies for encouraging coal
production from depillaring panels of underground mines in
conjunction with sand stowing for filling the voids created and for
taking up various protective measures for extraction and conservation
of coal. The Act also has mandated the offer of assistance towards
Research and Development activities and encouraging of Transport
Infrastructure Development in coalfield areas. The Committee have
been given to understand that the last revision of Stowing Excise Duty
took place with effect from 27/6/2003 and the rate was revised from
Rs. 3.50 per tonne to Rs. 10.00 per tonne with a view to partially fund
the Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj areas. Out of the Rs. 10.00 per
tonne of Stowing Excise Duty, Rs. 3.50 per tonne is earmarked for
partial reimbursement of the expenditure incurred by the coal
companies in implementing two schemes framed by the Central
Government namely (i) the Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines;
and (ii) the Development of Transportation Infrastructure in Coalfields
area and the remaining Rs. 6.50 per tonne is earmarked to meet the
requirement of Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj areas. The
Committee, are however, constrained to note that against a total Stowing
Excise Duty collection of Rs. 2463.22 crore during the 11th Plan period,

17
the expenditure under CCDA schemes was Rs. 756.57 crore against an
allocation of Rs. 862 crore (approx.) (35% of the Stowing Excise Duty
collected). The Committee are further perturbed to note the lower claim
of Rs. 79.58 crore for reimbursement under the Head Road and Rail
infrastructure during 11th Plan as Rs. 192.65 crore were disbursed during
10th Plan. Although, the Ministry of Coal has claimed that a number
of new coal projects are coming up as a result of new coal block
allotment for captive purposes which need to be provided with road
and rail infrastructure connecting to the main lines for coal evacuation,
the Committee feel that “The Coal Conservation and Development
Advisory (CCDA) Committee constituted to advise the Government
regarding formulation and implementation of National Policy has not
played effective role in disbursement of Stowing Excise Duty proceeds
to different coal companies, especially for road and rail infrastructure.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to fully
utilize the 35% of funds generated by collection of Stowing Excise
Duty for different schemes under CCDAC and expect that the enhanced
funds that would be available after necessary amendment to the Act
will be fully utilized.
3. The Committee note that an Advisory Committee called “Coal
Conservation and Development Advisory Committee” (CCDAC) was
constituted under the provisions of the CM (C&D) Act, 1974 and
CM (C&D) Rules, 1974 under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary
(Coal). The Committee advises the Government regarding the
formulation and implementation of National Policy in relation to “Coal
Conservation and Development Activity” and scientific utilisation of
coal seams of the country, rates of SED, disbursement of SED
proceeds to different coal companies etc. The Committee are, however,
dismayed to note that though CCDA consists of Additional Secretary,
MOC- Chairman, Financial Advisor and Joint Secy. MOC, Adviser
(Projects), Sr. Adviser (Energy), Planning Commission, DG, DGMS,
Three representatives of coal companies, CMD, CMPDIL, Director,
CIMFR and Coal Controller, they have failed miserably in monitoring
the expenditure of the Stowing Excise Duty collected for assistance
released under Conservation and Safety, R&D, development of road
and creation of rail infrastructure and for Master Plan for Jharia
and Raniganj Coalfields. While strongly recommending to the Ministry
of Coal to ensure that meeting of CCDAC should take place at
regular intervals and funds earmarked are fully utilized so that
physical targets envisaged are achieved. The Committee also
recommend that CCDAC should ensure that proposals are received
well in time for ensuring their speedy implementation and claims
submitted by the coal companies for reimbursement are settled within
the same financial year.

18
4. The Committee observe that the burden of proposed
enhancement is proposed to be passed on to the electricity consumers
after Stowing Excise Duty is increased to Rs. 20 per tonne and the
extent of enhancement would be 0.7 paisa/unit. The Committee,
however, desire that steps should be taken to ensure that the 20-30%
expected increase in stowing excise duty should not be passed on to
the consumers of electricity and the hike in stowing excise duty be
absorbed by the coal companies.
5. The Committee are dismayed to note that even after more
than 3 years of approval of the Master Plan dealing with fires,
subsidence and rehabilitation in the Jharia and Raniganj coalfields
with an approved outlay of Rs. 9770 crores, only Rs. 300 crore are
reported to have been spent for conservation and safety of Jharia and
Raniganj fields during the 11th Plan period. The Committee have been
given to understand that with the present requirement of Rs. 977 crore
per year, Rs. 350 crore will be provided by CIL from internal resources
and Rs. 357 crore would be made available from Stowing Excise Duty
collection and to bridge the gap of Rs. 270 crore, the increase in the
current rate of Stowing Excise Duty has been made in the proposed
bill. In view of the poor utilization of available funds during
11th plan, the Committee cannot but deplore the Government who has
come up with the present proposed Amendment Bill whereby Rs. 605
crore more will be collected under Stowing Excise Duty during 2013-
14 at the rate of Rs. 20 per tonne. The Committee also note that although
approved cost of Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj fields is
Rs. 9773 crore, the same is being revised and expected to be increased
atleast by 20-30% to about Rs. 12770 crore implying an annual outgo
of Rs. 1270 crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Coal should ensure full utilization of Stowing Excise Duty
collected so far at the current rate of Rs. 10 per tonne, before enhancing
the rate for the same as proposed in the Bill. Further, in view of the
submission by Secretary, Coal before the Committee that the
expenditure is going to pick up, the Committee expect that the increase
in disbursement of funds for Master Plan during the years to come
and the progress in implementation of R&R schemes in Jharia
and Raniganj coalfields will show the desired improvements.
Although the Committee endorse the present increase in proposed
Stowing Excise Duty, the Committee would like the Ministry to
ensure at the same time that the Master Plan be implemented on war
footing lest the natural catastrophe should take place. The Committee
would also like the Ministry to have frequent interaction with the
Governments of West Bengal and Jharkhand to expedite the
land acquisition process and settlement of oustees from the
endangered areas.

19
6. As regards the issue of acquisition of land by the respective
State Government for rehabilitation, the Committee note that Addl.
Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand mentioned that unless
some issues such as extending employment are resolved, acquisition
of land may not be possible. He further mentioned that land losers
are demanding for CIL’s R&R policy. The Committee also observe
that though the rehabilitation under the Master Plan is to address
the shifting of people from the endangered areas both from Jharia
and Raniganj coalfields and the rehabilitation package as approved
by Government of India was adopted after consulting the concerned
State Governments, the people are reluctant to move to other places
due to economic activities in the area and lack of skill for
employment and are thus demanding employment. The Committee
feel that the whole problem of fire and subsidence in Jharia and
Raniganj is due to unscientific mining and as immediate steps are
required to be taken to evacuate people to safer places, the Central
Government with the help of concerned State Governments should
act diligently and offer better compensation for acquisition of land
as well as preference to those displaced persons in employment
with proper training for improving their skills. The Committee
recommend that a policy for providing employment in this case of
rehabilitation be framed in consultation with the State
Governments.
7. The Committee note that the Master Plan dealing with fire,
subsidence and rehabilitation in the Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields
is to be implemented in 10 years which is to be funded from the
internal resources of Coal India Ltd. and Stowing Excise Duty
collection. The Committee feel that necessity of spending a large
portion of Stowing Excise Duty collection may not arise after the
implementation of the Master Plan. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Ministry to apprise them about the utilization of
the Stowing Excise Duty to be collected after the implementation
of the Master Plan.
N
EW DELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
6 May, 2013 Chairman,
16 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

20
ANNEXURE I
STATEMENT SHOWING THE DETAILS OF SED COLLECTION
VIS-À-VIS CCDAC ASSISTANCE RELEASED DURING
2007-2012 (FIVE YEARS)
(Figures in crores)
Sl. Head Financial  Year Total
No. 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
1. SED Collection 446.80 471.21 505.98 520.59 518.64 2463.22
2. Assistance on
Sand Stowing 127.90 125.08 125.24 105.09 150.88 634.19
Protective Work 7.79 5.54 14.54 12.49 12.02 52.38
R&D Work 0.00 0.00 0.68 0.00 0.00 0.68
Total 135.69 130.62 140.46 117.58 162.90 687.25
3. Assistance on 23.58 0.00 0.00 22.00 22.00 67.58
Road/Rail
Infrastructure
Development
Grand Total 159.27 130.62 140.46 139.58 184.90 754.83

21
ANNEXURE II
STATEMENT OF CCDA ASSISTANCE (ST&PW) IN RANIGANJ
AND JHARIA COALFIELDS RELEASED BY MOC
DURING 2007-2012
(Figures in Rupees)
Sl. Conservation and Financial  Year T otal
No. Safety (Stowing 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
and Protective
 works)
1. ECL 558,134,568 541,275,059 485,275,782 467,008,213 386,641,989 2,438,335,611
(Ranigunj Coal
Fields)
2. BCCL 226,212,032 89,281,481 94,102,582 71,596,422 88,266,313 569,458,830
(Jharia Coal Fields)
Grand Total 784,346,600 630,556,540 579,378,364 538,604,635 474,908,302 3,007,794,441

22
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 11 JANUARY, 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘ A’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1230 hours to 1345 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Shri Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
7. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh
8. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
9. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
10. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
12. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
13. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

23
WITNESSES
1. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Secretary
2. Ms. Zohra Chatterjee, Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri D.N. Prasad, Advisor (Projects)
6. Shri S. Narsing Rao, CMD, Coal India Ltd.
7. Shri N. Kumar, Director (Technical), Coal India Ltd.
8. Shri Acharya, Coal Controller, Coal Controller’s Organisation
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other
representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Public Sector Undertakings
to the sitting of Committee and apprised them of the purpose of the
sitting  i.e.  briefing by the Ministry of Coal on “The Coal Mines
(Conservation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2012” which was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 22
th November, 2012 and referred by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Departmentally Related Standing
Committee on Coal & Steel on 24
th December, 2012 for examination and
report thereon within a period of three months. The Chairman, then
apprised the representatives of Ministry of Coal about the provisions of
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Coal then briefed the Committee about
the objects of the proposed amendment empowering the Central
Government to increase the maximum amount of excise duty from the
existing ceiling of rupees ten per tonne to rupees fifty per tonne for all
types of coal.
4. Thereafter, the Members raised some queries which were
responded to by the representatives of Ministry of Coal. The Committee
also directed the Secretary, Ministry of Coal to furnish a detailed note
on the funds collected under the existing provisions of “The Coal Mines
(Conservation and Development) Act, 1974” and its utilization thereof.
5. The Committee also decided to issue a press communique to
seek views of individuals/organizations/experts/NGOs, etc., on the
proposed amendment Bill.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

24
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 17 APRIL 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1345 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
6. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
7. Shri Rajaram Pal
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
12. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
13. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
14. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu

25
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Coal and its PSU’s
1. Shri S. K. Srivastava Secretary, Ministry of Coal
2. Dr. A.K. Dubey Addl. Secretary
3. Shri A. K. Bhalla Joint Secretary
4. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Sujata Prasad Joint Secretary and FA
6. Dr. M. R. Anand Economic Advisor
7. Shri D. N. Prasad Advisor(P)
8. Shri S. Narsingh Rao Chairman, Coal India Ltd.
9. Shri Acharya, Coal Controller Coal Controller’s
Organisaion
10. Shri A. K. Debnath CMD, CMPDIL
11. Shri T. K. Lahiry CMD, BCCL
12. Shri D. C. Garg CMD, WCL
13. Shri Gopal Singh CMD, CCL
14. Shri N. Kumar CMD, SECL
15. Shri Rakesh Kumar Sinha CMD, ECL
16. Shri S. Bhattacharya CMD, SCCL
17. Shri A.N. Sahay MCL
18. Shri N. Kumar Director(Techn.), CIL
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary and other
representatives of the Ministry of Coal and coal companies to the sitting
of Committee and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Chairman mentioned that the
sitting of the Committee has been convened in connection with
examination of “The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Amendment Bill, 2012” of the Ministry of Coal.

26
3. The points discussed during the sitting broadly related to the
present status of implementation of Master Plan of Jharia and Raniganj
Coalfields; utilization of earmarked 35% of Stowing Excise Duty collected
for reimbursement of expenditure incurred by coal companies in
implementing the notified areas under “The Coal Mines (Conservation
and Development) Act, 1974 and 65% of earmarked funds to meet the
requirement of Master Plan; development of roads and railway
infrastructure in coalfield areas; employment to land oustees as per R&R
policy of Coal India Ltd., etc.
4. The Members raised their concerns on the above issues and
sought clarifications which were clarified by the representatives of the
Ministry of Coal.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

27
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 06 MAY, 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘E’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
3. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
4. Shri Pakauri Lal
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Shri Rajaram Pal
7. Kumari Saroj Pandey
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
9. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
10. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

28
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Report on “The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Amendment Bill, 2012” relating to the Ministry of Coal.
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Do not pertain to this Report.

29
THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND
DEVELOPMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation
and Development) Act, 1974.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines
(Conservation and Development) Amendment
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Coal Mines (Conservation and
Development) Act, 1974, in section 6, in
subsection (1), for the words “rupees ten per
tonne”, the words “rupees fifty per tonne” shall
be substituted.
ANNEXURE VI
A
S INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 22 of 2012
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section 6
of Act 28 of
1974.

30
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 provides
for the conservation of coal and development of coal mines and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. Section 6 of the Act provides that the Central Government shall
levy and collect such duty of excise not exceeding rupees ten per tonne
on all coal raised and despatched and on all coke manufactured and
despatched as may be fixed from time to time by notification. The Central
Government, by notification No. S.O. 727(E), dated the 25th June, 2003,
enhanced the rate of excise duty from rupees three and paisa fifty to
rupees ten per tonne for coking or non-coking coal.
3. Out of the total collection of excise duty, only thirty-five per
cent. is being utilised for two schemes framed by the Central Government,
namely, (i) the Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines, and (ii) the
Development of Transportation Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas and the
remaining sixty-five per cent. is reserved for the Jharia-Raniganj Master
Plan. This will enable partial funding for implementation of Jharia-
Raniganj Master Plan which is addressing the issues of fires and land
subsidence in the old mined out areas in Jharia and Raniganj coalfields
which were taken over at the time of nationalisation.
4. In August, 2009, the Central Government approved the master
plan dealing with fires, subsidence and rehabilitation in the Jharia and
Raniganj coalfields at a total outlay of rupees 9770 crores. It is to be
implimented over a period of 10 years. The annual requirement of bunds
would be about ruppes 977 crores. The implementation of the master
plan envisaged funding of rupees 350 crores per annum from the internal
resources of Coal India Limited and rupees 350 crores from the collection
of excise duty at the current rate of rupees ten per tonne. It is proposed
to enhance the current rate of excise duty to bridge the gap in funding
which is to the extent of ruppes 277 crores each year over the 10 years
period of implementation of the master plan.
5. Since, the aforesaid section 6 confers power upon the Central
Government to fix, by notification, rupees ten as maximum rate of excise
duty, the excise duty cannot be increased further without amendment of
the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974. It is, therefore,
proposed to amend the provisions of aforesaid section 6 of the aforesaid
Act to increase the maximum amount of excise duty from the existing
maximum ceiling of rupees ten per tonne to rupees fifty per tonne for
all types of coal.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SRI PRAKASH JAISWAL
The 24th February,  2012.

31
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE C OAL M INES ( CONSERVATION
AND DEVELOPMENT) A CT, 1974
(28 OF 1974)
* *** *
6. (1) With effect from the appointed day,
there shall be levied and collected on all coal
raised and despatched, and on all coke
manufactured and despatched, from the collieries
in India, such duty of excise, not exceeding rupees
ten per tonne, as may be fixed from time to time
by the Central Government by notification, and
different rates of duty may be levied on different
grades or description of coal or coke:
Provided that the Central Government may,
by general or special order, exempt any special
grade or grades or description of coal or coke
from the levy of such duty of excise.
* *** *
Imposition
of excise
duties.

32
LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Act, 1974.
_______
(Shri Sri Prakash Jaiswal, Minister of Coal)

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”