1 
 
 
51 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
"SERVICE CONDITONS OF WORKERS IN PUBLIC SECTOR  
STEEL COMPANIES" 
 
              
 
                                           FIFTYFIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935(Saka) 
 

2 
 
FIFTY-FIRST  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
"SERVICE CONDITONS OF WORKERS IN PUBLIC SECTOR  
STEEL COMPANIES" 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.02.2014                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA 1935 (Saka) 


3 
 
CC&S No. 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

4 
 
 CONTENTS 
                     PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2013-14)….…………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………………….... (v) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendations of the Committee………………………………         28 
 
  
  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
 
Details of Contract Labour engaged in SAIL as on 1.10.2013, 
Plant-wise, area-wise………………………………………………………………. 
 
39 
V Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 08.12.2013………….…………………………… 
 
40 
 
VI Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14)  held on 11.11.2013……………………………………… 
 
42 
 
VII Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 17.12.2013…………………………….………… 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
  
 
 
PART-I 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I Service Conditions of Workers in SAIL……………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER-II Service Conditions of Workers in RINL………………………… 13 
 
CHAPTER-III Service Conditions of Workers in MSTC Ltd………………… 24 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
  
Name of the Member 
  
Lok Sabha 
2.       Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh* 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
*Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f 10.12.2013. 
(iii)  

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh  - Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma - Additional Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Fifty-First Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on the subject "Service Conditions of Workers in Public Sector Steel Companies" 
pertaining to the Ministry of Steel. In this Report the Committee have examined in detail the 
service conditions of workers of SAIL, RINL and MSTC Ltd.  
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Steel and 
representatives of SAIL and RINL on 08.10.2013. The Committee also took oral evidence of 
representatives of Trade Unions of RINL and representatives of Ministry of Steel, RINL and 
MSTC Ltd. on 11.11.2013.  
 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Steel, 
SAIL, RINL and MSTC Ltd. for appearing before them to tender evidenc e and in furnishing 
material/information from time to time as desired by the Committee. The Committee also 
wish to express their thanks to representatives of Trade Unions of RINL for furnishing 
memoranda and appearing before  them to tender evidence on the subject.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
17.12.2013.   
 
5.  The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                       KALYAN BANERJEE 
       18 December, 2013                                                                        Chairman 
       27 Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)                    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
(v) 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
SERVICE CONDITION OF WORKERS IN STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.  
 
Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) is one of the Maharatna  PSU of  Govt. of 
India.  The Company is the largest  Steel Producer in India and  24th in world during 
2012.The t urnover of  the company is around Rs. 50,000 crore in 2012 -13.  
According to the Ministry of Steel, as on 1st September, 2013, SAIL is having 98899 
(Executives 14874 and Non-Executives 84025) employees. 
 
1.2 SAIL has  5 Integrated Plants, 3 Special Steel Plants & a Ferro -Alloy unit   
spread over seven states in India .  Moreover, the company has 20 Captive Mines - 
9 iron ore, 7 fluxes & 4 coal .  As regards the marketing network, the Committee 
were informed that SAIL has  37 Branches, 67 Ware houses, 27 Customer Contact 
Offices & around 2900 Dealers throughout the country .  The com pany exports to 
around 20 countries including EU, Middle East, SE Asian countries etc. 
A. Service Conditions of Employees 
1.3 Service conditions of non -executive employees in SAIL plants/units are 
governed by following sets of rules: 
 
(i) Terms & Conditions of Appointment. 
(ii) Standing Orders or Conduct, Discipline & Appeal (CDA) Rules, as 
applicable. 
 
1.4 The service conditions of employees of SAIL as per Terms & Conditions of 
Appointment are as under:- 
i. Appointment of non -executive employees is generally through t he 
‘Trainee’ route. The new-recruits are imparted training for a period of two 
years which may be extended by another two years at the discretion of 
the Company, as per requirement. During training period, the trainees 
are paid consolidated salary (along w ith statutory benefits).  After 
successful completion of training, the employees are confirmed in regular 
pay scale. 
ii. On regularization, the employees are under probation. On successful 
completion of probation, employees are confirmed in the post.  
iii. The appointment is subject to the following conditions:- 
 

9 
 
(a) Employees are governed by the service rules and regulations including 
Standing Orders (Plants/Mines) / CDA Rules as well as the 
administrative orders of the company in force from time to time and 
shall obey all such orders and directions as received from superiors. 
(b) Employee shall faithfully serve the company, obey its lawful orders, 
keep its secrets diligently and carefully learn and perform such work 
and business as may be entrusted, attend to work regu larly during 
such hours as may be prescribed and perform such duties as may be 
assigned.    
(c) The offer of appointment is subject to the employee having not more 
than one spouse living. Employees have to furnish a declaration to this 
effect. 
(d) Employee shall, if already married or get married to a foreign national 
during service period in the Company, report the spouse’s particulars 
such as name, age, place of residence with full address in the foreign 
country. 
(e) If employee is already in service, he/she will hav e to produce a No 
Objection Certificate from the present employer at the time of joining 
the service of plant/unit. 
(f) Services shall stand terminated on attaining the age of superannuation 
(60 years, at present). 
(g) During the period of probation, services can be terminated by the 
Company without any notice and without assigning any reason. 
(h) After successful completion of probation, employee is confirmed in the 
post. Thereafter, during the entire service period, services can be 
terminated by one month’s notice in  writing by either party without 
assigning any reason. The company always retains the right of giving 
pay in lieu of notice. 
(i) Services shall also be terminable at any time by the company without 
any previous notice if the company is satisfied on medical evi dence 
that employee is unfit and is likely for a considerable time to continue 
to be unfit, for reasons of ill health and thereby unable to discharge 

10 
 
his/her duties, provided always that the decision of the company that 
employee is likely to continue to be  unfit shall be conclusively binding 
on employee.  
(j) Shall have to work 8 hours a day and 48 hours a week and will work in 
any shift as per requirement. The work and conduct shall also be 
subject to rules and regulations notified by the Company from time to 
time. 
(k) Appointment in the Company will be as direct recruit and the company 
will not bear any liability on account of leave salary, pension 
contribution etc. to former employers, if any.  
(l) Will be liable to serve in any part of India. 
(m) The appointment shall b e provisional and subject to the caste/tribe 
certificate being verified through the proper channels and if it is 
revealed in the verification that claim to belong to Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be, is false, services will be 
terminated forthwith without assigning any further reasons and 
without prejudice to such further action as may be taken under the 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code for production of false certificates.  
 
Service conditions as per Standing Orders/CDA Rules 
 
1.5 The service conditions of regular and permanent Wor kers in SAIL  are also 
governed by the respective Standing Orders of  plants and units/CDA Rules, which 
among others prescribe the following:- 
 
(i) Every employee is provided with an identity card for the purpose of 
identification. 
(ii) Instructions issued from time to time relating to attendance, checking 
of arrival and departure, the periods and hours of work etc. are 
displayed for the benefit and guidance of employees. 
(iii) Shift working is regulated in accordance with th e provisions of the 
Factories Act/Mines Act. 
(iv) Wages due to an employee are paid in terms of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 before the expiry of the 10th day after the last day of the 
wage period.   

11 
 
(v) Employees are entitled to Earned Leave as per eligibility.  Employees 
are also allowed to carry forward leave upto a specified limit to the 
subsequent years. 
(vi) Half pay leave at the rate of 20 days for each calendar year may be 
granted either on medical certificate or on private affairs and this 
leave can also be ac cumulated and carried forward upto the specified 
limit. 
(vii) Commuted leave not exceeding half the amount of half pay leave due 
can be granted on submission of medical certificate.  
(viii) Extraordinary Leave for a period not exceeding three months can be 
granted in  
(ix) special circumstances when no other leave by rule is admissible. 
(x) There is a provision of quarantine leave necessitated in consequence 
of the presence of any infectious disease in the worker’s family or 
household. 
(xi) There is also provision of casual leave to Workmen. Special Casual 
Leave can also be sanctioned when the employee is unable to attend 
duty due to special circumstances for instance, due to civil 
disturbance, curfew etc. 
(xii) Workers are entitled to leave salary. 
(xiii) Workers may be transferred due to exigencies of work from their place 
of posting provided that the pay, grade, continuity and conditions of 
service do not get affected adversely on account of the transfer. 
(xiv) Workers are to observe all safety rules or orders notified by the 
Company and to use the safety equipment provided by the Company. 
(xv) An employee shall not work against the interest of the company and 
should maintain proper conduct. List of penalties is given in the 
Standing Orders. A list of acts of misconduct is illustrated in the 
Standing Orders and the procedure dealing with cases of misconduct, 
appeal and review is also spelt out.   
(xvi) Age of retirement on attaining the age of superannuation is spelt out. 
At present, the age of retirement for regular workers is 60 years. 
 
 
1.6 Asked about the emol uments and allowances, the Ministry of Steel has 
informed the Committee as under:- 
 
(a) "Emoluments 
 
Pay scales and allowances to non -executive employees are negotiated and 
finalised by a National level bi -partite forum called National Joint Committee 
for the Steel Industry.  The National Joint Committee for the Steel Industry 

12 
 
(NJCS), then called Joint Wage Negotiating Committee for the Steel Industry 
was constituted in pursuance of the decision taken at the second session of 
the Industrial Committee on Iron & Steel in October, 1969. The Committee 
has settled 8 National Wage Agreement for the workers of St eel Industry.  
The current wage agreement was signed on 29.4.2010 for a period of five 
years w.e.f. 1.1.2007.  The salient features of the wage settlement are: 
 
 
(b) Minimum Wage 
 
Minimum Wage as on 1.1.2007 was fixed as under:- 
  Basic:  Rs.8630 
  DA:  Nil 
Total:  Rs.8630/- per month 
 
(c) Dearness Allowance 
 
Industrial Dearness Allowance at AICPI (2001=100 series) 126.33 and is 
revised quarterly.  
 
Other admissible allowances  to the SAIL workers are as under:- 
 
Pay & Allowances 
 
Perk/Allowance 
 
Slab/Rate 
Reimbursement of Local Travelling 
Expenses  
Transport Subsidy  
 
                                          (Rs./month)  
Scooter/ Motorcycle              1000/-  
Moped                                     630/-  
Car (S9 to S11)              2000/-  
Maintenance Allowance equal to 2 months LTE  
Night Shift Allowance  
 
Rs.24/- per day of actual attendance subject to  
minimum of Rs.90/- p.m.  
Washing Allowance  
 
Rs.90/- per shift  to those employees who works 
from 2200 hrs. to 0600 hrs.  
Mining Allowance  
 
General  :                                    Rs.100/- p.m.  
Fighter Fighting Staff/Nursing :  Rs.150/- p.m.  
Special (Difficult) Area Allowance At Flux Mines:  Rs.600 per month  
Underground Allowance – ISP 
Collieries 
 
At Iron Mines : 10% of Basic pay 
 Energy Allowance  Rs.300/- per month  
 Canteen Allowance  Rs.23/- to Rs.32/ - per working day (varies 
unitwise) 
   where there is no subsidised canteen  
 LTC/LLTC  LTC: Once in a block of two years to 
hometown or    distance upto 750 km each way  
on actuals  
 LTA:  Once in a block of two years  in lieu of 

13 
 
LLTC  ranging from Rs.30000/- to Rs.43000/-  
House Rent Allowance (HRA) 
[if not provided Company quarter]  
 Cities with Population    Percentage of Basic  
    50 Lakh & above  :        30% 
  5 to 50 Lakh         :      20% 
 Less than 5 Lakh  :      10%  
House Maintenance Allowance [if 
provided Company quarter]  
 1 room:   1050/- p.a.                                  
 2 rooms: 1400/- p.a.                          
 3 rooms: 1750/- p.a.  
(d)  Statutory Benefits 
 
Statutory benefits include Provident Fund, Gratuity, Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, Life Cover Scheme (in lieu of EDLIs), Workmen Compensation, 
Funeral Expenses, Maternity Benefits and Welfare measures as per provision 
of Factories Act.  
 
(e) Other Non-Statutory benefits 
 
 Employees are being provided with free Medical facility for self and 
dependants.  
 Education facility for wards of employees in company run schools.  
 Scholarship schemes to encourage and support the meritorious and 
needy children of employees, Farewell to superannuated employees. 
 Long Service Award on completing 25 years of service. 
 Leave Travel Concession/Leave Travel Assistance. 
 All non-executive employees are eligible for an interest free Festival 
Advance. 
 Benefits on separation:- 
 
o Mediclaim Sche me (partial contributed scheme for retired 
employees) to take care of the medical requirement of employees 
on superannuation/resignation/VR. 
o Employees Family Benefit Scheme – Provides for monthly payment 
equivalent to last drawn Basic + DA of the deceased employees to 
dependants till notional date of superannuation subject to 
depositing an amount equal to PF and Gratuity." 
 
1.7 The Committee were informed that the process of finalizing the wages of the 
workers through negotiations with the representatives of the recognized Unions is 
at an advanced stage and expected to be finalized before end of December, 2013.  
 
Infrastructural facility 
 
1.8 SAIL is maintaining fully -developed residential townships at its plant/unit 
locations. SAIL also has own hospitals a t townships with state of the art facilities 
where free outdoor and indoor medical treatment is provided to all regular 

14 
 
employees and their dependent family members.  Good quality education centres 
for the benefit of the employees have also been provided. For recreation of 
employees, the townships are having Clubs, theaters, Sports Centres/Stadiums, 
Market places etc. The townships, known for their greenery and modern amenities, 
have been able to meet the aspirations of our employees.   
 
1.9 Employees’ wards are provided education on free -of-cost basis/nominal fee 
in Company run schools.  SAIL also has tie -ups with various reputed educational 
societies to provide quality education to wards of employees.  The schools at plant 
locations are known for their excellence in the field of providing quality education to 
the students." 
 
B. Service Conditions of Contract Workers 
 
1.10 As regards the s ervice conditions of Contract Workers in Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL), the Committee in a background note were apprised as under:- 
i. "SAIL awards Job Contracts in non core activities to contractors 
through tendering process to carry out different seasonal/temporary 
activities incidental to our work and for the jobs of specialized & 
intermittent nature. Contractors e ngage labour for executing the jobs. 
Majority of the contract labour are engaged in Projects/expansion 
areas as the expansion activities are in full swing at our major plants. 
Contract Labour are employees of Contractor who engages them. 
 
ii. Service condition s of the Contract Labour are governed under the 
provisions of Contract Labour (Regularization & Abolition) Act 1970 and 
other applicable Labour Laws.  
 
iii. Wages to Contract Labour are paid by the contractors engaging them 
in terms of the minimum wages notified by the Appropriate 
Government. SAIL, as a Principal Employer, ensures regular & correct 
payment by Contractor to the contract labour.  
 
iv. Payment of wag es to contract labour is witnessed and certified by 
Contract Operating Authorities (COAs) as a representative of Principal 
Employer at the time of disbursement of wages by the contractors. 
 
v. In case of default by the contractor, as the Principal Employer, S AIL 
pays wages to contract labour directly and the amount so paid is 
recovered against contractor’s pending bills/any payment due to the 
contractor. 
 

15 
 
vi. Payment of prescribed wages and compliance of other statutory dues 
are further ensured to the contract lab our at the time of issuing 
Statutory Dues Clearances (SDCs) to the contractor for release of their 
running bills. 
 
vii. SAIL as a Principal Employer also ensures compliance to various 
statutory provisions viz. PF deductions, ESI coverage, EPS’95 etc. 
Specific t erms & conditions are also incorporated in the tender 
documents for ensuring contract labour welfare by the contractors. 
 
viii. Contract Labour are having access to all the basic welfare facilities like 
Canteen/Public Conveniences/Drinking water/Restroom/First A id etc. 
inside the work premises as available to regular employees.  
 
ix. Special emphasis is given on the safety of Contract Labour deployed by 
the Contractors in the establishments of SAIL. General safety training 
& on the job training is provided prior to start of the job. In addition, 
personal protective equipments are also provided to them for their 
safety at work place, a clause for compliance is also inserted in the 
Notice Inviting Tenders (NITs)." 
 
1.11 Asked about the role as principal em ployer played by SAIL, the Committee 
were informed that the company ensure payment of regular & correct payment by 
contractor, witnessing payment of wages by contract operating authority, PF and 
ESI deduction as per law, in case of default by contract payment and recovery from 
Contractor Bill.   
 
1.12 As regards payment being made directly to contract labour through e -
banking, the Ministry of Steel have informed the Committee that SAIL plants and 
units are not making direct payment to the contract labour. Payment is being made 
to the contractor in terms of contract / scheduled progress of the work awarded. 
SAIL plants and units as Principal Employer witness payment of wages by the 
contractor to his workers. Efforts have been made for introducing payment through 
cheque/bank to the contract labour at our plants and units. Some units like Bokaro 
Steel Plant (100%) and Bhilai Steel Plant (in long term contracts) have ensured 
bank payment through contractors. 
 
1.13 The Company also ensure Provision of Welfare Amenities like  canteens, rest-
rooks, drinking water, first aid and crèche by contractor.  

16 
 
1.14 The Ministry of Steel have informed the Committee that a s Principal 
Employer, the company also ensure implementation of following: 
– Employees’ Provident  Funds &  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. 
– Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948. 
– Factories Act, 1948 
– Mines Act, 1952. 
– Minimum Wages Act, 1948, 
- Employees Compensation  Act, 1923 
 
1.15 As regards the number of Contract Labour e ngagement by SAIL(other than 
Projects), the Committee were informed as under:- 
 
 
1.16 The contractors engaged by SAIL at projects are 60771 and total work force 
of contract workers in SAIL is 93654  plant-wise and area -wise contract labour 
engaged by SAIL is given at Annexure-I 
 
1.17 Taking note of the Contract Labour(Regular and Abolition) Central Rules, 
1971, Rule 25(2)(5A) states that in case where the workman employed by the 
contractor perform th e same or similar kind of work as the workmen directly 
employed by the principal employer of the establishment, the wage rates holidays, 
hours of work and other conditions of service of the workmen of the contractor 
shall be the same as applicable to workm en directly employed by the principal 
employer of the establishment on the same or similar kind of work, the Committee 
had desired to know the fields in which contact labourers were engaged by SAIL. In 
this connection, a representatives of SAIL, informed the Committee during evidence 
on 8.10.2013 as under:-  
 
"Our job contracts are awarded with respect to capital repairs. During capital 
repairs, we award job contract. Then, incase of any outsourcing type of jobs 
–Fabrication masonry, transportation –we award job contracts."  
 
Area Nos. 
Works 19424 
Non-Works 7878 
Mining 5619 
Total 32921 

17 
 
1.18 Asked about t he Minimum wages paid by SAIL to unskilled workers in 
different states  in a background note, Ministry of Steel have informed the 
Committee as under:- 
 
"Wages – Unskilled 
Unit State Govt. 
minimum 
wage (Rs) 
Wages per day (Rs.) 
Basic + DA Allow Total 
BSP 201.61 201.61 48.46 250.07 
DSP 230.65 355.08 86.35 441.43 
RSP 150 150 70.96 220.96 
BSL 160.03 164.03 65.79 229.82 
ISP 230.65 231 38.46 269.46 
RMD 198 198 38.46* 236.46 
 
*Allowances pertaining to welfare, attendance, housing, production also paid 
as per practices varying across mines."  
 
1.19 The Committee were further apprised of the following proactive and welfare 
measures taken by SAIL for contract labourers:- 
(i) "Additional Welfare Amenity (AWA) paid @ Rs 38.46/- per day of 
attendance w.e.f. 01-10-2009 
(ii) Mandatory requirement of PF Code and ESI Code for contractors 
(iii) Photo – I Card/Gate Pass for contract labour  
(iv) Online Attendance System initiated  
(v)          Facilitating Bank Payment 
(vi) Safety Measures: 
a. Issue of Gate Pass on Safety Training and Medical Report 
b. Training on Heights/other areas as per requirement 
c. Provision of Personal Protective Equipment 
d. System of Fine to Contractors on safety violation 
(vii) Employment on compassionate grounds  
- In case of death due to accident arising out of and in course of  
employment within the Works premises  
(viii) Access to all basic welfare facilities: 
a. Canteen 
b. Drinking Water 
c. Rest Room 
d. First Aid etc.  
Welfare amenities are at par with regular employees" 

18 
 
 1.20 When enquired about any specific instances of default by the contractors 
statutory deductions like PF and ESI in IISCO Steel Plant during last three years 
alongwith action taken thereon, the Committee in a post evidence reply apprised as 
under:-    
 
"SAIL plants and units, as Principal Em ployer ensure compliance to various 
statutory provisions viz. PF deductions, ESI coverage, EPS’95 etc. by the 
Contractor. Before issue of Entry Gate Passes to the contract workers it is 
ensured that they are covered under PF & ESI. Random checking of all 
details is carried on thereafter with help of contract Executing Authorities. 
Running/Final Bills of the Contractors are released after checking records of 
PF & ESI deposits by the contractors with the concerned Authorities. Specific 
terms & conditions like possession of PF code etc. by the contractor are also 
incorporated in the tender document for ensuring social benefits & welfare of 
contract labour by the contractors. 
 
No case of blacklisting etc. against the Contractors has been observed at any 
of the establishments of SAIL during last 3 years. 
 
However, during last one year, 2 cases of PF default have been observed,  
details of which are as under: 
 
ISP – M/s UB Engineering defaulted PF remittance in the Contract Job of 
Erection Testing & Commissioning o f plant & equipment including refractory 
of BOF & CCP involving 900 contract labours. The matter was taken up with 
the Contractor & they have undertaken to comply with the provision of PF 
Act for all it’s workers by making required deposit with the RPFC an d 
producing the updated documentary proof to SAIL, ISP. 
 
CFP - One case of provident fund default was observed in the security 
contract awarded to M/s. Central India Security Services in the year 2012-13 
involving 48 security guards.  The matter was taken up with the contractor 
and the requisite amount towards provident fund of the security guards has 
been deposited by the Contractor. PF authorities have verified the same. 
 
The contracts being executed by M/s Tirupati Constructions awarded during 
the year 2013-14 at CFP have been verified and no violations were observed 
(The contracts for the earlier years are under verification)." 
 
 
1.21 As regards the benefits provided to the dependents of contract labour in case 
of death during work  by SAIL, the Committee in post evidence reply informed the 
Committee as under:-  
 

19 
 
(i) "Employment on compassionate grounds - In case of death of 
a contract labour due to accident arising out of and in course of 
employment within the Works premises (including those engaged 
for Project work), employment to one of his/her dependents may 
be provided on a case to case basis.  
 
(ii) Benefits under ESI Act - Pension under ESI scheme, Funeral 
Expenses – through Contractor (A sum equivalent to the sum 
provided in the ESI Act. The present amount is Rs. 10,000/-). 
 
(iii) Benefits under Employees’ Compensation Act,1923 – At 
locations which are not c overed under ESI Act, benefits under the 
Act are provided to the dependents.  
 
(iv) Statutory payments - like PF, Gratuity, Employee Deposit Linked 
Incentive Scheme (presently lump sum Rs. 130000).  
 
In this regard, the decision has been uniformly implemented across SAIL 
Plants and units w.e.f. 1.4.2009. SAIL plants and units have provided 
employment on compassionate grounds to dependents of contract labour 
in 49 cases. Another 9 cases are in process. In 8 cases, there was no 
eligible dependant of the deceased contract labour." 
 
 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER- II 
 
SERVICE CONDITIONS OF WORKERS IN RASHTRIYA LSPAT NIGAM 
LIMITED (RINL) 
 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. ( RINL)-Vizag Steel Plant is an integrated steel 
plant in the state of Andhra Pradesh. The plant has capacity to produce 3 Million 
tonnes of liquid steel with products consisting of long products viz., Wire Rods, 
Bars, Beams, Angles, Channels, Billets etc.   RINL is a Navratna company under 
Ministry of Steel.  The plant has been operating continuously over 100% of its 
capacity since 2001-02.  RINL is continuously making profit since year 2002-2003. 
 
2.2 RINL has undertaken expansion from 3.0 Mtpa to 6.3 Mtpa liquid steel which 
is already in advance stage of commissioning.  This expansion plan is undertaken at 
a cost of Rs.12,300 Crores which is being funded mainly through internal accruals / 
borrowings. 
 
2.3 The Committee were apprised that as  on 31st August, 2013, RINL is having 
18,404 employees (Executives including Junior Officers – 6335 and Non-executives 
– 12,069). Moreover, 7323 displaced persons were employed by RINL against the 
Commitment of 5000.   
 
2.4 The terms and conditions of appointment/service of non executive employees 
of RINL are in line with the terms of the Certified Standing Orders – a tripartite 
agreement signed between the workmen, management and the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central)   under Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act 1946. 
 
2.5 The terms and conditions of appointment of executives of RINL are in line 
with the terms of the Executive S ervice Rules and Conduct, Discipline and Appeal 
Rules. 
 
2.6 As regards the Employee Welfare, the Committee were informed that RINL 
provides the following amenities to its employees besides statutory facilities:- 
(a) Housing 
 

21 
 
 
(b) Advances towards festivals and medical expenses 
(c) Motivational schemes like Jawaharlal Nehru Awards, Suggestion Reward 
Scheme and Quality Circles 
(d) Mediclaim Insurance Policy for retired employees 
(e) Employees Consumers’ Cooperative Society 
(f) Employees Cooperative Thrift and Credit Society 
(g) Recreational facilities in and around Ukkunagaram 
(h) Death Relief Scheme 
 
 
2.7 As per Employee Family Benefit Scheme, in case of death/permanent total 
disablement arising out of accidents in course of employment while on duty or 
death/permanent total disablement arising out of accidents while coming to duty or 
going back from duty within one hour before or after the end of the shift on normal 
route of journey between the place of work and normal residence, the 
employee/dependants of such employee will have the following options:- 
 
(i) One of the dependants may opt for employment & he/she may be 
considered for regular employment to any of the posts mentioned in 
the scheme. 
(or) 
(ii) The dependant may opt for monthly payment equivalent to last pay 
(Basic+DA) drawn till the notional date of superannuation of the 
deceased employee without requiring to deposit with the Company the 
amount equivalent to Notional Provident Fund and  Gratuity. 
(or) 
(iii) The dependant may opt for a lumpsum one time amount equivalent to 
(ii) above at a discount rate of 20% per annum without depositing the 
amount equivalent to Notional PF & gratuity with the company. 
 
 
2.8 The  Committee were also apprised of the other welfare activities  for its 
employees by RINL which are as under:- 
(a) "Educational Facilities:- 
 
RINL has 14 Schools including Arunodaya Special School meant for 
differently abled children and 2 Junior Colleges for the wards of employees 
as well as the wards of people residing in and around Ukkunagaram, 
rehabilitation centers and townships of our captive mines.  
 
RINL's Philosophy towards educational facilities is not only to benefit the 
children of employees but to extend educational facilities to the wards of 

22 
 
people dwelling in and around in the plant and also to act as catalyst in 
promoting quality education by encouraging reputed educational institutions. 
 
(b) Township facilities:- 
 
The Company has a well laid out township – Ukkunagaram, consisting of 
7987 quarters with all modern amenities like water supply, underground 
sewerage, schoolin g, recreation facilities, parks, stadiums, shopping 
complexes etc. for its employees. Various types of quarters were constructed 
according to DPE norms.  Apart from this, there are 386   quarters at our 
Captive Mines.   
 
A congenial and beautiful township called Ukkunagaram, caters to the needs 
of employees and their families with all amenities to ensure good quality of 
life.  Hailed as the heaven of Andhra Pradesh for its serene scenic beauty, 
green cover, cleanliness free of pollution of any kind.  Ukkuna garam is an 
ideal model for any industrial township in the country with all the amenities. 
 
(c) Medical Facilities:- 
 
The company provides comprehensive health care scheme involving in -
patient and out -patient treatment in Company run hospitals and speciali zed 
treatment at referral hospitals to the employees and their dependants.  
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant has established a 160 -bedded ultra modern 
hospital -Visakha Steel General Hospital (VSGH) spread over 60 acres of land 
and is equipped with sophisticated equipment with 100 doctors and about 
300 para-medical staff.  In addition to this, there are 4 Health Centres, i.e., 
one each at   JLM   and   MDM   Mines, one at    Ukkunagaram and one at 
Pedagantyada RH Colony.  2 Emergency Medical Care Units in the Plan t 
premises to cater to the health needs of the employees.   
  
The Company also extends medical facilities and specialized treatment, if 
required at reputed corporate hospitals like Apollo, Seven Hills, Adayar 
Cancer Institute, NIMS, CMC, Vellore, etc.  Som e of the special features of 
VSGH are:- 
 
(a) Full-fledged Burns Unit, acclaimed to be best in the area. 
(b) Radiology Department equipped with ATL Ultrasound Scanner, 800 
mA X -Ray machines with image intensifier and 500 mA X -Ray 
machines with fluoroscopic facility. 
(c) Well equipped Pathology Lab with Hematology, Micro-biology & Bio-
Chemistry Laboratory, Blood Bank facilities and Histopathology 
Laboratory. 
(d) ICU equipped with bedside feather touch polychromatic modular 
monitoring with Central Monitoring system. 
(e) Cluster-type wards with central Nursing Station System. 
(f) Operation Theatres equipped with special sliding trolleys, imported 
operation tables with height adjustment facility and shadowless 

23 
 
cold lights to enable surgeons to have a clear vision of operating 
field.  
(g) Well equipped Physiotherapy wing. 
(h) A separate Central Sterile Supply Department with modern 
equipment  
(i) Automatic Laundry. 
(j) Diet Counseling Clinic for providing nutrition advice to 
malnourished children, diabetic patients, patients with 
hypertension, obesity, etc. 
(k) Occupational Health Services and Research Centre takes several 
measures in the area of preventive health care and attempts to 
ensure good health of the employees by conducting cyclical 
examination of the employees and constant monitoring of 
environmental conditions." 
 
 
2.9 Asked about the  salaries / pay scales, perks, allowances, bonus, etc. of the 
workers of RINL, the Committee were informed as under:-  
 
a) "Pay scales of the workers: 
 
WAGE STRUCTURE 
(With effect from 1st January 2007) 
Scale Codes Pay Scales 
S-1  8630  - 3% - 12080 
S-2   8890  - 3% - 12650 
S-3 9160  - 3% - 13150 
S-4 9440  - 3% - 13930 
S-5 9730  - 3% - 15020 
S-6 10120- 3% - 16400 
S-7 10530- 3% - 17030 
S-8 10960- 3% - 17680 
S-9 11400- 3% - 19350 
S-10 11860- 3% - 22920 
S-11 12460- 3% - 23970 
 
b) Dearness Allowance for the quarter Jul-Sep 2013 is 78.9%. 
 
c) Rate of Annual Increment in the scale w.e.f. 01.01.2007 shall be 3% of 
Basic Pay. 
 
d) Other allowances: 
 
i) LTE (Local Travelling Expenses) Rs.1000/ - per month for those who 
claim for using Scooter/Motor Cycle and Rs.630/ - per month for 
those who claim for using Moped.  In addition, workers are also 

24 
 
eligible for an amount equal to two months reimbursement of entitled 
LTE towards reimbursement of maintenance of vehicle (per annum). 
Employees in the grades of S -9, S-10 and S -11 and using his own 
Motor Car shall be entitled for reimbursement of LTE Rs.2000/ - per 
month. 
 
ii) Transport Subsidy Rs.24/ - per day of atten dance subject to a 
minimum of Rs.90/ - per month for those Non -Executive employees 
who are not claiming LTE. 
 
iii) Night shift allowance Rs.90/ - per shift for those who attend night 
shift. 
 
iv) Washing Allowance for Non -Executive employees, who are already 
availing this facility i.e. Rs.150/ - per month to Nursing Staff and 
Rs.100/- per month for others. 
 
v) All non -executive employees shall be paid Rs.300/ - per month 
towards Energy Allowance. 
 
vi) HRA (for those who are not allotted Company’s quarter) will b e paid 
as per city classification and applicable rates under Government 
guidelines as furnished below: 
 
Cities with Population Rates of HRA (% of 
Basic Pay) 
50 Lakhs and above (Classified as 
‘X’) 30% 
5 to 50 Lakhs (Classified as ‘Y’) 20% 
Less than 5 lakhs (Classified as ‘Z’) 10% 
 
vii) Leave Travel Concession (LTC) to go to home town or distance upto 
750 Kms in lieu of Home town within a four-year block. 
 
viii) Leave Travel Assistance (LTA) as under will be paid within a four-year 
block: 
 
Grade Amount 
S-1 to S-5 Rs.30,000/- 
S-6 to S-8 Rs.36,000/- 
S-9 to S-11 Rs.43,000/- 
 
ix) Non-executive Employees working in Medical Department is being 
paid Split Duty Allowance, if they perform duties in split shifts, i.e. 
from 8.00 AM to 12.30 PM and from 3.30 PM  to 7.00 PM at the 
following rates: 
 

25 
 
a) To employees who have not been  ...   Rs.30/ - per full day 
allotted Company's accommodation  of split duty. 
 
b) To employees allotted Company's  …  Rs.10/ - per full day 
accommodation  of split duty. 
 
The Spilt Duty Allowance is effective from 01.09.2001 and will be paid 
only if both the spells of the shift are performed.  
 
x) Mining Allowance @ Rs.600/- p.m. in respect of all regular non-
executive employees of RINL/VSP working in Mines locations [i.e. 
Madharam (MDM), Jaggayyapeta (JLM), Garbham (GMM) and Sarepalli 
(SSM)]. 
 
xi) The City Compensatory Allowance will be paid to eligible employees as 
per Government rates as indicated below: 
 
Basic 
Pay/Month 
Classification of Cities (Amount in Rs.) 
'A-1 
Metro' 
'A' 'B-1' 'B-2' 
Below Rs.4000 90 65 45 25 
Rs.4001-5250 125 95 65 35 
Rs.5251-6499 200 150 100 65 
Rs.6500 & above 300 240 180 120 
 
xii) School fees reimbursement shall be paid as under: 
 
Nursery    ...  Rs.200/-  per month per child 
Kindergarten   ...  Rs.200/-  per month per child 
Class I to V    ...  Rs. 300/- per month per child 
Class VI  to X   ...  Rs.400/- per month per child 
Class XI  to XII  ... Rs.500/- per month per child 
 
Further, Annual/Sessional Charges is reimbursed to the 
employees upto a maximum of  Rs.550/- per annum for their 
children studying in any Recognised/Registered Schools/ 
Institutions. 
 
xiii) All the Non -Executive employees are being paid Rs.31/ - per day of 
actual attendance, subject to a minimum of ` 260/- per month towards 
canteen subsidy. 
Bonus 
 
All the regular non -executive employees on the rolls of RINL -VSP are paid 
amount under Annual Performance Reward Scheme (APRS) in lieu of Bonus. 
In respect of such eligible employees of RINL who are not entitled for APRS, 
statutory bonus is paid based on attendance for that year. 
 

26 
 
 Facilities / benefits provided by RINL for the workers of RINL, who have been 
working in tougher / hazardous zones of the Plant: 
 
a) In departments there is an internal system of periodical rotation from 
hot zone to cold zone and vice-versa. 
b) Different types of safety appliances like, Safety Shoes, Helmet, Hand 
Gloves, Goggles, Fire Resistant Coat are provided by the Company for 
ensuring safe working. 
c) Monthly Performance Based Incentives are envisaged for workers  to 
motivate and encourage them to achieve higher levels of production 
and productivity.   Employees working in hot, hard and hazardous 
areas like Coke Ovens, Sinter Plant, Blast Furnace and Steel Melting 
Shop are given more incentive." 
 
Contract workers in RINL 
 
2.10 The Ministry of Steel have furnished  the following information as regards the 
salaries / wages, allowances and other facilities provided to contract labour working 
in plants of RINL: 
 
a) "In RINL, Wages to the contract labour are governed by t he minimum 
wages as notified by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) 
Hyderabad who is the authority under the Minimum Wages Act.   
 
The existing minimum wages w.e.f.1st April 2013 for different 
categories are given below: 
 
S. 
No. 
Category 
of worker 
Basic 
Wages 
Rs. 
Living 
allowance 
/ Variable 
DA* Rs. 
Total 
wages 
per 
month 
Rs. 
Daily rate 
of wages 
payable 
Rs. 
1 Un-skilled 3900/- 2496/- 6396/- 246/- 
2 Semi-
skilled 
4420/- 2834/- 7254/- 279/- 
3 Skilled 5200/- 3328/- 8528/- 328/- 
 
* The living allowance (Variable DA) is revised once in six months i.e., 
w.e.f.1st April and 1st October of a year.  
 
b) Besides the above, an amount of Rs.11.54p per day of actual 
attendance subject to a maximum of Rs.300/ - per month as ad -hoc 
amount and Rs.38.46 per day of actual attendance subject to a 
maximum of Rs.1000/- per month as Spl. Misc. Allowance is being paid 
to the contract labour by the Contractor.         
 

27 
 
c) In addition, in different zones depending upon the nature of work, 
extra allowances such as height allowance, heat allowances etc. are 
also provided to the contract labour by the Contractor. 
 
d) Group Personal Accident Insurance (GPAI): An amount of Rs.5 lakhs is 
being paid by the Contractor to the dependents of the deceased 
contract workers in case of fatal accidents arising out of and in the 
course of employment.  
 
e) Welfare amenities such as subsidize d canteens, rest rooms, drinking 
water, creche, latrines & urinals, washing facilities, first -aid facilities 
etc. as has been provided to regular employees are also being 
extended to the contract labour in RINL. 
 
f) Further, the representative of RINL witn esses the payment of wages 
made by the contractors as per statute and in case of default, RINL 
effects the payment of wages including remittances towards PF & ESI.  
Around 50 %  of the workers are being paid wages through bank 
accounts  Further, contractors’ bills are cleared only after ascertaining 
the compliance of payment of wages, remittances of ESI & PF 
contributions." 
 
2.11 Asked about the Labour laws/ rules, which are being implemented by RINL 
for better living conditions of the workers , the Ministry of Steel informed the 
Committee as under:- 
a) Various welfare provisions under different statutes like Factories Act, 
1948, Employees Compensation Act, 1923, Employees Provident Funds 
& Miscellaneous Provisions Act -1952, Payment of Gratuity Act -1972, 
Employees State Insurance Act 1948, Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 etc. 
are being implemented to ensure proper living conditions of the 
workers of RINL. 
 
b) The service conditions of the Workers in RINL are governed by the 
Certified Standing Orders. 
 
c) All worker s are provided annually two pairs of Work Dress and paid 
charges for getting their dress stitched.   
 
d) Allowances like Washing Allowance, Energy Allowance, Mining 
Allowance, etc., as mentioned at Point-1 above, are being paid to Non-
Executive employees.   
2.12 In a memorandum submitted by All  India Steel Workers Federation affiliated 
to AITUC, Bokaro, Jharkhand  the Committee inter -alia were requested to consider 
the following: 

28 
 
(a)   Steel Worker: 
Wage revision & Pension Scheme in Steel PSUs discussions were taken place 
many times and were not yet finalized even after a lapse of 22 months which 
is due on 01.01.2012.  During the discussions, Steel management offered 
16% MGB and 6% for pension.  This is pertinent to  mention here that wage 
revision of other PSUs like Coal India (25% MGB), HPCL, BHEL, NTPC& MOIL 
at 30% MGB and pension scheme with a minimum pension of Rs. 6000 pm 
were finalized.  it is demanded to finalise the wage revision and pension 
scheme similar to Coal India ltd.   
 
Requested to extend medical facilities to retired employees upto Rs. 6,00,000 
with the existing premium and to increase difficulty allowance to limestone 
and dolomite mines employees as being paid to iron ore mines employees. 
 
(b) Steel Contract Labour: 
 
The Contract labour are being engaged in various flexible jobs like operation 
and maintenance, housekeeping tec., exposed to heat and dust. 
 
During expansion of SAIL & RINL plants, jobs were outsourced in place of 
recruiting permanent employ ees to make high productivity.  Requested to 
provide the safety, social security, better working conditions and equal work 
equal pay.  
 
The present minimum wages being paid to the contract labour is very low.  
The minimum wages being paid to contrat labour  are uneven among the 
states as well as within the Steel PSUs and vary between operation and 
expansion project construction.  The details are shown in the enclosed 
statements. 
 
A separate wage policy was made to the contract labour of NLC, Coal and 
BHEL.  Requested to constitute Wage Board in the Steel Sector for steel 
contract worker.  
 
2.13 The federation further requested to resolve the following issues: 
a)  Fix the minimum wages equivaslly to all the contract labour working in 
steel sector with a minimum wage of Rs. 15,000/- for unskilled.  
b) To make a policy continue the same contract workmen even ater change 
of the contractor which shows social security to the worker upto 60 years. 

29 
 
c) Extend medical facilities as per norms of ESI Act and increase eligibility 
upto Rs. 4,00,000/-. 
d) Establish ESI hospitals at all the steel plant & mines areas. 
e) Increase pension with a minimum amount of Rs. 6,000 pm. 
f) Requested to extend all the allowance to mines contract workers as being 
paid to steel contract labour. 
g) Contract work ers engaged in steel sector and mines be paid wages 
directly through bank.  
2.14 In a memorandum submitted to the Committee by Steel Progressive 
Employees Union, Visakhapatnam has also suggest the following:-  
(a) Casual Leaves shall be provided to the Non-executives on par with executives 
(15 days). 
(b) Wage settlement shall be done through NJCS immediately for non -executive 
employees without any further delay. Separate dressing room and toilets 
should be provided for contract working men/women. 
(c) A contract worker shall be paid minimum wages per month is Rs. 12,500/- to 
meet basic needs for bare survival. 
(d) Equal wages for  equal work policy should be implemented irrespective of 
gender factor.  
 
2.15 As regards the training programme to workers, RINL has inform ed the 
Committee that contract labour are subjected to various training programmes in 
addition to mandatory general safety training: site -specific, job -specific, fire, 
height, gas, electrical confined space, chemical, behavioral based, hazards training, 
mock drills , etc.  Further , awareness through safety films on material handling, 
electrical safety, road safety, use of PPEs etc. are also being given.  
2.16 The Committee were further informed that contract workers in RINL  are 
supplied free Personal Protective Equipment by the respective co ntractors.  Safety 
Committee has been constituted for contra ct labour they also visit industries like 
SAIL, other PSEs etc. Training facilities have been set up at Govt. ITI, Gajuwaka for 
working at heights and in confined spaces under CSR initiatives at a cost of Rs. 
7.55 lakh.  
2.17 Regarding engagement of contract labour in RINL, t he Committee were 
informed during the evidence that they are employed in activities not perennial but 

30 
 
of intermittent /temporary/ad-hoc in nature viz. , capital repairs, emergency 
breakdown jobs, supply -cum-application jobs - piece-rated works, one time jobs , 
jobs related to addition, modification, repair, canteens etc. are being carried out by 
contractors. The contract labour strength in Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant is 5834.   
2.18 Asked about the local persons engaged by contractors, the Committee we re 
informed by RINL that contractors engaged by VSP are advised to fill 50% of their 
requirement in the unskilled category by displaced persons of RINL/VSP.  Further, 
an amount of Rs. 5 lakh is paid to dependents of the deceased by the contractor 
through Group Personal Accident Insurance Scheme in case of fatal accident arising 
out of and in the course of employment.  As exclusive Contract Labour Cell to act as 
monitoring mechanism to address issues relating to contract labour  has also been 
setup by the company.  
2.19 As regards ESI coverage of contract workers in RINL, the Committee were 
informed that contract labour is covered under ESI Act w.e.f. Feb., 2006.  Free 
medical treatment at ESI dispensaries and hospitals provided and referral to 
corporate hospitals/higher centres for treatment wherever needed is also done.  
2.20 Regarding  the category/nature of employees of canteen, Chairman, RINL 
while deposing before the Committee on 11.11.2013 informed  the Committee that 
canteen facilities at RINL, VSP is outsourced.  On being pointed out that under the 
Factories Act, 1948, cante en should be provided and maintained in a plant by the 
occupier for use of the workers and not by outsourcing and engaging con tract 
workers.  Chairman and Managing Director , RINL  assure the Committee that the 
work force in canteen will be regualrised.  
  

31 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
SERVICE CONDITION OF WORKERS IN MSTC LTD. 
 
Presently MSTC is engaged in two segments of business – e-
Commerce and Trading. E-Commerce includes disposal of Scrap, sale of Coal, 
Ferro Manganese Ore, Iron Ore, Baryte, Chrome ore, Human Hair, Tea etc. 
through forward e -auction and purchase of goods, se rvice contracts by 
buyers through e-procurement.    
 
3.2 Trading – Import and domestic trade of mainly bulk industrial raw 
material for actual users. Trade Division looks after sourcing, purchase, both 
from international and domestic markets, and sale of industrial raw materials 
like Heavy Melting Scrap, Low Ash Metallurgical Coke, HR Coil etc..   
 
 The manpower status of MSTC as on 31st October, 2013 is given below : 
 HO ERO NRO WRO SRO BLR VIZ BHP
L 
VDORA HYD LKN
O 
TOTA
L 
EX 82 12 18 13 12 11 9 2 8 4 2 173 
NON-
EX 
57 15 20 15 10 12 11 3 7 0 1 151 
 
Service Conditions for Employees of MSTC Limited 
 
3.3 Initially, MSTC was a subsidiary of SAIL till 1982, when it was delinked from 
SAIL and became an independent Company under the Ministry of Steel. Therefore, 
for historical reasons, the rules of the company, the perks, allowances, other 
welfare benefits of MSTC employees are almost at par with those of the city based 
employees of SAIL.   
 
3.4 The Ministry of Steel in a background note furnished to the Committee has 
informed following service conditions and benefits extended to the employees of 
MSTC Ltd. :- 
 

32 
 
1. "WORKING HOURS:  
The company functions 6 days a week except on 2 nd and 4th Saturdays of the 
month.  The working hours for non -executive employees are from 10.00 am 
to 5.00 pm with lunch time of half an hour.  
2. AGE OF RETIREMENT:  
All employees would retire from the services of the Company on completion of 
the age of superannuation i.e. 60 years or the age as may be applicable at the 
relevant point of time. 
3. WAGES: 
a. Pay structure:  The wages and fringe benefits of the non -executive 
category of employees are impl emented through Agreement between 
the employees represented by the Union and the Management. The 
pay scales and allowances given to the employees are mostly at par 
with the best in the Steel Sector. A chart indicating the pay scales is 
indicated hereunder : 
 
 
 
 
b. ALLOWANCES & BENEFITS:  Besides basic pay, the employees are 
paid the following allowances : 
Dearness Allowance : Variable (quarterly) Dearness Allowance 
(IDA) is linked to AICPI for the industrial workers and paid at rates 
declared by the Govt. on quarterly basis (present IDA being 85.5% 
of Basic pay). 
City Compensatory Allowance(CCA) : As per Govt. guidelines. 
House Rent Allowance(HRA) : Employees covered by the 
Agreement shall be paid house rent allowance equal to the HRA 
Scale Code REVISED 
S-1 Rs.8630-3%-12080/- 
S-2 Rs.8890-3%-12650/- 
S-3 Rs.9160-3%-13150/- 
S-4 Rs.9440-3%-13930/- 
S-5 
 
Rs.9730-3%-15020/- 
S-6 
 
Rs.10120-3%-16400/- 
S-7 
 
Rs.10530-3%-17030/- 
S-8 
 
Rs.10960-3%-17680/- 
S-9 
 
Rs.11400-3%-19350/- 
S-10 
 
Rs.11860-3%-22920/- 
S-11 Rs.12460-3%-23970/- 
 

33 
 
rates as per city classification and applicable rates under Govt. 
guidelines on the revised Basic pay w.e.f. from 1.1.2007.  
Energy Allowance: Energy Allowance is paid at the rate of Rs. 
300/- per month to all employees.  
Canteen Allowance/Facility: Management gives canteen subsidy 
of Rs. 300/ - per employee per month. In addition, Rs.12/- per day 
(on actual attendance) is also paid by the Company towards canteen 
allowance. 
Conveyance Allowance: Conveyance Allowance @ Rs.24/- per day 
of actual attendance is paid to the employees, subject to a minimum 
of Rs.90/- per month.  
 Local Travelling Expenses : Employees who own their own 
vehicles are reimbursed local travelling expenses as follows: 
Scooter/Motor Cycle  - Rs.1000/- per month 
Moped    - Rs.630/- per month 
*Motor Car    - Rs.2000/- per month 
(*For employees in S-9 to S-11) 
 Leave  Travel  Concession : LTC is paid for visit to Hometown or 
any place up to a distance of 750 kms. in lieu of hometown to 
employee and dependent family members including dependent 
parents. AC 2-Tier Railway fare is paid for this purpose once in two 
years. Road mileage for travel to places not connected by road is 
also paid.   For availing Leave Travel Concession, minimum number 
of days of leave to be taken by employees is only 3 days. 
 Leave  Travel  Assistance:   LTA is paid once in two years at the 
following rates for travel to any place in India: 
 
Grades  Rates  
S-1 to S-5 Rs.30,000/- 
S-6 to S-8 Rs.36,000/- 
S-9 to S-11 Rs.43,000/- 
 
Cash Handling Allowance:  A quantum of Rs. 200/ - per month or 
Rs. 40/- per day is given to employees for handling cash, packeting 
and disbursement.  
 
Travelling Allowances:  All employees are reimbursed expenses 
incurred on official travel in India 
 
Liveries: All employees coming within the categories of Peon, Head 
Peon & Driver (Staff cars) will be entitled for both summer as well 

34 
 
as winter uniforms. Monsoon Liveries will be  provided to such 
employees who are exclusively and regularly put on outdoor duty. 
Gratuity: Gratuity is paid as per Statute. 
Provident Fund: MSTC has an exempted PF Trust which is managed 
by representatives of Management and Union. Employee & Employer 
contribute 12% of( basic + DA) towards PF. 
MEDICAL FACILITIES : All non-executives of the company are reimbursed 
IN FULL ,  expenditure incurred towards domiciliary and hospitalization 
treatment for self,  spouse and dependent family members, which include 
children, parents, minor brothers, un-married/widowed sisters."  
 
 
  

35 
 
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
Equal Pay for Equal Work 
1. The Committee observe that both the regular employees and  
contract labourers are being engaged in coke oven battery, sinter plant 
blast furnace, steel melting shop, etc in steel plants of SAIL and RINL. 
Although, Rule 25(2) (5A) of the Contract Labour (Re gulation and 
Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, states that in cases where the workman 
employed by the contractor perform the same or similar kind of work as 
the workmen directly employed by the principal employer of the 
establishment, the wage rates, holiday s, hours of  work and other 
conditions of service of the workmen of the contractor shall be the same as 
applicable to the workmen directly employed by the principal employer of 
the establishment on the same or similar kind of work, the Committee note 
that the wages to unskilled workers in SAIL vary from Rs.229.82/ - to 
Rs.441.43/- per day against the minimum wages of Rs.8630/ - per month 
fixed for employees of SAIL alongwith other admissible allowances.  The 
Committee have been given to understand that job co ntracts are awarded 
with respect to fabrication, mechanical and transportation units where 
SAIL also have permanent workers. The Committee are surprised to note 
that though the contract workers are engaged in such works which are 
perennial in character and they are regularly engaged by the contractor for 
the last 20-30 years but they are still not provided a permanent job to feel 

36 
 
themselves to be part of the organisation. While deploring the attitude of 
Public Sectors Companies like SAIL and RINL to engage contract workers 
in such activities which are not only the core activities of the company but 
help the company to improve their production and profits, the Committee 
strongly recommend that Ministry of Steel should issue necessary 
directions to the PSUs under their administrative control to implement Rule 
25(2)(5A) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Central Rules, 
1971, in letter and spirit and wages and allowances paid to regular 
workers be also paid to contract workers engaged in similar wo rk. The 
Committee recommend that wherever Contract Workers are engaged for 
more than 5 years at a stretch , in that places Contract Workers be made 
permanent by framing a policy.  
 
WAGE REVISION IN STEEL PSUS 
 
2. The Committee note that new pay scales for steel workers were to be 
implemented w.e.f. 01.01.2012.  The Committee observe that though 
discussions have reportedly taken place many times but even after  lapse 
of 2 years, wage revision is yet to be finalized.  The Ministry of Steel have 
informed the Committee  that more than 15 rounds of discussions have 
been held with the Unions and the Committee were assured that presently 
the negotiations are going on in a very advanced stage and wage 
settlement can be expected anytime soon.  The Committee have come to 
know that some of the workers unions of Steel PSUs desire wage 

37 
 
settlement and pension scheme on the lines of Coal India Ltd. During 
discussions, the Management have reportedly offered 16% of Minimum 
Guarantee Benefit ( MGB) for employees and  6% for pension.  The 
Committee were further apprised that wage revision for other PSUs like 
Coal India  was finalized with 25% MGB and of HPCL, BHEL, NTPC & MOIL 
with 30% MGB.  The Committee have been given to understand that the 
SAIL management is in the process of finalizing the wage agreement and 
desire that while setting the wage revision, it should be ensured by steel 
PSUs that settlement should be done  keeping in view the wages of other 
Maharatna PSUs and the rising cost and inflation should also be kept  in 
mind. 
 
Minimum Wages to Contract Workers 
 
3. The Committee note that as per Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, Rule 25(2)(4), the rates of wages payable 
to the workmen by the contractor shall not be less than the rates 
prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948(11 of 1948), for such 
employment where applicable and where the rates have been fixed by 
agreement, settlement or award, not less than the rates so fixed.  The 
Committee, however, observe that  the minimum wages paid per day to 
contract labour are not only uneven amongst the SAIL Plants in different 
states but there is disparity in wages between different steel PSUs. The 
minimum wages per day for unskilled workers in Integrated Steel Plant 

38 
 
(ISP), Burnpur is Rs.269.46/- against Rs.441.43/- in Durgapur Steel Plant 
of SAIL.  As regards RINL, the minimum wages paid to contract workers 
per day are Rs.257/ - only.  The Committee do not agree with the present 
different wage structure for contract wo rkers by different units of SAIL 
and RINL and desire that a separate wage policy should be made for the 
contract labourers in the entire steel sector. The Committee feel that the 
Government / Steel Companies should take appropriate steps so that this 
disparity in minimum wages is removed and reduced to the minimum.   
 
Number of Contract Workers in SAIL and RINL 
4. The Committee note that there are 93654 (work s – 19462, non -
works – 7908, projects – 60771, Mines -5513) contract labourers engaged 
by SAIL in  different areas other than projects. Similarly, the number of 
contract labourers engaged by RINL is reported to be 5834 whereas Trade 
Unions have claimed that there are 13000 contract labourers in RINL.  As a 
principal employer SAIL and RINL are required to ensure implementation 
of Employees’ Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, 
Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, Factori es Act, 1948, Minimum 
Wages Act 1948, Employees, Compensation Act, 1923 etc.  The Committee 
observe that the exact number of contract workers in an organization are 
always challenged by the Trade Unions. The Committee feel that such 
situation arises due to  non-maintenance of records of contract workers. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that it should be made mandatory 
for contractors to maintain plant -wise records of contract workers to 

39 
 
ensure proper implementation of all the above referred labour laws so that 
the interests and rights of the contract workers are protected. The 
Committee also expect Steel PSUs to develop foolproof mechanism to 
monitor the same.    
 
Methodology for Payment of Wages 
5. The Committee note that SAIL has made mandatory requirem ent of 
PF code and ESI code for contractors, photo I cards / gate pass for 
contract labourers and online attendance system has also been initiated by 
the company.  The company is  reportedly facilitating bank payment to 
workers.  As regards RINL, the committee observe that 50% of  the 
workers are being paid wages through Bank Accounts. The Committee are 
not happy as even today about 50% of the workers in RINL are being paid 
wages in cash whic h may cause malpractices and exploitation of contract 
workers regarding payment of minimum wages.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all the contract workers in SAIL and RINL 
should be paid their wages through cheques or their bank accounts and the 
companies should ensure that contractor bills are settled only after 
ascertaining the compliance of payment of wages, PF and ESI remittances.   
 
Compassionate Appointments  
6. The Committee observe that SAIL is uniformly implementing 
employment to dependent of contract workers across the company's plants 
and units w.e.f 01.04.2009  in case the worker's death happens to be in the 

40 
 
steel plant.  According to the Ministry of Steel, SAIL has provided 
employment on compassionate ground to 49 dependents of contract 
labourers.  According to the Ministry of Steel, 9 cases are under process 
and in 8 cases, there was no eligible dependent of the deceased contract 
labourer.  The Committee while appreciating the SAIL decision, desire that 
the same  be implemented in othe r PSUs like RINL also and a proper 
system with clear cut guidelines for the management to follow should be 
put in place so that the bereaved family of the worker do not have to run 
from pillar to post to obtain benefits dully entitled and the benefits to b e 
accrued  in such cases including  compassionate appointment to his kin, 
educational facilities for his children, amount of compensation to be 
awarded etc. should be decided and paid in a fixed time period.   
 
Local People for Contract Works in Steel Plant 
7. The Committee note that the works outsourced by SAIL and RINL are 
not given to local peoples and the contractors employ and bring workers 
from outside and paying them lower wages. The Committee have time and 
again recommended that local / displace d persons should be given 
preference for recruitment and even for contract jobs.  While appreciating 
that RINL has employed 7223 displaced persons against the commitment 
of 5000, the Committee feel that SAIL and RINL should ensure that local 
people be given preference by contractors for engaging workers in mining, 
works and non-works areas of steel plants.   
 

41 
 
  Canteen Facilities at Workplace 
8. The Committee observe that canteen facility at Visakhapatnam Steel 
Plant of RINL has been outsourced. The Committ ee are concerned that 
though the Factories Act 1948, provide that a canteen should be provided  
and maintained in plant by the occupier for use of workers and not by 
outsourcing and engaging contract workers, instead of maintaining  the 
canteen for a large workforce , in RINL, the same has been outsourced to a 
contractor. During evidence, the CMD, RINL had assured the Committee 
that he will look into the matter and ensure that the canteen is managed 
by the Company and the employees working in the canteen ar e 
regularized. The Committee expect that necessary action in the matter has 
already been taken. The Committee also desire similar practice to be in 
vogue in all steel plants of SAIL and would like to be apprised of the same.  
 
Facilities for Women Workers 
9. The Committee have been given to understand that the permanent 
women employees of RINL are working in the administrative buildings 
where the toilet facility is there.  But there are women workers  who work 
at plant and toilet facilities are not made ava ilable to them.  Further, no 
change rooms/rest rooms are provided to women workers.  The Committee 
are concerned to the poor working conditions, particularly for women 
workers and strongly recommend that SAIL and RINL should immediately 
take cognigence of this complaint of trade unions and establish rest rooms, 

42 
 
change rooms and women toilets at all the steel plants/work place with 3 
months and apprise the Committee action taken in this regard.  
 
SAFETY, SECURITY OF CONTRACT WORKERS 
 
10. The Committee fe el t hat another important aspect for workers 
welfare which should not be overlooked at any cost i s the health sector.  
The Committee note that the contract labourers in steel sector are engaged 
in various flexible jobs like operation and maintenance, housekeeping etc.  
These workers are exposed to high amounts of heat and dust  generated 
during the operation .  The various trade unions representing  contract 
workers have, therefore, demanded  safety, security, better working 
conditions for these workers.  The Committee feel that due care should be 
given to their demands as health and general well being of the employees 
should be th e priority of any organisation. Taking note of the demands of 
trade unions  that workers engaged in hazardous zones, Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) li ke safety shoes, helmet, hand g loves, 
goggles, fire resistance coats should be in adequate supply and  of proper 
quality and provided by the company and not through the contractor, the 
Committee recommend that the companies should take note of this serious 
demand of trade unions .  The Committee also desire that time to time 
inspections should be carried o ut by the companies to ensure that these 
equipments are being worn by the workers and are of desired standards.  
 

43 
 
11. The Committee note that contract labourers in SAIL and RINL are 
covered under ESI , Act.  Free medical treatment at ESI dispensaries and 
hospitals are provided to the contract workers and their dependents.  First 
aid medical facilities are also provided to contract labourers at the 
occupational health ce ntres within plant premises.  The Committee feel 
that the Ministry of Steel should also take up the matter of setting up of 
ESI dispensaries and hospitals near the steel plants and  whenever needed 
referral to corporate hospitals/higher medical centres for treatment shall 
also be made for contract workers.  The Committee also recommend that 
periodical medical examination of workers employed in hazardous sectors 
and immediate medical relief in case of any exigency should be the 
topmost agenda to ensure fait h of workers in the organisation.   Further, 
the Committee desire that it should be e nsured that each employee 
working in hazardous sectors should be covered under personal accident 
insurance scheme and Mediclaim Insurance Scheme, etc.  
 
12. The Committee are concerned to note that though 
employees/contract workers deployed in hot, hard and hazardous areas 
like coke ovens, sinter plant, blast furnace and steel melting shop are 
given incentives or extra allowance such as height allowances, heat  
allowance, etc.  The Committee feel that though the workers  have been 
offered incentives, they are deprived of the proper treatment, 
rehabilitation and compensation.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that management of Steel PSUs should accor d top priority to 

44 
 
the safety and security of the workers in iron ore mines and Steel plants 
and in this direction adequate, budgetary provisions should be made, 
vigilance and statutory compliances should be strictly implemented.  
 
  Training and Skill Development  
 
13.  As regards the training to workers, RINL has informed the 
Committee that contract labour is subjected to various training 
programmes in addition to mandatory general safety training, site -
specific, job -specific, fire, height, gas, electrical , confined space, 
chemical, behavioral Based, hazards training, mock drills etc. Further as 
training and skill development  lays foundation of long term sustainability 
of an organization, the Committee while appreciating the regular training 
programmes arr anged by RINL, feel that all regular employees and 
contract workers be given greater exposure to safety measures and 
advance technology in mining sector  and operation of steel plants. The 
Committee would, therefore, stress the need for more innovative and  
compulsory training programmes for all the staff at various levels after 
every 3 to 5 years  and contract workers by  Steel PSUs.   
 
Service Conditions of Employees of MSTC Ltd. 
14. The Committee observe that MSTC Service Rule for Non -Executive 
employees has been construed as per the service condition of SAIL/CMO 

45 
 
for city based non executive employees.  The pay structure and other 
related service condition have also been followed in l ine with SAIL/CMO.  
This is as per the Government approval in principle while delinking from 
SAIL.  The Committee also note that All India Association of MSTC Ltd. – 
Employees Unions, the only registered union by MSTC Ltd. has not voiced 
any objection rega rding industrial relation problem in MSTC Ltd.  and the 
organization is also maintaining the service condition in the desired path.  
As a result there is a reasonably disciplined working atmosphere in the 
Company.  The Committee are happy to observe  that the union is 
maintaining the tradition of co -operation, in upbringing the welfare and 
professional competencies of its members and has been co -operating 
consistently with the management towards development of a healthy 
working environment in the company along with active participation in the 
developmental needs of the organization.  The Committee expect that the 
same tradition of co -cooperativeness and mutual beneficial relationship 
inter-se will continue and bring more efficiency and healthy working 
environment in the company.   
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                             KALYAN BANERJEE 
18 December, 2013                                                               Chairman                
27 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
  

46 
 
Annexure-I 
 
 
Details of Contract Labour engaged in SAIL as on 1.10.2013, Plant-wise, area-wise 
 
Plant/Unit Works Non 
Works Projects Mines Total 
Bhilai Steel Plant 2951 1668 30500 412 35531 
Durgapur Steel Plant 2719 627 3106 0 6452 
Rourkela Steel Plant 2948 490 13564 0 17002 
Bokaro Steel Plant 4060 673 4175 0 8908 
IISCO Steel Plant 2887 430 9400 0 12717 
Alloy Steels Plant 442 0 0 0 442 
Salem Steel Plant 122 81 0 0 203 
Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant 767 238 2 8 1015 
Central Marketing Organization 0 2353 0 0 2353 
Raw Materials Division 0 266 24 3798 4088 
SAIL Refractory Unit 1588 154 0 0 1742 
Chandrapur Ferro Alloy Plant 392 50 0 0 442 
Research & Development Center for 
Iron & Steel 0 201 0 0 201 
Centre for Engineering & Technology 0 32 0 0 32 
Management Training Institute 0 20 0 0 20 
Central Coal Supply Organisation 0 23 0 0 23 
Environment Management Division 0 8 0 0 8 
Growth Division/SAIL Growth Works 316 170 0 0 486 
Collieries Division 270 424 0 1295 1989 
TOTAL   19462 7908 60771 5513 93654 

47 
 
Annexure-II 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 8th OCTOBER, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘ D’, PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
       
 LOK SABHA  
 
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3.    Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
4.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
5.    Shri  Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
6.    Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
7.    Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
8.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
9.    Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
10.  Shri K. R. G. Reddy  
11.  Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
12.  Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
13.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
14.   Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
15.   Shri Srinjoy Bose 
16.   Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
17.   Shri Nand Kumar Sai 
18.   Shri T. Rathinavel 
19.   Shri Sanjay Raut  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
2.  Shri Arvind Sharma -  Deputy Secretary 

48 
 
WITNESSES 
 
               MINISTRY OF STEEL AND ITS PSU's 
 
1. Shri G. Mohan Kumar Secretary,  Ministry of Steel 
2. Shri  Lokesh Chandra Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Steel 
3. Shri Syedain Abbasi Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Steel  
4. Shri J.P. Shukla,  Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Steel 
5. Shri C. S. Verma  Chairman, SAIL  & NMDC 
6. Shri P. Madhusudan Director(Operations), RINL 
7. Shri Y.R. Reddy Director(Personnel), RINL 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Steel and other 
representatives of the Ministry and Steel PSUs to the sitting of Committee c onvened to 
have briefing on the subject "Service Conditions of Workers in Public Sector Steel 
Companies".  
 
3. Thereafter, a visual presentation on the subject was  made by the 
representatives of SAIL. The Committee broadly discussed the issues  relating to the 
services conditions of workers including contract workers in SAIL especially with 
reference to their social security measures, health and educational benefits, provident  
fund, pension system, safety of workers , housing, canteen facilities for contract labour, 
bank facility for direct payment of wages to labourers, employment of labourers in case 
of death during service, employment of contract workers in such activities which are 
perennial in nature and disparity in their wages an d those of regular employees, 
reasons for different wages given in different States by SAIL etc. 
 
4. The Committee also decided to have another meeting on the subject where 
alongwith the representatives of the Ministry of Steel/PSUs, representatives of Tra de 
Union will also be called to depose before them.  
A copy of verbatim proceedings has been kept on record. 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 

49 
 
Annexure-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL HELD 
ON 11  NOVEMBER, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1630  hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
     LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
3. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
6. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
7. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
10.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
 
11. Shri  
12.  
13. Shri  
14. Shri  
15. Shri  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
                                                                   OFFICIAL 
Sl. No. Name  Designation  
   
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Thakral Additional Secretary& FA,  
2. Shri J.P. Shukla,  Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Steel 

50 
 
3. Shri A. P. Choudhary CMD, RINL  
4. Shri Y. R. Reddy Director (Personnel), RINL 
5. Shri S. K. Tripathi CMD, MSTC 
 
Representatives of Trade Unions  
 
                                                            RINL 
1. Shri D. Adinarayana General Secretary, Steel Plant Employee Union  
2. Shri M. Rajasekhar General Secretary, Visakha Steel Employees 
Congress (INTUC) 
3. Shri J. Ayodya Ramu President , Steel Progressive Employees 
Union(CITU) 
4. Shri G. Ganpati 
 
President , Hind Mazdoor Steel Employees Union 
(HMS) 
                                                       
                                                         MSTC Ltd. 
 
1. Shri P. K. Kaushik  President, All India Association of MSTC Ltd. 
Employees’ Union 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the 
Ministry of Steel, RINL and MSTC to the sit ting of the Committee convened in connection with 
examination of the subject "Service conditions of workers including contract workers in Steel 
PSUs."  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee first sought the views of the Ministry of Steel/RINL and MSTC 
Ltd. on the working conditions of the workers, especially the contract labourers employed in 
mining activities and non -mining with regard  to payment of minimum wages,  leave 
entitlements, health facilities, soci al security and safety measures for workers  etc. While 
apprising the Committee of the working conditions of employees of MSTC Ltd, the Committee 
were informed that MSTC Ltd. do not have contract labour.  
(Representatives of RINL and MSTC Ltd. then withdrew and representatives of Trade Unions 
were called.) 
4. The representatives of Trade Union of RINL  raised their problems on issues regarding 
safety of workers, procurement procedure for safety appliances for workers, periodic wage 
agreements, separate toilets and change rooms for women workers, lack of adequ ate 
manpower in spite of expansion plan of RINL, pension scheme for workers, specialized hospital 

51 
 
facilities for workers, etc.  The Hon'ble Chairman directed the Trade Union Leaders to submit a 
written Memorandum on the subject for consideration of the Com mittee. The representative of 
Trade Union of MSTC Ltd., however, raised no grievances and was satisfied with present wage 
structure and condition of services.  
(Representatives of Trade Union then withdrew and representatives of RINL were again called) 
5. The Chairman then apprised the representatives of RINL regarding the demands and 
problems being faced by the workers as put forth by the representatives of Trade Unions and 
directed the  Ministry of Steel and CMD, RINL to address the above referred issues raised by 
the Trade Unions and to resolve them amicably.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
              The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
Annexure-II 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL HELD 
ON 17 DECEMBER, 2013 IN ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR ,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
    LOK SABHA  
 
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
 
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
6.    Shri Babu Lal Marandi  
7.    Shri  Govind Prasad Mishra  
8.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
9.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
10.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11.  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
12.  Shri Jugul Kishore 
13.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
14.  Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
15.  Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:- 
(i)          **   **   **   ** 
 
(ii)         **   **   **   ** 
 

53 
 
(iii)        **   **   **   ** 
 
(iv)       **   **   **   ** 
 
(v)    Draft Report on " Service Conditions of Workers in Public Sector Steel Companies" 
pertaining to the Ministry of Steel. 
 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports with some minor changes/modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the basis of factual 
verification from the concerned Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________  
**Do not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
 