STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
“CSR ACTIVITIES IN COAL INDIA LIMITED
AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES”
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
32


THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COAL
“CSR ACTIVITIES IN COAL INDIA LIMITED
AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES”
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.4.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.4.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

CC&S No. 71
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
PART I
CHAPTER I Introduct ory ...................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II A. Concept of Corporate Social Responsibility and
Department of Public Enterprises Guidelines .... 3
B. CSR Policy of Coal India Ltd. ................................. 7
C. Implementation of CSR  Policy ............................... 11
D. Training Progra mme by TISS ................................. 13
E. CSR proposal for Dankuni Coal Company ......... 13
F. Funding Pattern and Utilization of Funds under
CSR .............................................................................. 14
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ... 20
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2012-13) held on 21.01.2013 ............... 29
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2012-13) held on 26.02.2013 ............... 32
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2012-13) held on 17.04.2013 ............... 35

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2012-13)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Sabbam Hari
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
8. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
9. Shri Pakauri Lal
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Rajaram Pal
13. Kumari Saroj Pandey
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
15. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
16. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
21. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary*
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Sanjay Raut
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
30. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Balsekhar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “CSR Activities
in Coal India Limited and its Subsidiaries” relating to the Ministry of
Coal.
2. The Committee were briefed on the subject matter by the
representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Companies on 21st
January, 2013 and took oral evidence of the Ministry of Coal on 26th
February, 2013.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Coal and Coal Companies for placing before them and
in furnishing material/information from time to time as desired by the
Committee.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 17.04.2013.
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for
the valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
18 April, 2013 Chairman,
28 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

PART - I
CHAPTER I
Introductory
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) can be defined as the
“economic legal, ethical and discretionary expectations that society has
of organizations at the given point in time.” The concept of corporate
social responsibility means that organizations have moral, ethical and
philanthropic responsibilities in addition to their responsibilities to earn
a fair return for investors and comply with the law. A traditional view
of the corporation suggests that its primary, if not sole responsibility is
to its owners, or stockholders. However, CSR requires organizations to
adopt a broader view of its responsibilities that includes not only
stockholders, but many other constituencies as well, including employees,
suppliers, customers, the local community, local, state and federal
governments, environmental groups, and other special interest groups.
Collectively, the various groups affected by the actions of an organization
are called “stakeholders”.
1.2 Public Corporations have legal responsibilities to maximize
shareholder profits; but a shift in corporate mindset led by social
expectations and pressure is causing business leaders to rethink their
responsibilities with respect to corporate performance measures in terms
of economic impact, social impact and environmental impact – commonly
called the Triple Bottom Line.
1.3 Economic growth is possible only through consumption of
inputs available in the environment and society. The harnessing of natural
resources has a direct impact on the economy, the environment and society
at large. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is a concept whereby
organizations serve the interests of society by taking responsibility for
the impact of their activities on customers, employees, shareholders,
communities and the environment in all aspects of their operations.
1.4 Corporate Social Responsibility is a Company’s commitment to
operate in a economically, socially and environmentally sustainable
manner, while recognizing the interests of its stakeholders. This
commitment is beyond statutory requirements. Corporate Social
Responsibility is, therefore, closely linked with the practice of Sustainable

2
Development. Corporate Social Responsibility extends beyond
philanthropic, activities and reaches out to the integration of social and
business goals. These activities need to be seen as those which would,
in the long term, held secure a sustainable competitive advantage.
1.5 A properly implemented CSR concept can bring along a variety
of competitive advantages, such as enhanced access to capital and markets,
increased sales and profits, operational cost savings, improved
productivity and quality, efficient human resource base, improved brand
image and reputation, enhanced customer loyalty, better decision making
and risk management processes.
1.6 The Standing committee on coal and Steel have examined the
CSR of Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries in detail. The detailed scrutiny
of implementation of CSR activities of these companies and observations
and recommendations of the committee are in subsequent chapters.

3
CHAPTER II
A. Concept of Corporate Social Responsibility and Department of
Public Enterprises Guidelines
Corporate Social Responsibility is a management concept whereby
companies integrate social and environmental concerns in their business
operations and interactions with their stakeholders. CSR is generally
understood as being the way through which a company achieves a balance
of economic, environmental and social imperatives.
2.2 As per Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility document
for Central Public Sector Enterprises, the planning for Corporate Social
Responsibility should start with the identification of the activities/projects
to be undertaken. CSR projects/activities may be undertaken in the
periphery where a company carries out its commercial activities as far
as possible. Where this is not possible or applicable, a Company may
choose to locate CSR projects anywhere in the country. Company specific
Corporate Social Responsibility strategies should be developed that
mandate the design of Corporate Social Responsibility Action Plan (Long-
term, medium-term and short-term), with a shift from the casual approach
to the project based accountability approach. The business plan under
CSR should be integrated with the social and environment concerns related
to the business of the company.
2.3 Further, selection of activities under CSR may be made to ensure
that the benefits reach the smallest unit i.e. village, panchayat, block or
district depending upon the operations and resource capability of the
company. The approach to CSR planning needs to be shifted from an
ad-hoc charity to a long term sustainable approach. The Project Management
and Monitoring skills available with the companies could be shared as
far as possible, with the local administration by training and setting up
required structures and systems.
2.4 The long-term Corporate Social Responsibility Plan should
match with the long term Business Plan. This should be broken down
into medium term and short term plans. Each of these plans should
clearly specify:—
(i) Requirements relating to baseline survey;

4
(ii) A ctivities to be undertaken;
(iii) Budgets allocated;
(iv) Time-lines prescribed;
(v) Responsibilities and authorities defined;
(vi) Major results expected.
2.5 According to the Guidelines, such plans should also clearly
specify the implementation guidelines and the involvement of the
implementing agency. The procedures and methodologies prescribed for
monitoring should be highlighted as well as the modalities of the
concurrent and final evaluation. Finally, there should be a clear
specification regarding mandatory documentation of the experience.
2.6 According to the guidelines issued by Department of Public
Enterprises for CSR activities that the initiatives of Central Public Sector
Enterprises(CPSEs) should consider the following parameters for
identification/selection of schemes/projects:—
(i) Thrust should be given wherever possible to areas related to
the business of the CPSEs as a natural corollary to the business.
(ii) Inv estment in CSR should be project-based. Mere donations
to philanthropic/charity or other organizations would not
come under the category of CSR.
(iii) CSR activities should generate community goodwill, create
social impact and visibility.
(iv) For every project, the time-frame and periodic milestones
should be finalized at the outset.
(v) CSR activities should also involve the suppliers in order to
ensure that the supply chain also follows the CSR principles.
(vi) CSR activ ities should help in building a positive image of
the company in the public perception.
(vii) CSR activities may be related to United Nations Global
Compact Programme on Environment.
(viii) CSR projects may be closely linked with the principles of
Sustainable Development based on the immediate and long-
term social and environmental consequences of their activities.

5
(ix) Every CPSE should shoul der responsibility for restoring/
compensating for any ecological damage that is taking place
as a result of its operations.
(x) Care may be taken to ensure that CPSEs work towards
fulfillment of the National Plan goals and objectives, as well
as the Millennium Development Goals adopted by our
country, ensure gender sensitivity, skill enhancement,
entrepreneurship development and employment generation
by co-creating value with local institutions/people.
(xi) Central Public Sector Enterprises should redefine their
business continuity plan to factor in hazards, risks and
vulnerabilities. They should also create value in innovative
social investments in the community and may focus on the
areas of “Preparedness and Capacity Building” in Disaster
Management (DM).
(xii) Public-Private Partnership between the Government and the
Central Public Sector could also be encouraged to leverage
the strengths of the latter in Disaster Management. CPSEs
need to network with Ministries in Government of India/
NDMA at the National level and State Governments/SDMAs
at the State level to strengthen and formalize their role in the
DM process for ensuring preparedness of the communities
towards disaster resilience.
2.7 Project activities identified under CSR are to be implemented
by Specialized Agencies and generally NOT by staff of the CPSE
concerned. Specialised Agencies could be made to work singly or in
tandem with other agencies these specialized agencies would include:—
(i) Community based organizations whether formal or informal;
(ii) Elected local bodies such as Panchayats;
(iii) Vol untary Agencies (NGOs);
(iv) Institutes/Academic Organisations;
(v) Trusts, Missions, etc.;
(vi) Self-help Groups;
(vii) Gov ernment, Semi-Government and autonomous
Organisations;

6
(viii) Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE);
(ix) M ahila Mandals/Samitis and the like;
(x) Contracted agencies for civil works;
(xi) Professional Consultancy Organisations etc.
2.8 CPSEs should generate awareness among all levels of their staff
about CSR activities and the integration of social processes with business
processes. Those involved with the undertaking of CSR activities should
be provided with adequate training and re-orientation.
2.9 Initiatives of State Governments, District Administration, Local
Administration as well as Central Government Departments/Agencies,
Self-Help Groups etc., would be dovetailed/synergized with the initiatives
taken by the CPSEs. Every care should be taken to ensure that there is
no duplication of CSR activities undertaken by the CPSEs with that of
programmes run by Central, State and Local Governments.
2.10 While assigning CSR projects to specialized agencies, every
possible effort must be made to verify the reliability and clean track
record of such agencies. CPSEs may make efforts to prepare suitable
panels of such agencies or they may select from panels maintained by
Government, Semi-Government, Autonomous Organisation or the
National CSR Hub, etc.
2.11 The concept of Corporate Social Responsibility(CSR) has gained
prominence from all avenues. Organisations have realized that
Government alone will not be able to get success in its endeavour to
uplift the downtrodden of Society. With the rapidly changing corporate
environment, more functional autonomy, operational freedom etc., Coal
India has adopted CSR as a strategic tool for sustainable growth. For
Coal India in the present context, CSR means not only investment of
funds for Social Activity but also Integration of Business processes with
Social processes.
2.12 Even much before the issue of CSR has become global concern.
Coal India was fulfilling the aspiration of the Society through well-defined
Community Development Policy within the periphery of 8 kms. of the
Project sites. This has resulted into a harmonious relationship between
Coal India and the peripheral Committees. With the introduction of well
defined CSR policy as per DPE’s guidelines, CSR initiatives are being
practiced with broader perspective.

7
B. CSR Policy of Coal India Ltd.
2.13 The Committee were informed that Coal India Limited has
a well-defined CSR policy introduced w.e.f. 29.6.2010 based on the
guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprise for Central PSUs
on CSR in April, 2010 which is also applicable in respect of subsidiary
companies of CIL.
2.14 In a background note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry
of Coal has informed that poor and needy people of the society living
in and around coalfields/mining areas in different parts of India are the
major areas covered under CSR activities, the CSR policy is operational
within the radius of 15 KM of the project site and areas including
Headquarters. Further CSR activities are also undertaken beyond mining
areas within the respective State with the approval as per norms. CIL
being a holding company execute CSR activities which are beyond
jurisdiction of subsidiary companies.
2.15 Asked about the major CSR activities that have been
undertaken by CIL and subsidiaries during the last five year, the
Committee were apprised as under:—
(i) Education facilities.
(ii) Water supply including drinking water.
(iii) Health care by providing indoor medical facilities and
medicines and conducting medical camps including
awareness programmes, providing medical facilities through
mobile medical vans.
(iv) Social Empowerment.
(v) Infrastructure for village electricity/solar light/pawanchakki
etc.
(vi) Sports and culture.
(vii) Generation of employment and setting up cooperative society.
(viii) Infrastructure support.
(ix) Grant/financial assistance/sponsorship to NGOs for different
development work of the nation as well as for undertaking
different activities involving upliftment of the society.

8
(x) Empowerment of women for education/health and self
employment.
(xi) Relief of victims of natural calamities/disasters.
(xii) Street lighting and solar lighting system to villagers belonging
to BPL.
(xiii) Construction of playing grounds/stadiums and organizing
sports tournaments for villagers.
(xiv) Financial assistance to concerned State/District Administration
for opening Engineering and Medical Colleges.
(xv) Promotion of sports and cultural activities and support events
at State and National level.
(xvi) Utilisation of Mahila Sabha of the company, club and Women
in Public Sector (WIPS) for conducting various CSR activities
related to women of the society.
(xvii) Relief to victims of natural calamities like earthquake, cyclone,
drought and flood situation in any part of the country.
(xviii) Wellness Clinic.
(xix) HIV/Aids awareness programme.
(xx) Adoption of village for carrying out the activities like
infrastructural development i.e. road, water supply, electricity
and community centre etc.
2.16 In a background, Ministry of Coal has informed the Committee
that CIL believes in ‘mining with a human face’ through a socially
sustainable inclusive development. It pursues a structured CSR policy in
and around the coal mining areas to improve quality of life with
community consensus and inclusive participation. Some of these are:—
• New CSR Policy adopted and provided CSR budget as 5%
of retained earnings of previous year subject to minimum of
Rs. 5/- tonne of coal production, whichever is higher.
• Inclusive model of all-round growth for Project Affected
Peoples (PAPs).
• Massive social investm ent in Education, Health and
Community Development.

9
2.17 Asked about the major CSR initiatives taken by CIL, the
Committee were informed as under:—
• Funding for 500 bedded multi-specialty general hospital for
needy and under privileged to Bharat Sevashram Sangha.
• Financial help for Empowerment of under privileged women
of the society by virtue of vocational training, Hand
embroidery, cutting and tailoring, beautician training courses
to Karmakutir, Kolkata.
• For construction of 107 single room houses in the Leh District
of Jammu and Kashmir for the victims of Cloud Burts.
• Adoption of 14 children affected with Cerebral Palsy through
Indian Institute of Cerebral Palsy.
• Imparting of ITI training/education to promote technical skill
development of youth on cutting edge courses/trades as well
as skill development to readily cater to the core industries.
• Training and Development imparted through Kabiguru
Industrial Training Centre (KGITC) as one of the stakeholders
on equal sharing basis with DVC and BHEL. The ITI would
cater to the specific manpower requirement of Mining
Industries and also provide platform to equip the youth with
necessary skills for job opportunity.
• Proposed opening of IIIT at Kalyani under PPP Model in
West Bengal.
• Five(5) medical colleges proposed to be established by
subsidiary companies of CIL in and around coalfield areas
in three different States i.e. Jharkhand, Odisha and
Chhattisgarh.
• Infrastructural grant to Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Cancer
Research Institute for the development of their existing set
up of Bone marrow & umbilical cord blood transplantation
and stem cells research unit.
• Recently CIL has entered into a MOU with ISM (Indian School
of Mines), Dhanbad in the State of Jharkhand to facilitate
mining engineering education in close relation with the
mining industry. CIL help the ISM by providing Rs. 1.05 crore
for Rajiv Gandhi Chair Professor in Mining Environment and
Rs. 1.27 crore for CIL Chair.

10
Professor in Under Ground Mining towards the building corpus
fund to meet the salary and other expenses of above mentioned chairs.
2.18 As regards the constraints, the Committee were informed that
Lack of Baseline data has been one of the major constraints faced by
subsidiaries and CIL. Another constraint is reported to be conflicting
demands from various groups in the vicinity to avoid conflicting demands,
following steps are reportedly being taken by coal companies:—
(i) Generally the Local Administration and Local Community
are consulted in indentifying and execution of the CSR
Project.
(ii) As far as possible the CSR activities are done through Local
authorities help.
(iii) To avoid con flicting demands in future now baseline survey
is being conducted in all places of our operation and the
activities will be taken up based on the need identified and
impact assessment done after implementation.
2.19 According to Ministry of Coal, CIL is showing a positive
commitment towards CSR and setting an example to be a responsible
Corporate Citizen by engaging in variety of Socially Responsible activities.
Coal India CSR activities should have been made an impact on protection
and improving ecology, commitment towards improving the quality of
life of the Local Community as well as the Society at large through
activities like Community Development, Resettlement and Rehabilitation
maintaining ecological balance etc.
2.20 It has further been stated by the Ministry of Coal that CIL
believe in cultivating a socially sustainable inclusive development which
can contribute to build the better sustainable community through sound
business activities and touching the lives of millions of people positively
by supporting environmental and health care projects and social, cultural
and educational Programmes.
2.21 During the course of evidence the Committee were informed
that the overall condition of coal areas particularly roads is in bad shape
and there is no provision of potable water and electricity. These conditions
are being faced by the people displaced from coalfields. In the absence
of tree plantation in and around coalfield areas there is degradation in
the environment.

11
2.22 The Ministry have informed the Committee that CIL and its
subsidiary companies are having separate CSR Cells headed by CGM/
GM for executing CSR activities as per the policy. Every Coal Company
is having separate Committees for monitoring the progress of the CSR
activities.
2.23 The Committee have been further informed that CIL and its
subsidiaries has not established any primary health centre, reproductive
and child health centres/hospitals and super speciality hospitals. However,
the subsidiaries of CIL have dispensaries and hospitals at various coalfields
to look after the health needs of its employees.
2.24 TISS the National CSR Hub has been engaged to guide, assist
and monitor in implementation of CSR activities in CIL and its subsidiaries
including in carrying out the baseline survey. However, CIL has entered
into a MOU with Tata Institute of Social Science (TISS) for extending
assistance and guidance in implementation of CIL’s CSR activities in a
befitting manner, which will gain momentum in executing CSR activities.
C. Implementation of CSR Policy
2.25 The Committee have been informed that Coal India Limited
has appointed Tata Institute of Social Science (TISS) as Nodal Agency for
CSR activities of CIL and its subsidiaries. The TISS will be involved in
conducting:—
• Baseline Survey/Need Based Assessment.
• Project formulation based on survey in collaboration with
CIL.
• Enlistment of NGOs for CSR activities.
• Monitoring of implementation of CSR projects.
• Documentation of Projects and Impact Assessment.
2.26 TISS will complete Baseline Survey for balance projects in all
subsidiaries by 15th May, 2013 and thereafter projects will be finalized
on Survey and for 2013-14, each subsidiary will identify one backward
district for development work apart from other activities The
representative of the Ministry of Coal during the course of evidence
informed the Committee that actually, in the project-related cases, after
doing the baseline survey, they were able to do the projects. But in respect

12
of other than project-related, doing this baseline survey in various other
places was a little bit difficult one. This is the problem in respect of all
the public sector undertakings. This was taken up with DPE. Now, DPE
has amended this guideline, and now the baseline survey is not mandatory;
wherever project-related things, there we can do the baseline survey and
in other places we can do based on the project evaluation mode. That
amendment has come. Now, it makes it easy for further implementation
of CSR. About one month back, this amendment was made. Now, Coal
India is fast-tracking all the CSR projects which were pending for quite
some time. Now, we are speeding them up………Some CSR projects are
being delayed because of non-availability of clearances. There are other
problems at the panchayat/district/state level halting the progress of the
CSR projects.
2.27 The representative of the Ministry also informed the Committee
that Coal India facing difficulties in deciding the CSR activities..…. There
are two-three groups in the villages who are coming up with their own
list of CSR activities….. Sometime list of CSR activities are being suggested
by MPs/MLAs/District Collectors/BDOs and villagers making it extremely
difficult for coal subsidiaries for taking up CSR activities in the absence
of clear cut guidelines in this regard.
2.28 Asked about the inspection and surveillance on various CSR
activities the Ministry have informed the Committee as under:—
• CIL and its subsidiaries have a structured vigilance
set up who undertake periodic system study, inspection
and surveillance of various activities including CSR
activities.
• Structured Internal Audit system in CIL and its subsidiaries
that does regular Audit of various functions of the
organization including the CSR activities.
• CAG has pointed-out the absence of Baseline Survey before
carrying-out the CSR activities and appointment of an external
agency for monitoring the CSR Activity implementation.
• Basically, it involves putting in place proper system and
procedures as this has become a major activity. From later
part of 2010-11 various process are being developed and put
in place for smoother and effective implementation of the
CSR activities.

13
• Based on experience, wherever required, policy commitment
has been carried-out and TISS has been engaged to guide us
in implementing CSR activities.
2.29 The Committee have apprised that a few reputed NGOs have
been given grants who are well experienced and doing social service.
Some of the NGOs are as below:—
• Bharat Sevashram, Kolkata
• Child in Need Institute, Pailan, Kolkata
• Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College,
Ragahar, Kolkata
• Rehabilitation Centre for Children, Kolkata
• National Association for the Blind, Kolkata
2.30 NGOs have been selected with the recommendations of the
local authorities and subsequent in-house CSR committee
recommendations. In future CIL, will develop the suitable criteria for
selection of NGOs for CSR activities.
D. Training Programme by TISS
2.31 The training programme has been conducted by TISS among
the different executives of CIL and Subsidiary companies who are dealing
with CSR activities. In the said training programme the related to new
guideline on CSR by DPE has also been discussed. Recently, on 31.01.2013,
meeting of director’s level was held at TISS, Mumbai on CSR activities
of CIL and its subsidiaries. For every CSR activity, there is a time bound
programme depending upon the Project Report of the work. The authority
at various levels for CSR projects has been spelt out in the CSR policy
of the company. Subsidiaries-wise details is voluminous and will be
submitted due course.
E. CSR proposal for Dankuni Coal Company
2.32 The action taken so far on the CSR proposal of Dankuni Coal
Complex is as below:—
• A CSR proposal of 12 Nos. of works was received at DCC
vide letter dated 17.3.2012. As per the instruction of SECL
HQ details were sought by DCC for the suggested work of

14
providing 200 cycles to needy girl students attending schools
in remote areas around Dankuni vide letter No. SECL/DCC/
06/2012/552 dated 28/29.6.12. The list of 200 girl students was
received vide letter dtd. 25.7.12.
• Further, detailed estimate and plan of individual and plan
of individual remaining 11 Nos. of works was also sought by
DCC by SECL vide letter dated 30.8.12. In response, to the same,
in a letter dated 22.9.12 the value and location of 7 works
to be taken up under CSR were received by SECL from the
concerned. However, details of 4 works were submitted.
• Accordingly, a reminder dt. 25.9.12 addressed to the concerned
was sent by DCC requesting to submit the detailed estimate
and plan of each individual work. Further in a letter dt. 9.10.12
the concerned had shown eagerness for the work of providing
200 cycles to needy girl students and therefore was requested
vide letter No. SECL/DCC/06/2012/1097 dt. 18.10.12 by DCC
to arrange to send his comments and details of all the
items recommended under CSR. However, till date, the
detailed estimate and layout plans of the works have not
been received.
• However, the 12 proposed works have been approved in
principle by competent authority of SECL on 10.1.13 subject
to compliance of due procedure under CIL CSR Policy. The
same has been communicated to GM, DCC vide letter No.
SECL/BSP/CSR/2013/15 dated 20.01.13.
• Subsequently, competent authority approved for financial
assistance towards the work of providing 200 cycles to needy
girl students who are attending schools in remote areas
around Dankuni as per the list of the girl students submitted
by the concerned. GM, DCC vide his letter No. SECL/DCC/01/
F-25/2013/203 dated 11.2.13 handed over a cheque for an
amount of Rs. 6 lakh towards the above work to Chairperson,
Dankuni Municipality.
Thus, all the 12 Nos. of works proposed to be taken up under CSR
have been approved in principle and communicated.
F. Funding Pattern and Utilization of Funds under CSR
2.33 The guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprises
for CSR activities mandated that the CSR budget will be mandatorily

15
created through a Board Resolution as a percentage of net profit in the
following manner:—
Type of CPSEs Expenditure range for CSR
Net Profit (Previous Year)  in a Financial Year (% of profit)
(i) Less than Rs. 100 crore 3% - 5%
(ii) Rs. 100 crore to Rs. 500 crore 2% - 3%
(subject to a Minimum of Rs. 3 crore)
(iii) Rs. 500 crore and above 0.5% - 2%
Loss-making companies are not mandated to earmark specific
funding for CSR activities.
2.34 They should achieve CSR objectives by integrating business
processes with social processes wherever possible and taking up such
initiatives which do not involve cash outgo, e.g., by synergizing their
CSR activities with those of other profit-making companies.
2.35 The CSR Budget should be fixed for each financial year. This
funding will not lapse. It will be transferred to a CSR Fund, which will
accumulate—as in the case of non-lapsable pool—for the North-East.
2.36 In case CPSEs have different Profit Centres like Factories/Plant
locations, they may be allocated separate CSR budgets to be spent by
them under the Annual CSR Budget allocations. The annual budget for
CSR is allocated based on 5% of the retained earnings of previous year
subject to minimum of Rs. 5 per tonne of coal production of previous
year. In respect of CIL as a Holding Company 2.5% of retained profit
of last year is allocated for execution of CSR activities.
2.37 The Department of Public Enterprise has revised the CSR
guidelines on 18th December, 2012 to be made effective from 1.4.2013.
The salient features of the revised guidelines are:—
(i) CSR and Sustainable Development have been clubbed
together.
(ii) Baseline Survey is not mandatory.
(iii) One backward district is to be taken up for development of
weaker section of the society by each subsidiary.
(iv) Budget not utilized in three consecutive financial years, the
unspent amount would be transferred to a centralized
sustainability fund created by DPE.

16
2.38 The budget allocation and actual utilization of fund for CSR
activities during the last five years by Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries
are as under:—
(Rs. in crores)
Company 2007-2008 2008-2009 2009-2010
Allocated Actual Allocated Actual Allocated Actual
ECL 2.00 0.87 2.40 2.39 2.25 2.49
BCCL 2.40 1.86 2.52 2.16 2.75 1.70
CCL 4.92 3.46 7.17 4.50 8.00 7.86
WCL 4.32 3.51 4.35 3.47 4.47 2.88
SECL 8.85 7.35 9.38 11.64 10.01 7.43
MCL 9.47 9.80 8.80 10.84 9.60 14.92
NCL 4.92 3.18 4.16 2.01 6.23 2.35
NEC 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.50 0.51
TOTAL 37.00 30.15 38.90 37.13 43.81 40.14
(Rs. in crores)
Company 2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013
Amount Actual Amount Actual Total Amount
allocated allocated fund Spent
available  till Dec.-
2012
ECL 05.00 04.75 16.50 13.14 17.76 3.09
BCCL 13.75 03.15 14.50 05.53 34.67 4.77
CCL 25.69 10.98 53.88 11.00 51.46 8.29
WCL 23.00 07.13 55.82 07.86 51.31 8.89
SECL 54.00 15.70 146.44 17.66 139.02 19.02
MCL 52.04 53.45 82.00 14.47 91.98 17.37
NCL 36.00 04.35 93.42 09.25 101.20 3.42
CMPDIL 00.20 00.19 0.77 00.49 1.26 0.49
CIL/NEC 52.60 08.71 90.00 02.54 119.58 6.74
(CIL,
H.Q.)
00.05
(NEC)
TOTAL 262.28 108.42 553.33 82.00 608.34 72.08
2.39 Regarding the failure to utilize funds by CIL and its subsidiaries
for CSR activities, the Committee have been informed that most of the

17
subsidiaries and CIL have more or less common constraints. Some of
these are listed below:—
• As per DPEs guidelines planning for undertaking CSR
activities are to be prepared to ensure that the benefits reach
the economically backward and needy people of the society
in villages, panchayats, blocks or districts and planning needs
to be the long term sustainable approach. Such planning for
execution of CSR activities needs considerable time and comes
on the way of timely completion/utilization of the allocated
budget.
• After June, 2010, there was sudden increase of fund for CSR
activities. Infrastructure was not adequate to handle the entire
activities. Besides requirement for Baseline Survey before
taking up CSR activities also contribute to delay and less
expenditure.
• CSR projects are to be implemented by specialized agencies
and in order to quantify the impact made by CSR activities,
baseline data is to be created by conducting baseline survey
before start of any project. The observance of the above
formalities is time taking resulting delay in the finalization
and completion of the projects within the budgeted period.
• In order to execute CSR activities involvement of Local
Authorities are required which also needs considerable time.
• The budget provision of on introduction of CSR Policy of
CIL are much higher than that of the guideline given by DPE.
Moreover, the spillover amount of the previous year is being
carried over to the next financial year.
• Time consuming clearance from outside agency i.e. State
Government/District administration, lengthy procedure
formalities etc. Enforcement of code of conduct for various
election in different States at different times for implementing
for CSR activities also stand on the way of utilization of budget
provision under CSR.
• Mandatory Baseline survey as per DPEs guideline has been
one of the constraints in timely completion of the activities.
The proposal received for consideration under CSR did not

18
have baseline survey. As such, in conducting Need
Assessment/Base Line survey, the projects could not be
finalized in time.
• Proposals submitted by various agencies in some cases were
not in the proper format which required more time in
addressing the same.
• Some projects have suffered because of delay in clearances
from village panchayat/nagar panchayats due to inter group
rivalry etc.
• The data provided earlier was based on the actual amount
spent whereas there were number of projects which have
been sanctioned and amount committed the expenditure for
which will take place in future.
2.40 The Ministry of Coal have further informed the Committee
about some of the other constraints which have been faced in utilizing
the entire CSR budget. These are as under:—
• As per DPEs guidelines planning for undertaking CSR
activities is to be prepared to ensure that the benefits reach
the smallest unit i.e. village, panchayat, block or district and
planning needs must be of long term sustainable approach.
Such planning for execution of CSR activities needs
considerable time and comes on the way of timely completion/
utilization of the allocated budget.
• CSR projects are to be implemented by specialized agencies
and in order to quantity the impact made by CSR activities,
baseline data is to be created by conducting baseline survey
before start of any project. The observance of the above
formalities is time taking resulting delay in the finalization
and completion of the projects within the budgeted period.
• In order to execute CSR activities involvement of Local
Authorities are required which also needs considerable time.
Delay in getting NOC/Site Clearance from local authority is
an area of constraint. Some projects have suffered because
of delay in clearances from village Panchayat/Nagar
Panchayats due to inter group rivalry etc.

19
2.41 Late clearance from outside agency i.e. State Government/
District administration, lengthy procedure formalities etc. Enforcement
of code of conduct for parliament as well as assembly election in West
Bengal and different States at different times for implementing for CSR
activities also stand on the way of utilization of budget provision under
CSR.

20
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Although the prime aim of a company is to generate profit,
it has to contribute to social and environmental objectives by
integrating Social corporate responsibility as a strategic
investment into its business. The concept of Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) has drawn the attention of the policy makers
in the Government and has gained significance making
incumbent on the part of public or private enterprises to sell out
a percentage of their earnings for the welfare of the society and
the area in which they are operating. The importance of CSR
necessitated the issuance of guidelines on Corporate Social
Responsibility for Public Sector Enterprises by the Department of
Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public
Enterprises. Since the guidelines issued by the Government are
applicable to Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) only, the
Committee would like the Government to frame such guidelines
for Private Sector Enterprises also as there is growing participation
by their companies in exploitation of coal reserves and other major
infrastructural projects.
2. The Committee have given to understand that CIL has well
defined CSR Policy introduced w.e.f.  29.6.2010 based on the
guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprise for Central
PSUs on CSR in April, 2010 which is also applicable to all the
subsidiary companies of CIL. The poor and needy people of the
society living in and around coalfields/mining areas in different
parts of India are the major beneficiaries who are covered under
CSR activities. The Committee also note that CSR policy is
operational within the radius of 15 KM of the project site and areas
including Headquarters. Further, CSR activities are also undertaken
beyond mining areas within the respective State with the approval
as per norms laid down in this regard. CIL being a holding company,
execute CSR activities which are beyond jurisdiction of subsidiary
companies. Although, the CSR Guidelines issued by Department
of Public Enterprises mandates that the planning for CSR should

21
start with the identification of the activities/projects to be
undertaken the scrutiny of utilization of funds by subsidiary
companies of CIL indicate that no such advance planning has
been done. The Committee, therefore, would like CIL and its
subsidiaries to identify the CSR activities and projects well in
advance so that the same could be completed without any time and
cost overrun.
3. The Committee also note that CIL is claiming to have
fulfilled the aspiration of Society through well defined Community
Development Policy which has resulted into the harmonious
relationship between CIL and peripheral Committee, the scrutiny
of CSR activities undertaken by CIL and its subsidiaries reveals
that no perceptible progress is discernible as the funds allocated
for the purpose have not been fully utilized by the companies and
therefore much more is needed to be done to realize the objectives
of the policy.
4. The Committee have been informed that CSR activities of
CIL and its subsidiaries have made an impact on protection and
improving ecology, commitment towards improving the quality of
life of the Local Community as well as the Society at large through
activities like Community Development, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation, maintaining ecological balance, etc. The Ministry
has, however, only furnished a list of major CSR activities
undertaken by CIL and its subsidiaries during the last five year.
The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the detailed
report on each component of CSR activities undertaken by CIL and
its subsidiaries during the last five years.
5. The Committee note that CIL and its subsidiaries have not
established any primary health centre, reproductive and child health
centres/hospitals and super specialty hospitals. However, the
subsidiaries of CIL have dispensaries and hospitals at various
coalfields to look after the health needs of its employees. The
Committee would like the Ministry to specify the precise reasons
as to why the Primary Health Centre and Reproductive and Child
Health Centre and Super-specialty Hospitals have not been
established which could cater to the needs of local people/villagers
who are otherwise not the regular employees of the CIL and its
subsidiaries.

22
6. The Committee observe that Coal India subsidiaries have
proposed for establishment of five medical colleges in or around
coalfield areas in three different States i.e. Jharkhand, Odisha and
Chhattisgarh. While recommending that all necessary ground work
for setting up these medical colleges be immediately taken up, the
Committee also desire that one or two super-specialty hospital
may also be set up in and around coalfield areas along with the
proposed medical college. The Committee also expect that local
people/villagers in the peripheral area of the coal mine areas covered
by these hospitals be also given subsidized treatment in these
hospitals.
7. During the course of evidence it was brought to the notice
of the Committee that the roads in coalfield areas are in dilapidated
condition and coal companies have failed to keep them roadworthy
despite having sufficient funds to maintain them. Further, there is
scarcity of drinking water and electricity in the coalfield areas. The
Committee recommend that all kutcha roads in the coalfield areas
may be made roadworthy and a provision of drinking water and
electricity, particularly, for the people displaced from the coal areas
be immediately made and they be apprised of the action taken by
each subsidiary company of CIL in this regard. The Committee
would also like the coal companies to earmark small houses for
people displaced by coal mine activities and also to ensure that
residential quarters in the coalfield areas are not misused for illegal
activities by unscrupulous elements of the Society.
8. Since coal mining has a cascading affect on the
environment in and around the coalfield areas, it is imperative that
sufficient plantation is done in the coalfield areas to save ecology
and environment. The Committee would, therefore, like the coal
companies to carry out massive plantation, particularly, bamboo
plantation in the coalfield areas. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the subsidiary-wise plantation work already
undertaken during the last three years and that proposed to be
undertaken during 2013-14.
9. Coal India has recently entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding with Indian School of Mines (ISM), Dhanbad to
facilitate mining engineering education in close association with
the mining industry. CIL help the ISM by providing Rs. 1.05 crores
for Rajiv Gandhi Chair Professor in Mining Environment and

23
Rs. 1.27 crores for CIL Chair Professor in Under Ground Mining
towards the building corpus fund to meet the salary and other
expenses of above mentioned chairs. However, the Committee are
baffled over providing Rs. 1.05 crores and Rs. 1.27 crores for Rajiv
Gandhi Chair and CIL Chair respectively for providing salary and
other expenses. The Committee strongly feel that this amount could
have been utilized for other pressing CSR activities rather than a
corpus utilized for salary, etc. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the desirability of providing the above amount for the
aforesaid purpose. The Committee would also like to be apprised
on the status of the MoU entered with ISM.
10. The Committee note that 12 CSR works proposal in the
Dankuni Municipality in Southern Eastern Coalfield Command Area
which also include providing of 200 cycles to needy girl students
attending school at remote areas to Dankuni has been pending
since 17.2.2012. Though, all the 12 works proposed to be undertaken
under CSR have been approved in principle and communicated
and an amount of Rs. 6 lakh handed over to the Chairman Dankuni
Municipality, the Committee recommend that these works to be
expedited at the earliest and they be apprised about the present
status of all the 12 works.
11. During the course of evidence the representative of the
Ministry of Coal informed the Committee that CIL and its
subsidiaries are finding it difficult to conduct the Baseline Survey
which was mandatory for undertaking CSR activities in various
places. Now Department of Public Enterprise has amended these
guidelines which has helped CIL and its subsidiaries for fast
tracking of all the CSR projects which were pending for quite some
time. The Committee expect that at least now with amendment in
the guidelines, all the pending CSR projects will be progressed on
fast track basis.
12. CIL and its subsidiaries have structured Internal Audit
System that carry out audit of various functions of the organization
including CSR activities. Comptroller General of Accounts has also
pointed out the absence of Baseline Survey before carrying out
CSR activities and appointment of an external agency for monitoring
the CSR activity implementation. The Committee would like to
know the status report in this regard.

24
13. The representative of the Ministry of Coal has also
informed the Committee that conflicting demands are pouring in
for undertaking CSR activities from MPs/MLAs/District Collectors/
BDOs and villagers making extremely difficult for coal companies
to undertake such projects. To avoid conflict demand in future
Baseline Survey is being conducted in all places of operation and
all the activities will be taken up based on the need identified and
impact assessment done after implementation. Though the
Committee understand the difficulties being faced by coal
companies in identifying and implementing CSR projects they
desire that in the case of conflicting demands, consideration should
be given to the views/suggestions of people representatives and
also based on the impact assessment studies aimed at benefiting
society at large.
14. The Committee note that CIL has appointed Tata Institute
of Social Science (TISS) as nodal agency for CSR activities in CIL
and its subsidiaries. This will complete Baseline Survey for balance
projects in all the subsidiaries by 15th May, 2013 and the projects
will be finalized on the basis of their survey. The training
programme has been conducted by TISS among the different
executives of CIL and its Subsidiary companies who are dealing
with CSR activities. In the said training programme, the issues
related to new guideline on CSR by DPE has also been discussed.
Recently, on 31.01.2013, meeting of director’s level was held at TISS,
Mumbai on CSR activities of CIL and its subsidiaries. The
Committee recommend that the study to be conducted by TISS be
expedited immediately and they be apprised of the progress in this
regard. The Committee also desire that training to the personnel
responsible for implementing CSR activities in CIL and its
subsidiaries be made a regular feature.
15. The Ministry have informed the Committee that CIL and
its subsidiary companies are having separate CSR Cells headed by
CGM/GM for executing CSR activities as per the policy. Every Coal
Company is having separate Committees for monitoring the progress
of the CSR activities. The Committee would like to draw the
attention of the Ministry to their recommendation contained in the
24th Report (DFG 2012-13) where it was specifically recommended
that coal companies must create a discipline and cadre consisting
officers and employees for looking after the implementation of the
CSR scheme and to ensure that money allocated for CSR activities

25
is fully utilized. Keeping in view the importance of CSR, the
Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation that
a separate discipline and cadre having experience and proficiency
in the related subject be created in CIL and its subsidiaries.
16. The Committee note that few NGOs have been given
grants by CIL and its subsidiaries to carry out CSR activities in
their area. NGOs have been selected with the recommendations of
the local authorities and subsequent in-house CSR committee
recommendations. During the course of evidence it was brought to
the notice of the Committee that some NGOs and village panchayats
who have been given ambulances by the PSUs were being used for
illegal activities. It is gathered from the reply of the Ministry that
NGOs selected for CSR activities did not fulfill the suitable criteria
for selection. The Committee have been given to understand that
CIL will develop the suitable criteria for selection of NGOs for
CSR activities. Needless to say, the Committee are of the firm view
that NGOs for undertaking CSR activities should be selected
keeping in view their track record and after following vigorous
selection process.
17. The Committee note that Central Public Sector Enterprises
(CPSEs) are required to spend 3 to 5% of their profit for CSR
activities in the previous year whose profit is less than Rs. 100
crores. For those CPSEs whose net profit during previous year is
Rs. 100 crores to Rs. 500 crores they are required to spend 2 to 3%
of profit during previous year subject to a minimum of 3 crores.
All other PSUs whose profit is Rs. 500 crores and above they are
required to spend 0.5% to 2%. However, loss making companies are
not mandated to earmark specific funding for CSR activities. The
Committee are dismayed to note that guidelines issued by
Department of Public Enterprise for CSR activities are
discriminatory against those CPSEs whose net profit is less than
100 crores as they have to shell out a higher percentage of their
profit than those having projects above Rs.500 crores and therefore,
need to be revisited. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Ministry of Coal to take up the matter with Department of Public
Enterprise to revise the existing guidelines.
18. The Committee observe that in case of profit of more than
100%, PSU must spent 3 to 5%. The main object of spending in CSR
is to improve infrastructure and social activities in and around

26
operational areas of the PSUs. It is the responsibility of PSU to
eradicate illiteracy and other prejudicial activities of Society in and
around area of their operations. It is the obligation of the PSU to
bring development in rural areas, areas dominated by weaker
section, backward class and minority section. It is the duty of the
PSU that every children in and around the area gets their education
and poor children enjoy their childhood and develop their full
blossomed personality. For building up the rural India, PSU’s must
take effective role in implementing CSR activities so that good
relationship is build up between PSU’s and inhabitants of the
locality.
19. The Committee observe that annual budget of CIL and its
subsidiaries for CSR activities is allocated based on 5% of the
retained earnings of previous year subject to minimum of Rs. 5 per
tonne of coal production of previous year. In respect of CIL, as a
Holding Company, 2.5% of retained pr ofit of last year is allocated
for execution of CSR activities. The Committee would like the
Ministry to furnish the detail of the total budget allocation for CSR
activities during the last three years based on the net profit earned
during these years.
20. The Committee are constrained to observe that the
utilization of funds by CIL and its subsidiaries has been very
discouraging. During 2010-11, against the Budget allocation Rs. 262.28
crores the actual expenditure was Rs. 108.42 crores which comes to
41% only. Similarly, against the budget allocation of Rs. 553.33 crores
during 2011-12 the actual expenditure has been only Rs. 82 crores
which accounts for only 14%. Similar trends of under utilization
of CSR funds have been witnessed during 2007-08, 2008-09 and
2009-10 respectively. For the year 2012-13 the budget for CSR
activities has been enhanced to Rs. 673.74 crores. The Committee
are further dismayed to note the poor utilization of available funds
for CSR activities by Central Coalfields Ltd. as it could spent only
Rs. 8.29 crores upto December 2012 against the total available fund
of Rs. 51.46 crores. Similarly WCL, SECL and NCL could also utilize
Rs. 8.89 crores, Rs. 19.02 crores and Rs. 3.42 crores against the total
available funds of Rs. 51.31 crores, Rs. 139.02 crores and Rs. 101.20
crores respectively. The Committee deprecate non-utilisation of
budgetary funds for CSR activities by the Coal India and its
subsidiaries. In fact out of allotment of Rs. 553.33 crores in 2011-12,
Coal India and its subsidiaries could spent only Rs. 82.00 crores

27
and the same is, therefore, gross failure of duty on the part of Coal
India and its subsidiaries. Although they have said that they had
intention to spend money for CSR activities but in reality they do
not have interest to spend the money for CSR activities. It shows
their callousness. The officers who are in charge of spending money
in CSR activities should be punished for dereliction of duty. The
Committee observe that officers responsible for CSR activities
committed misconduct. The Committee are apprehensive whether
CIL and its subsidiaries would be able to spend the increased
allocation for CSR activities given the pace of expenditure during
the last five years. This gives credence to the fact that how the CSR
activities are being completely ignored by Coal India Limited which
is a sad commentary on the part of such a company which boast
of having conferred the status of the ‘Maharatna Company’. The
Committee recommend the Coal India Limited must prepare an
action plan for identification and implementation of CSR projects
on war footing during 12th Plan period. The Committee would like
Coal India Limited to shoulder more responsibility in implementing
and monitoring CSR projects being undertaken by its subsidiaries
by reviewing them at regular intervals. The Committee also desire
that funds made available under CSR to Coal PSUs be kept
separately in Nationalized Banks and released as per the approved
CSR activities.
21. The Committee observe that existing monitoring
mechanism in place in all the coal companies has been far from
satisfactory. The CGM/GM heading CSR Cell have utterly failed in
discharging their lawful duties. The Director(P) of each subsidiaries
are incompetent enough to implement the CSR schemes. The
Committee recommend that CSR cell should be headed by Board
Level Senior Officer and he should be made accountable in case
of slackness in the implementation of CSR projects and action taken
against accordingly.
22. The Ministry have cited late clearance from outside
agencies i.e.  State Government/District administration, lengthy
procedure formalities etc. enforcement of code of conduct for
parliament as well as assembly election in different states at
different times for implementing for CSR activities also stand in
the way of utilization of budgetary provision under CSR. The reply
of the Ministry that under utilization of CSR funds by coal
companies has been as a result of enforcement of code of conduct

28
for Parliament and Assembly elections in some of the States is
quite shocking. The Committee would like to remind the Ministry
and coal companies that these elections are held only once in five
years and the code of conduct remains in force only for a brief
period. This is nothing but a lame excuse for hiding the
incompetency of officers responsible for implementation of CSR
projects. The Committee would like the Ministry to facilitate coal
companies in removing the constraints being faced by coal
companies in the utilization of CSR funds which ultimately affects
the implementation of such projects.
NEW DELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
18 April, 2013 Chairman,
28 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

29
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 21 JANUARY 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1345 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Yashbant N. S. Laguri
6.  Shri Babu Lal Marandi
7. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
13. Shri Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
14. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
15. Shri Sanjay Raut

30
16. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
17. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Coal and its PSU’s
1. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Secretary, Coal
2. Smt. Zohra Chatterji, Additional Secretary (Coal)
3. Shri Sailesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary (LA)
4. Smt. Anjali Srivastava, JS&FA
5. Shri S.Narsingh Rao, Chairman, Coal India Limited (CIL)
6. Shri P.E. Ketchap, Director(Personnel), Bharat Coking Coal
Limited
7. Shri G. Singh, CMD, Central Coal Limited
8. Shri R. Sinha, CMD, Eastern Coal Limited
9. Shri A.N. Sahay, CMD, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited
10. Shri T.K. Lahiri, CMD, Northern Coalfields Limited
11. Shri D.C. Garg, CMD, Western Coalfields Limited
12. Shri S. Bhattacharya, CMD, Singareni Collieries Company
Limited
13. Shri B. Surinder Mohan, CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited
14. Miss Shanti Lata Sahu, Director, Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited
15. Shri S.K. Acharya, Director, Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited

31
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry
of Coal and other representatives of Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs to
the sitting of Committee convened in connection with briefing on the
subject, “CSR Activities in Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries”.
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal briefed the Committee
on the subject, and informed that Coal India has a well defined policy
for CSR which was introduced in June, 2010, based on the guidelines of
the Department of Public Enterprises. The Committee were informed
that the CSR activities of Coal India Ltd.’s subsidiaries companies are
implemented within a radius of 15 kilometers of the project and in respect
of Coal India Ltd. as a holding company, 2.5 per cent of the retained
profit is allocated for execution of CSR activities.
4. The Committee then discussed the points relating to shortfall
in the utilisation of the allocated funds for CSR activities by various
subsidiaries of CIL, various constraints faced by Coal India Ltd. and its
subsidiary companies in implementing CSR projects, steps taken by the
Government/CIL in implementation of CSR activities in a befitting manner.
5. The Chairman, thereafter thanked the witnesses for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information
discussed by them. He also directed them to furnish information on points
on which the Ministry could not reply during the sitting to the Committee
Secretariat, within one month.
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee
has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

32
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 26 FEBRUARY 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
3. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
4.  Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Pakauri Lal
6. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
7. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

33
WITNESSES
Ministry of Coal and its PSU’s
1. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Secretary, Ministry of Coal
2. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Coal
3. Shri Sailesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Anjali Srivastava, Joint Secretary and FA
5. Shri M.R. Anand, Economic Advisor
6. Shri D.N. Prasad, Advisor(P)
7. Shri V. Peddana, Director, Parl./Vig.
8. Shri M.K. Sharma, Director (PMS)
9. Shri S. Narsingh Rao, Chairman, Coal India Ltd.
10. Shri R. Mohan Das, Director (P&IR), CIL
11. Shri A.N. Sahay, CMD, MCL
12. Shri A.K. Debnath, CMD, CMPDIL
13. Shri T.K. Lahiry, CMD, BCCL and NCL
14. Shri D.C. Garg, CMD, WCL
15. Shri G. Singh, CMD, CCL
16. Shri N. Kumar, CMD, SECL
17. Shri R. Sinha, CMD, ECL
18. Shri B. Surender Mohan, CMD, NLC
19. Shri S. Bhattacharya, CMD, SCCL
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry
of Coal and other representatives of Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs to
the sitting of Committee convened in connection with the oral evidence
on the subject, “CSR Activities in Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries”.
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal informed the
Committee about the Ministry’s decision to regularly review the CSR
spending by CIL and its subsidiaries during its review meetings. The
Committee were also apprised that CIL has been asked to start a
process of building up of an Action Plan to implement CSR activities for
2013-14.

34
4. The Committee then broadly discussed the basis of fund
allocation for CSR Activities by Coal PSU’s vis-a-vis Department Public
Enterprises Guidelines, reasons for shortfall in the utilisation of the
allocated funds for CSR activities by various subsidiaries of CIL and the
steps taken by CIL for a time-bound implementation programme of CSR
Activities and involvement of local administration, MP’s and MLA’s in
carrying out CSR Activities in their respective constituencies.
5. The Committee also directed the Ministry of Coal to submit
detailed information on the news reports alleging child labour in coal
mines of Coal India Ltd. in Meghalaya.
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee
has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 17 APRIL 2013 IN COMMITTEE
ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1500 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee —Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
6. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
7. Shri Rajaram Pal
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
10. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
12. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
13. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
14. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu

36
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iii) Report on “CSR Activities in Coal India Limited and its
subsidiaries” relating to the Ministry of Coal.
(iv) *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Do not pertain to this Report.

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”