STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BY COAL INDIA LTD.
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Rehabilitation and
Resettlement by Coal India Ltd.” of the Ministry of Coal]
7
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COAL
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT
BY COAL INDIA LTD.
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Rehabilitation and
Resettlement by Coal India Ltd.” of the Ministry of Coal]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 December, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 December, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


CC&S No. 46
Price : Rs. 35.00
© 2010 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
12
18
19
22
26
28
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ..............................................................
INTRODUCTION...........................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report...............................................................................
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government..........................................
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee.............................................................
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited.........
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2010-11) held on 20th September, 2010..
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha).................................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2010-11)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G . Ahir
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury
6. Shri Ismail Hussain
7. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire*
8. Shri Yashbant Laguri
9. Shri Narahari Mahato
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
12. Kumari Saroj Pandey
13. Shri Ramesh Rathod
14. Shri Rakesh Sachan
15. Shri Adhi Sankar
16. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
17. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
18. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  (Lalan)
19. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
20. Shri Shibu Soren
21. Dr. G. Vivekanand
(iii)
*Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27.09.2010

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Mohd. Amin
23. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
24. Shri Jugul Kishore
25. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty
26. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao
27. Ms. Mabel Rebello
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
31. Shri R.C. Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Smt. Sunita — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Rehabilitation and Resettlement by Coal India
Ltd.” of the Ministry of Coal.
2. The Thirty Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2008-09) was presented to Lok Sabha
on 21 October, 2008. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 19th February,
2009.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 20th September, 2010.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.
  N EW D ELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
23 November , 2010 Chairman,
2 Agrahayana , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2008-09) on ‘Rehabilitation and Resettlement by Coal India
Limited’ of the Ministry of Coal which was presented to Lok Sabha/
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.10.2008.
1.2 The Report contained 10 Observations/Recommendations, Action
Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Coal in respect of all
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have
been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl.Nos. 3, 6, 7, 9 and 10
Total - 05
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Total - 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Sl.No. 1 and 4
Total - 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Sl.No. 2, 5 and 8
Total - 03
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in Chapter I and Chapter V should be
furnished to them expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee also desire that utmost importance should be
given to the implementation of the Observations/Recommendations
accepted by the Ministry. In case, it is not possible for the Ministry to
implement any recommendation(s) in letter and spirit for any reason, the
matter should be reported to the Committee in time with reasons for non-
implementation.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their Observations / Recommendations made in their
35th Report.
PROVISION OF LAND FOR LAND
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 15)
1.6 The Committee had noted that Coal India Ltd. (CIL), keeping in
view the fact that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people are
affected by forced displacement due to coal mining projects, framed its
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 to safeguard the
interests of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) so that they may regain their
original standard of living and earning capacity after a reasonable transition
period. This policy has been in operation with modifications from time to
time. This Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd.
(CIL) has now been revised in 2008 in consonance with the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy (NRRP)-2007. The Committee had
observed that even after the revision of the policy by CIL, much needs to
be done. In some cases, NRRP-2007 progressive and pragmatic vis-à-vis
CIL’s R&R Policy, 2008. For example, while NRRP contain a provision of
providing ‘land-for-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there
is no such provision in R&R Policy of CIL. Similarly, NRRP-2007 provides
for house-site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) in proportion to the actual
loss of land but not more than 250 sq.m. in rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban
area, whereas CIL’s policy offers 150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house
whether it is less or more acquired. The Committee had felt that CIL’s R&R

3
packages should have not been less than that of NRRP. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-
land’ and house-site should have been suitably incorporated/modified in R&R
Policy of CIL.
1.7 The Ministry in their replies have stated as under :
“ ‘Land-for-land’ provision has not been considered due to non-
availability of Government land. There is scarcity of land in CIL and
the land acquisition for both mining and associated infrastructure
development purposes is very difficult. Subsidiary companies of CIL
do not have extra land for implementing the ‘land-for-land’ provision.
In case of NRRP-2007, the Project Affected People (PAP) are provided
with land equal to the actual loss of area of the house upto a maximum
of 250 square meters in rural areas and 150 square meters in urban areas
whereas Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy-2008 of CIL
provides 100 square meters of land for construction of house,
irrespective of the house area whether it is less or more, in a resettlement
site where all necessary basic amenities and infrastructure are made
available.
From the foregoing, it may be concluded that, the R&R Policy-2008
of CIL is more beneficial to the comparatively less house area holder
upto 100 square meters.”
1.8 Keeping in view the fact that National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy of 2007 was more progressive and pragmatic
vis-à-vis Coal India R&R Policy, the Committee had recommended that
the provisions of National Policy on Rehabilitation and Resettlement
relating to ‘land-for-land’ and house site should be suitably modified and
incorporated in Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy of Coal India
Limited. The Ministry have responded that ‘land-for-land’ provision has
not been considered due to non-availability of Government land.
However, CIL provides 100 sq. mtrs. of land for construction of
house irrespective of the house area whether the acquired area is
less or more in a resettlement site where all the necessary basic amenities
and infrastructure are made available. In case of NRRP-2007

4
the Project Affected Persons are provided with land equal to the actual
loss of the area of the house upto a maximum of 250 sq. mtrs. in rural
areas and 150 sq. mtrs. in urban areas. The Ministry of Coal have
contended that R&R Policy 2008 of CIL is more beneficial to the
comparatively less house area holder upto 100 sq. mtrs. The Committee,
however, are not inclined to accept this view of the Ministry as it goes
against the interest of Project Affected People whose houses have been
acquired in excess of 100 sq. mtrs. The Committee strongly feel that Coal
India Limited should address this issue in right perspective and come
out with a more liberal policy. Consequently, the Committee reiterate
that CIL should come up with a provision of ‘land-for-land’ as is being
provided in National R&R Policy.
NEED TO AMEND LAW ACQUISITION ACT 1984 AND COAL
BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT,
1957
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 22)
1.9 The Committee noted that Coal India Limited acquires land for
coal mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and in certain cases, by direct
purchase. Whenever any land in any locality/area is to be acquired, a
notification under the above Acts, to that effect, is published in the Official
Gazette wherein the extent of land, so required, is notified. In case of any
objection to the acquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/
their objections within 30 days from the date of publication of notification.
It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in the country are mostly in the
far-flung areas inhabited by the tribal communities, most backward and
weaker sections of the society. They hardly have any access to the Official
Gazette wherein they could see that their lands are to be acquired for public
purposes. The Committee felt that a mechanism may be in place to ensure
that such people automatically become aware of the acquisition of their land
and if necessary, they could timely file any objection therefore within 90 days
instead of the present provision of 30 days. For this purpose local NGOs may
be involved and wide publicity through print and electronic media can also
be given. Necessary action might be taken to amend the said Acts, in this
regard, if required.

5
1.10 The Ministry in their replies have stated as follows :
“Notification for acquisition of land under different sections of Coal
Bearing Areas (Acquisition & Development) Act (CBA Act), 1957 is
published by the Central Government in the official Gazette while the
notification for acquisition of land under different sections of Land
Acquisition Act (LA Act), 1894 is published by the State Government
in the official Gazette.
Apart from above Gazette notification, the notice of acquisition under
the CBA  Act is communicated amongst the land owners by proclaiming
by beat of drums in the locality. For wider publicity regarding the land
acquisition, copies of the notice are affixed in conspicuous places like
local schools, panchayat offices, temples etc.
Notice of acquisition under Land Acquisition Act is published in 2 daily
newspapers circulating in that locality of which one is in regional
language. The District Collector also arranges to display a public notice
of the substance of such notification at convenient places in the said
locality.
Section 8(1) of the CBA Act, 1957 provides for 30 days for raising
objections to land acquisition. As and when the said Act is amended,
the recommendations of the Committee would be kept in view.”
1.11 In view of the provisions contained in the Land Acquisition
Act, 1984 and Coal Bearing areas (Acquisition and Development) Act,
1957 that before acquiring any land a notification is Published in the
official gazette to this effect and objections are invited from interested
persons within 30 days, the Committee had desired that the period for
filing objections should be raised from 30 days to 90 days. The Ministry
have informed the Committee that recommendation of the Committee
would be kept in view as and when the said Act is amended. The
Committee, however, note that the Ministry have not given any serious
thought to the recommendation of the Committee as no time frame has
been indicated in the reply for amending the Act. The Committee would
like this amendment to be affected at the earliest and they may be
informed about the same.

6
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 23)
1.12 The Committee were given to understand that CIL was in
possession of unutilized land acquired for mining and also reclaimed land.
At present, there was no provision under CBA (A&D) Act, 1957, for returning
acquired land to Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The Committee had been
informed that measures were being contemplated by CIL for returning mined
out areas and unutilized land, which were no more required by the coal
companies. The Committee hoped that necessary changes in this Act should
be effected to ensure return of unutilized land to the PAPs after proper
development. The Committee had, therefore, recommend that CIL should
plan their land requirements so that the same is judiciously and optimally
utilized.
1.13 The Ministry in their replies have stated that “Coal companies
acquire land to open up site specific coal projects. Suggestion of the
committee for proper planning on land requirement and its judicious use is
already in vogue. However, further care to ensure minimum requirement/
acquisition for maximum utilization of land will be taken up as per suggestion
of the Committee. Action has been initiated to revisit Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and consider necessary amendment
to enable use of unutilized land.”
1.14 In the absence of any provision in Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition and Development) Act 1957 to return the mined out and
unutilized land to Project Affect People, the Committee had desired the
Ministry to effect necessary changes in the Act. Although the Ministry
have stated that action has been initiated to revisit the Act and consider
necessary amendment to enable use of unutilized land but the Ministry
have not come out clearly with any time frame for bringing the
amendment in the Act. The Committee would appreciate if action in this
matter is taken up as early as possible and they would like to be informed
in this regard.
PROVISION FOR COMPULSORY EMPLOYMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 30)
1.15 The Committee noted that as per the revised R&R Policy of CIL,
one employment is released for each two acres of land acquired (irrespective

7
of category of land) subject to availability of vacancy and suitability of the
candidate in the descending order of land lost. The Committee had observed
that the assurance for providing employment is subject to availability of
vacancies and suitability of the affected persons and not as a guarantee. As
such the assurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather than
any serious efforts to achieve it. The Committee had, therefore, felt that the
PAPs should have the right to get employment in the projects as the
employment remains the most preferred option of the PAPs since it is a
permanent source of income. The Committee had therefore, recommended
that instead of conditional provision of employment, CIL should provide
employment on mandatory basis within a reasonable time. The Committee
had also recommended that the employment in lieu of acquisition of land
should be provided to the oustees in ascending order of land lost so that the
interests of the poorest of the poor are taken care of. The Committee had
further recommended that employment might be provided to the PAPs
according to their qualifications. The Committee hoped that the Ministry
would ensure that there is no discrimination against women in employment
under CIL and its subsidiaries.
1.16 The Ministry in their replies have stated that “As per the revised
R&R Policy-2008 of CIL, employment to one person is provided for each
two acres of land acquired (irrespective of category of land) subject to
availability of vacancy and suitability of the candidate in the descending order
of land lost. Coal India tries its best to accommodate as many displaced
persons as possible, through provision of employment. However, keeping in
view the productivity as well as the economic viability of the company, the
manpower has to be regulated and as such provision of unlimited vacancies
is not possible. In such a scenario, in order to compensate the left out people,
the new R&R Policy of CIL makes a provision for the payment of cash
compensation in lieu of employment to the PAPs at the rate of Rs. 2 lakhs
for 1st acre of land, Rs. 1.50 lakh for the 2nd and 3rd acre of land and
Rs. 1 lakh for land beyond 3 acre in addition to the land compensation paid
under Coal Bearing Areas Act and Land Acquisition Act. Regarding offer of
employment, it may be pointed out that, least land loser does not necessarily
mean least land holder. Employment in terms of descending order is
considered so that highest land loser, who is most affected, gets preference.

8
If preference is given in ascending order of land lost then there are chances
of land getting distributed amongst the family members to increase the
numbers of land oustees with least holding of land. The matter relating to
employment of PAPs as per their qualifications, is under consideration of
CIL.”
1.17 The Committee had recommended that instead of conditional
provision of employment to the Project Affected People, Coal India
Limited should provide employment on mandatory basis within a
reasonable time according to their qualifications. The Ministry in reply
have explained that keeping in view the productivity as well as the
economic viability of the company, the manpower has to be regulated
and as such provision of unlimited vacancies is not possible and in order
to compensate the left out people, the new R&R policy of Coal India
Limited makes a provision for payment of cash compensation in lieu of
employment. The Committee hardly need to emphasise that employment
is a permanent source of income for PAPs whereas cash compensation
is a temporary measure. Needless to say that the oustees should be in
a better position to lead a reasonably good life and earn livelihood in
their rehabilitated locations. The Committee are, therefore, inclined to
conclude that providing compulsory employment to PAPs would to a
certain extent help the uprooted people. Consequently, the Committee,
reiterate that compulsory employment may be provided to the PAPs
according to the qualifications. The Committee would like to be apprised
in this regard.
COAL INDIA TO STUDY COMPENSATION PACKAGE PROVIDED
BY PRIV ATE PLAYERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 38)
1.18 The Committee found that CIL makes the payment of
compensation for the loss of means of livelihood of the Project Affected
Persons (PAPs) as per their R&R Policy in vogue. In lieu of employment,
the policy provides for cash compensation of Rs. 2 lakh for 1st acre of land,
Rs. 1.50 lakh for the 2nd and 3rd acres of land and Rs. 1 lakh for beyond
3 acres in addition to the compensation paid under CBA & LA Acts. The
Committee were not satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate

9
to acre of land acquired. The Committee desired that compensation should
have been paid equally for each acre of land which will create a sense of
financial security in the minds of PAPs. The Committee would also like CIL
to come with a package of compensation that yields a permanent source of
income not only to the head of the family but also to other dependants of
the family.
The Committee had noted that the private players are able to overcome
the land acquisition by offering attractive compensation package, whereas
the CIL and its subsidiaries take into consideration registration value of the
land, which is far below the prevailing market rate for fixing compensation.
The Committee apprehended that CIL may not be in a position to offer
attractive rate to the land oustees. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended that coal subsidiaries should become competitive vis-à-vis
private players in their approach while dealing with land acquisition. The
Committee also recommended that CIL and its subsidiaries should become
more flexible in finalizing the relief packages according to the prevailing
ground realities. For this it may be desirable that CIL may study and analyse
packages being offered by the private parties to the PAPs.
1.19 The Ministry in their replies have stated as under:
“Cash compensation in lieu of employment to the land losers is provided
as per the norms of the concerned State Government. If there is no
such provision of State Government, then cash compensation is given
to the land losers which has recently been enhanced to Rs 2.00 lakh
for 1st acre (minimum 0.50 lakh), Rs 1.50 lakh for 2nd & 3rd acre
and Rs 1.00 lakh for the land beyond 3 acre.
Payment of compensation equally for each acre of land has not been
considered to ensure better payment to lesser land loser. In addition to
compensation of land in lieu of employment, CIL provides the following
additional benefits as under:
(i) Subsistence allowance of 25 days Minimum Agricultural Wages
(MAW) as per NRRP-2007.

10
(ii) One time financial assistance of Rs 25000/- for construction of
working shed or shop to the displaced rural artisan, small trader
or self employed person.
(iii) Affected displaced family having cattle shall be given financial
assistance of Rs 15000/ for construction of cattle shed.
(iv) Tribal community is treated as per the provision in the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy (NRRP) -2007
The R&R Policy-2008 of CIL has been formulated after careful
examination and giving due consideration to all related aspects
concerning land acquisition and rehabilitation of land oustees.
However, the suggestion of the Committee concerning the study to be
made by CIL is under consideration.
1.20 Since the private players are able to overcome the problem of
land acquisition by offering attractive compensation package, the
Committee had desired that Coal India Ltd. might study and analyze
the packages being offered by the private parties to the PAPs. The
Committee have been informed that the R&R Policy 2008 of CIL has
been formulated after careful examination and giving due consideration
to all related aspects concerning land acquisition and rehabilitation of
land oustees. However, the suggestion of the Committee concerning the
study to be made by CIL is under consideration. The Committee would
like the Ministry to apprise them about the findings of such a study and
resultant action taken thereon.
PROVISION FOR SEPARATE ALLOCATION OF FUND FOR R&R
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para No. 60)
1.21 The Committee noted that funds for implementation of R&R
schemes were provided in the overall budget under the head of Account
“Land” and no separate budget provision was made for this purpose. The
Committee felt that implementation and progress of R&R schemes could be
well monitored if separate allocation was made therefor. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that a separate budgetary head should be made for
allocation of funds for R&R schemes.

11
1.22 The Ministry in their replies have stated that “R&R budget is
included in Mine Development head in Project Reports of the companies.
These provisions are kept along with land, the provision for infrastructure
etc. There is no separate budget head for R&R. The recommendation of the
Committee for separate budgetary provision for R&R activities is under
consideration of CIL. However, a separate fund for Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) has been created in the modified R&R Policy-2008 of
CIL.”
1.23 With a view to have proper monitoring of implementation
and progress of R&R Scheme, the Committee had recommended to
create a separate budgetary head for this purpose. The Ministry in their
written reply have informed the committee that there is no separate
budget for R&R and the same is included in Mine Development Head
in project reports of the companies. The Ministry have, however, stated
that the recommendation of the Committee for separate budgetary
provision for R&R activities is under consideration of CIL. The
Committee would like the Ministry to speed up the matter and they
would like to be informed in this regard.

12
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
The Committee are given to understand that CIL is in possession of
unutilized land acquired for mining and also reclaimed land. At present, there
is no provision under CBA (A&D) Act, 1957, for returning acquired land
to Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The Committee have been informed that
measures are being contemplated by CIL for returning mined out areas and
unutilized land, which are no more required by the coal companies. The
Committee hope that necessary changes in this Act should be effected to
ensure return of unutilized land to the PAPs after proper development. The
Committee also recommend that CIL should plan their land requirements so
that the same is judiciously and optimally utilized.
Action Taken
Coal companies acquire land to open up site specific coal projects.
Suggestion of the committee for proper planning on land requirement and
its judicious use is already in vogue. However, further care to ensure
minimum requirement/acquisition for maximum utilization of land will be
taken up as per suggestion of the Committee.
Action has been initiated to revisit Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and
Development) Act, 1957 and consider necessary amendment to enable use
of unutilized land.
[Ministry of Coal. O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
(Please see para 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee note that around 4500 cases of compensation are
pending with CIL and its subsidiaries. The Committee also note that CIL and

13
its subsidiaries propose to set up a mechanism for dealing with the disputes
of PAPs. The Committee, therefore, desire that the CIL and its subsidiaries
should expedite the establishment of mechanism and settle the pending cases
in a time bound manner. The Committee also desire the Ministry to monitor
the progress in this regard.
The Committee have been apprised of the difficulties such as
non-availability of updated record of rights, delay in authentication of
ownership by the State Governments, non-production of relevant documents
to establish ownership etc. being faced in disbursing compensation to PAPs.
The Committee feel that application of Information Technology tools like
e-governance, e-seva etc. in land reforms can be of immense help to overcome
these difficulties. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Coal should pursue the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land
Resources) to carry out land reforms like updating relevant land records and
establishing authenticity of land ownership rights of concerned PAPs in the
coal bearing States.
Action Taken
Subsidiary companies of CIL are carrying out regular follow up with
the land owners for disposal of compensation cases. Payment camps are also
being organised in the locality . Besides, help and support of the State Govt.
is also taken for this purpose.
For dealing with disputes, a provision for a committee comprising the
nominee of the State Government, a nominee of the project General Manager,
a representative of PAPs, an independent party such as a local community
leader, a retired judge or principal of a local educational institution has been
kept in new R and R Policy of CIL to examine the grievances of the PAPs
and propose corrective action as required.
The Ministry has brought to the notice of Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Land Resources), the recommendations of the
Committee on land reforms like updating relevent land records and
establishing authenticity etc., for early action in the matter.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]

14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
The Committee have been apprised that as a part of compensation
package CIL and its subsidiaries would assist PAPs to establish non-farm self-
employment through provision of infrastructure, petty contracts or formation
of cooperatives. The Committee feel that success of the above initiatives is
possible only if the PAPs are provided proper marketing facilities for their
products. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL should provide
marketing facilities to PAPs for their products and to instill entrepreneurial
skills in them. For this, active support and participation of NGOs and State
Government should be obtained.
Action Taken
As a part of non-farm self-employment, training on income generation
and entrepreneurship development programme is being conducted by CIL for
the PAPs. They are also being provided necessary infrastructural and other
supports to initiate the self employment scheme. Local marketing facility of
their products is also available in and the surrounding areas of the mine
(eg: mine colony, guest houses, offices, mine hospital, dispensary etc).
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
The Committee observe that problems relating to land acquisition and
compensation is more pronounced in the major coal bearing States. 34 R and
R Schemes in Coal India Ltd (CIL) and its subsidiaries are stated to have
been spilled over from 10th Five Year Plan to 11th Five Year Plan and are
under progress. The Committee desire that ongoing R and R Schemes/projects
should be implemented without any further delay. In addition, some projects
of SECL namely Amera OC, Amadand OC and Mahan OC could not be
started due to slow progress in R and R/land acquisition activities. The
reasons for poor implementation of R and R schemes might be either the land
oustees are unwilling to shift or non-acceptance of compensation packages
offered to them or faulty approach to the Project Affected Persons (PAPs).
The Committee feel that sincere efforts for speedy clearance of land

15
acquisition and compensation cases are need of the hour so that coal
production is not affected. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Coal should facilitate CIL and its subsidiaries in close
coordination with Governments of coal bearing States in land acquisition and
settlement of compensation cases.
Action Taken
Implementation of some of the projects, both mining and non-mining,
are delayed due to problems in land acquisition and obtaining its physical
possession. Regular follow up is being done with the land losers for their
acceptance of compensation and R and R benefits. Coal India has formulated
new R and R Policy-2008 with a view to offering better compensation
packages to the land losers.
The subsidiary coal companies of CIL are also interacting with the
concerned State Government for expeditious acquisition of land and
obtaining its physical possession to implement the projects in time.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee have been informed that CIL and its subsidiaries
undertake Community Development activities in the coal mining areas and
earmark 1 to 2½ percent of their retained earning on such activities. During
the last seven years, there had been lesser utilization of budgetary funds
earmarked for Community Development. The Committee are unhappy over
dismal performance of CIL and its subsidiaries in utilization of funds
earmarked for Community Development. The Committee, therefore, desire
that CIL and its subsidiaries should make sincere efforts to utilize the
earmarked funds fully for Community Development activities. Welfare of
PAPs should be taken care of under various programmes/schemes with a
major emphasis on providing facilities for higher and technical education to
the children of PAPs.
Action Taken
Under the existing Community and Peripheral Development Scheme of
CIL and its subsidiaries, Re. 1/- per tonne of coal production has been fixed

16
for Community Development Programme (CDP). Various activities are
normally taken up in the peripheral villages within a radius of 8 Kms from
the mine which can be extended to district towns also on the recommendation
of the Community Development Committee.
The estimated budget and related actual expenditure for the year
2007-2008 on C.D.P., including primary budget for the year 2008-09 are as
under:—
(Figures in Rs. lakh)
Company BE Expenditure Primary Budget
2007-08 2007-08 2008-09
ECL 400.00 387.68 480.00
BCCL 240.00 185.78 252.00
CCL 492.00 345.80 717.00
WCL 439.07 351.46 435.12
SECL 885.00 734.66 937.91
MCL 946.47 980.20 1026.47
NCL 492.17 318.14 416.56
NEC 12.00 12.00 13.00
CMPDL – – 10.00
Total 3906.71 3315.72 4288.06
It may be pertinent to mention here that the total budget in the year
2006-07 on C.D.P. was Rs. 3479.48 lakh against which expenditure incurred
was Rs.2338.76 lakh whereas in the year 2007-08 the total budget has been
increased to Rs. 3906.71 lakh and the expenditure incurred has also increased
considerably to the tune of Rs. 3315.72 lakh. Thus it can be seen that
expenditure on C.D.P. has increased significantly in comparison to the year
2006-07. Further it may be mentioned that the coal companies have tried to
achieve the budgeted target and every effort is being made by the companies

17
to ensure 100 percent utilization of the allocated budget before the end of
the financial year.
Apart from the existing Community and Peripheral Development
Schemes, CIL has introduced a Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Scheme to intensify the development activities in and around the villages
where land is being acquired. A provision of 1 to 2.5 percent of retained
earnings will be made initially depending upon the requirement. The funds
would be utilized for creation of social assets, developing infrastructure,
creating Institutions and to conduct various welfare programme for women/
children.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]

18
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
— NIL –

19
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The Committee note that Coal India Ltd (CIL), keeping in view the fact
that lives and livelihoods of a large number of people are affected by forced
displacement due to coal mining projects, framed its Rehabilitation and
Resettlement (R&R) Policy in 1994 to safeguard the interests of the Projected
Affected People (PAPs) so that they may regain their original standard of
living and earning capacity after a reasonable transition period. This policy
has been in operation with modifications from time to time. This
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy of Coal India Ltd. (CIL) has
now been revised in 2008 in consonance with the National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy (NRRP) 2007. The Committee, however, observe that
even after the revision of the policy by CIL, much needs to be done. In some
cases, NRRP-2007 is more progressive and pragmatic vis-à-vis CIL’s R&R
Policy 2008. For example, while NRRP contains a provision of providing
‘land-for-land’ subject to availability of the Government land, there is no such
provision in R&R Policy of CIL. Similarly, NRRP-2007 provides for house-
site to Project Affected Persons (PAPs) in proportion to the actual loss of
land but not more than 250 sq.m. in rural area and 50 sq.m. in urban area,
whereas CIL’s policy offers 150 sq.m. irrespective of the size of house
whether it is less or more acquired. The Committee feel that CIL’s R&R
packages should not be less than that of NRRP. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these provisions of NRRP relating to ‘land-for-land’ and
house-site should be suitably incorporated/modified in R&R Policy of CIL.
Action Taken
‘Land for land ’ provision has not been considered due to non
availability of government land. There is scarcity of land in CIL and the land

20
acquisition for both mining and associated infrastructure development
purposes is very difficult. Subsidiary companies of CIL do not have extra land
for implementing the ‘land for land’ provision.
In case of NRRP-2007, the Project Affected People (PAPs) are provided
with land equal to the actual loss of area of the house upto a maximum
of 250 square meters in rural areas and 150 square meters in urban areas
whereas Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy-2008 of CIL provides
100 square meters of land for construction of house, irrespective of the
house area whether it is less or more, in a resettlement site where all necessary
basic amenities and infrastructure are made available.
From the foregoing, it may be concluded that, the R&R Policy-2008
of CIL is more beneficial to the comparatively less house area holder upto
100 square meters.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
(Please see para 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
The Committee note that as per the revised R&R Policy of CIL, one
employment is released for each two acres of land acquired (irrespective of
category of land) subject to availability of vacancy and suitability of the
candidate in the descending order of land lost. The Committee observe that
the assurance for providing employment is subject to availability of vacancies
and suitability of the affected persons and not as a guarantee. As such the
assurance of employment is often found as a lip-service rather than any
serious efforts to achieve it. The Committee, therefore, feel that the PAPs
should have the right to get employment in the projects as the employment
remains the most preferred option of the PAPs since it is a permanent source
of income. The Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of conditional
provision of employment, CIL should provide employment on mandatory
basis within a reasonable time. The Committee also recommend that the
employment in lieu of acquisition of land should be provided to the oustees
in ascending order of land lost so that the interests of the poorest of the poor
are taken care of. The Committee further recommend that employment may
be provided to the PAPs according to their qualifications. The Committee

21
hope that the Ministry would ensure that there is no discrimination against
women in employment under CIL and its subsidiaries.
Action Taken
As per the revised R&R Policy-2008 of CIL, employment to one person
is provided for each two acres of land acquired (irrespective of category of
land) subject to availability of vacancy and suitability of the candidate in the
descending order of land lost. Coal India tries its best to accommodate as
many displaced persons as possible, through provision of employment.
However, keeping in view the productivity as well as the economic viability
of the company, the manpower has to be regulated and as such provision of
unlimited vacancies is not possible. In such a scenario, in order to compensate
the left out people, the new R&R Policy of CIL makes a provision for the
payment of cash compensation in lieu of employment to the PAPs at the rate
of Rs. 2 lakhs for 1st acre of land, Rs. 1.50 lakh for the 2nd and 3rd acre
of land and Rs. 1 lakh for land beyond 3 acre in addition to the land
compensation paid under Coal Bearing Areas Act and Land Acquisition Act.
Regarding offer of employment, it may be pointed out that, least land
loser does not necessarily mean least land holder. Employment in terms of
descending order is considered so that highest land loser, who is most
affected, gets preference. If preference is given in ascending order of land
lost then there are chances of land getting distributed amongst the family
members to increase the numbers of land oustees with least holding of land.
The matter relating to employment of PAPs as per their qualifications,
is under consideration of CIL.
Regarding employment of women, no gender discrimination is done in
the R&R Policy of CIL.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
(Please see para 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report)

22
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AW AITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
The Committee note that Coal India Limited acquires land for coal
mining under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 and in certain cases, by direct
purchase. Whenever any land in any locality/area is to be acquired, a
notification under the above Acts, to that effect, is published in the Official
Gazette wherein the extent of land, so required, is notified. In case of any
objection to the acquisition of such land, the interested person(s) can file his/
their objections within 30 days from the date of publication of notification.
It is pertinent to note that the coal reserves in the country are mostly in the
far-flung areas inhabited by the tribal communities, most backward and
weaker sections of the society. They hardly have any access to the official
Gazette wherein they could see that their lands are to be acquired for public
purposes. The Committee feel that a mechanism may be in place to ensure
that such people automatically become aware of the acquisition of their land
and if necessary, they could timely file any objection therefore within 90 days
instead of the present provision of 30 days. For this purpose local NGOs may
be involved and wide publicity through print and electronic media can also
be given. Necessary action may be taken to amend the said Acts, in this
regard, if required.
Reply of the Government
Notification for acquisition of land under different sections of Coal
Bearing Areas (Acquisition & Development) Act (CBA  Act), 1957 is published
by the Central Government in the official Gazette while the notification for
acquisition of land under different sections of Land Acquisition Act (LA Act),
1894 is published by the State Government in the official Gazette.
Apart from above Gazette notification, the notice of acquisition under
the CBA Act is communicated amongst the land owners by proclaiming by

23
beat of drums in the locality. For wider publicity regarding the land
acquisition, copies of the notice are affixed in conspicuous places like local
schools, panchayat offices, temples etc.
Notice of acquisition under Land Acquisition Act is published in 2 daily
news-papers circulating in that locality of which one is in regional language.
The District Collector also arranges to display a public notice of the substance
of such notification at convenient places in the said locality.
Section 8(1) of the CBA Act, 1957 provides for 30 days for raising
objections to land acquisition. As and when the said Act is amended, the
recommendations of the Committee would be kept in view. Ministry of Coal.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
(Please see para 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee find that CIL makes the payment of compensation for
the loss of means of livelihood of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) as per
their R&R Policy in vogue. In lieu of employment, the policy provides for
cash compensation of Rs. 2 lakh for 1st acre of land, Rs. 1.50 lakh for the
2nd and 3rd acres of land and Rs. 1 lakh for beyond 3 acres in addition to
the compensation paid under CBA & LA Acts. The Committee are not
satisfied with compensation as it is not proportionate to acre of land acquired.
The Committee, therefore, desire that compensation should be paid equally
for each acre of land which will create a sense of financial security in the
minds of PAPs. The Committee would also like CIL to come with a package
of compensation that yields a permanent source of income not only to the
head of the family but also to other dependants of the family.
The Committee note that the private players are able to overcome the
land acquisition by offering attractive compensation package, whereas the
CIL and its subsidiaries take into consideration registration value of the land,
which is far below the prevailing market rate for fixing compensation. The
Committee apprehend that CIL may not be in a position to offer attractive
rate to the land oustees. The Committee, therefore, recommend that coal
subsidiaries should become competitive vis-à-vis private players in their

24
approach while dealing with land acquisition. The Committee also
recommend that CIL and its subsidiaries should become more flexible in
finalizing the relief packages according to the prevailing ground realities. For
this it may be desirable that CIL may study and analyse packages being
offered by the private parties to the PAPs.
Action Taken
Cash compensation in lieu of employment to the land losers is provided
as per the norms of the concerned State Government. If there is no such
provision of State Government, then cash compensation is given to the land
losers which has recently been enhanced to Rs 2.00 lakh for 1st acre
(minimum 0.50 lakh), Rs 1.50 lakh for 2nd & 3rd acre and Rs 1.00 lakh for
the land beyond 3 acre.
Payment of compensation equally for each acre of land has not been
considered to ensure better payment to lesser land loser. In addition to
compensation of land in lieu of employment, CIL provides the following
additional benefits as under:
(i) Subsistence allowance of 25 days Minimum Agricultural Wages
(MAW) as per NRRP-2007.
(ii) One time financial assistance of Rs 25000/- for construction of
working shed or shop to the displaced rural artisan, small trader
or self employed person.
(iii) Affected displaced family having cattle shall be given financial
assistance of Rs 15000/ for construction of cattle shed.
(iv) Tribal community is treated as per the provision in the National
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy (NRRP) -2007
The R&R Policy-2008 of CIL has been formulated after careful
examination and giving due consideration to all related aspects concerning
land acquisition and rehabilitation of land oustees. However, the suggestion
of the Committee concerning the study to be made by CIL is under
consideration.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
(Please see para 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report)

25
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
The Committee note that funds for implementation of R&R schemes
are provided in the overall budget under the head of Account “Land” and
no separate budget provision is made for this purpose. The Committee feel
that implementation and progress of R&R schemes can be well monitored
if separate allocation is made therefor. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that a separate budgetary head should be made for allocation of funds for
R&R schemes.
Action Taken
R&R budget is included in Mine Development head in Project Reports
of the companies. These provisions are kept along with land, the provision
for infrastructure etc. There is no separate budget head for R&R.
The recommendation of the Committee for separate budgetary
provision for R&R activities is under consideration of CIL. However, a
separate fund for Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) has been created in
the modified R&R Policy-2008 of CIL.
[Ministry of Coal, O.M. No. 20011/13/2008-IF, dated 19/02/2008]
(Please see para 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report)
  N EW D ELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
20 September , 2010 Chairman,
29 Bhadra , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

26
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 20th SEPTEMBER, 2010 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI.
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1500 hours.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee —  Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Ismail Hussain
4. Shri Yashbant Laguri
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Shri Ramesh Rathod
7. Shri Rakesh Sachan
8. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh(Lalan)
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
11. Dr. G. Vivekanand
12. Shri Mohd. Amin
13. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
14. Ms. Mabel Rebello
15. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
16. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Smt. Sunita — Deputy Secretary
3. Md. Aftab Alam — Under Secretary

27
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting
of the Committee.
2. ** ** ** **
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the Draft Action Taken Report
on Action Taken by the Ministry of Coal on the recommendations contained
in the 35th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel viz. “Rehabilitation and Resettlement by Coal India Limited” Ministry
of Coal.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize these Reports
after making consequential change arising out of factual verification by the
concerned Ministries and to present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
5. ** ** ** **
6. ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.

28
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH RE-
PORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 10
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3, 6, 7, 9 and 10) 5
Percentage of total 50%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies
(vide recommendation at S1. No. Nil) 00
Percentage of total Nil
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 1 & 4) 2
Percentage of total 20%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. 2, 5 & 8) 3
Percentage of total 30%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”