 
 
48 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"FUNCTIONING OF MSTC LTD." 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth  Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-EIGHTH   REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2013/AGRAHAYANA, 1935(Saka) 
 


 
 
FORTY-EIGHTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
"FUNCTIONING OF MSTC LTD." 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   17.12.2013 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2013/Agrahayana 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
CC&S No. 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v) 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
 
22 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
23 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
 
25 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 10.12.2013…………………………………………... 
 
       30 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
     32 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Additional Director 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendation s contained in the Fortieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Functioning of 
MSTC Ltd."  pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2013. Replies of the 
Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 4th November, 2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on  10.12.2013.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I  
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
      16 December, 2013                                                                   Chairman 
      25 Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on "Functioning of MSTC Ltd." relating to the 
Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha on 29.08.2013 and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.08.2013. 
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry  of 
Steel in respect of all the 16 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 4th November, 201 3. These have been categorised as 
follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 12, 14, 15 and 16 
         Total – 10 
                (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. No. 6 
Total – 01  
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 8 and 13 
Total – 02 
                         (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. No. 9, 10 and 11 
                       Total – 03 
     (Chapter V) 
 

 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given 
to implementation  of the Observations/Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for 
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
on some of their observations/recommendations made in the Fortieth 
Report.  
 
A. LEVEL PLAYING FIELD FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTOR 
COMPANIES 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
5. The Committee noted that MSTC ha d been facing stiff competition 
in volume of business in e -commerce services due to increasing service 
charges and challenges from private sector service providers who were 
quoting lower rates. Although most of the PSUs and Gove rnment 
Departments were availing the services of MSTC on nomination basis, of 
late some PSUs are selecting service provider through tendering wherein 
small players having no infrastructure and expertise quote very low rates 
and get the tender. Taking note of the fact that in a number of cases, 
Works/Purchase/Consultancy contracts by Government of India/PSUs 
were awarded on nomination basis, CVC had issued guidelines (Circular 
No. 15.5.2006 dated 9.5.2006) whereby the practice of award of works to 
PSUs on no mination basis by Govt. of India/PSUs ha d been asked to be 
reviewed forthwith to bring greater transparency and accountability in 
award of such contracts. The Ministry had also shown its reluctance in the 
matter by citing the CVC guidelines. Although, the Committee had taken 
note of the present policy of the Government wherein it was not 
mandatory to award work from one PSU to another PSU and particularly 

 
 
when the Company like MSTC Ltd. wa s consistently earning profit, the 
Committee felt that the State Gove rnments and PSUs should continue to 
award work to MSTC on nomination basis as was being done by them 
hitherto. As pointed by MSTC Ltd., that some companies having no IT 
infrastructure and expertise also grab contracts at much lower service 
charges which ot herwise cannot sustain with profound financial health of 
the Company as at times it may not cover minimum expenditure incurred, 
the Committee would like the Government to fix minimum service charges 
to avoid unhealthy competition as these private players were not bound to 
comply with CVC guidelines. The Committee also recommend ed that not 
only CVC guidelines, but all other Government of India Guidelines 
including guidelines issued by the Dept. of Electronics for e -commerce 
must also be part of open tenders floated by PSUs for e -commerce 
services to ensure level playing fields both for PSUs like MSTC Ltd. and 
private players. The Committee  desired that matter be taken up by 
Ministry of Steel/MSTC Ltd. at appropriate level in the Government to 
ensure compliance of their recommendation.  
 
6. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
"When the Ministry of Steel/MSTC approach other 
Departments/Organizations for giving e -auction/ e -procurement 
work to MSTC, compliance of guidelines of Ministry of Information 
Technology/ CVC etc. by MSTC is highlighted." 
7.  Taking note of the fact that some companies having no IT 
infrastructure and expertise grab e -commerce contracts at much 
lower service charges which otherwise cannot sus tain with 
profound financial health of the company as at times it may not 
cover minimum expenditure incurred, the Committee had 
recommended that Go vernment should fix minimum services 
charges to avoid unhealthy competition. The Committee had also 
recommended that not only CVC Guidelines but all other 
Government of India Guidelines including those issued by the 
Departments of Electronics for e -commerce must also be part of 
open tenders floated by different departments/PSUs for e -
commerce services to ensure level playing fields both for PSUs like 

 
 
MSTC Ltd. and private players.  They are, however, concerned to 
note that the reply of the Government is silent on the same.  While 
reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry of Steel should immediately take up the matter at 
the appropriate level in the Government to fix minimum service 
charges and also ensure that all departments/organizations issue 
e-auction tenders complying with guidelines of Ministry of 
Information and Technol ogy/CVC and this should not be 
highlighted by MSTC Ltd. itself  while participating in bids for e -
auction/e-procurement works. Performance of e -auction by MSTC 
is highly satisfactory. 
 
B. STATUS OF RECOVERY AGAINST EXPORT OF GOLD 
JEWELLERY 
 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 9, 10 & 11 
 
8. The Committee noted that during 2007, MSTC Ltd. had entered into 
a new business of export of gems and gold jewellery on post shipment 
basis. MSTC Ltd. exported plain gold jewellery worth Rs. 260.63 crore 
backed by the Export Cred it Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) policy to 
Dubai based buyers in 2007 -08 against which full recoveries were made. 
During 2008-09, jewellery worth Rs 638 Crore was exported to 47 foreign 
buyers through 6 associates based in Mumbai. The Committee also note d 
that the jewellery exported during 2008-2009, the foreign buyers failed to 
make payment amounting to Rs. 598.63 crore against the exports citing 
economic slow down as the main reason. Total export outstanding was Rs. 
600 Crore from 46 foreign buyers against which a total amount of Rs. 475 
Crore (upto 80% of the export value) was paid to 6 associate suppliers. 
The Committee further note d that as per Govt. of India, Exim Policy, 
ECGC’s insurance was mandatory before any agency took up export on 
Document Against Acceptance (DAA). The Corporation ha d also initiated 
cases against all the foreign buyers – 44 in UAE and one each in Kuwait 
and Singapore. The Committee found that adequate safeguards were not 
taken by MSTC Ltd. before venturing into a new territory of business and 
no elaborate study about the risk involved and credentials of those with 
whom business ha d to be transacted was carefully carried out by the 

 
 
Company. Moreover, as the foreign buyers cited economic slowdown as 
the main reason for failing to make payment, the Committee also felt that 
MSTC Ltd. had not properly analyzed the demand of gold jewellery in 
foreign markets before venturing into export business. The Committee felt 
that this vital aspect was conveniently overlooked by MSTC Ltd. The 
Committee fel t that had due diligence been taken in this  matter, the 
situation would had been different. Taking note of the fact that Committee 
on Public Undertaking of Parliament ha d already examined the audit 
observations on the issue and had submitted a Report to Parliament on 30 
April, 2013, the Committee while endorsing the observation made by 
them (Committee on Public Undertaking) would also like to be apprised of 
the latest development like recovery of payments as well as corrective 
steps taken so that no such misadventure business activities do not recur 
in future.  
 
 
9. The Committee fou nd that MSTC Ltd. had reportedly took the 
Export Credit Guarantee Corporation’s insurance policy and got all its 
exporters verified from Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) 
before undertaking exports in United Arab Emirates (UAE) and elsewhere 
as per limits approved by ECGC. Despite this, on occurrence of default, 
ECGC refused to settle the claim. In pursuance of this, Secretary, Ministry 
of Steel had  reportedly written to Secretary, Ministry of Commerce on 
14/03/2013 proposing a joint meeting along with CMD, ECGC and CMD, 
MSTC Ltd. for expeditious settlement of MSTC’s Claim by ECGC and 
avoiding costly litigation. The Committee were further informed that 
Secretary, Commerce vide letter dated 04/04/2013 forwarded a note from 
ECGC giving reasons for rejection of MSTC’s claim expressing difficulties to 
re-consider the decision. MSTC Ltd. ha d since forwarded its comments on 
ECGC’s contention to Ministry of Steel on 03/05/2013. Though, the matter 
had been taken up with National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission (NCDRC) in 2010 and was reported to be at procedural stage, 
the Committee desired expeditious settlement of the matter by according 
top priority by all concerned. The Committee  recommended that a joint 
meeting of Secretary Steel, Secretary Commer ce alongwith CMD, MSTC 
Ltd. and representatives of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation should be 

 
 
held immediately to resolve contentious issues and an amicable solution 
be arrived at in the matter.  
 
10. The Committee had  also been given to understand that  MSTC Ltd. 
had invoked arbitration proceeding against all the 6 Associate Suppliers 
through whom exports were done. Out of six arbitration cases against the 
Associate Suppliers, awards had  been received in respect of three cases, 
all in favour of MSTC Ltd.  for a total amount of Rs. 347.23 crore. 
Arbitration for remaining three associates wa s in different stages of 
hearing. The Committee would like to be apprised of the receipt of Rs. 
347.23 crore as awarded to them in arbitration process and the latest 
progress in respect of remaining 3 associate suppliers.  
 
11. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
"Status of Recovery of Outstanding for Export of Gold 
Jewellery as on 29.09.2013 
i. Cases against Foreign buyers:- 
MSTC has received 43 (Forty three) decrees (42 in UAE & 1 in 
Singapore) in it’s favour amounting to Rs. USD 131,690,479 /- 
equivalent to Rs. 672.30 Cr (approx) towards its claim against 46 
Foreign Buyers. 
MSTC has given instructions to M/s Al Shamsi & Part ners, MSTC’s 
advocates in Dubai to proceed on execution of all the cases after 
publication of the judgment by the court. The execution cases are 
under progress in various stages.   
The following foreign Buyers have gone on appeal against the 
judgment and the progress of such cases is detailed below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Buyer 
                       Remarks 
1. Al Sidra Jewellery. Expert has submitted his report & the Court posted 
the next hearing to the 20.10.2013 for both parties 
to submit comments on the Expert’s Report. 
2. Hadir Projects & 
Environment 
Systems. 
The court rejected their appeal and upheld the 
judgment at the court of First Instance. However, 
MSTC is yet to receive the copy of the text of the 

 
 
judgment. 
3. Mine Gold & 
Jewellery. 
The Court adjourned the hearing to the 30.10.2013 
for the Expert to submit his supplementary report. 
4. Zeeba Gems Ltd. The court adjourned the hearing to the 09.10.2013 
to join the file from the court of First Instance to the 
Appeal Court file. 
5. Ghanim Trading.  MSTC filed an appeal at the cassation court and the 
number allocated is 482/2013. The court did not fix 
the date of hearing yet. 
6. Golden Place 
Jewellery LLC 
The opposite side has filed an Appeal and the 
Number allocated is 1022 of 2013. The f irst hearing 
has been posted to the 31.07.2013, wherein they 
had submitted their detailed Memorandum of 
Appeal. MSTC has submitted memorandum to the 
court. Posted for judgment on 2.10.2013. 
 
ii. Status of Arbitration Cases as on 12.09.2013:-            
Out of the 6 Arbitration cases filed against Associate Suppliers, 
MSTC has so far received 3 Awards in our favour as detailed below: 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of Associate Suppliers Date of 
Award 
Award value 
1 Space Mercantile Company Pvt. Ltd. 15.03.2013 Rs. 277.72 cr. 
2 Joshi Bullion Gems & Jewellery Pvt. Ltd. 16.07.2012 Rs. 53.29 cr. 
3 Bond Gems Private Limited 14.02.2012 Rs. 16.22 cr. 
 
All the cases are put to execution.  
The progress of the other three arbitration cases are in various 
stages of hearing. 
iii. Cases against ECGC before NCDRC:- 
MSTC has filed cases against Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
in the Natural Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission for refusal 
of their claim.  MSTC has filed new affidavit based on internal 
notings of ECGC which has be en accepted by Commission. On the 
basis of submission by ECGC, the Hon’ble Commission further 

 
 
directed to submit copy of charge sheet by CBI alongwith all 
documents. The next date of hearing is on 28.10.2013. 
Meanwhile, Ministry of Steel has requested the Ministry of 
Commerce to settle the issue amicably, but latter refused on the 
ground that the matter is under investigation of CBI and 
Enforcement Directorate.  
iv. Status of Pen Urban Co-Operative Bank, Pune:- 
Two separate cases have been filed in the Bomb ay High Court after 
the mandatory expiry of two months after notice in writing has 
been delivered, against  
1) Pen Bank with Ushma Jewellery on 12.12.2012; and  
2) Pen Bank with Space Mercantile on 21.12.2012. 
Both the cases are for   encashment of the BGs  and FDRs issued by 
the bank in favour of MSTC totaling to Rs. 162 cr. 
v. Legal Case for Sale of Mortgaged Properties –M/s 
Ushma Jewellery:- 
a) The notice of motion appeared before the Hon'ble Bombay 
High Court on 03.10.2012, upon hearing the arguments of 
the advocates appearing for the defendants and Shri 
Setalwad, Sr Counsel of MSTC, the Hon'ble court was pleased 
to grant ad -interim reliefs in favour of MSTC. The case was 
adjourned for hearing on 30.10.2012 before which the 
defendants have been directed to  file their replies. The 
Hon'ble court during the course of hearing has observed that 
the prima facie case has been made out by the plaintiffs for 
grant ad -interim reliefs regarding the properties. However, 
the Hon'ble Court has not listed the case on 30.1 0.2012 for 
hearing.  As the case was not listed thereafter, MSTC had 
taken out Notice of Motion for expeditious hearing. The suit 
was listed for hearing on 17.6.2013 before the Hon’ble High 
Court when Sr. Counsel and Additional Attorney General Shri 
Kivic Setalwad appeared on MSTC behalf and argued on the 
point of jurisdiction. The Hon’ble Court was pleased to pass 
order stating that unless the Defendant moved Application 
for revocation the jurisdiction issued stands decided in favour 
of MSTC. The court als o ordered that the ad -interim stay 
granted on the properties shall continue. 
b) As advised by our Solicitors J&P we have issued public notice 
through our Solicitors in local news papers in Marathi, Hindi, 
English & Gujarati, informing public at large, the details of 

 
 
properties mortgaged with  MSTC and  mortgage rights as 
well as the order passed by the  Bombay High Court Suit 
No.2123 of 2011. 
c) In Bombay High Court Suit No.2123 of 2011 we have filed 
fresh Affidavit -in-Support, bringing on record the Crimin al 
Writ Petition No.339 of 2012 and the order of Hon'ble 
Bombay High Court as well as re-rejoinder to the Affidavit-in-
reply filed by Defendants. 
vi. Recoveries:- 
MSTC and Ministry of Steel are constantly monitoring the progress 
of all cases for recovery o f dues. As a result of constant follow -up 
action recoveries made/judgments & documents available with 
MSTC are as below: 
Sl.  
No. 
Particulars Dues recovered 
in cash Rs. in 
cr. 
Awards, Decrees and 
recoverable dues with 
MSTC Rs.  in cr. 
i. Money received by MSTC 
through remittance from 
foreign buyers (already 
considered in the calculation 
of the outstanding of ` 
598.63 Cr.) 
39.00 
- 
ii. Interest on FD 13.00 - 
iii. FDR & BG* - 162.00 
iv. Original title deeds of 
Properties in Raigarh  District, 
with MSTC - properties 
mortgaged in favour of MSTC 
as collateral security by M/s 
Ushma Gem & Jewellery Ltd. 
(as per IT approved valuer) 
- 
39.00 
v. 43(Forty three) Decrees in 
favour of MSTC awarded by 
Singapore and UAE Courts. 
- 
672.30(US$134460315) (at 
national exchange rate of 
USD 1=Rs.50) 
vi. Three Arbitration award in 
favour of MSTC. - 347.23 
 Total 52.00 1220.53 
 
* Later not hono ured by Pen Bank as the bank is under 
administrative control of RBI directions under Section 35A of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 since 23.09.2010. 
Note: The Decrees are being pursued for execution but this will 
require sustained and pursuing costly legal actions due to 

 
 
time consuming legal process in India and concerned 
countries. 
12. The Committee are unhappy to note that although the 
Ministry of Steel have forwarded the Action Taken Replies on 
4.11.2013, the status of recovery of outstandings for gold 
jewellery exports has been submitted as on 29.09.2013.  The 
progress of such cases i ndicate that in case of Al Sidra Jewellery, 
the next hearing was reported to be on 20.10.2013. In case of 
another buyer, Mine Gold  and Jewellery, the next hearing was 
reported to be on 30.10.2013 and for Golden Place Jewellery, LLC, 
the judgment was expec ted on 2.10.2013.  The Committee cannot 
but deplore the casual approach of the Ministry in furnishing 
unsatisfactory replies and desire that the Government must have 
ensured that the replies must be thoroughly scrutinized before 
they are submitted for info rmation and consideration by them.  
The Committee, therefore, while reiterating that all out efforts be 
made by the Ministry of Steel/MSTC Ltd. for recovery of 
outstanding and also recommend that updated information of 
progress made in all cases for recove ring of outstandings for 
export of gold jewellery be furnished to the Committee at the 
earliest.  
C. FUNCTIONING OF FSNL 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 12 & 15 
 
13. The Committee note d that FSNL, a subsidiary company of MSTC 
Ltd. was set up with the main objective of processing of steel mill slag and 
other refuse for the recovery of iron and steel scrap and other metallics. 
Besides, FSNL had  diversified its business into warehouse manag ement 
and also making efforts to get into mi ning business. The Committee fe lt 

 
 
that the mission of FSNL to generate 'wealth from waste' was a noble one 
as the focus was on maximizing recovery from waste material generated 
by iron and steel making and other manufacturing processes. The 
Committee appreciated the fact that due to FSNL's operation of recovery 
of metallics and processing of slag for recycling, the Corporation wa s 
lending a helping hand in conservation and saving natural resources and 
protection of the environment. The Committee were also happy to note 
that in pursuance of the above, FSNL ha d implemented ISO 14001 
certification for environmental management system to make its entire 
operation environment friendly. The Committee would  like to be appr ised 
of the progress made by FSNL in entering into the mining business so far.  
 
14. The Committee while noting the details of agreements/contracts 
signed by FSNL during last 3 years find that only one agreement had been 
signed by FSNL with a Government organization Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelahanka, Karnataka and 7 agreements had been signed with PSUs for 
recovery/processing and handling of Iron and Steel scrap. The Committee 
felt that this was too low with just 2 contracts per year. The Committee 
also noted that 5 of these contracts had expired on March 2013, one in 
May, 2013 and the other tw o will expire by July and September 2013. 
Moreover, no agreement had been signed by FSNL with any private 
company. The Committee felt that FSNL needed to persuade not only the 
Government Companies but also the private companies in their endeavour 
to expand their client base. The Committee felt that there was an urgent 
need that FSNL adopted vigorous marketing strategies to stay in 
competition. For this, the Committee felt that a core group should be 
created within FSNL with the sole motive of Business Devel opment. The 
Committee had learnt that FSNL had diversified its business into 
Warehouse Management and was also making effort for diversification into 
the mining business. While endorsing the diversification plan of FSNL to 
sustain in the market, the Committee desired that all out efforts should be 
made by FSNL to venture into new business territories alongwith 
maintaining its core business competence.  
 

 
 
15. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
"FSNL has submitted Expression of Interest (EOI) to SAIL 
Refractory Company Ltd. Salem for over burden removal of their 
Magnesite Mine. 
FSNL is functioning within the premises of steel plants of SAIL and 
RINL for executing the job relating to slag processin g, metal scrap 
recovery etc., It is fully dependent on these steel plants for its 
sustenance. Since the FSNL’s core competence in scrap recovery/ 
slag processing, it will be continued to function as a separate 
company.   However, diversification plans have  been initiated to 
secure business in other allied areas of its functioning. FSNL is 
rendering warehouse management service for MSTC pledged 
material at 28 sites in consultation with their holding company 
MSTC Ltd. In addition, FSNL is exploring the feasib ility of 
overburden removal of magn esite mines of SAIL Refractory 
Company Ltd., Salem." 
16. While observing that FSNL's operation of recovery of 
metallics and process of slag for re -cycling is lending a helping 
hand in conservation and saving natural resou rces, the Committee 
had desired to know the progress made by FSNL in entering into 
the mining business.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of 
Steel have informed the Committee that though FSNL has 
diversification plans to secure business in other a llied areas of its 
functioning and besides rendering warehouse management 
service for MSTC at 28 sites, the company has submitted 
Expression of Interest to SAIL Refractory Company Ltd., Salem for 
over burden removal of their magnesite mine.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the income generated by FSNL from 
warehouse management services and present status of Expression 
of Interest submitted by the company for over burden removal of 
magnesite mine of SAIL Refractory Company Ltd., Salem.    

 
 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
 
17. The Committee were perturbed to note that though total income of 
the Company had grown from Rs. 158.61 crore in 2009 -10 to Rs. 185.79 
crore in 2012 -13, the profit after tax has fallen from Rs. 4.18 crore to 
0.62 crore in 2012 -113 . What had further dismayed the Committee wa s 
that the p rofit after tax during 2012 -13 wa s 0.62 crore against the 
projected target of Rs. 4.85 crore. Although, FSNL ha d submitted to the 
Committee that profitability of the company gradually decreased due to 
increase in cost of diesel, other consumab les and wages, the Committee 
felt that these factors should be well considered and accordingly service 
charges be levied by the Company to attain financial sustainability. The 
Committee were of the firm view that s ound business principles should 
always be the guiding factors for any commercial entity. The Committee 
recommended that the Ministry of Steel should take appropriate measures 
to ensure that minimum service charges levied by a Company be fixed 
with suitable escalation formula. This w ould ensure the sustainability of a 
Company engaged in such an important mission of "Waste to Metal".  
 
18. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished as 
follows:- 
"The Steel Authority of India Ltd.(SAIL) is taking work from FSNL at 
the old rates effective from 1.10.2011.  Renewal of long term 
contract of FSNL with SAIL with effect from 1.4.2013 has not yet 
been finalized. In the absence of the workable service charge rate 
effective from 1.4.2013, FSNL is c ontinuing to incur heavy financial 
losses due to abnormal increase in input cost like 40% increase in 
prices of diesel, lubricants and wages etc.,. To make the operational 
FSNL economically viable and sustainable, hike and services charge 
rates with annual  escalation commensurate with increase in input 
cost is to be considered immediately. Wholesale Price Index (WPI) 
based increases rates on the same line has been done in the past 
has to be agreed by the SAIL for sustainable operation by FSNL in 
the steel p lants of SAIL. It may be stated that Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Ltd. (RINL) has renewed its work contract with FSNL , 
allowing WPI based escalation in service charge rates, for a period 
of 36 months w.e.f. 1.11.2011. Since SAIL and RINL both are under 
the Minis try of Steel, the SAIL has been requested to consider 
adopting the model work agreement as has been agreed to 
between FSNL and RINL." 

 
 
19. The Committee are perturbed to note that the Ministry of 
Steel have not taken any steps to ensure that minimum service  
charges be fixed with suitable escalation formula to ensure 
sustainability of a company like FSNL which is engaged in an 
important mission of  'Waste to Metal'.  The Committee have been 
given to understand that though RINL has renewed its work 
contracts w ith FSNL allowing wholesale price index base 
escalation in service charge rates for a period of 36 months w.e.f. 
1.11.2011,   what has further dismayed the Committee is the fact 
that the renewal of long term contract by FSNL with SAIL w.e.f. 
1.04.2013 has not yet been finalized and in the absence of 
workable service charge rate, the company is continuing to incur 
heavy financial losses due to abnormal increase in input cost of 
about 40%.  The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of 
Steel should immediately give necessary instructions to SAIL for 
renewal of long term contract allowing wholesale price index 
based escalation formula for service charges to be levied by FSNL 
and the Committee be apprised of the same.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
INTRODUCTORY  
Recommendation Serial No.1 
 
The Committee note that Metal Scrap Trading Corporation Limited 
(MSTC Ltd.) was set up in 1964 for the purpose of regulating export of 
ferrous scrap from the country and in 1974 it was made a subsidiary of 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL). The Corporation was later in 1982-
83 converted into an independent Public Undertaking under the Ministry of 
Steel. The Committee also note that although during 1998, the 
Government had recommended complete disinvestment of the Company 
as it was heading towards oper ating losses, MSTC did a turn around and 
since 1998-99, the Company consistently improved its performance both 
in terms of volume of business and net profit (PAT). The Committee have 
also been informed that MSTC was awarded Mini Ratna Category II status 
in 2002 followed by category I status in 2005. Further, during 2007 -08 
the status of the company was upgraded from schedule C to schedule B 
and the Company is expected to be upgraded to Schedule A as a proposal 
to this effect is reported to be under active c onsideration of the 
Government. MoU ratings of the Company since 2007 have always been 
excellent or very good. The Committee have dealt with some of the 
aspects like functioning, diversification activities, manpower, 
environmental conservation and control of pollution/contamination with 
regard to disposal of ferrous and non -ferrous scrap etc. by MSTC Ltd. and 
FSNL, subsidiary of MSTC Ltd. in the succeeding paragraphs of this 
Report.  
 
The Committee observe that MSTC Ltd. has diversified its trading 
operations and these operations of the Company which were earlier 
limited to shredded scrap, HMS, Pellets, Lam Coke etc. have been 
expanded to Billets, Pellets, Bloom, DRI, Ingot, CLO, Coke, Coal, Copper -
wire, HR Coil, CR Coil, Iron Ore, Manganese Ore, Naptha, Cru de Oil etc. 
The diversification was reportedly done to distribute risk due to product 
price fluctuation and changing demand profile of the industry. Also during 
the last 3 years MSTC Ltd. has gradually increased the volume of e -
commerce business to sustain consistent growth in profit. The Committee 
note that the total volume of business during the last 4-5 years has shown 
a steady increase and from Rs. 12739 crore in 2009 -2010, the business 
grew to Rs. 25030 crore in 2012 -2013. The Committee further note th at 
MSTC is diligently engaged in the business of providing full fledged e -
commerce services which include e -auction and e-procurement which are 
facilitated by the state of art infrastructure and in -house capability of 
development and customization of softw are to suit the requirement of 
consumers. The Committee also note that during the last 3 years MSTC 
has signed a total number of 288 new agreements which include 70 
agreements with Central PSU's, 69 with state PSUs, 71 agreements with 
Central Government De partments, 31 with State Government 
Departments and 47 agreements with private companies. The prominent 

 
 
principals of MSTC Ltd. include Prime Minister's office, New Delhi, 
Government of NCT of Delhi, Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanam(TTD), 
Tirupati, Reliance C ommunication Ltd., Mumbai, Shipping Corporation of 
India Ltd. etc. While appreciating the increased volume of e -trading work, 
the Committee expect the Organization to step up their efforts for 
maintaining sustainability.  
 
Action Taken 
MSTC is signing MOUs  with State Governments and PSUs for e -
auction of chrome ore, agriculture produce, land and properties. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Recommendation Serial No.2. 
 
While reviewing the manpower of MSTC Ltd., the Committee 
observe that as on 31.3.2013 there are 168 number of executives and 
151 number of non-executives in the Company. The Committee note that 
the strength of executives in Northern Regional Office, Wester n Regional 
Office, Southern Regional Office and Banglore Region Office are the same 
as that of non -executive employees. The Committee have been informed 
that the reason for shortfall in non-executive employees is that there is no 
direct recruitment in Grou p 'B' services. The Committee feel that for 
proper functioning of an organization, ideally the number of non -
executives should exceed the number of executives and therefore, 
recommend, that this aspect be looked into while framing rules and fresh 
recruitments be made for filling all the vacant posts in the organization. 
The Committee are also unhappy to note that there is no ex -servicemen 
recruited in the organization as on date and expect the Government/MSTC 
Ltd. to ensure recruitment of desired quota for rehabilitation of ex -
servicemen who also bring integrity and discipline at the workplace. The 
Committee desire that proper attention should be given in this regard 
during the next recruitment and the Committee be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter in due course.  
 
Action Taken 
The functioning of the Company has gone through a sea change 
since its inception. MSTC worked first as a scrap export regulatory body 
and then import canalizing agent. Thereafter, due to the change in the 
Government policy towards a liberalized economy, th e very fibre of the 
Company has changed to a market driven competitive entity. As a result, 
the orientation as well as skill mix required of the manpower for 
competing in the market has also changed. In such a scenario, aggressive 
marketing efforts are required to be made, which has to be done primarily 
by the executives only. Besides, during earlier times when MSTC was the 
canalizing agent, there were a lot of typing and other clerical jobs. Due to 
computerization and the factors mentioned above, the requi rement of 
non-executive manpower has gone down in the Company. As such, 
functioning of MSTC has become essentially officer-oriented. In fact, some 
eligible and suitable non -executives have also been promoted as 

 
 
executives for effective utilization of exist ing manpower and this is also a 
reason for relative increase in executive manpower. 
 Nevertheless, whenever requirement has been felt, recruitment has 
taken place in non-executive category.  It may be pointed out that as per 
Recruitment Rule of the Company, Group B is filled up through promotion 
only and the induction level of Ministerial posts is Group C (viz. Junior 
Assistant-cum-Typist/Junior Computer Assistant/Junior Stenographer). 
During the last 5 years, 33 no. of non -executive posts have already been  
filled up. Besides, as stated above, with a view to providing career growth 
to the employees, 14 non -executive employees were promoted to the 
executive cadre over the last 5 years. However, the point regarding 
recruitment of ex-servicemen has been noted and appropriate action shall 
be taken in future recruitments. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Recommendation Serial No.3 
 
The Committee have been given to understand that there are less 
number of female employees as compared to male employees which is 
matter of serious concern. The Committee would like MSTC to give fair 
representation to female employees in the organization in order to remove 
the gender bias.  
 
Action Taken 
The female representation in MSTC is around 16%. Recruitment of 
both executives and non -executives is done through open advertisement. 
Selection is done on the basis of same standards, giving equal 
opportunities to candidates of both genders.  Therefore, there is no 
gender bias in the Company. However, the concern on the issue has been 
noted for appropriate action. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Recommendation Serial No.4 
 
The Committee observe that the CSR expenditure by MSTC Ltd. was 
Rs. 100.13 lakh and Rs. 166.38 lakh during 2010 -11, and 2011 -12 
respectively. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that during 
2012-13 against an outlay of Rs. 354 lakh, only Rs. 128.28 lakh c ould be 
spent by the Company. The Committee further note that during 2010 -11, 
out of total budgetary allocation of Rs. 100.13 lakh for CSR, only Rs. 
19.71 lakh & Rs. 11.82 lakh were spent for health and education 
respectively. Similarly during 2011 -12, only Rs. 16.96 lakh and Rs. 4.30 
lakh were spent for health and education out of a total amount of Rs. 
166.38 lakh spent on CSR activities by MSTC Ltd. Again, during 2012 -13, 
out of a total amount of Rs. 128.28 lakh spent on CSR activities only Rs. 
8.10 lakh and Rs. 1.19 lakh were spent on health & education 
respectively. The Committee are unhappy to note that though MSTC has 

 
 
drawn up a clear cut policy framework prioritizing CSR activities to be 
undertaken by the organization, yet lower budgetary allocations were 
earmarked for the most important sectors of health and education. The 
Committee feel that no doubt that Company’s spending on CSR activities 
like village uplift, solar light, skill development, infrastructure, 
environment protection, etc. is in no way  less important, but at the same 
time the Committee desire that health and education should be accorded 
priority.  
Action Taken 
 
MSTC had contributed to various projects for creating educational 
facilities for poor and under privileged children, home and s chool for 
disabled children, mentally retarded children during the year 2012 -13. 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and appropriate 
action shall be taken in future CSR activities. A Board level CSR 
Committee is looking after the CSR activit ies of the company. As per DPE 
guidelines, MSTC constituted a Nodal Committee to look after CSR 
activities. The Nodal Committee is headed by Chief General Manager 
(CGM)(HR) of the Company. Periodically this committee puts up projects 
after due diligence, t o Board level committee for approval or otherwise. 
During the year 2012 -13 MSTC contributed towards construction of road, 
installation of hand pumps and Solar lights, skill development training etc. 
in association with Gram Panchayat. However, the concern of the 
Committee on the issue has been noted for appropriate action. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
 
While appreciating that MSTC Ltd. has in -house and external 
training programme for officers deputed to oversee CSR activities, the 
Committee feel that a dedicated separate cell be created in the 
organization. At the same time, the Committee recommend that people’s 
representatives who are more aware of the ground realities and the 
requirement of the local people must be involved while finalizing and 
executing the CSR activities by MSTC Ltd.  
 
Action Taken 
The concern on the issue has been noted for appropriate action. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
      
The Committee are happy to note that MSTC has various proposals 
lined up for the future in diverse areas. Among the various proposals for 
future one is sale of Tea through MSTC by United Plants Association of 
South India(UPASI) which is an apex body of pla nters of Tea, Coffee, 
Rubber, Pepper and Cardamom. State Governments of Odisha and Andhra 
Pradesh have also decided to utilize e -auction services of MSTC. The 
Committee also note that MSTC has decided to set up a new shredding 

 
 
plant in the country for shre dding of used cars, buses, scooters for the 
dual purpose of adding value and for recycling of scrap. The Committee 
appreciate the hard work done by MSTC which is helping the Company to 
sustain itself in this highly competitive environment where survival of  
PSUs can be challenging unless concerted efforts are made in this 
direction.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Matter of record, no comments. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.12 
 
The Committee note that FSNL, a subsidiary company of MSTC Ltd. 
was set up with the main objective of processing of steel mill slag and 
other refuse for the recovery of iron and steel scrap and other metallics. 
Besides, FSNL has diversified its business in to warehouse management 
and also making efforts to get into mining business. The Committee feel 
that the mission of FSNL to generate 'wealth from waste' is a noble one as 
the focus is on maximizing recovery from waste material generated by 
iron and steel making and other manufacturing processes. The Committee 
appreciate the fact that due to FSNL's operation of recovery of metallics 
and processing of slag for recycling, the Corporation is lending a helping 
hand in conservation and saving natural resources an d protection of the 
environment. The Committee are also happy to note that in pursuance of 
the above, FSNL has implemented ISO 14001 certification for 
environmental management system to make its entire operation 
environment friendly. The Committee would, h owever, like to be apprised 
of the progress made by FSNL in entering into the mining business so far.  
 
Action Taken 
FSNL has submitted Expression of Interest (EOI) to SAIL Refractory 
Company Ltd. Salem for over burden removal of their Magnesite Mine.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.14 
 
The Committee would also like FSNL to focus on reducing input 
costs and emphasis should be gi ven on maximizing output for better 
sustainability by resorting to proper maintenance & servicing of 
equipments, identification and closure of uneconomic activities and control 
of administrative expenses. To enhance its efficiency and output the 
Committee feel that FSNL should also identify and phase out the worn out 
old equipments and replace them with new equipments with latest 
technology.  
 

 
 
Action Taken 
The FSNL has been replacing the old machinery and equipments 
from time to time. Procurement action has  been initiated to procure the 
following equipments in 2013-14 :- 
 i) Dumper (35 Ton)  - 9 Nos. 
 ii) Dozer    - 2 Nos. 
 iii) Excavator (45 Ton)  - 3 Nos. 
 iv) Excavator (30 Ton ) - 2 Nos. 
 v) Excavator(19 Ton)  - 3 Nos. 
 vi) Loader (3 Cu.M)  - 2 No. 
These machinery and equipments will be deployed in various 
worksites of FSNL.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.15 
 
The Committee while noting the details of agreements/contracts 
signed by FSNL during last 3 years find that only one agreement has been 
signed by FSNL with a Government organization Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelahanka, Karnataka and 7 agreements have been signed  with PSUs for 
recovery/processing and handling of Iron and Steel scrap. The Committee 
feel that this is too low with just 2 contracts per year. The Committee also 
note that 5 of these contracts have expired on March 2013, one in May, 
2013 and the other tw o will expire by July and September 2013. 
Moreover, no agreement has been signed by FSNL with any private 
company. The Committee feel that FSNL needs to persuade not only the 
Government Companies but also the private companies in their endeavour 
to expand their client base. The Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need that FSNL adopts vigorous marketing strategies to stay in 
competition. For this, the Committee feel that a core group should be 
created within FSNL with the sole motive of Business Developm ent. The 
Committee have learnt that FSNL has diversified its business into 
Warehouse Management and is also making effort for diversification into 
the mining business. While endorsing the diversification plan of FSNL to 
sustain in the market, the Committee  desire that all out efforts should be 
made by FSNL to venture into new business territories alongwith 
maintaining its core business competence.  
 
Action Taken 
 
FSNL is functioning within the premises of steel plants of SAIL and 
RINL for executing the job relating to slag processing, metal scrap 
recovery etc., It is fully dependent on these steel plants for its 
sustenance. Since the FSNL’s core competence in scrap  recovery/ slag 
processing, it will be continued to function as a separate company.   
However, diversification plans have been initiated to secure business in 
other allied areas of its functioning. FSNL is rendering warehouse 

 
 
management service for MSTC pledged material at 28 sites in consultation 
with their holding company MSTC Ltd. In addition, FSNL is exploring the 
feasibility of overburden removal of magnasite mines of SAIL Refractory 
Company Ltd., Salem. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
 
As regards the constraints faced by FSNL, the Committee have 
been informed that during the year 2002, when the steel industry was 
facing recession, the Company had to agree to the condition of SAIL not 
to increase its service charges for the next 3 years. Even during renewal 
of agreement in 2005, there was a nominal increase in service charge and 
escalation was also limited to only 5%. Due to nominal service charges 
FSNL was reported to have suffered a loss of about Rs. 3 crore annually. 
The Committee note that the MoU with SAIL regarding 
recovery/processing and handling of iron, steel scrap and slag jobs at all 
the SAIL plants has since expired on 31.3.2012. In order to maintain the 
continuity of jobs, though the SAIL units of Rourkela and Bhilai have 
extended the existing agreements on adhoc basis from 1.4.2013 to 
30.6.2013, agreements with other units of SAIL like Burnpur, Durgapur 
and Bokaro are yet to be finalized. In the absence of long term agreement 
with SAIL, which otherwise would have provided FSNL the adequate 
financial security, the Ministry has apprised the Committee that the 
Company is unable to plan and project its expansion, investment and 
equipment rehabilitation programme. While observing that FSNL has no 
firm agreements of work in its kitty,  the Committee strongly recommend 
the Government to intervene in the matter and work out an amicable 
solution to bail out FSNL from this crisis by giving necessary direction to 
SAIL & RINL to enter into long term agreement with FSNL to keep it afloat 
in the business. At the same time, the Committee desire that FSNL should 
also persuade other PSUs and private companies besides SAIL and RINL 
for obtaining more work orders in order to maintain its sustainability in 
the market lest other players should edge it out of the market. 
 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Steel has requested the SAIL to renew the long term 
contract of FSNL for scrap recovery and slag processing in their steel 
plants based on WPI based service charge rates. FSNL also favours a 
business plan fo r utilization of slag accumulated in the steel plants for 
road making, railway blast and building material as a substitute of stone 
chips to preserve the natural resources.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
The Committee note that MSTC facilitates use of waste and obsolete 
materials which have lost their primary use through  the process of 
recycling. This reduces not only the cost of production but also conserves 
energy and saves the space which the waste or rejected materials would 
otherwise occupy. The Committee have been given to understand that the 
Company also makes cons istent efforts through its e -commerce portal to 
protect the environment from hazardous waste material by facilitating its 
collection in lots and thereafter selling it to competent agencies for 
recycling and safe disposal. The Committee also note that using  scrap in 
production process saves the naturally occurring minerals which are prime 
raw materials for metal production. Further, precious resources like coal, 
electricity and manpower are also conserved which also helps in reducing 
production cost. Besides , MSTC also conducts auction for disposal of 
rejected/mixed oils, waste petro-products and non metal scrap. These are 
then recycled and substantial value is recovered from waste. While 
appreciating the concern MSTC has for the environment, the Committee 
feel that adequate care should be taken while handling this waste so that 
it does not harm the personnel handling the same. For this, proper and 
regular in house training programmes should be conducted from time to 
time for the employees involved in such pro cesses. For bulk sustainable 
handling, competent agencies should be involved so that the risk factor is 
minimal.  
 
Action Taken 
 
MSTC conducts e-Auction for disposal of hazardous waste materials 
like waste oil, battery scrap, slag etc. for a number of government owned 
companies. The scope of work for MSTC includes providing online services 
for smooth disposal of the materials. MSTC also ensures that the materials 
are sold only to those State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) registered 
users/recyclers who have valid license for handling such hazardous 
materials. The registered buyers for such items have to file returns 
regularly for hav ing recycled in eco -friendly manner. MSTC does not 
handle any such material itself and hence people are not subjected to any 
risk associated with physical handling of the materials.   
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
Recommendation Serial No.8 
 
 The Committee note that MSTC has been facing stiff competition in 
volume of business in e -commerce services due to increasing service 
charges and challenges from private sector service providers who are 
quoting lower rates. Although most of the PSUs and Go vernment 
Departments are availing the services of MSTC on nomination basis, of 
late some PSUs are selecting service provider through tendering wherein 
small players having no infrastructure and expertise quote very low rates 
and get the tender. Taking note  of the fact that in a number of cases, 
Works/Purchase/Consultancy contracts by Government of India/PSUs are 
awarded on nomination basis, CVC had issued guidelines (Circular No. 
15.5.2006 dated 9.5.2006) whereby the practice of award of works to 
PSUs on no mination basis by Govt. of India/PSUs has been asked to be 
reviewed forthwith to bring greater transparency and accountability in 
award of such contracts. The Ministry have also shown its reluctance in 
the matter by citing the CVC guidelines. Although, the  Committee have 
taken note of the present policy of the Government wherein it is not 
mandatory to award work from one PSU to another PSU and particularly 
when the Company like MSTC Ltd. is consistently earning profit, the 
Committee feel that the State Gove rnments and PSUs should continue to 
award work to MSTC on nomination basis as was being done by them 
hitherto. As pointed by MSTC Ltd., that some companies having no IT 
infrastructure and expertise also grab contracts at much lower service 
charges which ot herwise cannot sustain with profound financial health of 
the Company as at times it may not cover minimum expenditure incurred, 
the Committee would like the Government to fix minimum service charges 
to avoid unhealthy competition as these private players a re not bound to 
comply with CVC guidelines. The Committee also recommend that not 
only CVC guidelines, but all other Government of India Guidelines 
including guidelines issued by the Dept. of Electronics for e -commerce 
must also be part of open tenders flo ated by PSUs for e -commerce 
services to ensure level playing fields both for PSUs like MSTC Ltd. and 
private players. The Committee, therefore, desire that matter be taken up 
by Ministry of Steel/MSTC Ltd. at appropriate level in the Government to 
ensure compliance of their recommendation.  
 
Action Taken  
When the Ministry of Steel/MSTC approach other 
Departments/Organizations for giving e -auction/ e -procurement work to 
MSTC, compliance of guidelines of Ministry of Information Technology/ 
CVC etc. by MSTC is highlighted. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
     
The Committee are perturbed to note that though total income of 
the Company has grown from Rs. 158.61 crore in 2009 -10 to Rs. 185.79 
crore in 2012 -13, the profit after tax has fallen from Rs. 4.18 crore to 
0.62 crore in 2012 -113 . What has further dismayed  the Committee is 
that the profit after tax during 2012-13 is 0.62 crore against the projected 
target of Rs. 4.85 crore. Although, FSNL has submitted to the Committee 
that profitability of the company gradually decreased due to increase in 
cost of diesel, other consumables and wages, the Committee feel that 
these factors should be well considered and accordingly service charges 
be levied by the Company to attain financial sustainability. The Committee 
are of the firm view that sound business principles shou ld always be the 
guiding factors for any commercial entity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Steel should take appropriate measures to 
ensure that minimum service charges levied by a Company be fixed with 
suitable escalation formula . This will ensure the sustainability of a 
Company engaged in such an important mission of "Waste to Metal".  
 
Action Taken 
 
The Steel Authority of India Ltd.(SAIL) is taking work from FSNL at 
the old rates effective from 1.10.2011.  Renewal of long term contract of 
FSNL with SAIL with effect from 1.4.2013 has not yet been finalized. In 
the absence of the workable service charge rate effective from 1.4.2013, 
FSNL is continuing to incur heavy financial losses due to abnormal 
increase in input cost like 40% increase in prices of diesel, lubricants and 
wages etc.,. To make the operational FSNL economically viable and 
sustainable, hike and services charge rates with annual escalation 
commensurate with increase in input cost is to be considered immediately. 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) based increases rates on the same line has 
been done in the past has to be agreed by the SAIL for sustainable 
operation by FSNL in the steel plants of SAIL. It may be stated that 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) has renewed its wor k contract with 
FSNL , allowing WPI based escalation in service charge rates, for a period 
of 36 months w.e.f. 1.11.2011. Since SAIL and RINL both are under the 
Ministry of Steel, the SAIL has been requested to consider adopting the 
model work agreement as has been agreed to between FSNL and RINL. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
The Committee note that during 2007, MSTC Ltd. had entered into 
a new business of export of gems and gold jewellery on post shipment 
basis. MSTC Ltd. exported plain gold jewellery  worth Rs. 260.63 crore 
backed by the Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) policy to 
Dubai based buyers in 2007 -08 against which full recoveries were made. 
During 2008-09, jewellery worth Rs 638 Crore was exported to 47 foreign 
buyers through 6 assoc iates based in Mumbai. The Committee also note 
that the jewellery exported during 2008-2009, the foreign buyers failed to 
make payment amounting to Rs. 598.63 crore against the exports citing 
economic slow down as the main reason. Total export outstanding was Rs. 
600 Crore from 46 foreign buyers against which a total amount of Rs. 475 
Crore (upto 80% of the export value) was paid to 6 associate suppliers. 
The Committee further note that as per Govt. of India, Exim Policy, 
ECGC’s insurance was mandatory befo re any agency took up export on 
Document Against Acceptance (DAA). The Corporation has also initiated 
cases against all the foreign buyers – 44 in UAE and one each in Kuwait 
and Singapore. The Committee find that adequate safeguards were not 
taken by MSTC Ltd. before venturing into a new territory of business and 
no elaborate study about the risk involved and credentials of those with 
whom business has to be transacted was carefully carried out by the 
Company. Moreover, as the foreign buyers cited economic slowdown as 
the main reason for failing to make payment, the Committee also feel that 
MSTC Ltd. had not properly analyzed the demand of gold jewellery in 
foreign markets before venturing into export business. The Committee 
feel that this vital aspect was c onveniently overlooked by MSTC Ltd. The 
Committee feel that had due diligence been taken in this matter, the 
situation would have been different. Taking note of the fact that 
Committee on Public Undertaking of Parliament has already examined the 
audit observations on the issue and had submitted a Report to Parliament 
on 30 April, 2013, the Committee while endorsing the observation made 
by them (Committee on Public Undertaking) would also like to be apprised 
of the latest development like recovery of payment s as well as corrective 
steps taken so that no such misadventure business activities do not recur 
in future.  
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 The Committee find that MSTC Ltd. had reportedly took the Export 
Credit Guarantee Corporation’s insurance policy and  got all its exporters 
verified from Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) before 
undertaking exports in United Arab Emirates (UAE) and elsewhere as per 
limits approved by ECGC. Despite this, on occurrence of default, ECGC 
refused to settle the claim.  In pursuance of this, Secretary, Ministry of 
Steel has reportedly written to Secretary, Ministry of Commerce on 
14/03/2013 proposing a joint meeting along with CMD, ECGC and CMD, 
MSTC Ltd. for expeditious settlement of MSTC’s Claim by ECGC and 
avoiding co stly litigation. The Committee were further informed that 

 
 
Secretary, Commerce vide letter dated 04/04/2013 forwarded a note from 
ECGC giving reasons for rejection of MSTC’s claim expressing difficulties to 
re-consider the decision. MSTC Ltd. has since forw arded its comments on 
ECGC’s contention to Ministry of Steel on 03/05/2013. Though, the matter 
has been taken up with National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission (NCDRC) in 2010 and is reported to be at procedural stage, 
the Committee desire expeditiou s settlement of the matter by according 
top priority by all concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
a joint meeting of Secretary Steel, Secretary Commerce alongwith CMD, 
MSTC Ltd. and representatives of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
should be held immediately to resolve contentious issues and an amicable 
solution be arrived at in the matter.  
 
Recommendation Serial No.11 
               
The Committee have also been given to understand that MSTC Ltd. 
has invoked arbitration proceeding agains t all the 6 Associate Suppliers 
through whom exports were done. Out of six arbitration cases against the 
Associate Suppliers, awards have been received in respect of three cases, 
all in favour of MSTC Ltd. for a total amount of Rs. 347.23 crore. 
Arbitration for remaining three associates is in different stages of hearing. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the receipt of Rs. 347.23 
crore as awarded to them in arbitration process and the latest progress in 
respect of remaining 3 associate suppliers.  
 
Action Taken 
Status of Recovery of Outstanding for Export of Gold Jewellery as 
on 29.09.2013 
i. Cases against Foreign buyers:- 
MSTC has received 43 (Forty three) decrees (42 in UAE & 1 in 
Singapore) in it’s favour amounting to Rs. USD 131,690,479 /- 
equivalent to Rs. 672.30 Cr (approx) towards its claim against 46 Foreign 
Buyers. 
 MSTC has given instructions to M/s Al Shamsi & Partners, MSTC’s 
advocates in Dubai to proceed on execution of all the cases after 
publication of the judgment by the court . The execution cases are under 
progress in various stages.   
The following foreign Buyers have gone on appeal against the 
judgment and the progress of such cases is detailed below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Buyer 
                       Remarks 
1. Al Sidra Jewellery. Expert has submitted his report & the Court posted the 
next hearing to the 20.10.2013 for both parties to submit 
comments on the Expert’s Report. 
2. Hadir Projects & 
Environment 
Systems. 
The court rejected their appeal and upheld the judgment 
at the court of First Instance. However, MSTC is yet to 
receive the copy of the text of the judgment. 

 
 
3. Mine Gold & 
Jewellery. 
The Court adjourned the hearing to the 30.10.2013 for 
the Expert to submit his supplementary report. 
4. Zeeba Gems Ltd. The court adjourned the hearing to the 09.10.2013 to join 
the file from the court of First Instance to the Appeal 
Court file. 
5. Ghanim Trading.  MSTC filed an appeal at the cassation court and the 
number allocated is 482/2013. The court did not fix the 
date of hearing yet. 
6. Golden Place 
Jewellery LLC 
The opposite side has filed an Appeal and the Number 
allocated is 1022 of 2013. The first hearing has been 
posted to the 31.07.2013, wherein they had submitted 
their detailed Memorandum of Appeal. MSTC has 
submitted memorandum to the court. Posted for 
judgment on 2.10.2013. 
 
ii. Status of Arbitration Cases as on 12.09.2013:-            
Out of the 6 Arbitration cases filed against Associate Suppliers, 
MSTC has so far received 3 Awards in our favour as detailed below: 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of Associate Suppliers Date of 
Award 
Award value 
1 Space Mercantile Company Pvt. Ltd. 15.03.2013 Rs. 277.72 cr. 
2 Joshi Bullion Gems & Jewellery Pvt. Ltd. 16.07.2012 Rs. 53.29 cr. 
3 Bond Gems Private Limited 14.02.2012 Rs. 16.22 cr. 
All the cases are put to execution.  
The progress of the other three arbitration cases are in various 
stages of hearing. 
iii. Cases against ECGC before NCDRC:- 
MSTC has filed cases against Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
in the Natural Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission for refusal of their 
claim.  MSTC has filed new affidavit based on internal notings of ECGC 
which has been accepted by Commission. On the basis of submission by 
ECGC, the Hon’ble Commission further directed to submit copy of charge 
sheet by CBI alongwith all documents. The next date of hearing is on 
28.10.2013. 
Meanwhile, Ministry of Steel has requested the Ministry of 
Commerce to settle the issue amicably, but latter refused on the ground 
that the matter is under investigation of CBI and Enforcement Directorate.  
iv. Status of Pen Urban Co-Operative Bank, Pune:- 
Two separate cases have been filed in the Bombay High Court after 
the mandatory expiry of two months after notice in writing has been 
delivered, against  
1) Pen Bank with Ushma Jewellery on 12.12.2012; and  

 
 
2) Pen Bank with Space Mercantile on 21.12.2012. 
Both the cases are for   encashment of the BGs and FDRs issued by 
the bank in favour of MSTC totalling to Rs. 162 cr. 
v. Legal Case for Sale of Mortgaged Properties –M/s Ushma 
Jewellery:- 
a) The notice of motion appeared before the Hon'ble Bombay High 
Court on 03.10.2012, upon hearing the arguments of the advocates 
appearing for the defendants and Shri Setalwad, Sr Counsel of 
MSTC, the Hon'ble court was pleased to grant ad -interim reliefs in 
favour of MSTC. The case was adjourned for hearing on 30.10.2012 
before which the defendants have been directed to file their replies. 
The Hon'ble court during the course of hearing has observed that 
the prima facie case has been made out by the plaintiffs for grant 
ad-interim reliefs regarding the properties. However, t he Hon'ble 
Court has not listed the case on 30.10.2012 for hearing.  As the 
case was not listed thereafter, MSTC had taken out Notice of Motion 
for expeditious hearing. The suit was listed for hearing on 
17.6.2013 before the Hon’ble High Court when Sr. Cou nsel and 
Additional Attorney General Shri Kivic Setalwad appeared on MSTC 
behalf and argued on the point of jurisdiction. The Hon’ble Court 
was pleased to pass order stating that unless the Defendant moved 
Application for revocation the jurisdiction issued  stands decided in 
favour of MSTC. The court also ordered that the ad -interim stay 
granted on the properties shall continue. 
b) As advised by our Solicitors J&P we have issued public notice 
through our Solicitors in local news papers in Marathi, Hindi, 
English & Gujarati, informing public at large, the details of 
properties mortgaged with  MSTC and  mortgage rights as well as 
the order passed by the  Bombay High Court Suit No.2123 of 2011. 
c) In Bombay High Court Suit No.2123 of 2011 we have filed fresh 
Affidavit-in-Support, bringing on record the Criminal Writ Petition 
No.339 of 2012 and the order of Hon'ble Bombay High Court as 
well as re-rejoinder to the Affidavit-in-reply filed by Defendants. 
vi. Recoveries:- 
MSTC and Ministry of Steel are constantly monitoring the progress 
of all cases for recovery of dues. As a result of constant follow -up action 
recoveries made/judgments & documents available with MSTC are as 
below: 

 
 
Sl.  
No. 
Particulars Dues recovered 
in cash Rs. in 
cr. 
Awards, Decrees and 
recoverable dues with 
MSTC Rs.  in cr. 
i. Money received by MSTC 
through remittance from 
foreign buyers (already 
considered in the calculation 
of the outstanding of ` 
598.63 Cr.) 
39.00 
- 
ii. Interest on FD 13.00 - 
iii. FDR & BG* - 162.00 
iv. Original title deeds of 
Properties in Raigarh District, 
with MSTC - properties 
mortgaged in favour of MSTC 
as collateral security by M/s 
Ushma Gem & Jewellery Ltd. 
(as per IT approved valuer) 
- 
39.00 
v. 43(Forty three) Decrees in 
favour of MSTC awarded by 
Singapore and UAE Courts. 
- 
672.30(US$134460315) (at 
national exchange rate of 
USD 1=Rs.50) 
vi. Three Arbitration award in 
favour of MSTC. - 347.23 
 Total 52.00 1220.53 
 
* Later not honored  by Pen Bank as the bank is under administrative 
control of RBI directions under Section 35A of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 since 23.09.2010. 
Note: The Decrees are being pursued for execution but this will require 
sustained and pursuing costly legal a ctions due to time consuming 
legal process in India and concerned countries. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014(4)/2013 dated 04.11.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                              KALYAN BANERJEE 
__ December, 2013                                                           Chairman           
__ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 10 DECEMBER, 2013 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
    LOK SABHA  
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar  
5.    Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri  
6.    Shri  Pakauri Lal  
7.    Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
8.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
9.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
10.  Shri T. Rathinavel 
11.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Arvind Sharma -  Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports:- 
(i)        **   **   **   **  
 
 
(ii)      **   **   **   **  
 

 
 
(iii)     Draft Action Taken Report on “Functioning of MSTC Ltd.” relating to the   
Ministry of Steel 
 
(iv)     **   **   **   **  
 
(v)     **   **   **   **  
 
 (vi)    **   **   **   **  
 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman 
to finalise the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the 
concerned Ministry  and present the same to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTIETH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made       16   
            
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 12, 14, 15 and 16) 10
  
Percentage of total                      62.5%
           
         
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 6)             01 
Percentage of total                     06% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 8 and 13)                       02
           
Percentage of total                         12.5%
                
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 9, 10 and 11)           03
            
 Percentage of total              19%
       