 
1 
 
PART - I 
CHAPTER-I 
Introductory 
India is one of the biggest coal producers in the world with an annual 
production of about 500 million tonne.  Illegal mining and theft of coal which 
has been going on for a long time , are not only affecting financial health  of 
the coal public sector undertakings but also the central & State Governments 
that rely on these coal mines produce . Illegal mining and theft of coal in India  
has become a wide spread phenomenon in the coal bearing states, 
particularly in CCL, BCCL & E CL lease hold areas. Illegal mining can be 
defined as mining carried out in contravention of any of the provisions of the 
applicable Acts, rules & orders.   India‘s largest state -owned producer of 
coal—Coal India Ltd (CIL) has taken several steps for enhanc ing the 
country‘s coal production and bridging the demand supply mismatch. 
However, despite all efforts by CIL, power and steel consumers often allege 
about supply shortages. It is sometimes alleged that CIL is under the control 
of mafia and a large number of irregularities are attributed to coal mafia. Coal 
mines are generally located in the central and eastern part of India and many 
collieries are located in isolated places, often amidst hilly terrains, forests and 
tribal areas. The surrounding areas of c oal mines are generally under 
developed and the socio -economic conditions of the people are very  bad. 
This type of condition creates a fertile ground for coal theft, pilferages and all 
sorts of anti social activities.   Gradually over the years, these offen ces have 
grown into bigger crimes and the people involved have become more 
organized, systematically richer and powerful in organized outlawed 
operations leading to forming cartels and mafia.   As the profit from these 
illegal activities increased, they gai ned muscle and money and were able to 
rope in the services of all and sundry, thus forming coal mafia. With the 
involvement of anti -social, criminal elements and the underworld, the 
problem has become very serious and grave. Sometimes anti social groups 
like MCC, Naxals and PWG have also formed alliance with mafia elements. 
Many areas being quite interior and sparsely populated often are not 

 
2 
 
routinely inspected or monitored by law enforcement agencies.  Coal 
production in Jharkhand is generally affected due to bandhs and obstructions  
created by the Naxalites, Maoist groups, or other groups of people. 

 
3 
 
Chapter II 
Problem of Illegal Mining and Theft of Coal 
 
The main source of illegal mining of coal and theft is abandoned  
mines.  After economic extraction is over, the remaining coal in an 
abandoned mine is stolen by coal mafias, villagers leading to roof falling, 
water flooding, poisonous gas leaking, leading to the death of many 
labourers.  The exact number of deaths as a result of such illegal activities is 
never reported as no one takes responsibility for these deaths and no one 
comes forward for claiming compensation.  Illegal mining also take place on 
fresh land.  The diggers often burst explosives after the first entry point, 
called the fox hole reportedl y stolen illegally from colliery magazines.  The 
illegal mining also hampers the legal mining.  Since tunnels are 
unscientifically made without keeping security of labour engaged in this 
illegal trade the mining cannot be done in the vicinity. 
 
2.2 Furnishing the details of (a) where extraction of coal is being carried 
out without obtaining valid mining lease from the State Government and (b) 
where illegal mining is being carried out by lease holder outside his lease 
hold, the Ministry of Coal have stated as under:- 
 
―(a)  Illegal mining is being done generally in small patches in 
haphazard manner and always keep on changing. 
However, details of illegal mining being done within and 
outside leasehold areas in ECL, BCCL & CCL are given 
in the Annexure - I. 
 
             (b) No such instances have come to notice.‖ 
 
2.3 The Ministry of Coal have informed the Committee that both Illegal 
mining and theft & pilferage of coal are predominant in eastern  
region. Traditionally, areas prone to Illegal Mining, thefts and  Mafia  
operations in CCL, BCCL and ECL are: 
  
―CCL:  Hazaribagh, Kuju, Argada, Rajarappa and Giridih. There are total 
195 illegal mining sites in CCL, including 6 in Rajarappa area. Out 

 
4 
 
of these 195 sites, 174 places have been closed and work for 
closing remaining sites is under progress. 
BCCL :  Baroda , Block -II, WJ (Mohuda Group), Govindpur, Katras, Sijua, 
Kusunda, Kustore, Bastacolla, Lodna, EJ Area and Chach Victoria. 
  
There are total 49 illegal mining sites in BCCL 
  
   
ECL: Satgram, Sripur, Salanpu r, Sodepur, Kunstoria, Pandveshwar, 
Mugma, SP Mines and Rajmahal. There are total 203 illegal mining 
sites in ECL.‖ 
  
   
2.4 On being asked whether the Ministry have carried out any study to 
evaluate the financial loss per annum suffered by the national exchequer due 
to illegal mining and theft of coal, the Ministry of Coal have provided the 
following information:- 
 
―Though, no study has been carried out by the  Ministry specifically in 
this regard, XLRI, Jamshedpur was engaged by Govt. of Jharkhand 
and fin anced by CIL to study ― Illegal Coal Mining in Jharkhand and 
Control Strategies‖. XLRI, Jamshedpur in their report submitted to the 
Govt. of Jharkhand has made an assessment on ―Economics of Illegal 
Coal and Burden on Coal Companies and State‖. In the said report 
they have assessed cost to the coal companies amounting Rs.106 
crore and cost to the State exchequer to the tune of Rs.34 crore in a 
year in Jharkhand State alone.‖ 
 
2.5 Major reasons for illegal mining of coal: 
 
 Large scale rural unemployment and poverty. 
 Organised marketing network controlled by coal mafias/influential 
person. 
 Easy availability of old, abandoned, unused, closed coal mines. 
 Geographically scattered, isolated  peripheral patches of coal deposits. 
 Apathy of State government Officials. 
 Inadequate infrastructure of law enforcement agencies.  
 
2.6 Adverse Effects of Illegal Mining: 
 
 Leads to accidents and loss of life to persons engaged in illegal 
mining. 
 Loss of revenue earnings (royalty) of the Govt. 
 Adverse impact on the conservation of precious fossil fuel. 
 Creates unsafe conditions in adjoining working mines. 
 Causes environmental degradation. 

 
5 
 
 Facilitates corruption leading to law and order problems. 
 Creates unaccounted assets and or black money. 
 Encourages involvement of mafia 
 
2.7 When asked about the environmental hazards taking place as a result 
of illegal mining and the number of accidents, mishaps reported at the illegal 
mining sites, the Committee have been given to understand that the 
environmental hazards of illegal mining are:- 
 
(i) ―Illegal mining means r emoving of coal in an unsystematic manner 
without following safety and conservation norms as a result of which 
unpredictable subsidence takes place. This invariably causes damage 
to surface structures. Such practices carried out i n populated areas 
make these areas unstable and unsafe.  
(ii) Illegal mining also leads to occurrence of underground fire on account 
of spontaneous heating. Open flames can sometimes be seen on the 
surface along with emission of obnoxious gases. One of the most  
persistent threats from the fire is land subsidence. As the burning coal 
turns to ash, hollow pockets are created underground, that leave the 
surface unstable and prone to sudden collapse, which leads to 
degradation of land/loss of green cover. This loss of green cover 
disturbs the ecological balance adversely affecting the flora and fauna.  
(iii) Water balance is disturbed in and around the locations of illegal mining. 
(iv) There are socio -economic factors involved due to loss of livelihood on 
account of fire/land s ubsidence / land degradation resulting from illegal 
mining.  
(v) Due to unsystematic workings , these mines are potential death traps 
and a potential safety hazard.  
 
The accidents, mishaps reported at illegal mining sites are being dealt 
 with by the State/District administration.‖  
 
 
Study visit by the Committee to Raniganj Coalfield 
 
2.8 The Committee undertook a spot visit to Raniganj Coalfield of the 
Eastern Coalfields Ltd (ECL) during their study visit on 28 June, 2010 to 
assess the event of illegal mining  taking place in Raniganj Coalfields and 
other areas in Burdwan District of West Bangal.  The Committee visited the 
places where illegal mining are carried on. It is st range that when everyone 
understands that everyday illegal mining is carried in that plac e despite of 
having underground weigh machine there, law enforcement agency failed to 
prevent such coal mining.  The Eastern Coalfield Ltd. have submitted the 

 
6 
 
following information to the Committee during the course of their visit to 
Raniganj Coalfield. 
 “Probable Areas for Illegal Mining: 
 Outcrop of coal seams and in areas of very low cover.  Underground 
coal mining cannot be done by ECL as per Coal Mines Regulations, 
1957, in outcrops and where the hard cover above the seam is less 
than 15 mtrs. from point of view of safety. 
 Coal min ing cannot be done within 60 mtrs of important surface 
structures like Railway track, highways, river/jores, etc. as per Coal 
Mines Regulations, 1957. 
 Where normal coal mining is uneconomical due to limited reserves or 
surface constraints.  
 
 Impact of Illegal Mining: 
 Loss of assets, as coal within ECL‘s lease hold area is being illegally 
mined. 
 Danger of fire and inundation of adjacent ECL mines. 
 Closing of mine and thus loss of production on apprehension of danger 
to existing working sites of ECL. 
 Incurring huge expenditure o n account of dozing and filling of illegal 
mining sites, both within and outside lease-hold area. 
 Diversion of productive machinery into dozing/filling jobs, adversely 
affecting production of coal. 
 Colliery management being harassed on occurrence of subsidence, 
etc. caused due to illegal mining, thus causing loss of man -hours and 
production. 
 Loss of revenue on account of Royalty/Cess to the State. 
 Illegal mining has attracted organized anti -social gangs for l aundering 
illegal revenue. 
 
 Constraints in Curbing Illegal Mining: 
 The leasehold area of ECL and land where surface rights belong to 

 
7 
 
ECL is quite large, the guarding of which on regular basis is difficult. 
 For the areas where mining lease is available wit h the company, but 
the surface rights belong to others, raid s by ECL security and CISF 
may lead to law and order problem, as they do not have powers as are 
available with law enforcement authorities.  In such cases ECL 
provides information reports and part icipate in join t inspection with 
local Police and extend support when asked for by the police/District 
Administrations. 
 ECL security manpower which numbers about 4500 and CISF 
(sanctioned strength 1040 , normally available effective strength about 
900) are deployed at different places such as collieries stockyard, Rly. 
Siding, open cast mines, establishments.  They also take action for 
curbing illegal mining and theft of coal.  Out of 900 CISF personnel, 
about 700 have been deployed at sensitive mines i.e. R ajmahal, SP 
mines and Soneput Bazari.  Seetalput Camp is for static and patrolling 
duty.  Remaining manpower has been deployed in nine camps for 
patrol duty.  
 After illegal pits are dozed off, the miscreants again open the same pits 
for illegal mining.  
 
 Pilferage of Coal: 
Pilferage of coal from the stockyards/sidings and during road and rail 
transportation also takes place and the miscreants far out -number the 
security personnel.  In ECL theft/pilferage of coal is taking place mainly 
by miscreants from ne arby villages, who enter the open cast patches 
and railway sidings forcibly.  They outnumber the handful of security 
persons and carry away head -loads of coal.  Theft of coal has also 
been observed at Gaighata crossing of Kenda area and also in 
Pandaveswar Area.  At these places, while transporting coal from 
quarry to railway siding, large numbers of people unload coal from the 
loaded dumpers by way of hooking and take away this looted coal by 
outnumbering the handful of security persons.‖ 

 
8 
 
 
Constraints faced in checking theft, illegal mining & mafia activities.  
 
2.9 As regards constraints faced by the Ministry of Coal and the coal 
companies in tackling the menace of illegal mining and theft of coal, the 
following information has been furnished:- 
 
i)  ―The S tate administration lacks adequate infrastructure and 
modernization. 
ii)  Boundary walls and barbed wire fencing put around the coal 
stock depot are often removed or breached by the miscreants. 
iii)  Due to poverty, unemployed villagers living in the coal field 
areas go for theft of coal and illegal mining as an easy option of 
livelihood. With the existing strength of security personnel it is 
difficult to disperse the mob endeavor in such malpractices. 
iv)  Illegal mining is generally organized by mafia and  also taken up 
by individuals. 
v)  Lack of sufficient cooperation and prompt response from State 
police.  
vi)  General lack of will on the part of State administration to resist 
organized illegal activities.‖ 
  
 

 
9 
 
Chapter III 
Mechanism for Prevention  
 
Illegal mining is a term commonly used for mining without a valid 
prospecting license or mining lease. This is a criminal offence for which 
prosecution can be launched for violation of Section 4 of the MMDR Act 
1957. Further Section 5(1) of the said Act also p rovides that no mining lease 
can be granted for a mineral specified in the First Schedule of the said Act, 
without the prior approval of the Central Government. Coal and Lignite are 
specified in the First Schedule.  Therefore, mining of coal and lignite wi thout 
obtaining or mining lease would be illegal. The penalties are prescribed 
under Section 21 of the MMDR Act. 
 
3.2 The main Acts, Rules and orders that this Ministry is directly 
concerned with are:  
i) ―Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 
iii) Mineral Concession Rules, 1960; and 
iv)  Colliery Control Rules, 2004.  
ii) Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 
  
According to Section 4(1) of the Mines and Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1957, no party or person can mine coal without a 
valid coal mining lease granted by the concerned State Government. 
Illegal mining of coal can be classified into two categories:- 
  
(i) Extraction of coal carried out without obtaining a valid mining 
lease from the State Government. 
(ii) Mining carrie d on by a mining lease holder outside his lease 
hold area and in contravention of the terms and conditions 
given in the mining lease. 
  
 
  

 
10 
 
State-wise number of FIRs lodged for illegal mining are given below: 
 
Company State 2009-10 (upto 
Sept’09)(Prov) 
2008-09 2007-08 2006-07 
ECL WB 34 41 11 12 
Jharkhand 0 2 8 49 
Total 34 43 19 61 
BCCL Jharkhand 26 59 42 37 
WB 6 10 13 16 
Total 32 69 55 53 
CCL Jharkhand 4 47 13
1 
35 
NCL UP/MP 0 0 0 0 
WCL Maharashtr
a 
0 0 0 0 
MP 0 1 3 5 
Total 0 1 3 5 
SECL MP 0 0 0 9 
Chattisgarh 0 0 0 0 
Total 0 0 0 9 
MCL Orissa 0 0 0 0 
NEC Assam 7 3 2 3 
 
Coal India Ltd. 77 163 210 166 
 
 The details of the action with regard to number of conviction held are 
being collected from the concerned State authorities.‖ 
 
 
3.3 When asked about the number of convictions carried out in respect of 
first information report, the Ministry of Coal stated as under: 
―Your point is very well taken. At the outset, I must say that we have 
been rather lax in following up to see that these cases reach their 
logical conclusion. That point is coming up quite clearly. The fact is 
that once the FIRs are registered, there is a tendency to rely  on the 
prosecuting authority to carry forward the process. It is not correct for 
us to say that we are not re sponsible. Our responsibility does not end. 
That point is very well taken. The Chairman did make a point that the 
kind of seriousness which has now been taken after the last meeting, 
had it been done earlier, it would have been better.‖ 
 
 The Ministry of C oal have furnished the details of quantity and 
 approximate value of coal seized as under:- 
 
 Quantity of Coal Seized ( in Tonnes) 
 
Company 2009-10(upto 
Sept’09)(Prov.) 
2008-09 2007-08 2006-07 
ECL 4427 6529 2497 3528 
BCCL 872 2051 131 63 

 
11 
 
CCL 5 93 430 404 
NCL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
WCL NIL 11 41 39 
SECL NIL NIL 40 541 
MCL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
NEC NIL NIL NIL NIL 
CIL 5304 8684 3139 4575 
 
 Approximate Value of Coal Seized ( in Rs. Lakhs) 
 
Company 2009-10(upto 
Sept’09)(Prov.) 
2008-09 2007-08 2006-07 
ECL 44.27 65.29 24.97 35.28 
BCCL 16.33 35.92 2.03 0.97 
CCL 0.05 0.85 7.55 4.04 
NCL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
WCL NIL 0.11 0.80 0.41 
SECL NIL NIL 0.60 7.15 
MCL NIL NIL NIL NIL 
NEC NIL NIL NIL NIL 
CIL 60.65 102.17 35.95 47.85 
 
 
3.4 During the oral evidence, the represent atives of Ministry of Coal and 
Coal India Limited deposed before the Committee the following information: 
 
 
―Sir, NCL area is only having only eight large opencast mines.  The 
internal security is strong and the locality is very compact.  It is like a 
factory.  About 90 per cent of the coal goes to NTPC through merry-go-
round system.  So, the scope of stealing coal is very much less.  These 
are not scattered large number of mines like we have in ECL, BCCL 
and like that.  That makes the difference.  
 
 In WCL there are some cases but not like others.  Even South-Eastern 
Coal Fields is more than WCL but it is not like ECL and BCCL.  In fact 
CCL is an understatement.  The area of CCL is such that we should 
have expected more in CCL.  CCL has a problem. The CMD a lso 
confirms that.  They do not register cases quickly.  It is very difficult to 
get cases registered.  That is the difficulty they are experiencing.   
 
In NEC also there are some cases.  It is a small unit.  Here also there 
are some cases where the total production being one million tone.  It is 
basically the law and order situation, Sir.  It is not the CMD who 
matters it is the law and order situation that matters. In the cases of 
Northern Coal Fields, Sir, actually the whole area is very compact.  
Every mine being ten million tone, five million tone or 12 million tone 

 
12 
 
mine, they can have a lot of security arrangements.  The coal goes 
straightaway from a rapid loading system to individual power plants.  
There is hardly any scope.  The entire activity is de partmental.  The is 
no outside contractors, trucks or anything like that.  That also makes a 
difference.‖  
 
3.5 On being asked about the measures suggested to stop illegal mining of 
coal, the following information has been provided to the Committee:-  
  
(i)        ―Awarding the job of coal/sand transportation to villagers‘ Co -
operative on the basis of transportation capacity available with 
them will ensure villagers participation in the mining activities 
being carried out by the production companies. Provid ing 
source of earning in this way will be an incentive for them to 
desist from the illegal mining activities. 
  
(ii) Outside the leasehold areas, illegal mining generally takes place 
at some patches of coal deposit at shallow depth from the 
surface.  Some of the coal blocks can be awarded by the 
Central Govt. to the state Governments on nomination basis and 
the State Govts. can get the mining done through the villagers‘ 
Co-operative formed by the nearby villagers of the mine.  Apart 
from legalizing mining a ctivities, it will provide an alternative 
source of livelihood to the villagers which, in turn will reduce the 
chances of these villagers to be influenced by Mafias.  
(iii)  State Police administration should be strengthened with proper 
infrastructure and modernization for controlling the Mafia as well 
as for stringent patrolling.   
(iv) Legal provisions should be made to confiscate the equipment 
used in illegal Mining.  
(v)  Possibility of use of Information Technology in detecting Illegal 
  Mining should be explored.  
(vi)  A task force with experts from the field should be formed to 
examine the requirement of coal for local industries. 
(vii) Outsourcing to be allowed by state Govt. to work in abandoned 
OC mines, in the outcrops/incrops at shallow depths  
  
  Increasing instances of illegal coal mining and the seriousness of the 
 situation on the ground had attracted adverse media and public 
 attention due to indiscriminate pillaging of natural resources by 
 unscrupulous elements while endangering the lives  of innocent people 
 involved.  The Ministry is very much seized of the increasing instances 
 of illegal coal mining.‖ 
 

 
13 
 
3.6 Giving details of the Measures taken for prevention of illegal coal 
mining and theft, Ministry of Coal has stated as under:- 
 
               “(a)     Steps taken by the Government 
  
(i)         Ministry of Coal issued instructions on 18.12. 2001 to the Chief 
Secretaries of the coal producing States for placing effective 
mechanism to check illegal mining. The States were also directed 
to give appropriate direction to the concerned authorities to take 
effective steps to check such illegal activities at places where such 
large scale illegal mining is believed to be taking place. The State 
Government were also directed to consider framing o f suitable 
rules, if not already done, under the provisions of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,1957 to strengthen the 
District authorities in curbing such illegal activities. 
  
(ii)       Based on the decisions taken in the meeting held on 17.5. 2005 
between Secretary (Coal) and Chief Secretary (Jharkhand), CCL 
and BCCL have taken up action to check illegal mining. Joint action 
for prevention of illegal mining has been initiated by the 
management and District Collectors due to which i llegal mining has 
reduced considerably. Secretary (Mines) ,Govt. of Jharkhand has 
constituted State as well as district level Task Forces on 
05.10.2005. 
(iii)      The matter of illegal mining was again taken up by Secretary (Coal) 
with Chief Secretaries of Govt. of Jharkhand, West Bengal, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Chattisgarh, and Assam vide letter dated 
07.10.2005 
(iv)       Apart from the above steps, M inister of State (Coal) had also met 
with the Chief Ministers of Jharkhand and West Bengal. The two 
Chief Ministers had agreed to look into the matter and to instruct 
the administrative machinery for taking effective steps. 
  
(b) Steps taken by the Coal Companies 
  
Following steps are taken by coal companies to prevent illegal mining: 
  
i) Rat holes crea ted for the purpose of illegal mining are being 
dozed off and filled up with stone and debris wherever possible. 
ii) Trenches have been dug to isolate the illegal mining sites. 
iii)       Concrete walls have been created on the mouth of the 
abandoned mines  to prevent access and illegal activities in 
these areas. 
iv)  Fencing of illegal mining sites and displaying of sign boards 
mentioning    "Dangerous and Prohibited Place" 
v)  Dumping of the overburden is being done on the outcrop zones. 

 
14 
 
 
(vi) Erection of barbed-wire/wall fencing around pithead depots, 
static   security manning including deployment of armed guards 
during the night hours. 
(vii)  Escorting of loaded rakes up to railway weighbridges by armed 
guards and joint patrolling with Railway Protection Force (RPF) 
in the long railway tracks which are prone to wagon looting. 
(viii)    Sealing of illegal mining spots is resorted to. 
(ix) Stringent action is taken against transport vehicles caught in the 
act of theft or pilferage. 
(x)       Training of exis ting security personnel, refresher training of 
CISF  personnel and basic training to new recruits in security 
discipline are arranged  for strengthening the security set up. 
 (xi) Engaging of lady security guard for preventing women and 
 children indulging in theft/pilferage of coal, strengthening of the 
 security discipline by reassessing he requirement of security 
 personnel,  horizontal movement of executives with aptitude 
 for security work and  inducting qualified security personnel 
 at junior, middle and senior levels.‖ 
  
3.7 When asked whether an exclusive cell exists in the Ministry to monitor 
coordination with State Governments/Coal Companies to prevent illegal 
mining and theft of coal , the representatives of Ministry of Coal stated as 
under: 
 
―There is no special monitoring/liasoning cell at the Ministry at 
present. However, vigilance divisions in the ministry as well at CIL and 
its each subsidiary, monitors cases of theft and pilferages of coal. A 
committee headed by the then Minister of State for coal, with 
representatives at the Ministerial level from Jharkhand and West 
Bengal had studied these issues. 
 
The Ministry of Coal has stated that the following  mechanism has 
 been put in place to ensure that no pilferage of coal takes place at 
 pithead and also during transportation of coal:- 
 
a) Entry/exit points are manned by establishing proper check posts 
and barrier where all coal laden vehicles are physically checked. 
b) Patrolling is done within and outside the mine area by the security 
staff. 
c) Joint patrolling with local police is also being carried out in areas. 
d) Surprise checks/raids are conducted by flying squads of 
CISF/security department 
e) Security squads have been introduced to check transportation of 
coal enroute to Railway Siding. 

 
15 
 
f) Surprise re -weighment of coal laden trucks is done at 
weighbridges. 
g) Escorting of coal rakes in coordination with RPF upto weighbridge 
is arranged in pilferage prone areas. 
h) FIR is lodged in case of theft of coal, whenever it takes place. 
i) In 11 large opencast mines of CIL, be sides patrolling by the 
security personnel, it is also proposed to install Electronic 
Surveillance System for tracking of trucks involved in 
transportation.‖ 
 
3.8 Giving details of the reasons/factors behind rampant illegal mining 
and theft of coal , despite the measures taken by the authorities concerned, 
the representatives of the Ministry of Coal stated as follows: 
―a) Socio-Economic - unemployment, poverty, illiteracy, lack of 
consciousness; 
b)  Administrative - Innumerable small pockets spread over vast  
coalfield areas;  
c) Geological - Easy access to coal with very low cover; 
d) Economic - Adequate demand from end -users, willing to pay good 
price; 
e)  Poor track record of suitable action against offenders; 
f)  Landlessness/marginal land holding. 
g)  Dependence on illegal coal supply chain for sustenance. 
 
 While there is always scope for more effective implementation of 
preventive measures, problem has been with regard to enforcement of 
legal provisions, which would have more deterrent effect. Unless hea vy 
penalties in terms of confiscation of equipments, vehicles and premises 
used for illegal mining, imprisonment etc. are improved and cases are 
disposed of with priority, illegal mining may continue.‖ 
 
In replies to the list of points, the Ministry of Coa l while furnishing 
details of the achievements made by the state as well as district level Task 
Forces set up by the Government of Jharkhand to check the menace of illegal 
mining and theft of coal, stated as follows: 
―On 11.12.2009 a meeting was held in Jh arkhand State in which Chief 
Secretary, Jharkhand as Chairman informed the officials that Central 
Government and State Government are receiving information about 
illegal mining of coal and other minerals for which the government is 
very much concerned and informed that first of all, all the places of 
illegal mining should be identified and joint team of Police, Mines 
Department, Forest Department and coal companies should be 
constituted to inspect the sites. If required aerial photograph, satellite 
images should be collected.  
 

 
16 
 
Chief Secretary also directed that all coal companies should appoint 
officers of GM level as Nodal Officer, who should liase with IG Police 
(Special Branch) and contact him regularly. Director (Personnel), ECL 
pointed out that at Nirs ha PS i.e. Chapapur and Lakhimata, some 
antisocial elements have made incline entries and are doing illegal 
mining. 
Chief Secretary also advised that places on GT Road where illegal 
mining is going on should be filled up at the earliest. He also 
instructed that Task Force should be formed at Dhanbad district and 
they should inspect the illegal mining sites at Mugma & Nirsha. 
 
Chief Secretary also advised that requirement of end users such as 
sponge iron plants. brick kilns and other small industries SSI sho uld 
be checked periodically and a list of units who have got linkage should 
be prepared. After this, action may be taken against units which have 
got no linkage but are running. He has also instructed that if required 
regulation should be made for end user  industries in consultation with 
the Law Department.‖ 
 
3.9 When asked as to w hy CIL can‘t take suo moto action against illegal 
mining as  soon as it comes to its notice  even though the land may not be 
belonging to CIL but becomes deemed national property be cause of the coal 
reserves in that land, the Ministry of Coal have stated as under:- 
 
―Whenever incidents of illegal mining within the lease hold areas of the 
coal company is noticed, immediate action by lodging FIR in local 
police station for taking actio n under MMRD Act and for providing 
assistance in dozing/filling of illegal mining sites are taken.  The State 
Governments are the owners of the coal resources. They grant the 
mining leases/concessions. Therefore, as owners, it has to be 
responsibility of th e State governments to prevent illegal mining of 
coal. In respect of leased areas, the lessees (i.e. the coal companies) 
also have the responsibility to prevent any illegal mining of coal. As 
the law and order is the state subject, it is primarily the resp onsibility 
of the concerned state‘s Law enforcing authorities. E xisting provisions 
in the MMDR Act, 1957 are adequate for taking all necessary action to 
curb this menace of illegal mining activities in the country.‖  
 
 
3.10 While replying to the issues (i) overweighing of trucks with connivance 
of officials while showing loss weight (ii) Mining of Coal from abandoned 
mines at night (example of Hazaribagh) (iii) black marketing of unaccounted 
slurry and (iv) as to how the Ministry can control the illegal sal e of coal from 

 
17 
 
captive coal blocks over and above the justified production , the Ministry of 
Coal have stated as under:- 
 
            (i)  ―System of weighment with Challan have been introduced while 
transporting coal from one point to another point. Author ised 
loading inspector and weighbridge clerk are posted for 
monitoring the loading and dispatch arrangement. Check posts 
have been installed at vulnerable places with round the clock 
security guarding arrangement. 
   
During a recent meeting held by Special Director(A), CBI with 
the officers of CBI and CVOs of CIL and its subsidiaries, the 
related issue was flagged and it was decided that CBI would do 
sample checks of weighbridges with the help of CVOs and also 
local Weights and Measures Department officials. 
 
(ii) Whenever illegal mining has been noticed, the mining sites 
have been closed/filled up by  debris to avoid recurrence of 
illegal mining. 
 
   (iii)  No such case of black marketing of slurry has come to notice. 
 
  (iv) The captive coal block owners are re quired to submit returns 
indicating coal production and dispatch figures. The production 
from captive mines is mentioned by district mining officers at State 
level as per their rules and regulations. Any excess production 
beyond approved mining plan is not  permitted. Ministry of Coal 
while allotting coal block and giving permission for mining, allows 
only the adequate quantity of coal production for their captive end 
use. For any upward revision or downsizing production, adequate 
reasons along with the revi sed mining plan is required to be 
submitted for approval of Ministry of Coal. 
 
In so far as blocks allotted to private companies for captive use are 
concerned, the only incident of illegal trading of coal in violation of 
the condition of captive use of coa l in their end -use plant that has 
been established was in respect of M/s Central Collieries Company 
Limited, where the company had reportedly sold coal mined from 
Takli-Jena-Bellora (South) coal block allocated for captive use in 
its proposed power plant.  Action was taken and the lease granted 
by the Government of Maharashtra in respect of the said block was 
declared void by the Revisional Authority constituted by the Central 
Government in exercise of its power of revision under the Mines & 
Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957.‖ 
 
3.11 On being asked as to how can the theft by way of taking trucks three/four 
times on same paper can be stopped, whether postings at crucial weighment 

 
18 
 
points is being done on the directions of Mafia , the Ministry of Coal have stated 
as under:  
 
      “Coal dispatches by trucks are issued with challans afixed with 
 hologram, marked and duly authenticated by authorized officials. 
 Further, the truck numbers are mentioned in every challan with date 
 and time to  prevent repeat loading by trucks. The checks are done  at 
 loading points, weighbridges and entry/exit points. Posting at 
 weighment  points is done as per the direction of management; the 
 persons are  rotated periodically from sensitive posts to non -sensitive 
 posts.‖ 
 
3.12 When asked about the figure, if any, about coal lying in police stations 
having been claimed by the companies may be brought  to the notice of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Coal have stated that ―Coal seized by the police is 
kept at the police sta tion. However, in some cases, it is handed over to Coal 
Companies on ―Jamanatnama‖ basis.‖ 
 
3.13. When asked about the steps Ministry of Coal/PSUs plan to take 
(Policy changes/amendment of Acts etc.) for curbing illegal mining , the 
Ministry of Coal have stated as under:-  
 
―Since law & order is a state subject, primarily it is the responsibility of 
the State/District administration to take necessary deterrent action to 
stop/curb illegal coal mining.  Coal India Ltd. and its subsidiaries are 
also associated closely with the concerned State and District 
authorities to deal with this menace. Further , the existing provisions in 
the MMDR Act, 1957 are adequate for taking necessary action by the 
State Govt. against any person indulging in illegal mining activities. 
 
Section 4(1) of the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) 
Act, 1957 bans all mining operations other than those under a mining 
lease granted under the provisions of the said Act and Rules made 
thereunder.  Thus, any mining operations in contrave ntion of the 
provision contained in the above mentioned Section 4(1) invites 
punitive action as provided in Section 21 of the MMDR Act, 1957, 
including imprisonment for a term that may extend to two years, or fine 
that may extend to twenty five thousand ru pees or both.  It further 
provides that wherever any person raises, transports or causes to be 
raised or transported, without any lawful authority, any mineral from 
any land, and for that purpose, uses any tool, equipment, vehicle or 
any other thing, such mineral, tool, equipment, vehicle or any other 
thing shall be liable to be seized by an officer or authority specially 

 
19 
 
empowered in this behalf.  These are also liable to be confiscated 
through a court order.  The States have also been vested with powers 
to frame Rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage 
of minerals and for the purposes connected therewith, under Section 
23(c) of the MMDR Act, 1957.  Many States have already framed such 
Rules under the aforesaid Section. 
 
Ministry of C oal has again requested in Sept. 2009 to Chief 
Secretaries of coal bearing States to instruct their State law enforcing 
authorities to take stringent action under the provisions of the MMDR 
Act, 1957 to check illegal mining activities.  
 
However, in a new proposed draft of MMDR Act 2009, circulated by 
Ministry of Mines, some stringent measures like imprisonment up to 3 
years and cost recovery up to 10 time of the price of the mineral are 
being suggested to prevent such activities.‖ 
 
3.14 On being asked abou t the n eed to give views/ thoughts whether an 
expert/trained Force is needed, the Ministry of Coal have stated that ―It is felt 
that if necessary deterrent steps are taken as per the law i.e. MMDR Act 
1957 by the local law enforcing authorities, that shoul d itself be sufficient for 
curbing these activities.‖  
 
3.15 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry of Coal to discuss 
the issue of insufficient cooperation and lack of prompt action from state 
police with the Ministry of Home Affairs and State G overnments concerned, 
the Ministry of Coal have stated as under:-  
 
―The issue was taken up with the State authorities, as the subject of law 
and order is with them. However, Hon‘ble Minister of State (independent 
charge) of Coal, Statistics  and Programme Implementation held meeting 
with the Chief Minister of West Bengal on 24.6.09 and with H.E. the 
Governor of Jharkhand on 26.6.09 and 11.10.09 on the subject. In the 
committee headed by the then Minister of State for coal, this matter was 
discussed with the  Ministers of the State governments of Jharkhand and 
West Bengal.  
 
In SECL, regarding theft/pilferage of coal, the matter was taken up at the 
highest level with State Government of Chhattisgarh and Madhya 

 
20 
 
Pradesh regularly. Police co -operation is also giv en to SECL. Ministry of 
Home Affairs has also sanctioned 1452 posts of CISF for early 
deployment at SECL in Gevra/Dipka Areas. 
 
 Chairman-cum-Managing Director, ECL and Director(Personnel), ECL 
had a meeting with Addl. Chief Secretary(Home), Govt. of West Bengal, 
which was attended by DG(P) of West Bengal also. In the meeting, 
problems of illegal mining and theft/pilferage of coal was discussed at 
length. A meeting between State Govt. and Coal Companies was 
conducted on 11.12.09 under Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, 
Jharkhand for prevention of illegal mining.‖  
 
   
3.16 Eastern Coalfields Limited have provided the following information 
during the study visit to Raniganj as regards steps taken to curb the menace 
of illegal mining and theft of coal: 
 
“(a) Action Taken by ECL in curbing illegal mining and theft of coal: 
 
 CISF, ECL security and police are conducting regular raids/checks and 
seize coal and toehr materials, coal loaded trucks and apprehended 
and handed over the miscreants to the police and FIRs are lodged. 
 Dozing/filling/sealing of illegal mining sites by pay loaders/dozers 
under security cover provided by State Police on identification of illegal 
mining sites.  However many time,s the filled up/dozed areas are redug 
by miscreants. 
 CISF holds periodical meetings with ECL authorities and also cunducts 
surprising inspection on regular basis and also on report of Area GMs. 
 Take active part in various meeting at State Level Task force and 
district Level Task Force. 
 Areas have constituted Committees to i nspect sites prone to illegal 
mining and maintain liaison with concerned police stations. 
 ECL has provided 16 vechicles to District law and Administration 
Authorities involving an annual expenditure of about Rs. 27 lakhs to 
assists combating illegal mining and pilferage of coal. 
 When illegal mining activities out side leasehold area is detected, 

 
21 
 
information sent to police administration and assistance/help is 
provided to police/District Administration. 
 ECL security forces and CISF have been posted at vulner able 
pilferage posts like Collierieis stockyard, railway siding and open cast 
working.  
 
 The details of raids conducted, coal seized, FIRs lodged with police 
 station in respect of illegal mining together with information about 
 dozing off illegal mining sites and pilferage of coal for last 4 years is 
 given in Annexure-2  
 
(b) Follow Up action Taken After Observation by Parliamentary 
 Standing committee on Coal and Steel: 
 
A. After concern s expressed by Parliamentary Standing committee on 
coal and Steel, on the menaceof  illegal mining besides strengthening 
the measured as mentioned above, following further action have been 
initiated: 
 Follow up of FIR lodged by ECL.  The action has been started for 
follow up of actions taken in respect of FIRs lodged with the  various 
PS and accordingly information for FIRs lodged was sought from 
the concerned S.P.s vide letter dated 2.2.10 and 4.2.10. 
 The above letter was followed by letter No. ECL/CMD/27/33 dated 
10th March, 2010 written to the SPs – Purulia, Goddda and 
Burdwan by CMD requesting them to advise to all concerned to 
take necessary measures to deal with illegal mining of coal and to 
follow up of FIRs and information complaints lodged at the PS in 
courts so that cases are brought to their logical conclusion. 
 In reference to letters written by CMD to SPs as mentioned above, 
D(P), ECL vide letter dated 11 th May, 2010 requested the SPs – 
Godda, Purulia and Burdwan to fix a meeting to curb the illegal coal 
mining and coal theft. 
 The status of cases filed in pursuance to FIRs lodged in the various 

 
22 
 
PS under Dhanbad District was received from SP -Dhanbad.  SP – 
Purulia vide letter dated 10 th March, 2010 was again requested by 
COS, ECL to arrange to send the information at the earliest.  SP -
Purulia, vide letter dated 20.5.201 0 enclosing therewith a list of 
FIRs lodged by ECL, was again requested to arrange to send the 
status of cases filed before the Court of Law in pursuance to FIRs 
lodged by ECL. 
 SP-Burdwan forwarded our letter No. ECL/D(P)/illegal 
Mining/18/5376 dated 2 nd Feb., 2010 to Addl. S.P., Asansol. who 
desired copies of FIRs filed by ECL.  The same was furnished to 
Addl.S.P., Asansol by CSO and the matter is being pursued. 
 After vigorous follow up, status of some FIRs from different police 
stations could be received.   The follow up for remaining FIRs is 
being made for further action in the matter.  The status of 
information received in respect of FIRs lodged by ECL i n last 4 
years in given in Annexure-3. 
B. In order to follow up the out come of FIRs lodged by ECL with po lice 
stations, a team consisting of DY. CSO and Legal Inspector has been 
constituted. 
C. Besides, 3 lawyers have also been engaged for this purpose to obtain 
status of action taken on FIRs.  
D. Efforts have been made to tighten security at vulnerable points to c urb 
the pilferage of coal and other properties.  It is worth mentioning that 
while defending the properties of ECL, one armed guard was shot 
dead by miscreants on 24.12.2009.  In another incident on 15.6.2010, 
Area Security Officer was manhandled in at Jha njra Area by 
miscreants. 
E. The raids to curb illegal mining and coal pilferage and dozing off/filling 
up illegal pits have also been intensified.  The details for last 4 months 
are given in Anneuxure-4 
F. A Committee of D(P), CVO, Sr. Commandant, CISF with othe r officers 
has been constituted to review the progress in this regard. 

 
23 
 
G. Regular meeting with OICs of police stations by ECL authorities are 
being held. 
 
The representatives of the Eastern Coalfields Ltd. during the visit of the 
Committee have forwarded the following before the Committee: 
 
(c)    Help needed from the Government of West Bengal. 
 Outsourcing of those patches, which are within the leasehold of ECL, 
and which can be mined gainfully.  Support for quick acquisition of land 
and maintenance of law and order. 
 Suitable administrative checks and balances to contain mushroom 
growth of Brick Kiln/Sponge Iron etc., which form an easy consumption 
centres for illegally mined coal. 
 Appropriate administrative checks & balances for regulating 
transportation of illegally mined coal. 
 Intenstive inter -action between the State Government, local CISF and 
other stake holders. 
 Responsibility is required to be fixed to curb the illegal mining in such 
areas where ECL has underground mining lease but does not possess 
surface right.  
 Support of Police needed for preventing theft of coal, often by large 
number of persons, from sidings, opencast mines, outsourcing patches 
and during coal transport 
 Formation of Joint Inspection/Co -ordination Committees by including the 
Panchayats, Municipalities, Peoples representatives and other stake 
holders through proper administrative notification for creating appropriate 
awareness and control; and as recommended by the Committee of 
Petitions 2001 -02 of WB Legislative Assembly for prevention  of illegal 
coal mining, operation and related activities in coal belt areas. 
 Making available copies of FIRs in respect of illegal mining to ECL 
forthwith and periodic Action Taken Reports.‖ 
 
Study by XLRI Jamshedpur & ISMU, Dhanbad 
             
3.17 Government of Jharkhand has instituted a study through Indian School 
of Mines, Dhanbad and Xavier Labour Research Institute, Jamshedpur to 
examine, inter-alia, the supply-wise inter-linkages between illegal coal mining 
and socio -economic conditions/demographic  profiles of the main actors 
involved in this activity, understand the demand -side dynamics of illegally 
mined coal in different sectors, explore and suggest mitigation strategies 
rooted in social acceptability economic viability, environmental sustainabil ity 

 
24 
 
and practical implement ability, extant, spread and severity of the problem 
etc.  ISM Dhanbad has submitted the final report to the Government of 
Jharkhand and CIL.  XLRI, Jamshedpur has completed collection of data on 
illegal mining and they have subm itted the report to the Government of 
Jharkhand and CIL.  The steps/action recommended by XLRI, Jamshedpur to 
overcome illegal mining of coal are given below : 
  
―A.  Main drivers that force or induce individuals into illegal coal supply chain     
activities are : 
  
1)      Landlessness/marginal landholding 
2)      Dependence on illegal coal supply chain for sustenance 
3)      Lack of alternative employment opportunities 
4)      Illiteracy & low literacy levels 
5)  Debt burden, coercion by middlemen/c oal ma fia, easy 
availability of coal 
6) Better economic returns from illegal coal 
7) Market demand for illegal coal 
8) Failure of the Government and coal companies 
  
B. Illegal Coal Control Strategies are as follows:- 
  
            1. Socio-economic development strategies 
                      i.    Improve access to education 
                      ii.   Creating micro/lift irrigation facilities 
                     iii.   Access to drinking water, sanitation and health care 
                    iv.  Access to markets 
  
           2. Institutional arrangements for community development and 
 participation 
A)    Village cooperatives 
 (i)      Village cooperatives as ―Coal cooperatives‖ 
 (ii)     Village cooperatives as service providers 
 (iii)    Village cooperatives as share holders 
 (iv)    Village cooperatives as mining companies 
  
3. Strategies to create alternate employment opportunities – Micro 
Enterprises 
  
4. Strategies to manage demand for illegal coal 
  
1.     Demand for illegal coal in households 
2.     Demand for illegal coal in hotels and dhabas 
3.     Demand for illegal coal in brick-kilns, factories etc. 
  

 
25 
 
5.  Law enforcement and other measures 
6.  Ensure community participation 
  
 Coal companies will have to engage in each of the decision making,        
implementation and benefit sharing steps.     
  
 Steps/Actions recommended by ISMU, Dhanbad to overcome 
 illegal mining of coal 
 
 Permit coal mining through co -operative society making provision 
for small leasehold and easy working condition to create sour ce of 
livelihood to target groups. 
 Systematization of informal/illegal mining bringing them within legal 
framework/eliminating mafia‘s hold. 
 Public sector coal companies and Government may extend help in 
getting / transferring / granting lease for coal min ing in 
abandoned/discontinued open pit or fresh leases of small and 
shallow virgin deposits. 
 Conditions of mining leases in terms of tenure, size disposition with 
reference to geological boundaries and other mining conditions 
should be such as to make syst ematic and complete extraction of 
coal possible by the target group.  
 Total manpower employment in one mine may be limited in range 
of 100 to 150. 
 Public sector coal companies may come forward to provide 
technical guidance and assistance. 
 Government needs to include small -scale mining assistance 
programmes/projects in regional and local development 
programmes. 
 Mechanism like providing tax hol iday may  be designed and 
developed to absorb losses, if any, incurred during initial years of 
mining operation by co-operative societies.  
 
Parallel measures desirable in mitigating illegal mining problems in 
states suggested by ISMU. 
 AMO and DMOs should be armed with power of conviction and 
mining inspectors with power to prosecute. 
 Strength of mining inspectors should  made at least double of 
existing strength. 
 Field officers may be provided with armed guards placed under 
administrative control of DMOs. 
 Creation of Hot lines with toll free numbers for informers and 
incentives for informers. 
 All illegal collection centres may be closed. 
 Provisions of Sections 21 (4) and 21 (5) of the MMDR act, 1957 
must be implemented strictly. 
 Creation of sufficient numbers of check posts and barriers. 

 
26 
 
 Creation of special cells at district level to expedite legal cases 
admitted under Section 22 of MMDR Act 1957. 
 District administration may take necessary steps for cancellation of 
registration of trucks / vehicles involved in illegal transportation of 
coal. 
 Creation of flying squad to check function of check posts, barriers 
etc.  
 Various j obs such as removal of overburden, transport of coal, 
supply of materials etc. May be identified in mines of public coal 
companies that may be outsourced to co-operative societies. 
 Preference may be given to local registered contractors. 
 Fresh provis ions m ay be made in MMDR Act, 1957 for grant of 
lease of small and shallow deposits to cooperative societies of 
target groups.  
 Coal companies may be made responsible to check illegal min ing 
in respect of all such mines whose leases have not been 
surrendered to State Government. 
 Submission of time bound programme of mine closure in respect of 
mines likely to be closed within next two years.  
  
  In the meeting of Hon‘ble Minister of State for Coal with the Governor 
 of Jharkhand, it was decided that the Secretary , Mines & Geology, 
 Jharkhand Government, will study the report submitted by XLRI on 
 solutions to the problems on illegal coal mining and decide further 
 course of action.  Director General of Police, Jharkhand was directed 
 to issue instructions to take legal actions as per MMDR Act provisions 
 & impose three years imprisonment in respect of illegal coal mining. 
 CMDs of ECL, BCCL & CCL were directed by Chairman, CIL to 
 ensure certification of seized commodity as coal and also its removal 
 within 7 days of seizure.  
  
Chief Secretaries of all the coal bearing States were requested to 
suitably instruct and sensitize law enforcing agencies of their 
respective States  to apply stringent provisions and legal aspects 
available in the Mines & Minerals (Developm ent & Regulation) Act, 
(MMDR Act), 1957 for prevention and check of illegal mining practice 
in the States.‖ 
 
 
 

 
27 
 
PART - II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
1. The Committee regret to observe that coal, a vital raw material for many 
basic industries, is being lost in the form of illegal mining and theft due to 
negligence and carelessness on the part of those who are mandated under 
the law to provide for the efficient and optimal utilization of the scarce coal 
reserves and enforcement of law and ord ers. The best quality of coal is 
found in the reserves of Eastern India which is lamentably worst affected 
by the illegal mining and theft.  As the business of illegal mining has been 
thriving for decades in various States with the connivance of police, 
mafias, middle-man and administrative officials, the Committee are inclined 
to conclude that  the natural resources of the country are being plundered 
at the cost of national economy and destruction of environment. The 
Committee are of the opinion that officials responsible to curb illegal 
mining are either indifferent or too scared to stop the menace. In short all 
responsible officials including state law enforcement officers are not at all 
interested to prevent illegal coal mining. Committee feels that if t he police 
officers are serious to prevent Illegal coal mining, it can be done without 
much effort.  In fact the day the Committee visited Raniganj Area, there was 
no illegal coal mining operation on that day. It was prevented by the local 
police only for t hat day. This is so unfortunate that it cannot be described 
by any word. 
2. According to the Ministry of Coal , illegal mining, theft and pilferage of 
coal are predominant in Eastern Region particularly in the command areas 
of Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) , Central Coalfield Limited (CCL) and 
Eastern Coalfield Limited (ECL). The number of cases of illegal mining 
reported in the above subsidiaries of Coal India Limited was about 583  
from 2006 -07 to 2009 -10 (upto September, 2009)  as per information 
provided by Ministry of Coal. The Committee are of the view that there may 
be thousands of cases which go unreported. In this connection it is 
pertinent to note that t he representative of the Ministry of Coal conceded 
during the  evidence that a large number of ille gal mining was taking place 

 
28 
 
at the mine sites in the leasehold areas of ECL, BC CL and CCL where 
extraction of coal is being carried out by miscreants without obtaining valid 
mining lease from State Government. The Committee are of the view that 
the coal co mpanies should deploy CISF in coordination with the State 
police for maintaining more vigil and curb illegal mining and theft of coal in 
the leasehold areas.  
3. The Committee are constrained to point out that while the Government 
is aware of the fact that th e illegal mining and theft of coal is costing 
national economy heavily, it is still at the stage of identifying illegal miners  
with no concrete action being undertaken to put an end to this menace. 
This is evident from the information furnished to the Com mittee showing a 
huge gap between the number of cases of illegal mining and FIRs lodged. 
What is surprising and shocking is the fact that while 616 FIRs were lodged 
during the last four years, no information is available about the number of 
conviction carr ied out by the concerned State authorities. Even the coal 
companies have utterly failed in pursuing the FIRs and have left the matter 
to the mercy of prosecution authorities of the States. The Legal Department 
and vigilance of Coal Companies has also failed to discharge their duties in 
not pursuing the matter with the concerned authorities since cases against 
illegal operators can only be lodged by the government Officials and coal 
companies. This is nothing but dereliction of their duties and also failure 
can be part of concerned top officers of coal companies . What has 
anguished the Committee is that the coal companies have not even cared 
to claim the huge quantity of coal seized unclaimed in various police 
stations. This is a sad commentary on the part of  Vigilance, Personnel and 
Legal Departments of the concerned coal companies.  Nobody at any point 
of time bothered at all in above aspect. 
Although a large number of cases (616 FIR lodged up to September, 
2009) of illegal mining have been reported in Coal India subsidiaries 
particularly in Bharat Coking Coal Limited, Central Coalfield Limited and 
Eastern Coalfield Limited and 21702 tonnes of coal was seized during the 

 
29 
 
last four years (upto September, 2009) only one officer has been 
suspended by the Manageme nt for lackluster attitude towards curbing 
illegal mining. The Committee are surprised to find that action has been 
taken against only one officer while the number of illegal mining cases 
reported in coal subsidiaries has been on very high side. The Committee 
are shocked to note that there has not been an occasion in the last five 
years where any conviction order has been issued by the competent court. 
It is a matter of surprise that no one has taken any interest to see that in 
case of illegal coal mining, appropriate action should be taken and the 
cases are lodged for order of conviction.  
 
4. There is a need to fix the responsibility on the part of the officers 
incharge of a particular colliery for any illegal mining and theft taking place 
in and around hi s command area. With this mechanism in place, the 
Committee feel that illegal mining would be curbed to a large extent.  The 
Committee, therefore,  desire that the Ministry may issue necessary 
instructions to all the coal companies to appoint a Nodal Office r each who 
should be made responsible in case of illegal mining and theft of coal 
taking place in his command areas and the working of the officer may be 
constantly monitored and his performance reflected in the Annual 
Appraisal Report. 
5. The Committee du ring their Study Tour to Raniganj Coalfield areas had 
found that illegal mining was going on at a number of places in Jamuria 
and Sir ipur coalfields. The areas where such illegal mining was going on 
were mainly the mined out mines where a considerable amou nt of coal is 
left out by the coal companies to avoid subsiding. The Committee have 
been given to understand that illegal mining mostly takes place in mined 
out/abandoned and old mines, small and isolated patches spread over a 
large area, exposed coal seam  and also in the leasehold areas of public 
sector coal companies. The coal companies often neglect to refill the voids 
with sand thereby giving ready access for illegal mining of the coal. Illegal 

 
30 
 
coal mining in these areas takes place as a result of non -implementation of 
Mine Closure Plan in a scientific manner. The Committee, therefore, would 
like all the coal companies to strictly adhere to the Mine Closure Plan 
leaving no scope for illegal coal mining. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to frame rule s for imposing heavy penalties on all the public as 
well as private coal companies who fail to implement the Mine Closure Plan 
in a time bound manner.  The Committee were shocked to see that weigh 
machines were existing for weighing illegal coal for transpo rtation. But no 
one has taken any step to remove the weigh machines . The Committee  
deprecate the dismal p erformance of police offic ers and officers of coal 
companies. 
6.  The Committee note that coal is transported to Railway sidings from 
collieries where coal stock is maintained for loading into wagons.    There 
is inadequate security at many points enroute from Mines to the Railway 
sidings from where there are plenty of opportunities for miscreants for 
pilferage of coal.  The complicity of some insiders of coal companies with 
the coal mafia cannot be ruled out.  The Committee have been given to 
understand that generally large chunks of coal are thrown off from 
uncovered wagons and trucks along their routes.  Though, coal dispatches 
by trucks are issued wi th challans affixed with hologram, marked and duly 
authenticated by authorized officials, various checks are done at loading 
point, way-bridges and entry-exit points, the quantity of coal seized by coal 
subsidiaries during the last four years clearly indic ates that the pilferage 
and theft of coal continue unabated despite a host of measures taken by 
coal companies.  Needless to say, the present system of checking pilferage 
and theft of coal needs to be strengthened  in consultation with concerned 
State Gover nments/appropriate officer .  Keeping in view the above, the 
Committee recommend that more security guards and also CISF should be 
deputed on Railway sidings to prevent pilferage and theft of coal from 
railway wagons. The steps taken in this regard may be i ntimated to the 
Committee.  

 
31 
 
7.  The Committee note that as a result of increase in the coal price the 
business of illegal mining has become a more profitable venture than 
farming or any other petty trade and has led to a rapid growth to illegal 
mining.  Ra niganj and Jharia Coalfields have witnessed illegal mining for 
many years.  The supply of coal and coke by cycle has become a common 
sight on main roads and highways in coal bearing States.  The main reason 
for delivery of coal by cycle in the coalfields a reas is stated to be lack of 
regular delivery system to small local consumers.  The police tend to turn a 
blind eye to this type of coal distribution.  The Coal mafia wields 
substantial power and influence in their area, and therefore, it is extremely 
difficult to curb such practices.  It appears that a complete unholy nexus 
among police, administrative officials and officials of coal companies exist 
for mining, carrying, transporting and distributing illegally mined coal.  The 
Committee strongly feel that in the absence of other economic 
opportunities, the local villagers would continue to make a livelihood out of 
coal cycle trade.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the State 
Governments and coal companies should form village cooperatives for 
small scale mining and for its transportation so as to put an end to the role 
being played by coal mafia in illegal mining.  
8.  The Committee have been apprised of the constraints faced by the coal 
companies in checking theft, illegal mining of coal and mafia ac tivities, like 
lack of adequate infrastructure and modernization in the state 
administration, breaching of barbed fencing and boundary wall, lack of 
cooperation from State Police and the general lack of will on the part of 
management personnel of the coal companies concerned, and poverty and 
unemployment of local populace.  The Committee have noted that the 
Ministry of coal has been holding meetings with the concerned Central and 
State authorities of coal bearing areas to tackle the issues involved in the 
illegal mining.  However, at the same  time despite the so called concrete 
steps taken by the Ministry and the Coal Companies, illegal mining and that 
of coal continues unabated in all the major command areas of the coal 
companies.  It is an indication of th e half hearted attempt on the part of 

 
32 
 
officials of the coal companies concerned  to curb the menace.  The 
committee are regret to point out that though the senior officers of the coal 
companies are aware of the areas and modus operandi employed in illegal 
mining, yet they have made no serious attempt to provide solution to check 
such activities.  It is a matter of concern that no need has been felt by the 
Ministry of coal to set up a special monitoring and liaisoning cell at the 
Ministry level.  The Committ ee, therefore, desire that a special cell should 
be set up at the earliest where feedback from all the CMDs of coal 
companies is received and such information is passed on to Special Task 
Force which should be created at the State level to restric t such 
clandestine activities. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to set 
up a Quasi-judicial Regulatory Body who should look into the whole gamut 
of mining, carrying, transporting, distribution and to address the 
environmental problems generating as a result of illegal mining.  
9.  The Committee note that the Government of Jharkhand has conducted a 
study through Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad and Xavier Labour 
Research Institute, Jamshedpur to examine, inter -alia, the supply -wise 
inter-linkages between illeg al coal mining and socio -economic 
conditions/demographic profiles of the main factors involved in this 
activity, understand the demand –side dynamics of illegally mined coal in 
different sectors, explore and suggest mitigation strategies rooted in social 
acceptability economic viability, environmental sustainability and practical 
implementability, extent, spread and severity of the problem etc.  The 
above study has assessed cost to coal companies amounting to Rs. 106 
crore and cost to the State Exchequer to  the tune of Rs. 34 crore in a year 
in Jharkhand State alone due to illegal mining.  The Committee are, 
however, constrained to observe that except Jharkhand no major study has 
been undertaken by any coal producing State or coal companies to 
ascertain the extent of loss of money due to illegal mining.  The Committee 
recommend that ministry of Coal/Coal India Limited should also undertake 
a study to assess the extent of illegal mining taking place in Coal India 
subsidiaries and especially in the leasehold ar eas of Bharat Coking Coal 

 
33 
 
Limited, Central Coalfields Limited and Eastern Coalfields Limited where 
massive illegal mining is taking place. The Committee also desire that 
immediate steps/actions may be taken on the recommendations of above 
study and the Committee informed of the same.  
10.  The representatives of the Coal companies had informed the 
Committee during their recent tour to coalfield areas that assistance in a 
number of fields was needed from the State Governments which inter-alia 
included appropriate administrative checks to contain mushroom growth of 
brick-kiln/sponge iron units, fixing responsibility of land owners to curb 
illegal mining in their areas, support of local police for preventing theft of 
coal and making available copies of FIRs in respect of illegal mining to coal 
companies and periodic action taken reports. The Committee feel that there 
is utter lack of coordination between the coal companies and State 
administration for checking illegal coal mining and theft. Needless to say 
that coal is a national property and it is the bounden duty of every 
Government official to preserve coal from being illegally taken away by 
unscrupulous elements. The Committee would like the Ministry to persuade 
all the State Governments to be sensitive and t ake proactive steps to curb 
the massive illegal coal mining going on under the very nose of 
administrative authorities. The Committee would also like the State 
Governments to use Goonda Act against all those involved in the illegal 
mining and theft of coal. 
11.   Another disgusting feature of the problem of illegal mining is the lack 
of coordination between the Central and concerned State Governments and 
among various coal companies. The Central Government has been passing 
the responsibility on to the State  Governments on the pretext that law and 
order is a State subject and it is the responsibility of the State Government 
to prevent illegal mining. Since the State Governments are being paid 
royalty on coal and other minerals and they are imposing cess on co al, 
they cannot absolve themselves of their primary responsibility to prevent 
illegal mining. The Committee have also found that States who have been 

 
34 
 
mandated to frame rules under the Mines and Minerals (Development & 
Regulation) Act, 1957 for prevention o f illegal mining have not done so and 
the States who have framed such rules are not implementing them in letter 
and spirit. The responsibility for overseeing mines and mineral 
development including implementation of mineral legislations rests jointly 
with the Centre and the State Governments. While the Centre has exclusive 
power to make laws with respect to regulation of mines and major mineral 
development, the State Governments are mainly responsible for 
implementing such laws.  The Committee recommend tha t the Ministry 
should impress upon the coal producing States to immediately frame rules 
and also to setup an Inter -State Joint Intelligence and Action Force to 
combat the problem of illegal mining and for having better coordination.  
The Committee would al so like all the concerned State Governments to set 
up Task Force under the supervision of the Deputy Commissioner and 
Superintendent of Police of the concerned area who should coordinate with 
all coal companies in this regard. 
12.  The Committee also note that the poor and the tribals who struggle to 
earn a livelihood, are exploited by the unscrupulous elements in enticing 
them to join the illegal coal mining business and forcing them to work in in-
human conditions. The Committee strongly feel that the poor  quality of 
governance in coal bearing areas is primarily responsible for this menace. 
What is needed is better monitoring, policing and creating job 
opportunities for the poor in the areas where the problem of illegal mining 
is prevalent. The Committee wo uld like the Ministry to impress upon the 
concerned States to prepare an action plan for the socio -economic 
development of coal bearing areas in general and tribal inhabitated areas in 
particular. 
13.  The astronomical figure of illegal mining in various S tates clearly 
shows that State Governments are insensitive and indifferent towards the 
problem of illegal mining and failed to discharge their constitutional 
responsibilities. The Committee are extremely unhappy to note that though 

 
35 
 
the business of illegal mining has been going on for decades causing 
considerable loss of human lives and to the environment and national 
exchequer, no proper documented evidence on the actual loss to the 
economy and environment is available. This clearly indicates lack of will 
and effort on part of the Government to combat this problem which is 
considered to be a national security threat. The Committee would like the 
Ministry of Coal to ask all the coal companies to prepare a comprehensive 
document inter-alia the details of human  lives lost, environmental 
degradation and resultant loss to the national economy due to illegal 
mining. The Committee would like the Ministry to take corrective measures 
in overhauling the vigilance, personnel and Legal Departments of the 
concerned coal c ompanies and necessary action may be taken against 
those officials who have failed to discharge their designated duties. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in the matter.  
They would also like the Ministry to take stringent preve ntive measures to 
curb clandestine activities in all the affected coalfields and the outcome 
reported to them within 3 months of the presentation of this Report to 
Parliament.  
14.  The Committee have been given to understand that coal has been 
removed as an essential commodity under the Essential Commodity Act, 
1955 by an Amendment Act.  The Committee would like the Ministry of Coal 
to approach the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
for inclusion of coal as an essential commodity to  control the production, 
supply, distribution etc. of coal.  The Committee expect that this would help 
to curb the theft/pilferage and illegal mining of coal. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                            KALYAN BANERJEE 
    November, 2010                                                                Chairman 
    Kartika, 1932(Saka)              Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 

 
36 
 
Annexure – I 
 
Statement showing areas prone to illegal mining. 
 
ECL  
Mines sites where extraction of coal is being carried out by miscreants without obtaining 
valid mining lease from State Government.  
 
WEST BENGAL:  
 
Within  the leasehold of ECL but surface rights belong to others Outside the leasehold of 
ECL 
Sripur Area  
Charanpur, Bhanora, Pariharpur, Baijantipur, Konda, Mouldang a, 
C.Jamuria, Kalabagan, SSI, Damra, Kalipahari, Nunia Dhawrah, 
Karapara, Banksimulia, Adjacent Kalipahari Rly. Stn., North Ghusick, 
Garparia, Sripur 25 Hectares land given to Forest Department, 
Kalipahari Agent's Office, Nandi village, Near old Manager‘s 
Bungalow, Dhadka Incline near GM Ghusick Unit. 
 
South-east side of Satgram 
Area lease, East Kunustoria 
Area and West Salanpur 
lease.                                                         
Sodepur Area 
Naudiha Incline, Ranipur 2B,2C, Deoli Incline, Gangti kuli, 
Chhaterkanali, Perbelia (Ranabari),H irakund old, Dangajore, Poidhi 
OCP, Aldih OCP, Patmohona OCP, Ramjibanpur, Sodepur 11 No. 
Incline, Bejdih and Binodbandh mouza, Rakta Village, Near Chinakuri 
Magazine, Alothia, Dubeshwari  OCP, Pathardiha mouza, 
Bharatchak, Sodepur C.W/shop, At Bauripara and Gorai Para at 
Perbelia village and adjacent to Dubeshwari village, Amdanga 
Colony.  
   
Kalosota, Ramjibanpur, 
Sweedi.   
 
Salanpur Area 
Sangramgarh colliery, Dabor colliery, Mohanpur OCP, Gourangdih 
Begunia abd n. quarry, West side of Khairabad Phase -III, Old 
dumping yard of Bonjemehari OCP, Near the OCP W/shop – near 
Magazine house of Gourangdih colliery, Gourangdih Magazine, South 
east side of OCP, Gourangdih OCP, About 150mtrs in south direction 
from Chinchuri a Rly. Stn., Andal –Sitarampur Rly.Line under 
Chinchuria Mouza, Barmondia colliery. 
 
 Gourangdih Magazine -
paddy land, Forest land 
beside Nuni-Budi river. 
 
Satgram Area 
Damalia OCP, Sitaldasji Fire Project, 11,12, abandoned Pit Ratibati, 
Rangadanga Basti, Near abdn. Toposi OCP, Mithapur. 
 
             ------- 
Kenda Area 
CBI aban.quarry, Jambad abdn.pit,Pure Jambad , West Kenda 
OCP,Abdn.Chora OCP, Jambad abdn. quarry, Shankerpur OCP 
Patch 
 
            -------- 
Kunustoria Area 
Bansra behind Coal Sample Offi ce, Old abdn area of Purandip (R -VIII 
B) Seam and  Kabarsthan of old OCP namely Kargil Area (Bansra), 
North searsole, Kantagoria, Bijpur Village, Near  Toposi Village, Near 
Belbad, Sonachora near IOC Pipe Line, Runai, near Kuldanga village 
at South -East si de of the village., Habdubi at the bed of Singaran 
Jore under Toposi/Kunustoria colliery. 
  
              --------- 
Bankola Area - Bankola OC patch,   
Kajora Area - Parascole West abandoned OCP, Parasea, Old 
Dhandadih OCP, Near Madhabpur OC (H) Patch., G hanshyam OCP 
No.1 near Babuisole Shibmandir, Old Naba Kajora OC hired patch. 
 

 
37 
 
 
 JHARKHAND:  
 
Within leasehold Area of ECL Outside leasehold Area 
of ECL 
Mugma Area 
Chapapur(10No of Badjna Seam & new BP Seam), Badjna(Topatand 
Nala, 31 No. BP Seam, Kalimati , 30 No & old OCP of Khusri area ), 
Gopinathpur(north side of Pahari village(abdn, mines) & north side of 
Rly.Line). Shampur B (1/2 & 5/6 No seam of Sangamahal and west 
side of Chhatabad village) , Lakhimata (new MS Seam of Mandmand, 
BP Seam and east side of Lakhimata barior), Kapasara ( abdn. OCP 
& Reliance section quarry), Rajpura (near closed quarry and closed 
Satnarain quarry), Kumardhubi ( 5K abdn.quarry),  
 
                  -------         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pandaveswar Area 
Jorekuri and Palasthali within lease hold area and Rly.  acquired land,  
at Beldanga Forest near Beldanga Coal Stock & Kasta field. 
 
 
Rajmahal Area                                                     ---- Towards Simra village 
site 
 
BCCL  [Details of illegal mining sites (within leasehold area) in Jharkhand] 
 
Place / Location Thana District 
Area Colliery Site   
Barora P‘T Benidih Section(V/VI/VII) S.E. Rly. Line Barora Dhanbad 
Block-II (I) Along east bank of Jamunia river 
near Ssadariadih Village 
Bagmara Dhanbad 
Govindpur Govindpur West side of 5,5,7 seam OCP Katras Dhanbad 
X seam quarry Khas Mehatadih Section Katras Dhanbad 
Jogidih West side of 5,5,7 seam OCP Sonardih Dhanbad 
Sealing of old incline mouth in 3 seam Sonardih Dhanbad 
Akashkinari XIV seam OCP East Katras Section Katras Dhanbad 
XV seam OCP East Katras Section Katras Dhanbad 
XIII Seam OCP East Katras Section Katras Dhanbad 
X Seam quarry Katras Dhanbad 
Maheshpur X Seam Quarry Madhuban Dhanbad 
Kharkharee Top & Bottom 5 nos. Incline Madhuban Dhanbad 
17 & 18 seam top & bottom Madhuban Dhanbad 
Old Incline L-12, 17 seam Madhuban Dhanbad 
Katras Ramkanali IV/V Seam quarry Katras Dhanbad 
IV/V/VII Seam near 3 seam incline Katras Dhanbad 
Sijua Mudidih XV Seam East of 6 pit Mudidih Jogta Dhanbad 
XV seam West of 6 pit Mudidih Jogta Dhanbad 
XV seam near Mudidih Magzine Jogta Dhanbad 
Kusunda Bassuriya 6 Nos.  quarry Kenduadih Dhanbad 
Ganga patch, X seam North side of KT 
Incline 
Kenduadih Dhanbad 
44 no. OCP, X seam near pathak basti Kenduadih Dhanbad 
14th quarry, X seam near pathak Basti Kenduadih Dhanbad 
XI & XII seam incline near Colliery 
Office 
Kenduadih Dhanbad 
 
 
 
E/Basseria 
 
 
 
IV seam quary (I) 
 
 
 
Gondudih O.P. 
 
 
 
Dhanbad 
VIII Seam quarry in gareria section Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 
V/VI seam quarry (O) Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 
 II/III seam near 6 no. colony Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 
Gondudih V/VI seam of old quary near Hospital Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 

 
38 
 
K/Kusunda II/III seam old quary Dhobi Kuli Basti Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 
X seam old quary  Gondudih Basti 
(KKC) 
Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 
X seam old quarry near Dhari Joba 
basti 
Gondudih O.P. Dhanbad 
II seam old quarry near Gondudih 
Colliery 
Kenduadih Dhanbad 
II/III seam old quarry selected Godhur Kenduadih Dhanbad 
Godhar X seam 4th quarry (near R. store 
Godhar) 
Kenduadih Dhanbad 
XI/XII seam 6 no. quarry near Godhar 
magazine 
Kenduadih Dhanbad 
Dhansar Near New Delhi (Bright Kusunda 
Pahari) 
Dhansar Dhanbad 
Near Jha Colony Dhansar Dhanbad 
Area H Dhansar Dhanbad 
V-VIII seam quarry Dhansar Dhanbad 
Kustore E/Bhagatdih XI/XII seam quarry near 6 pit Jharia Dhanbad 
ROCP X seam quarry Jharia Dhanbad 
VII/VIII seam quarry Jharia Dhanbad 
Bastacolla Bastacolla South of old combine seam quarry Dhansar Dhanbad 
Kujama Pandebera/Phularibad Jharia Dhanbad 
Lodna Lodna XIII/XIII A seam at Chalchalla Dhowra Lodna O.P. Dhanbad 
XI/XII seam at Nadipar Kujama Lodna O.P. Dhanbad 
XI/XII seam quarry Ghamandi Patty Lodna O.P. Dhanbad 
Behind Lodna Old Magazine Lodna O.P. Dhanbad 
Bagdigi West of Patch ―D‖ Lodna O.P. Dhanbad 
Joyrampur In XII seam near H/C Bhatta Alakdiah O.P. Dhanbad 
N. Tisra IX/X seam near LUJ Pit Tisra Dhanbad 
Barari Patch ―A‖ Jealgora Dhanbad 
Patch ―B‖ Jealgora Dhanbad 
VIII seam near Lalpur Jealgora Dhanbad 
XIV seam quarry near Bazar Dhowra Jealgora Dhanbad 
XI/XI/XIII seam quarry Jealgora Dhanbad 
Laxmi quarry Jealgora Dhanbad 
In X seam near old fan house Jealgora Dhanbad 
XIV seam in Bhulan quarry Jealgora Dhanbad 
XI/XII/XIII seam near Chakkari Jore Jealgora Dhanbad 
NT/ST(OCP) III seam old working near N.T.C. Alakdiah O.P.  Dhanbad 
 Both side Sulunga Jore near S. Tisra 
patch of OCP 
Alakdiah O.P. Dhanbad 
Jeenagora X seam near Gurguria Alakdiah O.P.  Dhanbad 
Near Sulugna Basti Alakdiah O.P.  Dhanbad 
In Sulunga Jore near Jeenagora W/S Alakdiah O.P.  Dhanbad 
In Central Sulunga Alakdiah O.P.  Dhanbad 
In old quarry near Mari Gudam Alakdiah O.P.  Dhanbad 
E.J. Area Bhowra (S) V & VI seam of 28 Incline Qry. Bhowrah O.P. Dhanbad 
Sudamdih (I) XVII seam Qry. Gouri mGram Sudamdih Dhanbad 
Amlabad Amlabad Project (Dhobi Ghat) Amlabad O.P. Bokaro 
WJ Area  Along Bank of Damodar river in 
Bhatdee colliery 
Mahuda Dhanbad 
 Lohapatti 4/5 Incline Mahuda Dhanbad 
C.V. Area Basantimata 3 / 4  G.P. Bottom & kalimat Nirsa Dhanbad 
3 no. Qry. (GP Bottom & Kalimati seam) Nirsa Dhanbad 
2A no. Qry (GP Bottom & Kalimati 
seam) 
Nirsa Dhanbad 
3 no. Qry (palasia seam) Nirsa Dhanbad 
Qry. Palasia Local seam Nirsa Dhanbad 

 
39 
 
 
CCL 
 
Place/location where illegal mining is taking place 
 
 In leasehold area: 
 
(i) (A) West Bokaro Coalfields : 
 
Tapin South 44 & 45 Quarry, 
Tapin North 42 & 40 Quarry 
Jharkhand non-working quarry, 
Pindra, Topa, Ara, Sarubera non-working mines, 
Kuju – Morpa, Banwar, Pundi non-working quarry. 
 
(B)  Ramgarh Coalfields: 
 
 Karma Old quarry, Sugia, Rauta, Gidhania, Burakhap old quarry. 
 Rajrappa – I, II & III Quarry. 
 
(C)  South Karanpura Coalfields: 
 
 Argada B&J Incline, Sirka Quarry 1 & 2, Gidi 1, 5 & 2. 
 
      In fringe Area 
 
      a) West Bokaro Coalfields: 
           
           Kajari, Chutua nala, Bokaro river, Dudhi nala, Semra, Fagua tola. 
 
      b) Ramgarh Coalfields : 
  
            Jorakath Dhatuatand, Rajrappa OCP near Mial village. 
 
c) South Karanpura Coalfields : Bundu Damodar river near Lapanga quarry, 
Damodar River bed between Bhutatand and Kanbera. 
 
      Outside of leasehold 
 
a) West Bokaro Coalfields – Banwar, Kashikhap, Jarakaram, Magardaha, 
Burakhap, Jageswar, Choritand Tilaiya Forest land, Bokaro River bed. 
b) Ramgarh Coalfiel ds – Dhawaiya, Bhunchundih, Noniabera, Mahuatungri, 
Karma Damodar River bed. 
c) South Karanpura Coalfields – Damodar river bed between Gidi and 
Lapanga near Hesalong Forest land near Hesalong and Bundu Basti. 

 
40 
 
  
Annexure – II 
 
Statement showing status of underground mines reclaimed / 
to be reclaimed  
 
 
BCCL The total number of abandoned UG openings, inclines and 
other vulnerable sites prone to illegal mining or otherwise, 
reclaimed / filled up is 1316. Openings / sites proposed to be 
reclaimed / filled up is 253. 
 
CCL No underground mine has been reclaimed yet and there is no 
pending mine which is proposed to be reclaimed in near 
future. No illegal mining is reported in underground mine. 
 
ECL 
 
 
 
Underground mines where mining has been done in past and 
has been abandoned due to any reasons, actions are taken for 
sealing of the mouth immediately after discontinuance of 
operations. However, where any opening has been created 
due to any illegal activities within leasehold of mine boundary, 
they are immediately sealed by dozing as soon as it comes to 
the notice of mine management. This is a continuous process 
and action as such taken whenever need arises. 
 
Also in case of UG mines, there are many instances 
where mining activities has been stopped but 
openings are  maintained for providing drinking 
water to colonies and nearby villages. 
 
NCL No UG mine available in NCL. 
 
WCL To end the possibility of illegal mining, openings of un -used / 
abandoned / closed UG Mines are effectively sealed off. As we 
do not have any  report of illegal mining, at present, 
reclamation of underground mines to curb possibility of illegal 
mining does not apply. 
 
SECL There are 7 mines, which have been closed and reclaimed. No 
mine is pending for reclamation. No illegal mining is reported. 
 
MCL Number of UG mines reclaimed is nil. Number of UG mines 
proposed to be reclaimed is 2. No illegal mining is reported.  
  
NEC No illegal mining is reported and no UG mine is required to be 
reclaimed. 
 
 

 
41 
 
 

 
42 
 
 

 
43 
 
 

 
44 
 
 

 
45 
 
 

 
46 
 
 

 
47 
 
 

 
48 
 
Annexure – IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL 
AND STEEL HELD ON 15  JANUARY, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM  ‘D’, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1630 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2      Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3       Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4       Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury 
5       Shri Ismail Hussain 
6       Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
7       Shri Yashbant Laguri 
8       Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9       Shri Narahari  Mahato 
10       Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
11       Kumari Saroj Pandey 
12       Shri Ramesh Rathod 
13       Shri Rakesh Sachan       
14       Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
15       Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
16       Dr. G. Vivekanand 
17       Ms. Mabel Rebello       
18       Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
19       Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
20       Shri Mohd. Amin 
21       Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
22       Shri R.C. Singh 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ashok Sarin -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh  -  Director 
3. Smt. Sunita  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
       MINISTRY OF COAL  
1.  Shri  C. Balakrishnan, Secretary      

 
49 
 
2. Shri Alok Perti, Additional Secretary         
3. Shri K.S. Kropha, Joint Secretary                              
4. Shri Sanjiv Mittal, JS&FA     
5. Shri R.K. Mahajan, Joint Secretary    
6. Shri P.R. Mandal, Advisor (Project)    
7. Shri Kailash Pati, Economic Advisor 
8. Shri T.K. Lahiry, Economic Adviser 
 
COAL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS    
1. Shri P.S. Bhattacharya, CMD, Coal India Limited 
2. Shri M.P. Dikshit, CMD, Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
3. Shri D.C. Garg, CMD Western Coalfields Limited 
4. Shri S.R. Upadhyay, CMD, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited 
5. Shri V.K. Singh CMD, Northern Coalfields Limited 
6. Shri R.K. Saha, CMD, Central Coalfields Limited 
7. Shri A.K. Singh, CMD, Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd. 
8. Shri S. Chakravarty, CMD, Eastern Coal Fields Limited 
9. Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the representatives 
of the Ministry of Coal and Coal Public Sector Undertakings to the 
sitting of Committee. The Chairman  mentioned that the sitting of 
the Committee has been convened to hear the views of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Coal and coal companies 
regarding “prevention of Illegal Coal Mining and Theft”. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal gave  an audio -
visual presentation on the subject “Prevention of Illegal Coal Mining 
and Theft”.  Then the CMD, Coal India Limited briefed the 
Committee on the subject “Prevention of Illegal Coal Mining and 
Theft”.  The issues discussed during the sitting broad ly related to 
reasons for illegal mining of coal and theft and the measures taken 
by the Ministry of Coa l and coal companies in this regar d, need to 
augment security apparatus at the mine sites where illegal  mining 
is being carried out, need to plug looph oles in the existing laws, 
action taken on the report submitted by XLRI Jamshedpur to curb 
illegal coal mining and theft, need for better coordination among 
Ministry of Coal, Governments of coal producing States and law 
enforcing agencies to check the acti vities of mafia involved in 
illegal mining and theft of coal.  
 
4.  The Chairman directed that the replies to some of the queries 
raised by the Committee which could not be replied by the 

 
50 
 
representatives of the Ministry may be furnished well before the 
next sitting of the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee decided to further hear the views of the 
representatives of the Ministry at their sitting to be held on 10 th 
February, 2010. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
51 
 
Annexure – V 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL 
AND STEEL HELD ON 10 FEBRUARY, 2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM  ‗B‘, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1700hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Adhi Sankar 
3. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury 
6. Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire 
7. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9. Shri Narahari  Mahato 
10. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
11. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
12. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
14. Ms. Mabel Rebello       
15. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
16. Shri Mohd. Amin 
17. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh -  Director 
2. Smt. Sunita  -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Md. Aftab Alam -  Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
       MINISTRY OF COAL  
1. Shri C.Balakrishnan, Secretary 
2. Shri K.S. Kropha, Joint Secretary    
3. Shri Sanjiv Mittal, JS & FA 
4. Shri Alok Perti, AS(Coal) 
5. Shri R.K. Mahajan, JS 
6. Shri P.R.Mandal, Adv.(Project) 

 
52 
 
7. Shri Kailash Pati, Economic Adviser 
 
COAL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS    
8. Shri P.S.Bhattacharya, CMD, Coal India Ltd. (CIL) 
9. Shri T.K.Lahiry, CMD, Bharat Coking  Coal Ltd. (BCCL) 
10. Shri M.P.Dikshit, CMD, Southern Eastern Coalfields Ltd.(SECL) 
11. Shri D.C.Garg, CMD, Western Coalfields Ltd.(WCL) 
12.  Shri S.R.Uppadhyay, CMD, Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.(MCL) 
13. Shri V.K.Singh, CMD, Northern Coalfields Ltd.(NCL) 
14. Shri R.K.Saha, CMD, Central Coalfields Ltd.(CCL)  
15. Shri A.K.Singh, CMD, Central Mine Planning & Design Institute  
Ltd.(CMPDIL) 
16. Shri S. Chakravarty, CMD, Eastern Coal Fields Limited 
17. Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Coal and Coal Public Sector Undertaki ngs to the sitting of Committee. The 
Chairman mentioned that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to 
discuss the various issues and queries raised by the Committee regarding the 
subject ―Prevention of illegal coal mining and theft‖ in the previou s sitting held on 
15.01.2010.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee sought clarifications on the various issues 
related to ―Prevention of Illegal Coal Mining and Theft‖. The issues discussed 
during the sitting broadly related to steps taken/being taken by the Ministry of Coal 
and Coal PSUs to put an end to the menace of illegal coal mining & theft; number 
of convictions carried out in respect of FIRs lodged; measures taken by vigilance 
and law officers of the coal PSUs; overhauling of coal transportation system t o 
check theft of coal; need to enhance strength of security personnel at mine sites;  
Need for enhanced coordination among Ministries of Coal and Home Affairs and 
Governments of coal bearing states, progress made regarding closure of 
abandoned mines, details of mines where reclamation has been completed; etc.  
 
4.  The Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of Coal to furnish 
the replies to the queries raised by the Members which could not be responded to 
well before the next sitting of the Committee.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
53 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL 
AND STEEL (2010-11) HELD ON 29.10.2010 IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 
G-074, PARLIAMENT LIBRARY BUILDING, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee- Chairman 
 
      MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
2. Sanjay Bhoi 
3. Ismail Hussain 
4. Shri Narahari Mahato 
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
6. Shri Adhi Sankar 
7. Shri Pashupathi Nath Singh 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
11. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
12. Shri Jai Prakash Narain Singh 
13. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma   - Director 
2. Smt. Sunita    - Deputy Secretary  
3. Md. Aftab Alam   - Under Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the following Draft 
Reports subject to some minor modifications:- 
(i) **  **  **  **  ** 
 

 
54 
 
(ii) **  **  **  **  ** 
(iii) Prevention of Illegal Coal Mining and Theft. 
(iv) **  **  **  **  ** 
 
4.   **  **  **  **  **  **
  
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports after 
making consequential changes arising out of factual verifications by the 
concerned Ministries or otherwise and to present these Reports to both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 
 