39
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STEEL
PROMOTION OF STEEL USAGE
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)


THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
PROMOTION OF STEEL USAGE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.08.2013
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 29.08.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)


CC&S No. 78
Price : Rs. 61.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
PART-I
A. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
B. Intensity of Steel Usage .............................................................. 1
C. Crude Steel Production ............................................................... 3
D. Consumption of Steel in Rural Areas .................................... 5
E. Working Group on Steel for 12th Five Year Plan .............. 8
F. Sector-wise Demand of Steel ..................................................... 12
G. Role of Agencies/Steel PSUs in Promotion of Steel Usage .... 14
(i) Role of INSDAG .................................................................. 14
(ii) MDP Projects ........................................................................ 14
(iii) Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) .............................. 15
(iv) Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) ............................... 23
PART-II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ............ 33
ANNEXURES
I. Details of State-wise Dealership Network of SAIL............. 40
II. Details of State-wise Rural Dealership Network of SAIL .... 42
III. Details of Specific promotional activities undertaken by
sale during 2012-13 ...................................................................... 44
IV. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2012-13) held on 1.7.2013 ............................ 50
V. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2012-13) held on 26.8.2013 .......................... 53

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL (2012-13)
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
6. Shri Sabbam Hari
7. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
8. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
9. Shri Pakauri Lal
10. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
11. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Rajaram Pal
13. Kumari Saroj Pandey
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
15. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
16. Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
21. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary*
* Nominated w.e.f. 13.12.2012.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Smt. Smriti Zubin Irani
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Sanjay Raut
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
30. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Secretary
2. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Promotion
of Steel Usage” pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.
2. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2012-13) had selected
the subject for detailed examination and report to the Parliament. The
Committee (2012-13) took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Steel on 1st July, 2013.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Steel and Steel PSUs for placing before them and in
furnishing material/information from time to time as desired by the
Committee.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 26.08.2013.
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for
the valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
26 August, 2013 Chairman,
04 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

REPORT
PART I
A. INTRODUCTORY
Steel is the basic foundation material of any economy and it will
not be an exaggeration to state that the advancement of the economy
is assessed by the consumption level of steel therein.
2. Economic liberalization in India has led to huge capacity creation
for steel making and India has already attained the exalted rank of
being the 4th largest producer of crude steel in the world and is
expected to elevate its position further in the coming days as new
capacities become operational.
3. Indian Iron and steel industry with its strong forward and
backward linkages contributes significantly to overall growth and
development of the economy. As per official estimates, the Industry
today directly contributes 2 per cent of India’s Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) and its weightage in the official Index of Industrial Production
(IIP) is 6.2 per cent.
4. While one appreciates India has miles to go before it can match
the infrastructure/per capita consumption levels of the developed
world/newly industrialized economies of Asia, it does remain a fact
that despite significant strides in many respects (including technological
breakthroughs), domestic steel consumption, specially in per capita
terms, remains way below the desired level, hovering around 60 kg
compared to world average of 217 kg and 477 kg for China.
5. As the potential for domestic steel consumption is huge in India
which calls for intensifying the drive for promotion of steel usage in
the country, the Committee have examined in detail the steps and
major policy decisions taken by the Government and Steel Industry to
augment the per capita consumption of steel in the country.
B. INTENSITY OF STEEL USAGE
6. The domestic steel industry has been able to carve out a niche
for itself in the global scene. From a country with a fledgling status
of one million tonnes of capacity at the time of Independence, it has
today become the world’s 4th largest producer of crude steel preceded
only by China, Japan and USA.

2
7. The details of top ten Crude Steel Producing Countries of the
World are as shown below:—
Sl. Country Production (in million Rank
No. metric tonnes)
2011 2012
1. China 694.8 716.5 1
2. Japan 107.6 107.2 2
3. U.S.A 86.4 88.6 3
4. India 73.6 76.7 4
5. Russia 68.9 70.6 5
6. South Korea 68.5 69.3 6
7. Germany 44.3 42.7 7
8. Turkey 34.1 35.9 8
9. Brazil 35.2 34.7 9
10. Ukraine 35.3 32.9 10
World (Total) 1529.2 1547.8
Source: World Steel Association (WSA)
8. The Ministry of Steel have informed the Committee that India’s
steel production capacity is slated to increase manifold in the coming
years due to the envisaged large scale investments in steel both in
green field and brown field capacities by the public sector and private
entrepreneurs. However, In spite of being one among the largest
producers of steel in the world, India is still lagging way behind some
of the other major steel producing countries in the world in terms of
intensity of steel usage in overall economic activities ( i.e., per unit of
GDP) or per capita consumption of finished steel. In 2012 our per
capita consumption of finished steel was about 60 kg against the world
average of 216.9 kgs as per details given below:—
Per Capita Finished Steel Use in Selected Countries (in Kgs)
Sl.No. Countries 2012
1. China 477.4
2. S. Korea 1114.1
3. Japan 506.0
4. USA 306.2
5. India 60 (approx.)
World (average) 216.9
Source: World Steel Association (WSA)

3
The Per capita consumption of steel in the country is thus estimated
at around 60 kg.
9. Asked about trends in per capita consumption of steel (kilograms
finished steel products) in the country as reported by World Steel
Association, the Committee were apprised as under:—
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Per capita consumption 39.4 43.9 43.2 47.9 53.0 56.2 59.8
in India in Kgs.
C. CRUDE STEEL PRODUCTION
10. According to Annual Report of the Ministry of Steel World
crude steel production stood at 1547.8 million tonnes during 2012, an
increase of 1.2 per cent over 2011. During 2012, Chinese crude steel
production reached 7165.5 mt, a growth of 3.1 per cent over 2011.
China remained the largest crude steel producer in the world,
accounting for 72 per cent of Asian and 46 per cent of world crude
steel production during 2012. India was the fourth largest producer
with 76.97 million tonne of steel produced during the period with a
growth 4.6% over 2011.
11. Asked about the detail of new projects targeted to be completed
during 12th Five Year Plan for production of steel the Committee were
informed as under:—
“The list of major steel projects (both Brownfield and Greenfield)
that are considered likely to come up in different states of the
country during the 12th Five Year Plan period is below:—
Likely Crude Steel Capacity by 2016-17 (mt)
(A) Firm Projects
Producer/Company India: Likely Crude Steel
Capacity by 2016-17 (mt)
        1 2
SAIL (All plants) 20.75
RINL/Vizag Steel Plant (Andhra Pradesh) 7
NMDC, Chhattisgarh (Nagarnar) 3

4
Tata Steel—Jharkhand (Jamshedpur) 10
Tata Steel—Odisha (Kalinga Nagar) 6
JSW Steel—Karnataka (Vijaynagar) 12
JSW Steel—JSW Ispat (Maharashtra) 4.5
JSW Steel—JSW SISCOL (Tamil Nadu) 1.9
Jindal Stainless, Odisha 0.8
Essar Steel, Gujarat (Hazira) 10
JSPL—Chhattisgarh (Raigarh) 4
JSPL—Odisha (Angul) 4
JSPL—Jharkhand (Patratu) 3.5
Bhushan Steel Limited, Odisha 5.2
Electro Steel Castings, West Bengal 2.2
Visa Steel, Odisha (Kalinga Nagar) 1.5
Others (multi-location) 43.85
(A) Total (Firm Projects) 140
(B) Additional capacity not firm but possible
Tata Steel, Odisha (Gopalpur) 4
Posco, Odisha 4
Monnet Ispat, Chhattisgarh 1.5
Uttam Galva, Maharashtra 1.1
Bhushan Power & Steel, Odisha 2.5
Others (medium scale, multi-location) 4.5
(B) Additional Capacity not firm but possible 17.6
(C) Total (Realisable) Crude Steel Capacity by 2016-17 (mt)**
Capacity 149
Source: Report of the Working Group on Steel for the 12th Five Year Plan;
**(C)=(A)+0.5*(B)
Note: mt=million tonnes
        1 2

5
The Report of the Working Group on Steel for the 12th Five Year
Plan however points out that for expeditious implementation of
the identified projects, it is necessary to create a conducive policy
environment to ensure easy availability of physical and financial
resources such as raw materials, infrastructural facilities, land, water,
etc.”
D. CONSUMPTION OF STEEL IN RURAL AREAS
12. According to the Ministry of Steel, steel consumption has taken
place largely at the urban level and peripheral locations while growth
at rural level has been relatively minimal and in turn, has depressed
overall growth. The Committee were informed that there are significant
reasons for promoting steel consumption in rural India and some of
these are as follows:—
(i) In a 1 bn+ population, 72% live in ‘rural’ India with 23 out
of 35 States/UTs, having rural population in excess of 70%.
(ii) Studies conducted from time to time indicate, despite
significant strides of steel industry in post-1992 India, level
of rural steel consumption remains sub-optimal, indicating
scope of growth.
(iii) A step towards Inclusive Growth—increased use of steel
may well change the face of rural economy and lifestyle.
(iv) Ample scope of consumption of steel exists in key areas/
items of rural lifestyle like Grain Storage—Bins/Silos, Steel
Intensive Construction Activities, Short Span Road Bridges/
Culverts, Agricultural Implements, Water Tank, Non-
Mechanised Transport, Sewarage and Sanitation,
Scaffoldings/Fencing, Water Harvesting and Drip Irrigation.
13. Asked about the reasons for low consumption or penetration
level in rural areas, the Committee were apprised of following key
factors:—
(i) Perception of steel as a high-cost material in rural sector.
(ii) Problems of procurement and supply in interiors of rural
sector.
(iii) Market ups and downs of steel sector itself.
(iv) Low growth of rural industry and absence of proper skills
in rural sector.

6
(v) Concentration on high-valued, high-yield markets, typically
in urban areas.
(vi) Lack of proper assessment of steel demand in rural India.
14. India’s steel production capacity is going to increase manifold
in the coming years. The current abysmally low per capita consumption
of steel of 59 kg. in India compared to the world average of estimated
200 kg. strengthens the argument that the domestic steel industry has
a huge growth potential. The Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC)
on Coal and Steel on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of
Steel in its 25th Report had noted that “to achieve this objective, it is
necessary to create required infrastructure for steel industry as well as
increase per capita consumption of steel”.
15. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel, the Ministry of Steel has informed that a survey/
study was carried through the Joint Plant Committee to assess the
demand for steel in rural areas. The JPC has submitted the final Report
of this survey in July, 2011. The survey has come out with findings
regarding average per capita consumption of finished steel in rural
areas, trends of consumption of steel and future projections of steel in
rural India.
16. The survey collected the data for the purpose of analysis for
the three years i.e. 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 and assessment of
rural steel demand for the periods 2011-12, 2016-17 and 2019-20. The
average per capita consumption of finished steel in rural India has
been assessed at 9.78 kg. during the period 2007 to 2009, which is
estimated to increase to around 12 kg. in 2020 based on increased
penetration of steel products. This growth would be powered mainly
by construction activities, largely at the household level but also by
purchase of items such as items for professional use, furniture and
vehicles. It is also expected that the demand for household items would
decrease over the years. The major reason for the same is increasing
replacement of steel by plastic for some of the major contributing
items of that category.
17. The survey has also made recommendations for enhancing the
consumption of steel in rural India through shift in type of housing
structure (with more steel) with:—
(i) Re-looking steel design for various applications,
(ii) Investment in community structures,
(iii) Small and medium steel product manufacturing,

7
(iv) Highlighting the advantages of steel,
(v) Increased aesthetics of steel, improving logistics & supply
chain, and
(vi) Addressing steel quality issues.
18. Taking note of the present per capita consumption of steel at
9.78 kg. in rural areas and which is targeted to be increased to 12 kg.
by the year 2020, the Committee have desired to know the reasons as
to why only an increase of 3 kg. have been targeted to be achieved
for per capita consumption in rural areas during the next 7 years. In this
regard, the Committee were apprised by Ministry of Steel as un der:—
“One of the key findings of the study, “ Assessment of Steel Demand
in Rural India”, conducted by the Joint Plant Committee (JPC) under
the aegis of the Ministry of Steel, is that rural per capita finished
steel consumption, averaging 9.78 kg. during the survey period,
2007-2009, is estimated to go up to 12 kg. by 2020, depending on
the level of economic growth in the country.”
19. It further states:—
“(a) Given that growth rate of GDP of agricultural and allied
activities was around 3% during the study period and the
projected growth rate of steel demand (based on the steel—
GDP elasticity relation) over the period 2010-20 is 2.5%, it
emerges that if rural GDP grows by a further 1%, rural
steel demand grows by 1.25%. Using this information, the
potential demand projection of rural per capita steel
consumption by 2020 has been arrived at 12 kg.
(b) As such, this is a statistical projection only, based on the
field data as obtained during the survey. It is not a target
that has been laid down for achievement for the country/
industry by this time period.
(c) However, at the same time, the study has clearly indicated
that the potential for steel consumption is even higher. This
is because with increasing affluence and impact of
urbanization, rural populace can afford even more steel
products. This means that growth beyond 12 kg. is
achievable if rural GDP grows higher and in this regard,
the Study has pointed out various interventions or
promotional measures which may be required to elevate
rural steel consumption beyond present/perceived levels.”

8
20. Asked about the steps taken by the Ministry of Steel for
implementation of the recommendations made by JPC, the Committee
were informed of the following:—
(i) Funding of INSDAG projects on rural skill development
program under the Market Development Project scheme by
JPC.
(ii) Collection of data on rural level stock points by INSDAG.
(iii) Publication of books/study reports in connection with
framed steel structures for rural areas by INSDAG.
(iv) Schedule for next proposed study of steel demand in rural
India by JPC.
E. WORKING GROUP ON STEEL FOR 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN
21. The Working Group on steel for 12th Five Year Plan had
indicated that in order to achieve double digit growth rate of domestic
steel consumption investments of 1 billion dollar in infrastructure and
setting up of the national manufacturing and investment zones are
required as integral part to accelerate the pace of implementation of
infrastructure projects in the country. The Committee have desired to
know the steps taken by the Government/Steel Companies to improve
the cement to steel ratio in construction, deeper penetration into rural
markets, diversification strategies, etc. as pointed out by the Working
Group. In this regard, the Ministry of Steel in a post evidence reply
furnished to the Committee have informed as under:—
“(i) Steps taken by the Government
For the last decade INSDAG has been continuously
propagating various ways and means to improve steel to
cement ratio in construction. Preparation and dissemination
of various reports/guidebooks/manuals/Codes & Standards,
continuous education to professionals, faculties and students
through various classrooms trainings/seminars/competitions,
representation to various implementing authorities for steel/
steel-concrete composite construction, etc. are some of the
activities INSDAG has been doing to achieve the goal. One
prominent example in this regard is extensive and exclusive
use of structural steel in airport modernizations across the
country. In addition, development of various agro-
implements like steel bullock carts, storage bins,
multipurpose furniture are also being pursued by INSDAG.
Since fabrication is considered one of the major bottlenecks

9
of enhanced steel usage in rural/semi-urban areas, INSDAG
is trying to improve the scenario by imparting hand-holding
support to the prospective rural entrepreneurs to set up
their own fabrication units at their chosen locations. This
endeavour is keeping pace with the Government’s initiative
to provide electricity at every village in India. Currently,
this initiative is being pursued at Uttar Pradesh, Odisha,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Tripura and West Bengal.
(ii) Steps taken by SAIL
So far as penetration into rural markets is concerned, the
main area of concentration has been to put in place an
effective Rural Dealership Scheme and building upon it. So
far as diversification strategies are concerned, SAIL is in
the process of undertaking a modernization program in its
producing plants where product diversification with focus
on value added products would be of primary importance.
Diversification strategy related to exploring of new markets/
projects is an ongoing process and the thrust on the same
would continue. Application Engineering Group of SAIL
provides presentation to project customers (including
government customers) to use steel intensive designs in
construction.
(iii) Steps taken by RINL
RINL is making efforts for increasing the availability of steel
products in rural areas for construction by widening rural
distribution network. It is planned to increase the number
of rural dealers to 1000 by the end of the current financial
year.
RINL plans to take rolling mills on wet lease basis at
different locations in the country for conversion of semis
produced in the Plant into economy grade Rebars and
Structurals for supplying to rural customers.
RINL has developed earthquake resistant and corrosion
resistant rebars for usage in construction. These new grades
of steel products help in reducing damage during natural
calamities like earthquakes, floods, tsunamis, etc. in rural,
hilly and coastal areas and increases the life of structures
constructed.
INSDAG has been promoting designs of steel intensive
buildings, which are economical considering life cycle
costing.”

10
22. The Working Group on steel for the 12th Plan in their report
has also stressed on the need for projects like Bharat Nirman, PMGSY,
Rajiv Gandhi Awas Yojana to increase the per capita steel consumption.
Asked about the steps taken by the Steel PSUs to tap the potential of
the rural economy by giving thrust to design project developments
and fabrication of specially design steel houses for villages, culverts
and bridges etc. where steel could be used as a major material, the
Committee were apprised as under:—
“(i) Steps taken by the Government
INSDAG had developed comprehensive design and
construction manual for small span bridges & culverts for
National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) under
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways (MORTH) for implementation of
the same in rural areas under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY). These steel based designs of rural bridges
& culverts are presently being implemented in various parts
of the country. Border Roads Organizations (BRO) and
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) are also being
pursued to develop such manuals for their use. The
construction methodology is very simple and materials used
are generally available in all rural retail shops. The same
concept is also followed while developing steel framed rural
houses. INSDAG will shortly construct two prototype
buildings at Tripura for exposure to rural masses. One such
building has been constructed at a remote village in West
Bengal and being monitored for the last one year. Till date
the performance of the building is quite satisfactory . To
complement these activities, INSDAG is helping rural people
to develop their own fabrication units at their villages. These
units will also expect to solve the unemployment issues to
some extent.
(ii) Steps taken by SAIL
In order to tap the potential of the rural economy,
promotional activities like Mason Meets and Dealer Meets
are held to create greater awareness for use of steel in
various constructions including individual houses. The
benefits of using steel are explained in such meets. During
2012-13, a total number of 17 Mason Meets and 107 Dealers
Meets have been conducted by SAIL as a whole. However,
Projects incorporating new designs for fabricating of steel
houses/housing structures are being initiated by INSDAG
under the Ministry of Steel. SAIL along with other main
producers and Ministry of Steel is promoter of INSDAG.

11
(iii) Steps taken by RINL
RINL with the help of INSDAG plans to organize Workshops
for rural artisans on usage of steel products in rural areas
in the local Industrial Training Institutes (ITI).
RINL plans to set up Steel Processing Units (SPUs) to
manufacture “made to order” steel products at various
locations in the country. The shapes and sizes required by
the customers including those from rural areas are planned
to be manufactured in these SPUs.
INSDAG has developed steel houses for villages. As per
these designs, RINL has built a steel village in the vicinity
of Visakhapatnam Steel Plant as a CSR initiative. This village
has some houses, a School Building and a Community
Centre.
INSDAG is also imparting training on steel fabrication used
for construction in rural areas with the help of main steel
producers.”
23. Asked about any proposal furnished by the Governments/PSUS
for any subsidy for agri-implements/machinery through effective
targeting by UID scheme as suggested by the Working Group on Steel,
the Committee were informed by the Ministry of Steel that at present
there is no proposal of subsidy from Ministry of Steel for agri-
implements/machinery through UID scheme.
24. The Committee were informed that special design and increased
use of steel in construction has been suggested by various research
groups to improve the cement to steel ratio and how they are
implemented specially in hilly and rural areas including Uttrakhand
during the last 5 years. In this regard, the steps taken by INSDAG are
as under:—
“(a) Development of steel-concrete composite construction and
its propagation. Some live examples of this technology are
Handloom Complex at Janpath and Indira Paryavaran
Bhawan at Jorbagh, New Delhi.
(b) Development of efficient and economical structural sections
like parallel flange beams and columns (in the product line
of JSPL and SAIL). INSDAG has developed one ready to
use manual for parallel flange sections for wider use.
(c) Development of high grade reinforcement bars like 500 and
550 grades through TMT route. INSDAG has been providing
trainings for masons on good construction practices with
TMT bars.

12
(d) Maximizing use of colour coated roof and wall sheets.
(e) Development and popularizing of light weight structures
using Square Hollow Section (SHS), Rectangle Hollow
Section (RHS) and Circular Hollow Section (CHS). INSDAG
is providing improved fabrication techniques with lighter
sections periodically.
All these developments are taking shape predominantly
during last 5 years and due to their various advantages,
are being used extensively in difficult terrain like
Uttarakhand.”
F. SECTOR-WISE DEMAND OF STEEL
25. When asked about the sector-wise demand of steel and the
sectors which do not meet the targeted consumption from domestic
production and need to be imported, the Committee were informed as
under:—
“The, data collected by JPC on trends in production for sale, import,
export, real consumption of key items of non-alloy steel and overall
alloy/stainless steel and total finished steel, for 2012-13 (provisional)
is provided below.
Total Finished Steel (non-alloy + alloy): 2012-13 (prov.) (‘000t)
Category Production Imports Exports Real
for Sale Consumption
   1 2 3 4 5
Bars & Rods 28,847 514 413 29,497
Structurals 4,843 91 60 4,899
Rly. Materials 909 19 3 918
Non Flat 34599 624 476 35314
Plates 4,084 862 235 4,825
H.R.Coils/Skelp 15,935 1830 1615 16,381
H.R. Sheets 614 122 199 548
C.R. Sheets/Coils 8,769 1568 412 9,960
GP/GC Sheets 6,532 432 1509 5,524

13
Elec. Sheets 178 385 4 564
Tinplate (incl. ww) 239 184 54 372
TMBP 0 1 0 1
Pipes (Large Dia.) 2,036 134 136 2,071
Tin free steel 0 66 1 65
Flat 38387 5584 4165 40311
Less : Double - - - 6,646
Counting
Total: Non-Alloy 72986 6208 4641 68979
Total: Alloy 4630 1659 612 4351
Total Finished Steel 77616 7867 5253 73330
Source: JPC
As per the “India Steel Vision 2020” conducted by WSA, the
sector-wise consumption of steel during 2011-12 is as follows:—
1. Infrastructure & Construction — 63% (45 Million tonnes)
2. Engineering & Fabrication — 22% (16 Million tonnes)
3. Automotive — 10 % (7 Million tonnes)
4. Packaging — 3% (2 Million tonnes)
5. Other Transport — 2% (1 Million tonnes)
Some of the sectors which require imported steel are as given
below:—
(i) CRGO steel, which is not produced by any domestic steel
producer, for Power sector (transformers).
(ii) Some applications in Auto sector (Bake Hardenable [BH]
steels, Dual Phase Steel [DP], Transformation Induced
Plasticity [TRIP] steels, Interstitial Free [IF] steels, Ferrite-
Bainite steels).
(iii) High Tensile Grade Plates for Penstock, Earth Moving
equipment, Power sector and Boiler quality Plates for Boilers.
(iv) Special Quality Bars & Rods for application in Auto sector.
(v) API grade HR Coils/Plates for Oil & Gas sector.”
    1 2 3 4 5

14
G. ROLE OF STEEL PSUs TO PROMOTE USAGE OF STEEL
(i) Role of INSDAG
26. The Committee were informed that the Institute for Steel
Development and Growth (INSDAG) based in Kolkata, promoted by
the Ministry of Steel and leading domestic steel producers, is operating
for more than a decade towards promotion of steel use in Indian
construction and infrastructural sectors. In pursuance to this objective
the Institute disseminates steel related information/knowledge through
seminars, workshops, publications, etc., to professionals and academics,
organize award competitions, explores and innovates new and better
avenues of steel usage and provides specialized consultancy.
27. According to reports from INSDAG, some steel companies have
come forward to sponsor “Showcase Models” of specially designed
steel houses for villages. Besides, the Institute has been assigned the
task of developing design manuals for rural infrastructure such as
culverts and bridges where steel could be used as a major material.
Another innovative concept popularised by INSDAG is to promote
“steel bullock-carts” in villages in association with the “Central
Mechanical Engineering Research Institute”, Durgapur. These bullock-
carts will have a minimum life span of 20 years. Public Sector Banks
have been roped in for providing loan to the rural people for purchase
of the steel bullock carts. The Institute is also engaged in convincing
the steel companies to support production of the steel carts. Several
local NGOs and Khadi & Village Industries Corporations are taking
part in this initiative to promote the said item. From one village in
Odisha an order for 250 such bullock-carts has been received and
more efforts are underway from several other villages. A well organised
campaign is required.
(ii) MDP Projects
28. The Union Cabinet in its note in July 1997 had decided that an
amount of Rs. 5 (five) crores per annum may be spent on projects
intended to develop the market for steel. Popularly referred to as
Market Development Projects (MDP), these are meant for popularizing
steel usage in the country through innovative application/use of steel
in different areas. An Evaluation Committee, constituted by the Ministry
of Steel, operates with the objective to ensure that market development
projects are monitored and implemented on a holistic scale. A project
submitted under the scheme needs clearly to spell out how its
implementation will lead to a development in the domestic steel market
in terms of an increase consumption of steel/lead to innovative use of
steel.

15
29. Asked to furnish details of utilization of annual grants of
Rs. 5 crore for marketing development projects during the last 5 years,
the Ministry of Steel has informed the Committee in a post evidence
reply as under:—
“JPC does not have any project on account of market development
amounting to Rs. 5 crores and above as of now. However, details
of funds which were released are as follows:
Details of utilization of annual grants for market
development projects in last 5 years
Sl. Project Name Beneficiary Amout Released in
No. Released
(Rs. in lakhs)
1. Skill-cum-Entrepreneurship INSDAG 6.24 May 2013
Development Programme
(Uttar Pradesh)
2. Skill-cum-Entrepreneurship do 5.38 October 2012
Development Programme
(West Bengal)
3. Design manual for steel do 14.50 March 2008
structurals according to
new IS:800
4. Handbook on architectural do 12.00 March 2008
and construction in steel
Total: 38.12
(iii) Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL)
30. As on 1st January, 2013 SAIL has a network of 37 Branch Sales
Offices, 27 Customer Contact Offices and 66 Warehouses.
31. With a view to widen the reach of its products, SAIL has
established its dealer network extensively to cover almost all the
districts in the country. As on 1st June, 2013 SAIL dealership network
consists of 2986 dealers spread over 629 districts including 678 rural
dealers under its new Rural Dealership Scheme launched in 2011-12
with a view to expand its scope of business in rural areas of the
country especially at block/taluka level. The details of State-wise
dealership and rural dealership Network of SAIL are given at
Annexure-I and II respectively . Process for further appointment of rural

16
dealers is under progress. The primary objective of the Rural Dealership
Scheme is to meet the steel demands of the small rural consumers at
block, tehsils and taluka levels.
32. As per SAIL Dealership Policy and Rural Dealership Policy,
dealers are required to stock TMT Bars, GP/SC Sheets and other items
required by common men and sell to small/retail customers at prices
fixed by SAIL. Appointment of dealers in various districts/blocks/
talukas has helped in making steel items of mass consumption available
near the consuming points at competitive prices as SAIL absorbs
transportation cost from the nearest SAIL warehouse to the dealers’
premises. As a result, SAIL material is made available in rural and
remote locations at the same price at which it is available to dealers
at the nearest SAIL warehouse location.
33. As regards, according preference to applicants from SC/ST and
OBC categories for dealership of SAIL products, the Committee were
apprised that Dealers under SC/ST & OBC have been exempted from
payment of security deposit @ Rs. 500/- per tone of agreed monthly
off-take. Applicants belonging to SC/ST & OBC are being given
preference in appointment as SAIL dealer, subject to their fulfilling
eligibility criteria/conditions, as prescribed for them.
34. During the informal discussion at Darjeeling while the
Committee were on study tour, the Committee have desired to know
as to how far the new “SAIL Rural Dealership Policy” launched during
2011-12 has been successful for increase in the growth of steel usage
in rural areas. In this context, the Ministry of Steel/SAIL have replied
as under:—
“Consequent upon the launch of the Dealership Scheme, the first
appointment of Rural Dealers was made from April, 2012 onwards.
SAIL plans to increase the number of rural dealers to one thousand
by the end of this financial year. From a level of Nil supplies
during 2011-12, SAIL has increased supplies to Rural Dealers to
the level of 12990 tonnes during the year 2012-13. During the
current financial year, thrust would be given for increasing the
numbers and supplies to Rural Dealers. TMT Bars from ISP Bar
Mill will greatly help in enhancing the supply of steel (TMT Bars)
to rural areas.”
35. Enquired about the efforts made by SAIL to create adequate
network infrastructure to create more demand of steel in rural areas,
the SAIL has replied as follows:—
“As regards increasing demand for steel in rural areas, the
following initiatives are being considered:—
(a) Appointment of more Dealers in the rural areas;

17
(b) Increasing the volume of supply of steel to Rural Dealers
once ISP Bar Mill is commissioned;
(c) Creation of a viable supply chain logistics to serve these
Deale; and
(d) Increased quantum of promotional activities.”
36. Asked about the present rate of consumption of steel in the
country and whether there has been any increase in the percentage
consumption of finished steel in rural areas after the launch of ‘Rural
Dealership Policy’ by SAIL and whether any study has been conducted
in this regard, SAIL has informed the Committee as under:—
“As per Joint Plant Committee (JPC), consumption of steel in the
country during 2012-13 was 73.33 million tonnes, a growth of 3.3%
over CPLY. Based on this per capita consumption of steel in the
country during the year 2012-13 works out to 60 kg. A beginning
has been made by SAIL to take steel to the rural areas with the
introduction of the Rural Dealership scheme. With increased
availability, significant enhancement can be expected in usage of
steel in these areas in the coming years. JPC has recently sponsored
a study that revealed that consumption of Steel in Rural areas is
12 kgs per capita.”
37. When the Committee asked about the efforts made by the
SAIL management including funds allocated during the last three years
for “Promotion of Steel Usage” Region-wise, the Ministry of Steel/
SAIL has submitted the information as follows:—
“SAIL has been promoting steel usage primarily through its
Dealership Scheme. The region-wise promotional expenditure in
Retail has been as follows:—
(In Rs. Lakhs)
Year ER NR WR SR Total
2012-13 121.3 148.2 74.9 32.2 376.6
2011-12 111.3 125.0 94.1 45.0 375.4
2010-11 94.9 142.9 91.3 49.1 378.2
38. The Committee were informed that though SAIL and RINL
has increased their rural retail dealers to 678 and 606 respectively, the
per capita steel consumption in rural areas is mere 10 kg against the

18
given average of about 60 kg. Enquired about the increase in sale of
steel products by the increased number of retail rural dealers of both
SAIL and RINL during the last three years, the Committee were
informed in a post evidence reply as under:
“SAIL
Sale of steel materials through Retail Network of SAIL during the
last three years has been:—
TMT: ‘Qty in T
SALES 2012-13 2011-12 2010-11
Total Retail Sales 379127 392095 413230
Rural Dealership Sales 9552 0 0
GP/GC: ‘Qty in T
SALES 2012-13 2011-12 2010-11
Total Retail Sales 149159 139928 137471
Rural Dealership Sales 3172 0 0
LIGHT STRLS ‘Qty in T
SALES 2012-13 2011-12 2010-11
Total Retail Sales 14891 24092 28786
Rural Dealership Sales 266 0 0
39. As per SAIL Dealership policy, SAIL dealers are required to
spend Rs. 100 per tonne on promotion of SAIL products which is
reimbursed by SAIL.
40. As per SAIL’s Dealership Scheme, a Dealer is entitled to spend
on promotional activities a sum based on accruals which depends on
the lifting (off take) by the Dealer. The concerned Branch Office in
consultation with Regional Office undertakes expenditure of unspent
amount, if any, towards other promotional activities like holding of
Mason Meets/Architect Meets and also other forms of promotional
activities.
41. A brief summary of some of the major promotional activities
undertaken in 2012-13 in all the Regions are as under:—
(I) “Eastern Region
➢ 7 nos. of Dealer Meets, 2 nos. of Architect Meets and 5 nos.
of Mason Meets held.

19
➢ Various Promotional Activities undertaken:
• Distributed Calendars with SAIL products & Logo to
Dealers at Bokaro.
• Partly sponsored a Car Rally at Kolkata.
• Participated in the CII Exhibition in August, 2012—SAIL
stall with product displays, banners and brochures.
•W all paintings, Hoardings, Cable TV ads, displays at
Traffic Barricades, Printing and distributing T. shirts etc.
undertaken by the various Branches.
(II) Northern Region
➢ 80 nos. of Dealer Meets, 4 nos. of Architect and 4 nos. of
Mason Meets held.
➢ Various Promotional activities undertaken:
• Hoardings, Bus Back Advertisements etc. displayed by
the Branches.
(III) Western Region
➢ 14 nos. of Dealer Meets, 6 nos. of Mason Meets and
1 Architect Meet held.
➢ Various Promotional activities undertaken:
•W all Paintings, Bus Shelters, Flex on Trucks and Trailers,
Hoardings.
• Advertisement on RSTC Tickets and Yellow pages
published at Jaipur and Baroda.
•A  Cycle Rally “Paddle Power, 2012” was conducted at
Pune.
(IV) Southern Region
➢ 6 nos. of Dealer Meets and 2 nos. of Mason Meets held.
➢ Various Promotional activities undertaken:
• Participated in the International exhibition on Building
materials organised by Builders Association of India,
Southern Centre during 29th June-1st July, 2012 at
Chennai Trade Centre, Chennai.
• Backlit Display Board installed in SAIL Office, Chennai
during March, 2013.

20
• Hoardings at Railway Station, Bus Panel Ads, Cable TV
Ads, Pamphlets in local language, Wall paintings,
Newspaper Ads, Stickers on Auto Rickshaws etc.
undertaken by the Branches.
Expenditure on account of promotional activities is expected to
increase with higher off-takes under the Rural Dealership Scheme
from this year.
Besides the above, promotion of steel usage for other products not
covered under the Dealership Scheme is undertaken by the
Application Engineering Group in association with RDCIS and Steel
Plants through continuous interaction with customers.”
42. The promotional activities are undertaken by SAIL and its
dealers including in the interior areas attached to the SAIL Branch
Sales Office/Dealer. Some of the activities undertaken for publicity are
given below:—
“(a) Outdoor Advertisements
Wall Paintings, Hoardings, Mobile Vans, Display on Bus
backs, Kiosks, Bus Shelters, Welcome Signage at entry into
different districts/towns, Glowing boards.
(b) Printed Materials
Product Brouchers, Product Literatures/Pamphlets, Dealer
Directory, Posters, Calendars, Advertisements on Railway
Tickets/Railway Reservation charts, Bus tickets and Yellow
pages.
(c) Audio-Visuals
Films, Presentations, Radio/FM Jingles, Road Shows.
(d) Events
Mason Meets, Architect Meets, Dealer Meets/Conference,
Road Shows, Participation in Exhibitions and Melas,
Sponsoring/Co-sponsoring of events, Cycle rally.
(e) Gift Items
Pads, Pens, T-shirts, Caps, Gloves, Clocks, Diaries, Callipers,
Measuring Tapes, Bags etc.”
43. During the study visit to Darjeeling in May, 2013, the Committee
had enquired about the details of the special efforts made for
“Promotion of Steel Usage” especially in the rural, hilly and far flung

21
areas of North-Eastern Region. In this regard, SAIL has submitted the
following:—
“Major promotional activities undertaken in the North-Eastern
region are as follows:—
(i) To get optimum visibility 28 welcome kiosks were installed
at Guwahati airport road (Feb. 2013). The kiosks offer
visibility to both incoming and outgoing airport traffic.
(ii) A 70x20 welcome hoarding was installed at Guwahati airport
road area (Feb. 2013). The gigantic hoarding greets all
visitors to Guwahati.
(iii) A special campaign of SAIL branded buses was implemented
in August 2012. Also special SAIL branded traffic barricades
were implemented. 50 Buses plying all over Guwahati were
branded and 10 SAIL branded Traffic Barricades across
Guwahati was implemented.
(iv) 68,750 sq. feet wall paintings campaign undertaken in
Assam, Tripura and Meghalaya during June 2012 and
Aug. 2012 was highly successful and led to widespread
company visibility. A total of 36,750 sq. feet wall paintings
were done in Assam, 10,250 sq. feet in Meghalaya and
21,750 sq. feet in Tripura during this period.
(v) A Dealers’ meet on dealer finance programme was organised
at Guwahati in December 2012. Dealers were briefed on the
innovative dealer finance scheme being initiated by SAIL in
collaboration with metal junction with State Bank of India
as financing partner. The dealer finance scheme will facilitate
dealers with credit opportunities. Another dealers’ meet was
organised at Guwahati in April 2013 chaired by ED (LP)
and RM Retail.
(vi) A masons’ meet was organised at Agartala in May 2012 to
brief masons about the benefits of SAIL products.
(vii) An all India kick boxing championship held for the first
time was sponsored by SAIL at Guwahati in February 2013.
(viii) SAIL also sponsored the main Bihu function at Guwahati
in April 2013 with a footfall of 5 lakhs.
(ix) Sponsored Durga Puja celebrations at NTPC Salakhati
Township in Oct. 2012.
Expenditures on account of promotional activities in the
North-Eastern Region have increased from a level of Rs 17.48 lacs
in 2011-12 to Rs 21.44 lacs in 2012-13.”

22
44. Regarding steps taken for promotion of steel industry by SAIL,
the Committee were also apprised of the following:—
❖ “In addition SAIL, has undertaken following activities for
promotion of steel usages during 2012-13. Technical
presentations were made to Government Department and
project customers for publicity of new products like
corrosion resistant/earthquake resistant TMT Bars for
construction and rock bolt bars for tunnelling.
❖ At SAIL, continuous efforts are being made to develop new
products for meeting specific applications as required by
our customers for promoting steel usage. Development of
new and improved products helps in increasing use of steel
and in avoiding replacement of steel by other substitutes. It
also helps in adding value to the product and in turn
improves customer satisfaction levels. SAIL developed 24
new products during the year 2012-13 for a wide variety of
application. Some of the new products developed were—
• IS 2062 E350 HR Coil without micro-alloying (Thinner
Gauge 1.6-4.0 mm) at Salem Steel Plant and IS 2062
E450 HR Coil at Bokaro Steel Plant for Railway wagons.
• API X-70 HR Coil at Rourkela Steel Plant for Sour Gas
Application.
• ASTM 537 CL. II Q & T Plates at Bhilai and Rourkela
Steel Plants for Petrochemical and Heavy Machinery .
• Soft Iron Magnetic Plates at Bhilai Steel Plant for
Neutrino Observatory .
❖ SAIL regularly participates in fairs and exhibitions
highlighting various usages of steel. During 2012-13 SAIL
participated in India International Trade Fair (IITF) and India
Engineering Trade Fair held in November 2012, February
2013 at Pragati Maidan Delhi and also in India Steel 2013
held at Mumbai in April 2013.
❖ SAIL has taken up comprehensive development of 79 Model
Steel Villages spanning eight States. The development work
being undertaken in these villages is likely to result in
generation of steel demand. State-wise details of Model Steel
Villages are as given below.
State No. of Villages Plant/Units
12 3
Bihar 3 CMO-3
Jharkhand 13 BSL-8, RMD-5

23
Odisha 19 RSP-16, RMD-3
West Bengal 20 DSP-11, ISP-7, ASP-2
Chhattisgarh 21 BSP-21
Karnataka 1 AISP-1
Madhya Pradesh 1 RMD-1
Tamil Nadu 1 SSP-1
Total No. of villages 79 79
Specific promotional activities undertaken during 2012-13 is given
at Annexure-III.”
(iv) Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)
45. The Committee have been informed that RINL-VSP makes
efforts on continuous basis for promotion of steel usage through
development and supplying of new products and improving
Distribution Network for wider coverage. Efforts are made for
developing new products to meet specific applications, which in turn
help in promoting steel usage. The requirements of customers of new
products/grades/sizes of steel products are collected through various
interactions with the customers. In case it is found technologically
feasible, these products are developed and supplied to the customers.
Some of the new products developed and supplied to the customers
in the recent past include Billets for Axles, Squares for manufacturing
Structurals for Transmission Line Towers, Billets for manufacturing
Seamless Tubes etc.
46. In order to promote steel consumption in rural areas further,
RINL introduced Rural Dealership Scheme and the number of such
Dealers have been increased six fold to 606 in the last three years as
under:—
Item March, 2010 March, 2013
Rural Dealers 100 606
47. Out of 606 Dealers, 90 belong to SC/ST category and 109
belong to OBC category.
48. RINL has informed the Committee that in order to improve
distribution of steel in rural areas further, it is planned to increase the
number of Dealers to 1000 by end of current year. Appointment of
12 3

24
Dealers is being done on continuous basis to achieve Company’s
Objective of ensuring availability of RINL products in nook and corner
of the country.
49. Keeping in view the ongoing and future expansion of the plant
capacity, actions have been initiated by RINL to open 7 New Branches
at Raipur, Ranchi, Trichy, Allahabad, Siliguri, Panaji and Jammu.
Initially, RINL plans to appoint Marketing Contact Officers (MCOs) at
7 locations.
50. RINL also plans to open Nodal Stockyards in South, West and
Northern Regions to improve distribution of steel products to various
locations. At Head Quarters, Visakhapatnam a new Central Despatch
Yard is going to be constructed to facilitate systematic stacking and
speedy loading of products into the wagons.
51. With a view to popularising usage of steel in rural areas, RINL/
VSP introduced the Scheme of registration of District Level Dealers in
Small Towns and Rural Dealers at Block and Panchayat Level locations.
The process of registration of Rural Dealers is continuous and simple.
Preference is given for the minorities and women entrepreneurs in the
Rural Areas for the Rural Dealerships. For promotion of e-sales RINL
has also launched e-portal. RINL-VSP has floated EOI for taking Steel
Processing Units (SPUs) on Wet Lease basis for manufacturing of
economy Rebars and Structurals from the semis produced in RINL.
These economy products are to be sold in the Rural Areas with new
Brand Name.
52. During the study tour to Gangtok in May, 2013, when the
Committee desired to know the mechanism available in RINL for
marketing its various products, the RINL has submitted the following:—
“RINL has a wide distribution network spread across the country
for supplying steel products to various category of customers
include those in the nook and corner of the country. The company
has 5 Regional Offices located at Delhi (North), Mumbai (West),
Chennai (South), Kolkata (East) and Visakhapatnam (Andhra
Pradesh). RINL has 23 Branch Sales Offices and 22 Stockyards.
The company has Consignment Sales Agents (CSAs) at 5 locations
including 2 in North East i.e. Guwahati (Assam) and Agartala
(Tripura), Bhopal and Jabalpur (M.P .) and Varanasi (U.P .) and 133
Retailers, who market RINL’s Products. These outlets help in
supplying steel to customers in urban and semi-urban areas. There
are 606 Dealers as on 31.3.2013, all throughout the country
supplying steel products to urban, semi-urban and rural customer
in addition to other distribution points.

25
RINL primarily markets its products to 3 market segments i.e.
Projects, Industrial Consumers (Actual Users) and Retailers. In
addition, steel projects are also supplied to National Small Industry
Corporation (NSIC) and State Small Scale Industry Corporations
(SSIC) as per the allocation made by the Ministry of Steel,
Government of India.
Leveraging its Port based location, RINL also export pig iron and
a small quantity of steel products. The Export Division is located
at Head Quarters, Visakhapatnam. In the process of manufacturing
iron and steel, by-products are generated. RINL also markets the
by-products like naphthalene, benzol products, ammonium sulfate,
pitch, coal tar, coal oils, granulated BF slag, lime fines, oxygen
etc.”
53. Asked about the efforts that have been made by the RINL
management including funds allocated during the last three years for
“Promotion of Steel Usage” (Region-wise), RINL has informed the
Committee as under:—
“RINL has adopted a 3 Pronged Action Plan for improving steel
usage, as below:—
I. Widening Marketing Distribution Network
The per capita steel consumption of steel in rural areas has now
picked up but still it is a mere 10 Kg. against the country’s average
of about 60 Kg. In order to promote steel consumption in rural
areas further, RINL introduced Rural Dealership Scheme and the
number of such Dealers have been increased six fold to 606 in the
last three years. Region-wise number of Rural Dealers are as
under:—
Region March, 2010 March, 2013
North 3 190
West 8 81
South 29 162
East 25 158
Andhra 35 15
Total 100 606

26
Out of 606 Dealers, 90 belong to SC/ST category and 109 belong
to OBC category. In order to further improve distribution of steel
in rural areas, it is planned to increase the number of Dealers to
1000 by end of current year. Appointment of Dealer is being done
on continuous basis to achieve Company’s Objectives of ensuring
availability of RINL projects in nook and corner of the country .
Keeping in view the ongoing and future expansion of the plant
capacity actions have been initiated to open 6 New Branches at
Renigunta, Trichy, Ranchi, Allahabad, Sonepat and Jammu. RINL
also plans to appoint Marketing Contact Officers (MCO’s) at
7 locations. These are Raipur, Ranchi, Trichy, Allahabad, Siliguri,
Panaji and Jammu.
RINL has also plans to open Nodal Stockyards in South, West and
Northern Region to improve distribution of steel products to
various locations. At Head Quarters, Visakhapatnam a new Central
Dispatch Yard is going to be constructed to facilitate systematic
stacking and speedy loading of projects into the wagons. To
improve dispatch and delivery, it has also been proposed to
introduce coastal shipping in East coast from Visakhapatnam to
Chennai to begin with.
Export
RINL’s products are well accepted in international market. Currently
after the meeting the domestic requirement, export of around
Rs. 500 crore annually is being done. Last year RINL’s share in
export of pig iron from the country was the highest at 59%. As
per strategy, about 10% of its products will be targeted for export.
Under this endeavour, the company has opened International
Marketing Office (IMO) in World Trade Centre at Colombo, Srilanka
in April, 2013. Efforts are being made to take Rolling Mills on wet
lease basis in Srilanka and Myanmar for rolling RINL’s semis into
finished steel products like TMT bars and Structurals and market
in these countries and also export to other countries. It is planned
to open Marketing Offices in countries like Singapore, Dubai,
Malaysia, etc. to improve exports.
II. Development of new products and augmentation of capacity
Objectives: To serve customers better by meeting their requirement
of quality projects, decrease the specific consumption, making steel
use cost competitive and also to produce products, which are
currently being fully/partially imported.

27
Products development is a continuous process of RINL to meet
the specific requirements of customers. In response to the customers
need, product development is taken up, successfully developed
products are supplied to them. During last 3 years, about 65 new
products have been developed. The new products developed are
meeting the stringent quality requirement of sectors like
construction, railways, oil and gas, automobile, engineering etc.
Supply of the projects RINL contributes to increase in steel
consumption in the country.
RINL has taken a number of steps to produce projects of import
substitution. In the capacity expansion to 7.3 Mt, the product-mix
is being widened. State-of-the art Secondary refining facilities like
Electro Magnetic Stirrer (EMS), RH Degasser, Ladle furnace along
with several new technologies are introduced in the ongoing
expansion. These facilities give capacity to produce any chemistry
required by customers. Several new units are getting installed by
RINL to produce the following products, which are basically import
substitution items:—
Continuous Cast Rounds: to produce rounds upto 500 mm dia.
First time in India to meet the requirement of tube manufactures,
forgings sector etc.
Forged wheels: To supply wheels to Railways to meet the
requirement of High Speed Trains and others. Biggest Plant in
India. Installation of this unit will curb import and also encourage
export.
Axle Plant: To supply axles to Railways to meet the requirement
of higher wagon loads. This will be the 2nd Biggest plant in India.
The unit will curb import and encourage export and also meet the
requirement of special forging.
Seamless Tubes: To supply seamless tubes upto 18" dia. of higher
grades. The unit is going to be the 1st in India. This will meet the
growing requirement of power, oil & gas sector in India as well as
other countries, mostly in Gulf countries.
TLT Grade Structurals: All items at one place. This unit is going
to be the 1st of its kind in India.
Electrical Sheets in CRGO/CRNO Grades: It is at initial stage of
technology acquisition/development.
Flat Products: RINL has plans to diversify into the products
segment in the expansion from 7.3 MT to 11.5 MT capacity.

28
III. Advertisement campaigns
Objectives: To build brand name of the company and promotion
of steel usage to bring awareness amongst larger cross section of
people.
Earlier RINL was depending more on mouth-to-mouth publicity
arising out of its excellent Marketing Services. Survey made by
PM’s Trophy Team has also brought out this feature. Hence there
was limited expenditure on publicity. However, now with expansion
products and availability of higher projects volume, RINL’s
expenditure on sales promotion is getting increased in stages.
During the last 2 years, expenditure increased by 53% to Rs. 3.05
crore of last year i.e. 2012-13. Keeping in view the need and the
initiatives required to be taken for product campaigns, Board of
RINL has also enhanced the budget for product promotion to
Rs. 15 per tonne of steel sales. Steel promotion activities being
taken includes:
(i) Conducting workshops of Architects, Designers, Builders,
Consultants etc. at Major Metros (New Delhi, Kolkata,
Chennai, Mumbai Hyderabad, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Patna
Bhubaneswar, Kanpur/Agra)
(ii) Meet on Rural Marketing to promote “Steel consumption in
Rural Areas” was undertaken in association with CII and
ASSOCHAM.
(iii) Partners Summit held every year at HQ, Visakhapatnam,
where Rural Dealers participate and discuss various interface
issues.
(iv) Regular Rural Dealers Meets are being conducted in the
Branch Offices.
(v) CSR Programme along with promotion of steel in rural areas
have been conducted in Bhubaneswar, Bangalore, Jaipur,
Lucknow and Kanpur & such programme will be taken up
in other areas.
(vi) Advertisements during important Sports Events, Seminar etc.
(vii) Making a Product Film in local languages and telecast
through local Cable Network.
(viii) Making a CD consisting of Product Features and Contract
Persons.

29
(ix) Advertisements on Buses, Hoardings at Bus Stands, Airports
Railway Stations and vantage points.
(x) Glow Sign Boards at Stock Yards, Retailers, DLD’s and RDs
locations.
(xi) Product Campaign through News papers, Magazines etc.
(xii) Product Campaign in Airlines In-flight Magazines.
(xiii) Hoardings on RINL’s Products in Tier-II Cities & Rural
Areas.
(xiv) Pr ojections of video clips on RINL Products in Cinema Halls.
(xv) Participation in Exhibitions for displaying RINL’s Products.
(xvi) Printing of Product Brochures for Circulation amongst
customers.
(xvii) RINL along with INSDAG has also taken up steel product
promotion campaign for improving steel consumption in
the country.
With combined effects of advertisement, customer satisfaction, new
products, rural dealership scheme etc, RINL has recorded growth
in sales of steel products in major States  i.e. UP by 21%, Bihar by
13%, Uttaranchal by 58%, Haryana by 18%, Rajasthan by 15%,
Odisha by 25%, West Bengal by 21% and Maharashtra by 11% in
2011-12. Similarly, in 2012-13, growth rates were registered in
various States,  i.e. Bihar by 33%, Gujarat by 3%, Delhi 208% and
Kerala by 15%.
Institute for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG), promoted
by major steel producers in the country and the Ministry of Steel
(MoS) has been acting as a nodal agency for undertaking promotion
of steel usage campaign in the country. RINL is a member of this
campaign committee and finances the promotional activities
undertaken by INSDAG.
The details of actual expenditure on product promotion in the last
3 years by RINL are brought out below:—
Items 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
Actual expenditure 1.99 3.13 3.05
The expenditure was primarily for issuing Advertisement in the
News Papers, advertisements on the Buses, participating in
Exhibitions, Putting Banners and Bill Boards at Bus Stations and
important locations, advertisements at Airport and during important
Sports Events, Seminars etc.”

30
54. As regard the outlays that have been earmarked for the
promotion of steel for the year 2013-14, the Committee were informed
as under:—
“SAIL
SAIL plans to increase the expenditure on promotion on account
of Retail from the last year’s level of R 3.77 crores to about
R 4.25 crores which is an increase of over 12%.
RINL
The outlay earmarked by RINL for product promotion at RINL in
2013-14 is Rs. 2.5 cr.”
55. Asked about the constraints faced by the RINL in supplying
the steel products, the Committee were informed as under:—
“RINL is a single unit south based integrated steel plant located
in Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh. More than 50% of its steel
products are sold in southern states due to freight advantage.
Additional freight is incurred for sending products to farther places
making already thin margins due to lack of captive iron ore mines.
In case of addition of actual freight, product price is becoming
high. Waival of CST on sales in North-Eastern States would reduce
the sale price. Some of the constraints are brought out below:
(i) The lifting performance of steel products by Rural Dealers
is not upto expectation. RINL is taking action for
popularizing steel consumption in rural areas through
publicity and conducting seminars etc.
(ii) Transportation & Logistic is a constraint for movement of
steel products in the interior locations.”
56. During the informal discussion at Gangtok on 25.5.2013 when
asked as to whether RINL has launched a Rural Dealership Scheme
on the lines of SAIL and whether RINL has faced any hindrances in
the North-Eastern Region during the process, the Ministry of Steel/
RINL submitted as under:—
“As regards the Rural Dealership Scheme, the Committee were
informed that RINL is a pioneer in launching and the same was
launched during the FY 2010-11. There has been steady increase in
the number of Dealers appointed year after year. The No. of Dealers

31
at the end of the year in the last two years and the current years
is as under:—
Item 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
No. of Rural Dealers 229 318 606
As on 31.3.2013, 20 Rural Dealers have been appointed in various
States in North-Eastern Region. Steel products for these Rural
Dealers are serviced from Branch Sales Office (BSO), Kolkata. In
the North-Eastern Region, response to the advertisements issues is
normally poor and as result, RINL is not in a position to increase
the network.”
57. When the Committee asked about the present rate of
Consumption of steel in the country and enhancement in the percentage
consumption of finished steel in rural areas after the launch of ‘Rural
Dealership Policy’ by RINL, the Committee were informed as under:—
“After implementation of Rural Dealership Scheme by RINL, there
has been a steady growth in sales in the Rural Areas. The steel
supplies to rural areas by RINL are as under:—
Item 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
Quantity of Steel 1.52 1.74 2.00”
supplied through
Rural Dealers (Tonnes)
58. During the study visit of the Committee at Gangtok in May,
2013, when asked about the efforts made by RINL to create adequate
network infrastructure to create more demand of steel, the following
was submitted to the Committee:—
“RINL has a wide distribution network consisting of Regional
Officers, Branch Sales Officers and Stockyards spread across the
country. Consignment Sales Agents are appointed at locations,
where RINL does not have its outlets. Retailers are appointed for
supplying steel to the customers in various locations. Rural Dealers
are appointed for supplying steel products to the semi-urban and
rural customers.
Some of the initiatives taken by the Company for creating more
demand for steel are as under:—
(i) Appointment of Exclusive Dealers at various locations in
the country.
(ii) Appointment of Channel partners in the states, where RINL
has no presence or meager presence.

32
(iii) Posting of Marketing Contract Officers (MCOs) at Ranchi,
Raipur, Trichy, Allahabad, Panji (Goa), Jammu and Siliguri
to tap the potential market in the respective areas has been
taken up.
(iv) Taking Steel Processing Unit (SPU) for conversion of semis
into finished steel products.
(v) Opening Service Centres at important locations in the
Country.
(vi) International Marketing Office (IMO) at Colombo, Sri Lanka
to be operational.
(vii) T aking Steel Processing Unit (SPU) in Sri Lanka and
Myanmar.
Depending upon the requirement, Marketing Contract Officer
(MCO) of RINL are planned to be posted in Dubai, Singapore and
Kuala Lampur, so as to facilitate export tie ups with various
countries in Asia and other countries.”
59. The Committee have desired to know efforts made by RINL
during the last three years for promotion of steel usage in the country.
In this regard, RINL has submitted as under:—
“The following are the actions taken by RINL in the last 3 years
for promotion of steel usage in the country:—
(a) Increase in distribution network
INSDAG has been acting as a nodal agency for undertaking
promotion of steel usage campaign in the country & RINL
is a member of this campaign committee and finances the
promotional activities undertaken by INSDAG. Besides this,
RINL has also promoted usage of steel by making product
campaigns and also increasing the availability of steel in
rural areas by expanding its distribution network through
appointment of RDS.
(b) Development of new products
RINL makes efforts on continuous basis for development of
new products to meet specific requirement of the customers,
which increase usage of steel. The number of new products
developed in the last 3 years is as under:—
Sl.No. 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
No. of new products developed 21 25 26
The new products developed find application in various sectors
like construction, railways, oil and gas, automobile, engineering
etc. Supply of the products by RINL contributes to increase in
steel consumption in the country.”

33
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. The per capita consumption of steel is considered as an
important index for the socio-economic development and living
standard of the people of any country. The Committee are concerned
to note that though India ranked 4th in the world steel production
with annual production of steel at 73.6 million tonne after China
(716.5 million tonne) Japan (107.2 million tonne) and USA
(86.4 million tonne), the per capita consumption of finished steel in
the country stood awefully at 60 kg. against the world average of
216.9 kg. during 2012 which is also much below the per capita
finished steel used in South Korea (1114.1 kg.), Japan (506 kg.),
China (477.4 kg.). The Committee also note that per capita
consumption in the country have risen from 39.6 kg. in 2006 to
59.8 kg. in 2012. Although, the Committee note that after their
recommendation [25th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)] to
the Ministry to achieve the huge growth potential and to create
required infrastructure for steel industry as well as increase per capita
consumption of steel, there has been increase of about 16.6 kg. of
per capita consumption of steel in the country, they, however, are of
the view that with the present rate of increase in per capita
consumption of steel, it may take centuries to catch up with the
developed countries like South Korea, Japan and even China in
per capita consumption of steel in the country. Though SAIL has
formulated a new SAIL Rural Dealership Policy only during
2011-12, RINL does not have such policy to increase growth of steel
usage in rural areas. The Committee strongly believe that India being
a developing country, there is a huge scope for increase in steel
consumption in infrastructure sector like roads, railway network,
sea ports, airports, large scale housing projects, industries including
capacity addition in power generation and distribution, oil and gas,
steel, communication, manufacturing sectors, agricultural sector,
construction of dams and bridges, interlinking of rivers,
mechanization of farming, tapping potential of steel consumption in
rural area, fencing of countries borders, etc. The Committee would
like the Ministry of Steel/Steel PSUs to formulate a comprehensive
policy for promotion of steel usage since the consumption of steel
has a direct bearing on the production of steel keeping in view the
manifold increase in the steel production in the coming years.

34
2. The Committee observe that consumption of steel has not
grown relatively in the rural areas which comes out to 9.78 kg. What
has further perturbed the Committee is that despite huge potential
in rural India where 72% of 1 billion plus population of the country
live, the Joint Plant Committee (JPC) has assessed, only around
12 kg. per capita consumption by the end of the year 2020. Although,
the Government have admitted that it is not the target and is just
a statistical project, the Committee are of the view that increasing
affluence and impact of urbanization, rural populace can afford even
more steel consumption and with various promotional measures, the
rural steel consumption can grow beyond the perceived levels. The
Committee feel that for enhancing the consumption of steel in rural
India, it is necessary to make rural consumers aware of the
advantages of steel usage over the traditional materials like wood
and plastic in terms of inherent strength, design flexibility, the
fire resistance, durability and life cycle cost advantage besides the
eco-friendliness of using steel in construction, storage and other
household items. The Committee, therefore, recommend that rural
campaign of the Ministry/Steel PSUs for promotion of steel should
aim to achieve these ends.
Working Group on Steel for 12th Five Y ear Plan
3. The Committee note that the Working Group on Steel for
12th Five Year Plan had indicated that in order to achieve double
digit growth rate of domestic steel consumption investments of
1 billion dollar in infrastructure and setting up of the national
manufacturing and investment zones are required as integral part to
accelerate the pace of implementation of infrastructure projects in
the country. The Committee have been apprised that steps are being
taken by the Government/Steel Companies to improve the cement to
steel ratio in construction, deeper penetration into rural markets,
diversification strategies etc. as pointed out by the Working Group.
Further, Institute for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) has
been continuously propagating various ways and means to improve
steel to cement ratio in construction, preparation and dissemination
of various reports/guidebooks/manuals/Codes & Standards, continuous
education to professionals, faculties and students through various
classrooms trainings/seminars/competitions, representation to various
implementing authorities for steel/steel-concrete composite
construction, etc. The Committee have been informed that one
prominent example in this regard is extensive and exclusive use of
structural steel in airport modernization across the country. T aking
note of the huge investments required in manufacturing and

35
infrastructure projects, the Committee would like to be apprised of
the investments made by Steel PSUs for undertaking modernisation
programme and product diversification strategy so far with focus on
value added products.
4. The Committee note that the Working Group on Steel for the
12th Five Year Plan Period has stressed on the need for projects like
Bharat Nirman, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana and
Rajiv Gandhi Awas Yojana to increase the per capita steel
consumption. The Committee have been given to understand that
INSDAG had developed comprehensive design and construction
manual for small span bridges and culverts for National Rural Roads
Development Agency (NRRDA) under Ministry of Rural
Development and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
(MoRTH) for implementation of the same in rural areas. These steel
based designs of rural bridges and culverts are presently being
implemented in various parts of the country. While observing that
INSDAG is constructing two prototype buildings in Tripura for
exposure to rural masses and one such building has been constructed
at a remote village in West Bengal, the Committee recommend that
this concept be followed in more and more States to create greater
awareness for use of steel to help the rural people. The Committee
also desire that Border Road Organisation and National Highways
Authority of India should also be pursued by Ministry of Steel to
develop comprehensive design and construction manual for their use
as developed by INSDAG for NRRDA.
5. The Committee also note that Working Group on Steel for
12th Five Year Plan has also recommended that subsidies for
purchasing agri-implements/machinery through effective targeting by
UID scheme should be implemented. Although, the Ministry of Steel
has informed the Committee that there is no proposal for providing
subsidy by them for agri-implements/machinery, the Committee feel
that the Government should come out with such a proposal to ensure
deeper penetration into rural markets where demand remains
untapped.
6. As regards the thrust given to design product developments
and capacity building in fabrication of steel articles needed by the
rural economy for houses for villages, community halls, culverts and
bridges etc., the Committee observe that RINL has planned to set
up Steel Processing Units to manufacture ‘Made to Order’ steel
products on various locations in the country. The shapes and sizes
required by the customers from rural areas are planned to be

36
manufactured from these Special Processing Units. The Committee
note that SAIL has taken up comprehensive development of 79 model
Steel villages spanning over 8 States and development work
undertaken in these villages is likely to result in generation of steel
demand. Further, as per designs developed by INSDAG, RINL has
built a steel village with some houses, school building and
community centre in the vicinity of the Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant.
While appreciating RINL plan to set up Steel Processing Units at
various locations in the country, the Committee desire that
Government should come out with a plan where all steel producing
units, be in public or private sectors, are directed to set up such
‘Made to Order’ Special Processing Units at various locations in the
country to boost the per capita steel consumption in rural areas.
7. The Committee are given to understand that fabrication is
considered one of the major bottlenecks of enhanced steel usage in
rural/semi-urban areas and INSDAG is reported to be trying to
improve the scenario by imparting hand-holding support to the
prospective rural entrepreneurs to set up their own fabrication units
at their chosen locations. The Committee are, however, perturbed to
note that the Government and PSUs like SAIL and RINL have failed
to take desired steps to increase the demand of steel in rural market
by supporting the prospective rural entrepreneurs to set up their
own fabrication units. Further, though RINL has reported to have
developed earthquake resistant and corrosion resistant rebars for
usage in construction and has claimed that these new grades of steel
products help in reducing damage during natural calamities like
earthquakes, floods, tsunamis, etc. in rural, hilly and coastal areas
and increases the life of structures constructed, the Committee observe
that the company has failed to promote these products in hilly areas
which are prone to natural calamities like earthquakes, floods, etc.
Unhappy to note that the steel companies and INSDAG have failed
to promote these steel products in rural and hilly areas, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should come
up with a plan not only to support the prospective rural
entrepreneurs to setup their fabrication units but SAIL and RINL
should also setup the same at their chosen locations with focus on
value added products.
8. The Committee observe that INSDAG has been pursuing
various programmes for development of steel usage such as
development of steel-concrete composite construction and its
propagation, development of efficient and economical structural
sections like parallel flange beams and columns, development of

37
high grade reinforcement bars like 500 and 550 grades through TMT
route, maximizing use of colour coated roof and wall sheets,
development and popularizing of light weight structures using Square
Hollow Sections, Rectangle Hollow Section and Circular Hollow
Section. As the Ministry of Steel has informed the Committee that
all these developments have been taking shape predominantly during
last 5 years and due to their various advantages, are being used
extensively in difficult terrain like Uttarakhand, the Committee would
like to be apprised of the utilization and adoption of the above
technologies in different parts of the country.
Market Development Projects
9. The Committee note that in 1997, the Government had decided
that an amount of Rs. 5 crore per annum be spent on projects
intended to develop the market for steel. These market development
projects were meant for popularizing steel houses in the country
through innovative applications/use of steel in different areas. The
Committee are, however, dismayed to note that only four projects
with total grants amounting to Rs. 38.12 lakh were taken up for
these marketing development projects in the last 5 years. The projects
included skill-cum-entrepreneurs development programme in
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, design manual for steel structurals
and hand book on architectural and construction in steel. The
Committee, therefore, cannot but deplore the inaction on the part of
the Government and Institute for Steel Development and Growth
(INSDAG) for their utter failure to implement the project in right
spirit which was set up more than a decade ago for promotion of
steel use in Indian construction and infrastructural sectors. The
Committee feel that INSDAG has failed to achieve its objectives of
promotion of steel use by not providing requisite thrust to increase
steel consumption particularly in rural areas as it was unable to
come up with market development projects. What has further pained
the Committee is that despite the existence of various agencies like
JPC, INSDAG, Evaluation Committee for monitoring and
implementation of MDP , Steel PSUs and private companies, no
concrete steps were made to increase consumption of steel. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that necessary steps be
taken by the Government to ensure that more and more market
development projects are taken up and the grants of Rs. 5 crore per
year be fully and gainfully utilized for resultant increase in
per capita consumption of steel.
Rural Dealership
10. The Committee observe that the rural retail dealership of
SAIL and RINL has increased from nil and 240 in 2010-11 to 678
and 606 in 2012-13 respectively. As regards the sale of steel materials

38
through retail rural network by SAIL during 2010-11 and 2011-12,
the Committee note that it was nil and has increased to the level of
12990 tonnes during the year 2012-13. The steel supply by RINL to
rural dealers from 1.53 lakh tonne during 2010-11 and 1.74 lakh tonne
during 2011-12 has risen to 2 lakh tonne during 2012-13. From the
data furnished by the Government/SAIL, the Committee cannot but
deplore the way the SAIL has failed to supply steel materials to
rural areas during 2010-11 and 2011-12 and has entered in rural market
only after appointment of rural retail dealers during 2012-13. The
Committee also observe that the increase in quantity sold by RINL
during 2012-13 with 606 dealers at 2 lakh tonne has also not risen
sufficiently in proportion to 366 new dealers appointed during
2011-12 and 2012-13. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more
and more dealers should be appointed in villages, semi-towns and
municipal areas. The future of increased use of domestic steel
products rests with the people of rural, semi-towns and municipal
areas. Public sector undertakings like SAIL, RINL etc., should take
steps to educate the rural people regarding utilisation of domestic
steel products. Sometimes, they should hold ‘steel melas’ in rural
areas. Massive advertisements in regional languages should be made
in rural areas, so that people become aware of utilisation of steel
products. Time has ripen that Nationalized Steel Industry must open
their respective publicity department engaging professional experts
for publicizing use of steel products in entire India. Public Sector
Undertakings(PSUs) must give more time and energy to sell domestic
steel products and market development projects in the country.
Sector-wise demand of Steel
11. From the data furnished by the Ministry of Steel on trends
in production for sale, import, export, real consumption of key items
of non-alloy steel and overall alloy/stainless steel and finished steel,
the Committee observe that among the non-flat category against the
production of 3,45,99,000 tonne, the imports and export were 6,24,000
tonne and 4,76,000 tonne respectively. The major products imported
in the non-flat category were bar and roads. As regards the flat
items, the Committee observe that HR coils and HR sheets are
equally imported and exported. As per the India Steel Vision 2020,
the utilization of steel by infrastructure and construction sector will
be 63% i.e. 45 million tonnes of steel, whereas engineering and
fabrication is the another major steel consumption sector which will
consume 22% of the steel production (16 million tonne). The
Committee note that some of the sectors like CRGO Steel required
for transformers in power sector are not produced by any domestic

39
steel producer. Further, Bake Hardenable Steels, Dual Phase Steel
etc., in auto sector, power sector and boiler quality plates for boilers,
HR coils/plates for oil and gas sector etc., are also required to be
imported. In view of the emerging demand of these products in
power, steel, auto, oil and gas sectors, the Committee feel that the
steel companies should focus on their production also so as to
become self reliant and to save foreign exchange reserves.
Allocation of Funds for Promotion of Steel Usage
12. In order to tap the potential of steel usage, promotional
activities like mason meets and dealer meets are being held by the
steel PSUs to create greater awareness for use of steel in various
constructions including individual houses during 2012-13. A total
no. of 17 mason meets and 107 dealer meets were conducted by
SAIL. The Committee have been informed that steel PSUs has also
adopted a three pronged action plan for improving steel usage by
widening marketing, distribution network, development of new
products and advertisement campaign to bring awareness amongst
largest section of people by conducting workshop of architects,
designers builders, advertisement during sports events, seminars,
hoardings, product campaign through newspaper, printing of product
brochures etc. The Committee note that the actual expenditure on
product promotion by SAIL during 2012-13 was Rs. 3.78 crore and
the outlays for 2013-14 for promotion of steel by SAIL has been
kept at Rs. 4.25 crore. As regards funds earmarked by RINL for
product promotion in 2013-14, the Committee observe that these have
been decreased to Rs. 2.5 crore against the actual expenditure of
Rs. 3.05 crore during 2012-13. The Committee are unhappy to observe
that though the installed capacity of SAIL which is 12.84 million
tonne is much more than that of RINL which is 2.90 million tonne
per year, the expenditure incurred by both the companies during
2012-13 on promotion of steel usage is almost the same. The
Committee desire that SAIL should increase the outlays for promotion
of steel usage. Taking note of the likely crude steel capacity of SAIL
to be increased to 20.75 million tonne and that of RINL to 7 million
tonne by 2016-17, the Committee recommend that both the companies
should spend more amount on promotion of steel usage and the
Committee be apprised of the same.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALYAN BANERJEE,
26 August, 2013 Chairman,
04 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

40
ANNEXURE I
Details of State-wise Dealership Network of SAIL
State-wise, Category-wise Dealers as on 1.6.2013
State SC ST OBC Gen. Total
Odisha 5 0 7 117 129
Jharkhand 9 5 8 67 89
West Bengal 7 0 2 118 127
Assam 1 8 3 61 73
Meghalaya 0 7 0 5 12
Tripura 1 0 1 14 16
Arunachal Pradesh 1 44 0 0 45
Manipur 2 8 1 5 16
Mizoram 0 11 0 1 12
Nagaland 0 20 0 0 20
Bihar 15 0 69 58 142
Total-Eastern Region 41 103 91 446 681
Uttar Pradesh 24 0 62 206 292
Chandigarh 2 21 23
HP 1 4 1 83 89
Delhi 1 43 44
Haryana 32 1 23 102 158
UK 1 1 32 34
Punjab 2 0 0 79 81
J&K 1 3 0 37 41
Total-Northern Region 64 8 87 603 762

41
Gujarat 9 3 3 55 70
Chhattisgarh 1 2 2 43 48
Madhya Pradesh 4 1 7 83 95
Rajasthan 4 0 5 70 79
Maharashtra 74 1 29 118 222
Goa 0 0 077
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 0 1 0 0 1
Daman and Diu 1 0 1 1 3
Total-Western Region 93 8 47 377 525
Andhra Pradesh 18 4 12 78 112
Karnataka 2 0 2 28 32
Kerala 1 11 36 48
Tamil Nadu 39 1 56 46 142
Andaman and Nicobar 0 0 0 0 0
Islands
Puducherry 2 4 0 6
Total-Southern Region 62 5 85 188 340
All India 260 124 310 1614 2308
State SC ST OBC Gen. Total

42
ANNEXURE II
Details of State-wise Rural Dealership Network of SAIL
State-wise, Category-wise Rural Dealers as on 1.6.2013
State SC ST OBC Gen. Total
Odisha 2 1 4 17 24
Jharkhand 5 2 5 13 25
West Bengal 6 0 5 48 59
Assam 0 0 1 7 8
Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 0
Tripura 0 0 0 1 1
Arunachal Pradesh 0 1 0 0 1
Manipur 0 0 0 0 0
Mizoram 0 0 0 0 0
Nagaland 0 0 0 0 0
Bihar 0 0 4 4 8
Total-Eastern Region 13 4 19 90 126
Uttar Pradesh 18 1 57 89 165
Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0
HP 1 2 1 17 21
Delhi 0 0 0 0 0
Haryana 4 0 2 35 41
UK 0 0 011
Punjab 2 0 0 24 26
J&K 1 4 0 56 61
Total-Northern Region 26 7 60 222 315

43
Gujarat 2 2 3 11 18
Chhattisgarh 1 1 1 18 21
Madhya Pradesh 3 2 3 23 31
Rajasthan 2 3 6 11 22
Maharashtra 18 3 24 13 58
Goa 0 0 011
Total-Western Region 26 11 37 77 151
Andhra Pradesh 7 1 7 28 43
Karnataka 1 0 0 2 3
Kerala 0 0 1 11 12
Tamil Nadu 3 0 10 15 28
Andaman and Nicobar 0 0 0 0 0
Islands
Puducherry 0 0 0 0 0
Total-Southern Region 11 1 18 56 86
All India 76 23 134 445 678
State SC ST OBC Gen. Total

44
ANNEXURE III
Specific promotional activities undertaken by SAIL during 2012-13
Type of meets ER NR WR SR Total
Mason meets 05 04 06 2 17
Architect meets 02 04 01 - 07
Dealer meets 07 80 14 06 107
Region-wise, location wise other promotional activities
undertaken during 2012-13 for SAIL dealers are given below:—
Eastern Region:
• Participated in a CII exhibition in August, 2012 at Bhubaneswar
•W all paintings done at Bhubaneswar, Kolkata and Rourkela.
• Hoardings were put in prominent places at Bhubaneswar,
Guwahati, Bokaro and Patna.
• Newspapers advertisement at Bhubaneswar.
• Glow sign boards displayed at Durgapur Railway Station.
• Cable TV advertisement at Bhubaneswar and Durgapur.
•V intage Car rally organised by Statesman Kolkata, sponsored
by a dealer.
• Display board of SAIL TMT at construction site in Hailakandi
(Guwahati).
• Calendar with SAIL products at Logo distributed to Dealers at
Bokaro.
• Flex board in remote locations of Patna, Muzaffarpur and
Katihar districts of Bihar.
• Distribution of T-Shirts, Caps with SAIL Logo at Durgapur
and Patna.
Northern Region:
•W all paintings done at Delhi, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Agra,
Allahabad, Kanpur, Chandigarh, Jallandhar, Ludhiana and
Jammu.

45
• Hoardings were put in prominent places at Faridabad,
Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Chandigarh and Jammu.
• Magazine advertisements at Delhi and Faridabad.
• Distribution of diaries, calendars, pen and key chains with
SAIL logo at Delhi, Allahabad, Chandigarh and
Mandigovindgarh.
• Signboards of products with SAIL logo at Metro Stations in
Delhi.
• Distribution of Cricket kit, T-shirts and caps to young Cricket
players at Delhi and Faridabad.
• Hand holding meets were organised for SAIL rural dealers at
Ghaziabad and Srinagar.
• Flex boards at prominent places in Mandigovindgarh.
• Bus panelling done at Ludhiana.
• Bus body hoardings on 40 JKSRTC buses plying in various
districts of J&K.
Western Region:
•W all paintings done at Indore, Nagpur, Pune, Jaipur and
Mumbai.
• Hoardings were put in prominent places at Nagpur,
Ahmedabad, Baroda, Mumbai and Jaipur.
• Newspapers advertisement at Nagpur, Mumbai and Pune.
• Advertisement on mobile vans, trucks, bus panel at Jaipur,
Goa and Mumbai.
• Cycle rally conducted by BSO, Pune.
• Bus tickets and Yellow pages advertisement were done by
Jaipur and Baroda.
• Glow sign boards displayed at Railway stations of Indore.
• Advertisement on bus shelter at Mumbai.
Southern Region:
• Participated in international exhibition on building materials
organised by the Builders Association of India in June 2012 at
Chennai.
•W all painting done at Chennai & Tirupati.

46
• Hoardings were put in prominent places at Chennai Railway
Station.
• Backlit Display Board on SAIL, TMT installed in Kodambakam
High Road, Chennai.
•P roduct advertisement through bus panels at Chennai.
• Distributed T Shirts with SAIL logo at Chennai and Cochin
and Vizag.
• Given newspaper advertisements in local newspapers at
Hyderabad, Vizag and Coimbatore and Bangalore.
• Distributed laptop bags to select customers at Chennai.
• Distributed gift articles such as keychain, tabletop calenders,
tableclock with SAIL emblem at Coimbatore.
•W all painting of TMT done at Trichy.
• Distributed Mouse pad with SAIL logo at Coimbatore.
During the current financial year 2013-14 till date, the details of
Region-wise, location-wise promotional activities undertaken are as
given below:—
Eastern Region:
Branch Dealer/Promotional Activity
Guwahati 1. 500 Kiosks installed in Guwahati-Shillong
Highway.
2. 20x20 Hoarding At Nongpoh (Guwahati-Shillong
Highway).
Patna 1. Hoardings.
2. Flex Board Displays.
3. Key Rings and Caps with SAIL logo.
4. Carry Bags with SAIL logo and dealer related
steel products.
5. Umbrellas with SAIL logo.
Bokaro 1. 7 Hoardings at Ranchi, Deogarh, Koderma,
Hazaribagh, Garwa.

47
2. Wall Paintings at Bokaro & Deogarh—4000 Sq
Ft.
3. Gifts distributed by dealers to their customers—
T-Shirt, Coffee Mugs with SAIL logo.
Bhubneshwar 1. Cable TV Advt.
2. Newspaper Advt.
3. Gift Set—Emergency Light, Hot Case, Electric
Iron.
Rourkela 1. Hoardings—4
2. Wall Paintings—3
3. Banner—1
4. Gifts Distributed by dealers to their Customers—
T-Shirt, Wall Clock with SAIL Branding.
Kolkata 1. 3 Hoardings at/near Siliguri/Bagdogra Airport.
2. 9 Hoardings along Siliguri—Gangtok Highway.
3. 9 Hoardings along Siliguri—Darjeeling Highway.
4. 3 Hoardings at Batasia Loop and 1 at Ghoom.
5. 1 Hoarding in Darjeeling City.
6. 3 Banners at prominent places in Gangtok city.
Durgapur 1. Umbrellas with SAIL branding distributed by
SAIL dealer.
2. Mason meets At Batar, Bankura and Faridpur.
Northern Region:
Branch Promotional Activities by Promotional Activities
SAIL Branches by Dealers
12 3
Kanpur Rural Dealer-cum-mason Wall paintings – 8
handholding meet at Gonda–1
(to be held on 21.6.13)
4 Tata 207 vehicles painted
Extension of Police booth
by 3 months
Branch Dealer/Promotional Activity

48
Ludhiana Rural Dealer cum mason Wall paintings by the
handholding meet at dealers – 8-10
Jagraon on 16.6.2013–1
Chandigarh Wall painting – 47
Hoardings – 8-9
Key rings, pads etc.
distributed.
Agra Rural Dealer cum mason Wall painting – 15-20
handholding meet at
Hathras on 16.6.2013–1
Mason meet–1
Dealers meet–1
Allahabad Rural Dealer cum mason Bag distribution by 2
handholding meet at dealers Diary, calculator,
Gorakhpur on 21.6.2013–1 mason notepad
Newspaper Ads–4 distributed by 1 dealer
Mason meet–1 each.
Dealers meet–3
Jammu Rural Dealer cum mason Wall paintings – 3
handholding meet at 2 Hoardings in Leh will
Srinagar on 8.6.2013–1 be put up
Dealers meet–1
Mandi Joint Rural Dealer cum Gift items like thermos,
mason handholding meet calendar, pens, key
at Jagraon on 16.6.2013–1 rings distributed
Jalandhar Joint Rural Dealer cum Pens/Stationary –
mason handholding meet Rs. 1.5 lacs
at Jagraon on 16.6.2013–1 Wall paintings – 4-5
Newspaper ads–15 Hoardings – 2
Mason meet–1
Dealers meet–2
Faridabad Proposed Rural Dealer cum
mason handholding meet at
Jhajjar–1
Ghaziabad Rural Dealer cum mason Wall paintings – 20
handholding meet at Hoardings – 2
Moradabad on 7.6.2013
Delhi Metro station ads at 3 Wall paintings – 3
metro stations
12 3

49
Western Region:
Branch Details of promotional activities undertaken
Ahmedabad Hoardings, Magazine Advertisement, Gift items
Baroda Hoardings, Gift items
Bhilai Newspaper advertisement, Wall Paintings, Gift items
Dealer meet held in June, 2013
Indore Glow Sign Board at Railway Station, Gift items
Gwalior Wall paintings
Mumbai Bus Q Shelter at Chembur
One Architect Meet held at Sindhudurg under BSO,
Mumbai in May, 2013
Pune Gift items like key chains/Auto-rikshaw panel,
Hoardings Dealer Meet held in May 2013
Southern Region:
Branch Dealer/Promotional Activity
Chennai Carry bags with SAIL ad distributed by dealer
Bangalore Newspaper advertisement
Trichy Wall paintings in Trichy
Hyderabad Hoardings, Newspaper Advertisement & distribution
of Travel bags with SAIL advertisement
Coimbatore Wall paintings in Coimbatore
Vizag Pamphlets, Cable TV advertisement, Newspaper
Advertisement, Auto Panels
Cochin Distribution of diaries & Calendars

50
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 1ST JULY, 2013 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
4. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
5. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
6. Kumari Saroj Pandey
7. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
8. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
9. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
10. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
11. Shri K.R.G. Reddy
Rajya Sabha
12. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
13. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Steel and its PSUs
1. Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary Secretary , Ministry of Steel
2. Shri Vinod Kumar Thakral Additional Secretary & FA

51
3. Shri Lokesh Chandra Joint Secretary , Ministry of Steel
4. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh Joint Secretary , Ministry of Steel
5. Shri Syedain Abbasi Joint Secretary , Ministry of Steel
6. Shri J.P . Shukla Joint Secretary , Ministry of Steel
7. Shri Suraj Bhan Economic Advisor, Ministry of
Steel
8. Shri P . Madhusudan Director (Finance), RINL
9. Shri C.S. Verma Chairman, SAIL & NMDC
10. Shri S.S. Mohanty Director, SAIL
11. Shri Anil Chaudhary Director, SAIL
12. Shri H.S. Pati Director, SAIL
13. Shri Malay Chatterjee CMD, KIOCL
14. Shri Moyukh Bhaduri CMD, HSCL
15. Shri G.P . Kundargi CMD, MOIL
16. Dr. Satish Chandra MD, Birds Group of Companies
17. Shri S.K. Tripathi CMD, MSTC
18. Shri A.K. Basu Director, MSTC Ltd.
19. Shri K.K. Mehrotra CMD, MECON
20. Shri A.K. Tyagi Director, MECON
21. Shri N. Samaddar Executive Secretary, JPC
22. Shri Sushim Banerjee Director General, INSDAG
23. Dr. A.S. Firoz Chief Economist, ERU
24. Shri S. Thiagarajan Director, NMDC Limited
25. Shri Subimal Bose Director, NMDC Limited
26. Shri S.K. Das Director, NMDC Limited
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Steel and other representatives of Ministry of Steel and Steel PSUs to
the sitting of Committee convened to take oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Steel on the subject “Promotion of
Steel Usage”.
3. Thereafter, a visual presentation on the above subject was made
before the Committee by the representative of Ministry of Steel. The
points discussed during the sitting broadly related to the issues such
as production of steel; total consumption of steel in the country
including rural areas; steps taken to increase the steel usage particularly
in rural areas; per capita consumption of steel in the country vis-a-vis

52
other developed and developing countries; gap between consumption
and production; import of steel; dealership network in the country
including rural areas, etc.
4. The Members raised their concerns on the above issues and
sought clarifications from the Ministry of Steel. Some of the points
were clarified by the representatives of Ministry of Steel. The Chairman
directed the representatives of the Ministry of Steel to furnish written
replies to the queries raised by the Members which could not be
responded to.
A copy of verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

53
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 26 AUGUST, 2013 IN
ROOM NO. ‘112’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Kalyan Banerjee — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir
3. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
4. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar
5. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar
6. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri
7. Shri Pakauri Lal
8. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Rajaram Pal
10. Kumari Saroj Pandey
11. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
12. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
13. Shri Om Prakash Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Director
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.

54
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) ** ** ** **
(ii) Report on “Promotion of Steel Usage” pertaining to the
Ministry of Steel.
(iii) ** ** ** **
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.