1 
 
42 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
“REVIEW OF ALLOTMENT, DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE OF 
COAL/LIGNITE BLOCKS” 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First  Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-SECOND  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2014/MAGHA, 1935(Saka) 
 


2 
 
FORTY-SECOND  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
“REVIEW OF ALLOTMENT, DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE OF 
COAL/LIGNITE BLOCKS” 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  06.02.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   06.02.2014 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2014/Magha 1935 (Saka) 


3 
 
CC&S No. 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

4 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v) 
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
20 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
34 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not  been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
35 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
46 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2013-14) held on 17.12.2013…………………………………………... 
 
       49 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
       51 
 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2013-14) 
 
 Shri Kalyan Banerjee  - Chairman  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Bansa Gopal Choudhary 
5. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
6. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
7. Shri Sabbam Hari 
8. Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
9. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
10. Shri Pakauri Lal 
11. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
12. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
13. Shri Rajaram Pal 
14. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
16. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri K.  Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh   
21.  Shri O  
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26. Shri  
27.  
28. Shri  
29. Shri  
30. Shri  
31.  
 

6 
 
 
 (iii) 

7 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Additional Director 
  

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

9 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been authorised by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Forty -Second Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, “Review of Allotment, 
Development and Performance of Coal/Lignite Blocks” pertaining to the Ministry of Coal.  
 
2.  The Thirty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd April, 2013. Replies of the Government to all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report were received on 26 th September, 
2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this Rep ort at 
their sitting held on  17.12.2013.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Thirty -First Report (Fifteenth Lok S abha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I  of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                  KALYAN BANERJEE 
      __ December, 2013                                                                           Chairman 
      __ Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(v) 

10 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel on “Review of Allot ment, Development and Performance o f Coal/Lignite 
Blocks” relating to  the Ministry of Coal which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
23.04.2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.04.2013. 
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry  of Coal in 
respect of all the 2 0 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 
26th September, 2013. These have been categorised as follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13 and 14 
           Total – 10 
                   (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Sl. No. 15 
Total – 01  
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 5, 8, 11, 17, 18 and 19 
Total – 06 
                         (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Sl. No. 9, 16 and 20 
                            Total – 03 
          (Chapter V) 

11 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should 
be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final Action 
Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this 
Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry on some 
of their observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-First Report.  
 
SCREENING COMMITTEE 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
5. The Committee note d that from 1993 to 2004, applicant s used to identify a 
coal block and approach the Ministry of Coal for allocation and their applications 
were considered by Screening Committee consisting of Secretary (Coal) and 
representatives from Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Industr y and 
Commerce, Ministry of Environment and Forest, Ministry of Railways, Coal India 
Limited, CIL Subsidiaries, CMPDIL, NLC and the concerned State Governments for 
allocation of coal blocks under certain broad guidelines framed for selection of 
captive blo cks whereas allocation to Government companies were made by the 
Ministry of coal on the basis of recommendations of State 
Government/Administrative Ministry. The Committee observe d that most non -
transparent procedure was adopted from 1993 to 2010 for alloc ation and supply of 
coal blocks. Several coal blocks were allocated to few fortunate without disclosing 
the same to the public at large. The natural resources and state largesse were 
distributed to few fortunate for their own benefit without following any transparent 
system, was total abuse of power by t he Government. The Government could not  
give largesse on its arbitrary discretion or its sweet will. The Government wa s still 
the Government when it acts in the matter of granting largesse and it  could not act 

12 
 
arbitrarily. It did  not stand in the same position as a private individual. It was 
unfortunate that no one who were res ponsible to run the Ministry had  even applied 
their mind to the aforesaid extent. The Committee were also surprised to note that 
between 1993-2004, no data was maintained by the Ministry regarding number of 
applications received by the Ministry of Coal and only the minutes of the Screening 
Committee held to consider/reject the application of a particular company were 
made available to them. Though, advertisement calling for application of coal blocks 
were issued in 2005 and 2006 after putting the guidelines on website of the 
Ministry of Coal, no bidding process or auction was held. It was unfortunate that for 
allocating coal blocks n either any auction was held nor the Central Government 
earned any revenue. Natural resources were distributed without following any 
transparent system and without generating any revenue for the Government. Since 
the Ministry, could not indicate how much co al resources (either in quantum or in 
value) were distributed and since Committee observe that such distribution was 
done in a most unauthorized manner, no one knows for how much loss our country 
has suffered for that. The Committee observe d that whole pro cedure adopted by 
the Government for distributing coal blocks betrays the confidence of the people of 
our country reposed in the Government. The Committee fel t that entire decision 
making process for distribution of coal blocks needs investigation and nece ssary 
penal steps should be taken against everyone who was directly or indirectly party to 
such decision making process. Since Committee had come to conclusion that entire 
procedure for distribution of coal was unauthorized, no one should enjoy the benefit 
of distribution/allocation and therefore, recommended that all coal blocks allotted to 
the private coal companies, atleast where coal production ha d not yet started, 
should be cancelled immediately and the State and Central Government PSUs 
should be warned to start the mining work at the earliest. The Committee observe d 
that distribution of coal block was greatest example of betraying public trust by the 
Government. 
6. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the Committee 
as under:- 
"The Screening Committee was a broad based body with representation from 
State Governments, concerned Ministries of the Central Government and the 

13 
 
coal companies. As per the minutes, the procedure adopted for allocation 
involved wide consultations with all  stakeholders. All applicants were called 
for making a presentation before the Screening Committee.  The minutes 
also state that comprehensive details about the applicant, the group, 
performance of the group, financial strength, readiness of the end -use plant 
etc. were placed before the committee so as to enable it to make appropriate 
recommendations. 
As per the minutes, the Screening Committee assessed the applications 
having regard to the matters such as techno -economic feasibility of the end 
use project, status of preparedness to set up the end use project, past track 
record in execution of projects, financial and technical capabilities of the 
applicant companies and recommendations of the state governments and the 
administrative Ministry concerned.  
The progress of development of allocated coal blocks was reviewed from time 
to time by the then Review Committee. On the basis of review made by the 
Review Committee, 20 coal blocks were de -allocated due to unsatisfactory 
progress and 5 coal blocks surrendered by the allocattees were de-allocated. 
Further, in pursuance of the announcement of the Hon‟ble Finance Minister in 
the budget speech for the year 2012 -13, an Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) 
headed by Additional Secretary, Ministry of Coal has been constitut ed on 
21.06.2012 to undertake periodic review of the development of coal / lignite 
blocks allotted by the Government with following terms of reference (TOR): 
i) The IMG shall undertake periodic review and the progress of allocated 
coal mines / blocks and make  recommendations on action to be taken 
including de-allocations, if required. 
ii) The IMG may consider the replies where the show cause notices have 
been given and recommend action against the allocate companies including 
de-allocation, wherever necessary.  
iii) The IMG may make its own assessment and recommend action as to 
deduction of Bank Guarantee, if required. 
iv) Any matter where a reference is made by the Competent Authority. 
 
The then Review Committee for monitoring of development of captive coal 
blocks and Bank Guarantee stood subsumed in the IMG.   
The IMG has held 21 meetings so far.  It has discussed and finalized the 
guidelines/modalities for conduct of its business and also regarding 
computation of deduction of BG.  The IMG has also decided to give an 
opportunity of giving personal hearing to the allocatee companies of coal 
blocks before giving its recommendations.  So far, the IMG has 

14 
 
recommended de -allocation of 13 coal blocks allocated to 29 companies, 
deduction of Bank Guarantee (BG) in the cases of 14 b locks allocated to 19 
companies and imposition of BG in case of 1 (one) coal block in respect of 
allocations made to the Private Companies. Further, the IMG took up the 
review of 33 coal blocks allocated to Govt. companies and after hearing the 
allocatees, it recommended de -allocation of 11 coal blocks, deduction of BG 
in 5 cases and imposition of BG in 11 cases. Based on the recommendations 
of IMG, 22 coal blocks have been de-allocated so far. 
Thus, based on the recommendations of the then Review Committee  and of 
IMG now, a total of 47 coal blocks have been de -allocated so far. 
Subsequently, de-allocation order in respect of 3 coal blocks allocated to M/s 
National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) and 2 coal blocks allocated to 
Damodar Valley Corporation (DV C) and Jharkhand State Electricity Board 
respectively were withdrawn and 2 coal blocks were allocated again in the 
year 1999 and 2005.  Review of progress of coal block by IMG is an on-going 
continuous process. 
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has  registered 3 Preliminary 
Enquiry (PE) cases regarding alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks 
– relating to allocation of coal blocks to private companies during the period 
2006-09, relating to allocation of coal blocks to private companies du ring the 
period 1993 -2004 and relating to allocation of coal blocks to Government 
companies. As per information available, in the PE related to allocations of 
coal blocks made to private companies during 2006 -09, 13 FIRs have been 
lodged by CBI. 
Further, a Writ Petition (Criminal) No.120 of 2012 and a few PILs have been 
filed in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India inter -alia challenging the 
allocations of captive coal blocks made.  The matter is sub-judice." 
7. The Committee had observed that most non -transparent procedure 
was adopted from 1993 -2010 for allocation of coal blocks.  The natural 
resources and State largesse were distributed to few fortunate for their 
own benefit without following any transparent system, was total abuse of 
power by the Government.  The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply 
have stated that the Screening Committee, a broad based body with 
representation from State Governments, concerned Ministries of the 

15 
 
Central Government and the coal companies assessed the applications 
having regard to the matters such as techno -economic feasibility of the 
end use project, status of preparedness to set up the end use project, past 
track record in execution of projects, financial and technical capabilities of 
the applicant companies and reco mmendations of the State Government 
and Administrative Ministries concerned.  The Committee are dismayed to 
note that out of 195 allocated coal blocks  from 1993 to 2010, only 35 coal 
blocks have been developed so far. The Committee thus observe that entire 
selection process of Screening Committee seems to have favoured certain 
individual companies without going into merits of company's track record 
and preparedness to setup end use projects as majority of the coal blocks 
could not be developed even after 1 3 to 15 years of allotment of coal 
blocks, further, the Review Committee had not undertaken the periodic 
reviews and progress of allocated coal mine/blocks resulting in failure of 
the Government policy to allocate coal blocks to private entrepreneurs  for 
captive mining.  What has further surprised the Committee is the fact that 
the Government have nowhere accepted the fact that both the Screening 
Committee and the Review Committee did not function in objective and 
transparent manner and had acted arbitrari ly.  The Committee are 
astonished to observe that it is only on 21.06.2012 when certain 
discrepancies were pointed out after the Audit observation, the 
Government constituted an Inter -Ministerial-Group headed by Additional 
Secretary, Ministry of Coal to un dertake periodic review of the 
development of coal/lignite blocks allotted by the Government. This clearly  

16 
 
shows that Review Committee and Coal Controller's Organisation have 
totally failed to ensure implementation of the guidelines and milestone 
charts attached with the allocation letters and were completely ignored by 
these two bodies while reviewing the process and development of coal 
blocks.  As regards the Committee's recommendation that all coal blocks 
allotted to the private coal companies where  co al production has not yet 
started should be cancelled immediately, the Ministry of Coal have 
informed the Committee that the matter of challenging the allocation of 
captive coal blocks made so far is subjudice as a few PILs have been filed 
in the Hon'ble S upreme Court.  While not  further commenting on the 
subject matter as the same is reportedly sub -judice, the Committee 
conclude that both the Screening Committee and the Review Committee 
had miserably failed to ensure allocation and review of coal blocks a fter 
taking into account the track record of the company and the status of 
preparedness of the company to set up end use projects. The Committee 
expect the IMG to immediately complete their review of all the 195 coal 
blocks allocated for captive mining and  would also like to be apprised of 
the present status of their review.  
ESTIMATED VALUE OF COAL PRODUCED FROM CAPTIVE BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
8. The Committee were astonished to know that although 195 coal blocks with 
geological reserves of  about 44.23 billion tonnes had  been allocated by the 
Government for captive mining, the Government had stated that no estimation had 
been made so far as to the value of the coal extracted from 29 coal blocks and the 
total value of coal blocks allocated fo r captive mining. The Committee, therefore, 

17 
 
strongly recommended the Ministry to put in place a proper process or mechanism 
for correct evaluation and calculation of value of coal blocks with estimated 
geological and extractable reserves and they be apprised of the same. 
9. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the Committee 
as under:- 
"Ministry of Coal has initiated the process for correct evaluation and 
calculation of value of coal blocks (with estimated geological and extractable  
reserves) by appointing a consultant in May, 2012.  The Consultant, after a 
series of deliberations with stakeholders from power sector, steel sector, 
cement sector, Ministries/Departments of Power, Steel, Economic Affairs and 
CII have submitted its final  report in June, 2013. For the explored block, in 
which extractable reserves have been estimated, the consultant suggested 
use of Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) method for arriving at the intrinsic value 
of coal block. The intrinsic value of the coal blocks (r egionally 
explored/explored) to be put on offer will be determined by CMPDIL based on 
the methodology suggested and accepted on the basis of the report 
submitted by the consultant M/s. CRISIL Infrastructure Advisory." 
10. The Committee are dismayed to note  that although decision to 
allocate coal blocks was taken way back in 1993 and 195 coal blocks were 
allocated for captive mining with estimated geological reserves of 44.23 
billion tonnes, it is only in May, 2012 i.e. after 20 years, the Ministry of 
Coal h ad initiated the process for correct evaluation and calculation of 
value of coal blocks (with estimated geological and extractable reserves) 
by appointing a consultant.  Though the Ministry of Coal in their reply have 
informed the Committee that for the ex plored block in which extractable 
reserves have been estimated, the consultant suggested use of Discounted 
Cash Flow (DCF) method for arriving at the intrinsic value of coal block,  
they are unhappy to note that no mention has been made about the exact 
value of coal blocks exploited so far, the benefits accrued  to the private 
developers as a result of getting free fuel, the total revenue loss to the 

18 
 
Government by distributing coal blocks free of cost to the private 
developers and the benefits extended to t he citizens by these private 
developers for getting natural resources free of cost.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like  the Ministry of Coal to  carry out the correct 
evaluation and calculation of value of coal blocks with estimated and 
extractable coal blocks and they be apprised of the same.  
PERSPECTIVE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF COAL BLOCKS BY CIL 
Recommendation Serial No.11 
11. The Committee note d that initially in 1993 and 1999, coal blocks were 
identified for captive mining after being identified and taking approval of Coal India 
Ltd. Board. Subsequently, in 2006 with the objective of improving the availability of 
power, 81 coal blocks which were reserved for Coal India for production during 12 th 
Plan Period and beyond aggregating to 20 BT of reserves were de -reserved and 
allocated to power developers for captive mining. The Committee further observe d 
that though 138 coal blocks were asked by CIL for exploitation in 2007, these were 
not allocated to them. Instead, the Ministry of Coal allocated 119 coal blocks to CIL 
in July, 2012 only after repeated recommendations made by this Committee (16 th 
Report and 24th Report, 15th Lok Sabha). The Committee were, however, dismayed 
to note that project report  in respect of only 2 blocks had  been prepared and work 
for preparation of project report for 16 blocks is reported to be taken up during 12th 
Plan period i.e. from 2012 to 2017. With such a slow pace of work, the Committee 
were unable to understand when the actual production from these coal blocks 
allocated to CIL will be started. While strongly urging the Ministry of Coal/CIL to act 
swiftly to ensure that these 119 blocks allocated to CIL start productio n, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of a perspective plan for development of these 
blocks. 
12. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the Committee 
as under:- 

19 
 
"The Ministry of Coal in May, 2012 has assigned 116 coal blocks to Coal India 
Limited.  In addition to the above, three de -allocated coal blocks viz.  
Brahmini, Chichro Pastimal and East of Damogoria (from the de -allocated 
coal blocks) have been assigned to CIL for undertaking mining on priority 
basis. CIL has submitted its tentative perspective plan for development of the 
above coal blocks.  As reported by Coal India Limited (CIL),  project report 
has been prepared in respect of two blocks, geological report is available in 
respect of 16 coal blocks, exploration activiti es have been completed in 11 
coal blocks, exploration activities are in progress in 24 coal blocks and 
exploration activities are yet to be taken up in 66 coal blocks.  Once 
exploration is completed, CIL would plan for starting the mining operation.  
This would enable CIL to meet the coal requirements in long term subject to 
obtaining various clearances & evacuation constraints. 
Soon after the allocation of the 119 coal blocks to CIL in 2012-13, a schedule 
of activities including exploration, Project Report  (PR) preparation, etc. were 
prepared for development of these blocks as desired by MoC. Most of these 
blocks were regionally explored, requiring further detailed exploration for 
formulation of GR and PR. Detailed exploration of blocks, where some 
exploration was undertaken before the tentative allocation, has been 
concluded and GRs prepared in 2012-13 itself i.e., within a short period. Out 
of these 119 blocks, geological reports are now available for 25 blocks and 
detailed exploration is already in progress in 30 blocks. Out of the 25 blocks, 
for which GR is available, PRs have already been prepared for 2 blocks and 
will be prepared for 7 more blocks during 2013 -14 and the rest of the blocks 
will be taken up for PR preparation in a phased manner during the  balance 
period of XII Plan. PR preparation for the blocks, for which GR is not yet 
available, will be taken up after completion of exploration in these blocks.  
Considering the urgency of development of coal blocks at faster pace, CMPDI 
has considerably increased the outsourcing of drilling by utilizing the capacity 
of MECL and other agencies. The actual drilling through outsourcing has 
increased from 0.07 lakh m in 2007-08 to 2.86 lakh m in 2012-13 and target 
for outsourced drilling in 2013 -14 stands at 6 .15 lakh m. However, 
international agencies have not been showing interests in CMPDI's global 
tenders for drilling and limited numbers of domestic agencies are available 
for carrying out this task. Also, out of these 119 blocks, 27 nos. have been 
assessed to be worked with Opencast methodology and 55 nos. with 
underground methodology, whereas, the balance 37 blocks will have mixed 
(OC+UG) projects. Hence production realization from underground blocks 
would take considerably long in comparison to the opencast blocks/projects.  
 

20 
 
Also, a large number of these 119 blocks contain forest areas, for which, 
forest permission to drill with adequate number of boreholes (15 to 20 
boreholes per sq km) is required. It is pertinent to mention here that 
applications for permission to carry out detailed drilling in forest areas of 22 
blocks are pending with MOEF and state level officials since 3 -4 years; the 
no. of applications presently pending has since increased to 48.  Also, the 
prevailing law & order condition is adve rsely affecting the performance of 
drilling. Estimated cumulative loss due to law and order problems & non -
availability of forest clearance during XI plan period and 2012 -13 was 2.42 
lakh meter (approx.), which includes 1.08 lakh during 2012 -13. In view of  
these, all -out effort by CMPDI to carry out the pace of drilling would not 
increase considerably until these constraints are removed."   
 
13. The Ministry of Coal had allocated 119 coal blocks to Coal India Ltd. 
in July, 2012.  The Committee were dismayed to note that project report in 
respect of only 2 blocks w as prepared and work for preparation of project 
report for 16 blocks was reported to be taken up during 12th plan period 
i.e. from 2012-17.  The Committee had urged the Ministry of Coal and CIL 
to a ct swiftly to prepare perspective plan for development of these 119 
blocks.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Coal have informed the 
Committee that CMPDIL has considerably increased the outsourcing of 
drilling by utilizing capacity of MECL and other agencies.  The reasons put 
forward by the Ministry of Coal for not achieving the desired targets for 
development of these coal blocks are reported to be non -availability of 
domestic agencies, international agencies not showing interest in CMPDIL 
global tenders, large number of coal blocks having in forest areas, etc.  The 
Committee find that non-development of captive coal blocks is one of the 
major contributory factors for low coal production in the country.  The 
scarce coal resources which had b een diverted for captive mining continue 

21 
 
to remain unutilized.  The Committee feel that CIL and Ministry of Coal 
have not made sincere efforts to develop coal block s allotted to it, thus 
hindering coal production.  The Committee , therefore, desire the CIL to 
prepare an urgent action plan for the development of coal blocks and 
would like to be apprised of the specific measures taken by Ministry of Coal 
to address the bottlenecks hampering the development of these coal 
blocks. 
MONITORING OF COAL BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
14. The Committee noted that the responsibility of developing the coal blocks as 
per the prescribed guidelines and milestones rests entirely with the allottees and in 
the event of willful delay in the development of coal blocks/setting up  of the end 
use project, the Government reserves the right to take appropriate action to de -
allocate the said block. The Committee further note d that systematic monitoring of 
the progress had  been started since 2005 through a Committee under the 
chairmanship of Addl. Secretary (Coal) and genuine problems of allocatees were 
highlighted during the meeting and efforts were made to sort them out. Since State 
Govt. representatives we re also present during these meetings, they were also 
requested to provide all possible help in expediting the process. As regards the 
major constraints being faced by the coal block allottees, the Committee ha d been 
given to understand  that the coal blocks, which had  not come into pr oduction so 
far, the allottees we re in various sta ges of obtaining statutory clearances and 
mining lease, preparing mining plan, acquiring land, procuring machinery etc. for 
both mining as well as end -use projects. The Committee were, however, perturbed 
to note that though system of submission of bank gua rantee by the private sector 
allocatees was introduced from 2005 and under this system 50% of the bank 
guarantee had been linked to the milestones (time schedule) set for development of 
captive block, and the remaining 50% to the guaranteed production, no bank 
guarantee was deducted from  the defaulter allocattees. It wa s only now, the IMG 

22 
 
who ha d taken up review of the 58 cases referred to it for review ha d 
recommended the deduction of bank guarantee in the case of 14 blocks allocated to 
19 companies. This clearly indicated that the monitoring committee had  failed to 
take action against the defaulter companies since 2005 and even the loss of royalty 
to the exchequer due to delay in achieving milestones (time schedule) set for 
development of captive block as well as the rated yearly production level as per the 
approved mine plan which was required to be deducted from the bank guarantee 
were never recovered. The Committee observed that the Ministry de-allocated some 
of the coal blocks only recently after the re ceipt of C&AG Report in the matter. The 
Ministry, however, choose to sleep over this controversial issue rather than acting 
on their own. The Committee were of the firm opinion that this lackadaisical 
approach of the monitoring committee had  led to delay i n development of coal 
blocks and loss to the State Exchequer. Although, the committee felt that there was 
an urgent need to set up the institution of Coal Regulator to ensure development 
and regulation of coal blocks, they strongly recommend ed that the IMG which had 
now been constituted will expeditiously and transparently review all the coal blocks 
allocated for captive mining that had not been developed so far and take immediate 
and appropriate action to ensure that the infrastructure projects based on coal were 
not further hampered due to slow progress of development of these coal blocks. 
15. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the Committee 
as under:- 
"As indicated in reply to observation no.5, IMG has been monitoring the 
progress of development of coal blocks on a regular basis. Based on the 
recommendations of IMG, 22 coal blocks have already been de -allocated due 
to unsatisfactory progress.   
Status on Coal Regulator: 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 27.07.2013 has approved the proposal for 
setting up a Regulatory Authority for Coal Sector.  However, it has been 
noted by the Cabinet that the enactment of the legislation would take some 
time and therefore has directed that a non -statutory regulator be set up 
through an appropr iate executive order after carrying out modifications 
considered necessary in consultation the Department of Legal Affairs and 
after vetting by the Legislative Department.  Accordingly, the matter has 

23 
 
been referred to the Ministry of Law for advice/ consul tation for framing the 
executive order. 
Simultaneously, as per the decision taken by the Cabinet on its meeting held 
on 27.07.2013, the action was to be taken by the Ministry of Coal to 
introduce the bill in the Parliament.   The Ministry of Coal has forwa rded a 
copy of the Draft Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013, signed copy of the 
Statement of Object and a copy of the Recommendations of the President of 
India to the Ministry of Law & Justice for introduction in the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat.  The recommendation  of the President of India was received on 
6th September, 2013.  The last day of session of the Lok Sabha was 7 th 
September, 2013, due to shortage of time the draft Bill could not be sent to 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat.  Thus the Coal Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013 will 
now be introduced in the next session of the Parliament." 
16. The Committee had recommended that there is an urgent need to set 
up institution of Coal Regulatory Authority to ensure development and 
regulation of coal blocks.  The Ministry of Coal in their reply have stated 
that the cabinet in its meeting held on 27 J uly, 2013 has approved the 
proposal for setting up a Regulatory Authority for coal sector.  As the 
enactment of the legislation would take sometime, the Cabinet has 
directed that a non -statutory regulatory be set up through an appropriate 
execution order a fter carrying out modification considered necessary in 
consultation with the Department of Legal Affairs and after vetting by the 
Legislative Department.  The Cabinet also decided that the Ministry of Coal 
should introduce the Bill in Parliament in next Se ssion.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the present status of executive orders issued 
by the Government for setting up of Coal Regulatory Authority, its 
constitution and power.  The Committee expect that the proposed Bill 
should also be immediately introduced in Parliament.  
 

24 
 
ROLE OF COAL CONTROLLERS ORGANISATION (CCO) IN MONITORING THE 
CAPTIVE COAL BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.17 
17. The Committee are dismayed to note that the enormous work such as 
permission for opening and reopening of coal  mines, disposal of cases under Coal 
Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, collection of excise duty, 
inspection of coal samples, collection, compilation of coal statistics and monitoring 
and progress of coal blocks has been entrusted to C oal Controllers Organization 
(CCO) and the organization is having field offices at Dhanbad, Ranchi, Bilaspur, 
Nagpur and Kothagudem and each field office is to be headed by one GM/DGM level 
executive working in the capacity of officer on Special Duty being  supported by 
other technical officers; yet there is only one technical officer posted in the 
organisation and he is holding the post of Coal Controller. The Committee fail to 
understand as to how without having adequate manpower, the organisation can 
carry out inspection for ascertaining quality in selected mines. It will be difficult to 
undertake regular inspections to ensure compliance with specific orders relating to 
coal quality and resolving statutory complaints. The Committee also observe that 
though Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad had reviewed the functioning of CCO and 
submitted a report in 2006 to strengthen the organisation, nothing has been done 
by the Ministry of Coal in the matter. Although, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal was 
candid enough to admit that the Ministry has taken note of it and will take steps to 
strengthen the same, the Committee are surprised the way the Government have 
entrusted so much work to the organisation without providing the requisite staff. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to take immediate 
steps to strengthen the office of CCO to ensure that besides the various statutory 
functions the organisation could efficiently monitor the progress of work in allocated 
captive coal blocks. 
18. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the Committee 
as under:- 
"Ministry of Coal had engaged Indian Institute of Mines(ISM), Dhanbad to 
examine the issue of restructuring of Coal Controller‟s Organisation (CCO). 
The ISM, Dhanbad submitted its report in November 2006. The coal sector 
has undergone considerable changes  since the submission of the report 
including allocation of Coal Blocks for captive mining. Therefore, the 
recommendations contained in the Report had to be modified/updated 
keeping in view the changes that have taken place. This task has been 
assigned to ISM, Dhanbad in December 2012 and the revised report is 
expected to be submitted shortly. The recommendations will, thereafter, be 
considered and implemented." 
 
19. Taking note of the enormous work entrusted to the Coal Controller's 
Organisation(CCO) such as permission for opening and reopening of coal 
mines, disposal of cases under Coal Bearing Aras (Acquisition and 

25 
 
Development) Act, 1957, collection of excise duty, inspection of coal 
samples, collection, compilation of coal statistics and monitoring and 
progress of coal blocks, the Committee had failed to understand as to how 
without having adequate manpower, the organisation could carry out 
inspection for ascertaining quality in selected mines.     As Indian School of 
Mines, Dhanbad had reviewed the functioning of CCO and submitted a 
report in 2006 to strengthen the organisation and nothing was done by the 
Ministry of Coal in the matter, the Committee were surprised the way the 
Government had entrusted so much work to the organisation without 
providing the requisite staff.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of 
Coal have informed the Committee that as the coal sector has undergone 
considerable changes since the  submission of the report by ISM, Dhanbad 
in November, 2006 including allocation of Coal Blocks for captive mining.  
ISM has been asked to modify/update their Report in December, 2012.  
While not accepting the Government's contention, the Committee are of 
the view that no significant changes in coal sector have taken place after 
2006 and it  is only the Ministry's lackadaisical approach which is 
hampering the restructuring and strengthening of an important 
organisation like Coal Controller's Organisation. Needless to say  that 
necessary steps be taken by the Government within next 3 months to 
strengthen and restructuring of Coal Controller's Organization so that the 
organisation could function efficiently and discharge its important 
statutory works including m onitoring of progress of work of allocated 
captive coal blocks.  

26 
 
GUIDELINE REGARDING GOVERNMENT/PSU OFFICIALS JOINING PRIVATE 
COMPANIES AFTER RETIREMENT 
Recommendation Serial No.18 
20.  Committee had  been given to understand that Shri R.V. Sahi, a former 
Union Power Secretary, Shri N.C. Jha, former Chairman, Coal India Ltd. and others 
have joined private mining companies after retirement. The Committee express ed 
serious concern over joining of former Officers of the Ministries of Coal, Power and 
Mines in the companies which ha d been allocated coal blocks. The Ministry of coal 
had informed the Committee that they ha d not conducted any enquiry regarding 
employees who ha d retired/taken voluntary retirement from the Ministry of Coal, 
Coal India Ltd., CMPDIL etc. and ha d joined the companies which had been offered 
coal blocks. The Committee also fou nd that according to the guidelines issued by 
Department of Public Enterprise s vide their letter DPE OM No. 2(22)/99 -GM-GL-91 
dated 15 th May, 2008, the Director level officers of the coal companies were 
required to intimate / took permission from the Government regarding employment 
after retirement/VRS. The Board level officials of  PSUs were also required to seek 
permission from the respective companies to join the private companies after 
retirement. The officers in the Ministries and Public Sector Undertakings directly or 
indirectly connected with the allotment of coal blocks joini ng the private mining 
companies after their retirement raises serious doubt about their being impartial 
when they were associated with the process of allotment of coal blocks. The 
Committee failed to understand as to why no inquiry has been conducted so fa r to 
expose the unholy nexus between such bureaucrats and coal companies who ha d 
been allotted captive coal blocks. The Committee, therefore, strongly fel t that to 
put a check and restraint over bureaucrat and coal companies nexus in 
shareholding and profit making, a strong internal vigilance mechanism is required. 
The Committee, therefore, desire d that the Ministry of Coal should immediately 
conduct an enquiry into the matter and furnish details of the officers of the Ministry 
of Coal, CIL and its subsidia ries and CMPDIL who have joined private companies 
against the guidelines s et for the purpose and action might  be initiated against 
those offices who ha d joined the private mining companies without the prior 
permission of the Government or the company as pr ovided in Department of 
Personnel and Department of Public Enterprises guidelines. 
21. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed the Committee 
as under:- 
"As far as Ministry of Coal is concerned, most of the Officers are appointed on 
deputation under Central Staffing Scheme of Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT) for a fixed prescribed tenure and after the completion of 
tenure these officers repatriate to their own cadre.  No such records have 

27 
 
been maintained as most of the offic ers do not go on retirement from this 
Ministry but only repatriate to their respective cadre.   
However, as regards officers of CIL and its subsidiaries and CMPDIL, five 
applications were received in the Ministry seeking permission to take up post 
retirement assignment. Out of these, permission was given in two cases, and 
one case was rejected. In the remaining two cases, clarifications were sought 
from the concerned officers, however, no reply has been received. 
In any case, Ministry of Coal had expressed concern on this issue especially 
with reference to time limit allowed for giving permission and cooling off 
period.  Earlier there was a time limit of 30 days for the Ministries to give 
permission or otherwise to the retired officers of PSUs for taking pos t 
retirement job. However, This Ministry requested the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) to raise this cap to 90 days. However, the DPE agreed for 
60 days. This Ministry also requested the DPE to revise the time limit of the 
cooling off period from existing one year to at least two years. However, this 
was not accepted by DPE." 
22. The Committee had expressed their serious concern of joining of  
former officers of the Ministry of Coal and its PSUs  in the companies which 
have been allocated coal blocks.   Although, the Department of Public 
enterprises have issued the guidelines vide their letter DPE OM No. 
2(22)/99-GM-GL-91 dated 15th May, 2008 whereby  the Director level 
officers of the coal companies are required to intimate / take permission 
from the Government regarding employment after retirement/VRS. The 
Board level officials of PSUs are also required to seek permission from the 
respective companies to join the private companies after retirement.  As 
the officers of the Ministry and Public Sector Undertakings directly or 
indirectly connected with the allotment of coal blocks joining the private 
mining companies after their retirement raises serious doubt about their 
being impartial when they were associated with the process of allotment of 
coal blocks,  the Committee had desired that the Ministry of Coal should 

28 
 
immediately conduct an enquiry into the matter and furnish details of the 
officers of the M inistry of Coal , CIL and its subsidiaries who have joined 
private companies against the guidelines set for the p urpose.  The 
Committee are surprised to note from the reply of the Ministry of Coal that 
no such records have been maintained as most of the off icers do not go on 
retirement from this Ministry but only are repatriate to their respective 
cadre.  The Committee desire that the matter may be immediately taken up 
with the Department of Public Enterprises to ensure that all the records of 
the officers w ho have served the Ministries  of Coal, Mines and Power  on 
deputation basis be made available to either the Ministry they have served 
or with their respective cadre.  The Committee would like the Ministry of 
Coal to obtain records of all such officers who a fter their retirement have 
joined private companies especially those who were allocated coal blocks.  
As regards the recommendation of the Ministry of Coal to the Departm ent 
of Public Enterprises to review the time limit of the cooling off period from 
existing one year to at least 2 years, the Committee desire that the matter 
may again be pursued with the Department of Public Enterprises and the 
Committee be apprised of the same.  
  

29 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
EXTRACTABLE COAL AND LIGNITE RESERVES 
Recommendation Serial No.1 
The Committee have been informed that coal and lignite reserves in the country as 
on 1st April, 2011 are reported to be 285.86 billion tonne (upto 1200 meter depth) 
and 40.91 million tonne respectively. However, the Committee find that the focus of 
coal companies is on open -cast mining for production of coal. The Committee, in 
this connection, would like „to know the actual depth from which the coal is now 
being extracted. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the technological 
know-how, economic viability, preparedness of the Government/coal and lignite 
companies to extract coal and  lignite beyond the present extractable depth of 
reserves. As the production from underground mines at present is very small as 
compared to open cast mines, the Committee recommend that an action plan be 
prepared by the Government/coal companies for coal p roduction from underground 
mines in the years to come keeping in view the fact that the production of coal from 
the open-cast mines is gradually decreasing due to exhaustion of available reserves 
which will result in negative growth of coal production. 
Action Taken 
The coal reserves in India up -to a depth of 1200 m have been estimated by the 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) at 293.49 Bt as on 1.4.2012. Coal deposits are 
mainly located at Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Assam.  
Contribution of Opencast & Underground mines from CIL Sources: 
The ratio of production from Opencast (OC) and Underground (UG) mines remains 
almost the same (91:9) as last year. However, the increase in overall production  is 
attributed mainly to OC mines. In 2012 -13, OC raw coal production was recorded 
as 414.43 Mt compared to 397.45 Mt in 2011 -12. The corresponding figures for UG 
production are 37.78 Mt and 38.39 Mt respectively. Thus, production from OC 
mines achieved a growth of 4.27 % and decline by 1.59% in case of UG mines. 
Actual depth of work 
 
The maximum planned depth of opencast mine of CIL at present is up to 318 
meter.  Average depth of working at CIL underground mines is 200m to 300m. 

30 
 
However, coal seams lying at a depth of 600m and 650m have also been worked in 
Chinakuri Mine No. 1, ECL and Moonidih, BCCL respectively.  
 
Technological Knowhow: 
 
As the depth of the opencast mine is gradually increasing, the problem of extraction 
of coal from the deep seated open  cast mines is anticipated. As a measure of 
preparedness, CIL is taking steps for working of the open cast mines at a higher 
depth i.e. more than 300 meters by adopting the best technology available in the 
world in a phased manner. 
 
A major share of underg round production in CIL comes from mines using 
intermediate technology (using SDLs and LHDs) where the growth every year is low 
and is neutralized by decrease in production by manual coal loaders. Since 
production of underground coal by manual loader invol ves exposure of many 
workers at the face involving more risk to safety, as such CIL has decided to phase 
out manual loading. Besides this, a few mines where geo -technical conditions 
permit, are worked through continuous miner technology to achieve high 
production / productivity. Efforts are also being made to identify suitable 
prospective sites for application of High -wall mining which is a mining method to 
extract coal from an exposed coal seam at the terminating line of an opencast 
mine.  
There is a need to introduce modern technology in underground mines to accelerate 
the present trend of production. However, it will be extremely difficult to achieve 
the desired objectives due to following constraints:- 
 In case of existing underground units, final extraction could not be started in a 
number of units because of the surface being thickly populated and related  
infrastructure. For new underground projects, which could be planned for 
exploitation of coal reserves amenable only to underground mining, require surface 
rights of overlying land. This is required as per statute. It is required because the 
present day high capacity mechanized underground mines are operated with caving 
options which may cause subsiden ce up to the surface. Hence land acquisition is 
also a prerequisite in such operations.  
 The lack of response from international mining companies in reviving abandoned 
mines was also due to difficulties in obtaining required land (surface rights) for such 
projects as expressed during pre -bid meeting. So, land acquisition is one of the 
main reasons for declining underground production. 
 Geo-mining conditions like co-existence of fire affected UG workings, and existence 
of waterlogged workings in some of the s ubsidiaries of CIL also affect underground 
coal production. 
Further, taking up new underground projects, with stipulated 12% IRR, is very 
difficult to be feasible because of high cost of underground production, particularly 
at greater depth.  

31 
 
Economic viability 
 
Economic viability of a project depends on cost of production vis -à-vis selling price 
of coal which, in turn, is a factor of grade of coal. For a particular geo -mining 
condition and technology, the cost of mining remains the same irrespective of 
grade. So, the grade is one of the factors for economic viability of the project. 
Some of the CIL UG mines even having shallow working depth are running in loss. 
Cost of production increases for deeper mines due to extra support requirement, 
drivage of longer inclines / deeper shafts, ventilation, longer transport network etc. 
So economic viability is very much project -specific and will generally be 
economically viable only in case of superior quality of coal. 
 
Action Plan 
  There is a continuous effort to introduce mechanisation in underground 
mines of CIL to achieve high production / productivity, wherever, geo -technical 
conditions permit. Based on the geological conditions, priority is being given for 
adoption of Continuous Miner Technology or Long-wall Technology.  
Project Reports of twenty underground mines have been approved for introduction 
of continuous miners having a total capacity of 10.62 Mt per year. Another six 
mines are being planned to produce 6.18 Mt of coal per year. 
Work orders have already been issued to MDOs to operate five mines (Jhanjra in 
ECL, Kapuria, Moonidih (both XV & XVI seam), and Muraidih in BCCL) by long -wall 
technology. Likely capacity addition from these mines will be around 8.9 Mty. 
 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
NEED FOR COAL MINING BY PRIVATE SECTOR 
Recommendation Serial No.2 
India, being one of the fast developing economies in the world needs production of 
energy at a correspondingly faster rate as it is one of the main drivers of economic 
development. With the rising economy coupled with the quest for improved quality 
of life, the energy usage in India is bound to grow tremendously. Keeping in view 
the growing needs of energy, unscientific mining practices and poor working 
conditions of  labour in some of the private coal companies, the Government took a 
conscious decision to nationalize the private coal mines by enacting the Coking Coal 
Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1972 under which the coking coal mines and coke oven 
plants other than those with the Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited and Indian 
Iron & Steel Company Limited, were nationalized on 01.05.1972 and brought under 
the Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL), a new Central Government Undertaking. 
Another enactment, namely the Coal Mines (Taking over of Management) Act, 

32 
 
1973, extended the right of the Government of India to t ake over the management 
of the coking and non -coking coal mines in seven States including the coking coal 
mines taken over in 1971. This was aimed at maximizing the coal production in the 
country which will in turn meet the ever increasing demand for power . Therefore, it 
is all the more important for the Government to tap all the sources of energy 
including the production of coal for their time bound exploration. Further, the 
pronouncement of the ambitious mission by the Government of India „Power to all 
by 2012‟ which envisaged capacity addition of 100,000 MW power by 2012, has 
necessitated the need to increase coal production. The Committee are however, 
constrained to observe that there was no corresponding increase in the coal 
production during Xth and XI th Plan periods and the actual production in these 
periods, fell much short of the target raising serious doubts on the policies and 
strategies being pursued by the Government in this regard which is quite evident 
from the mismatch between supply and demand of coal. The huge gap between the 
demand and domestic supply of coal had prompted the Government to bring in 
amendment in the Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1973 allowing coal mining for 
captive consumption for generation of power, washing of coal and  other end uses. 
In spite of this measure, the captive coal regime has remained virtually a non -
starter given the progress made in this direction. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to work on war footing to make the captive coal regime an effective 
instrument in the furtherance of energy generation at a desired level with increased 
coal production. 
Action Taken 
As per the information compiled by the Coal Controller‟s Organization, 35 captive 
coal blocks has come into production as on 30 th June, 2013. During the year 2012 -
13, a total of 36.934 million tonnes of coal was produced from these 35 captive coal 
blocks against the target of 39.50  million tonnes. The target for the year 2013 -
2014 has been fixed at 45.69 Million Tonnes against which  production upto June, 
2013 was 9.91 Million Tonnes. The production from captive coal blocks is being 
monitored by Coal Controller. 
In addition, progress of development of coal blocks is being regularly monitored 
through Inter -Ministerial Committee constit uted for the purpose as explained in 
subsequent paragraphs.  Further, in order to expedite various clearances at State 
level, coal bearing State Governments have been requested to set up a monitoring 
committee under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary.  As  per the information 
available, Govt. of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh have already set 
up the monitoring committee. The first meeting of the monitoring committee 
constituted by Govt. of Chhattisgarh has already been held.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 

33 
 
ACQUISITION OF COAL MINES ABROAD BY CIL 
Recommendation Serial No.3 
The Committee have been given to understand that initially the coal blocks were 
allocated to private companies for captive use as the Go vernment companies have 
failed to cope-up with the increasing demand of coal in the country. The Committee 
are surprised to find that Coal India Ltd. who could not undertake coal production 
within the country is going abroad for acquiring mining concession s/assets. The 
Committee note this ambiguous situation created by the Government due to the 
leasing out of coal mines to the private companies on the one hand and 
simultaneously allowing the acquisition of coal concessions by Coal India Ltd. 
abroad on the o ther hand. The only conclusion the Committee can draw from this 
fact is that the Government coal companies have failed to develop coal blocks which 
ultimately led to captive coal block regime. At the same time, the Committee desire 
that Ministry of Coal sh ould have an appropriate road map for acquisition of coal 
blocks abroad through Coal India Ltd., for which CIL should carry out a due 
diligence. The Committee would also like to be informed of the detailed action plan 
of CIL for acquiring mining concession s abroad and desire that the data be made 
available to the Committee. 
Action Taken 
Coal India Limited (CIL) has obtained exploration licenses for two coal blocks i.e. 
3450L & 3451L covering a leasehold area of 224 sq.km. in Moatize district, Tete 
Province in Mozambique through competitive bidding process run by Govt. of 
Mozambique in early 2009. Exploration licenses have been granted in the name of 
Coal India Africana Limitada (CIAL), a wholly owned subsidiary of CIL in 
Mozambique.  CIL has awarded drilling  contract to take up scout drilling of these 
blocks for a target of 76,000 meters in November, 2012 and till date 18,662 meters 
of drilling has been completed. 
CIL has executed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with organizations owned 
by the Provincial Government of Limpopo, South Africa to acquire coal blocks in 
South Africa for exploration and development. CIL Board has accorded approval for 
setting up a wholly owned subsidiary of CIL in South Africa and process has been 
initiated for registration of t he same. Further in the past, Joint Venture Company, 
namely, International Coal Ventures (P) Ltd. (ICVL) was formed with CIL, SAIL, 
NTPC, NMDC & RINL as constituent members. However, after withdrawal of NTPC, 
CIL is also reviewing the decision regarding co ntinuance in the ICVL. So far ICVL 
has not acquired any coal block abroad. 
Further, in the year 2013 -14, an ad -hoc provision of Rs. 4000 crores has been 
proposed for acquisition of coal assets abroad and development of coal blocks in 

34 
 
Mozambique. A global E xpression of Interest (EOI) has been floated in February, 
2013 to acquire coal assets abroad by way of evincing interest from owners of coal 
assets and investment bankers who intend to sell coal assets. Against this EOI, 
proposals have been received for ac quiring coal assets in Indonesia, South Africa, 
Australia, USA, Columbia etc. The investment attractiveness of the proposals are 
under examination after which suitable ones shall be taken up for due diligence. If 
the due diligence results are in affirmativ e, the assets shall be acquired with the 
capital outlay kept for this purpose.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.4 
The Committee feel that the States, wherein Coal Mines are available, can be asked 
to use only Domestic Coal available within the State and the State‟s having coastal 
areas and also the requisite infrastructure for Coal Handling, can use certain 
quantum of Imported Coal. This would only be possible if there is a mechanism of 
pooling of the Coal Price for Domestic Coal as well as Imported Coal. This would 
help in saving Freight Charges for Transportation of Coal. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that Ministry of Coal should also take steps to provide 
Coal throughout the country at a uniform rate and the Coal Prices should be based 
on Calorific Value only and a policy mechanism be evolved about the uses of 
domestic coal as well as imported coal by the States. 
Action Taken 
  The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has con sidered various 
options to augment coal supplies to various Thermal Power Projects in the country, 
including the proposal for Pooling of price of Domestic Coal with Imported coal.  In 
the meeting of CCEA held on 21.6.2013, it was decided as under:- 
i) CIL would sign Fuel Supply Agreements (FSAs) with the power projects of 
78,000 MW Capacity which are commissioned/to be commissioned during the 
period from 1.4.2009 to 31.3.2015. 
ii) Taking into account  the  overall domestic  availability and  the likely  act ual 
requirement  of these power plants,  FSAs  be signed  for the domestic coal 
quantity  of 65%, 65%,67% and 75% for the remaining four years of the current 
plan.  
iii) To meet its balance FSA obligations   towards the above power plants, CIL to 
import coal and supply the same to the willing power plants on cost plus basis.  
Power plants may also directly import coal themselves if they so opt.  

35 
 
iv) The higher cost of imported coal to be considered for “pass through” as per 
the modalities suggested by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission. 
A Presidential Directive has been issued to CIL on 17.7.2013 to implement decision 
at (i), (ii) and (iii) above.  
Further Planning Commission while discussing the coal requirement for power 
sector have advised the Ministry of Power to think of some incentive mechanism to 
encourage power plants at coastal locations based on imported coal.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
With regard to the procedure for allocation of coal blocks allocated for coal to liquid, 
the Committee find that although the selection procedure was almost the same as 
was followed in the Screening Committee route under Section 3(3)(A)(iii) of the 
Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1973, exception was made that the 
recommendation in this case was to be made by the Inter -Ministerial Group under 
the chairmanship of Member (Energy), Planning Commission. The Committee have 
failed to understand as to why two coal blocks for coal to liquid with an estimated 
explorable reserves of 3000 million tonnes were allocated to private companies by 
ignoring the Government Companies. The Committee feel that the Inter -Ministerial 
Group (IMG) has not performed its duty honestly. Even though the blocks were 
cleared by the Screening Committee, the IMG should have studied the cases and 
cancelled the blocks allotted by the Screening Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the allocation of coal to liquid blocks to 2 private 
companies be examined by the Government and the Committee may be apprised of 
the details of the technology applied by these private companies to exploit the 
reserves and also the present status of these projects. The Committee also desire 
the Ministry of Coal to take necessary steps f or coal gasification projects and 
recommend that these projects should be given to State/Central PSUs only. 
Action Taken 
2(two) coal blocks, namely, North of Arkhapal and Ramchandi Promotional have 
been allocated to M/s Strategic Energy Technology Systems Limited and M/s Jindal 
Steel & Power Limited respectively for Coal -to-Liquid (CTL) project. These coal 
blocks have been allocated on experimental basis since the technology for coal to 
liquid is not available indigenously. Keeping in view the slow pace of development 
in these 2 CTL blocks, show cause notices (SCN) were issued to these allocattee 
companies.  Replies to SCN received from allocatees have been sent to State Govt. 
of Odisha for comments. Further action in the matter will be taken after receiving  

36 
 
comments of State Govt. and consideration of the same by the IMG. However the 
recommendation of the Honorable committee for giving such projects to Central / 
State PSUs have been noted. 
Coal Gasification (Underground as well as Surface) has also been noti fied as one of 
the end uses under the provisions of CMN Act for allocation of coal blocks to 
potential entrepreneurs. Ministry of Coal has also identified one lignite block for 
offer in Gujarat. Further, CIL has identified two coal blocks for development o f 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) in their leasehold areas. Ministry of Coal is 
also working out a policy to offer unexplored areas for development of UCG through 
bidding route. In addition, CIL in association with GAIL and RFC is going to set up a 
coal gasification plant for producing ammonium nitrate as per the decision of 
Government of India for reviving the sick fertilizer units.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
ANALYSIS OF STATUS OF CAPTIVE COAL BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
The Committee observe that though 40 coal blocks were identified by CIL in 1993 
for allocation to private captive mining and again in 1999, 49 blocks were identified, 
only 25 blocks were allocated for captive mining from October, 1993 to October, 
2003. The Committee are perturbed to note that although normative date of 
production from coal blocks like Utkal B2 (Talcher, Odisha) allotted to Monet Ispat 
Energy Ltd. on 16.08.1999 was 16 th February, 2003, it is only the stage –II forest 
clearance that has been obtained on 21.07.2011. Another coal block Brahmadih 
(Jharkhand) allocated on 01.09.1999 to Castron Mining Ltd. for steel sector, though 
all milestones are reported to be completed, there is synchronization problem 
between coal production and End use steel plant, as the company does not have its 
own steel plant and is trying to purchase or to acquire another steel project to 
synchronise with the coal production. The question that why a coal block was 
allotted to a company who has failed to set up end use projects for 13 years, needs 
to be answered. The Committee, therefore, like the Ministry to offer an explanation 
to them and they would also like the Ministry to furnish a list of such companies 
who have been allotted coal blocks without  having any end use project. These 
instances speak volumes of the total failure on the part of the Ministry in the entire 
process of allotment of coal blocks and their subsequent development. From the 
analysis of status report of captive coal blocks and En d use project linked with the 
blocks allocated from August, 2004 to November, 2008, the Committee observe 
that for 138 coal blocks allocated for captive mining for power, iron and steel, 
commercial purpose, etc., the normative date of production was kept m ore than 6 
and 7 years i.e. 72 to 84 months though the guidelines provide that in respect of 
unexplored block, the allocatee company shall apply for a prospecting license within 

37 
 
3 months of date of issue of allotment. The Committee are further constrained to 
note that forest clearances/ Prospecting Licence has been obtained/granted only in 
2010 and 2011 to those blocks which were allocated in the years 2004 -2005. The 
Committee further find that out of 195 coal blocks allocated so far for captive 
mining 30 b locks have started coal production and out of 160, captive coal blocks 
allocated during 2004 to 2008, only 2 have started production. The Committee feel 
that though the guidelines and milestone charts are attached with the allocation 
letters, there is will ful delay in the development of coal blocks and question of 
setting up end use projects has been completely ignored by the Review/ Monitoring 
Committees giving credence to the fact that the entire exercise was not objective 
and transparent. The Committee w ould therefore, like to be apprised of the 
concrete action taken by the Government on all such cases and expect that in 
future the Review Committee will function in more objective and transparent 
manner for the timely development of coal blocks and necessa ry action should be 
taken against non -serious coal block allottees. The Review Committee should 
complete their work as expeditiously as possible. 
Action Taken 
With regard to review and monitoring of the development of allocated coal blocks, 
as indicated in the reply to observation no.5, the Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) has 
been reviewing the development status on a regular basis.  The production from 
captive coal blocks is also being monitored by the Coal Controller‟s Organisation. 
In order to further improve monitoring and expedite the process of development of 
coal blocks, Chief Secretaries of coal bearing states have been requested to set -up 
a State level monitoring committee under the chairmanship  of Chief Secretary with 
representative of the concerned  departments of the State Government such as 
revenue, forests, mines as well as representative of Ministry of Coal, CMPDIL and 
CCO.  As per the information available, Govt. of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and 
Madhya Pradesh have already set up the monitoring committee. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
COAL BLOCKS OFFERED TO IPPS 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
The Committee are dismayed to note that although coal blocks were allocated to 
private sector power projects without any monetary consideration by the 
Government with the purpose of making available cheap power to the consumers, 
no specific condition was i ncluded by the Screening Committee in the allocation 
letter to ensure that benefit of allocating coal free of coast is passed on to the 

38 
 
consumer. The Committee are surprised to note that it was only in March, 2012, 
the Ministry of Power has pointed out and  desired that for all coal blocks given for 
power sector, the developers must participate in the bids for procurement of power 
by the discoms as per bidding guidelines issued by Ministry of Power and offer the 
benefit of the government allotted coal blocks  to the consumers failing which coal 
block allocation could be cancelled. The Committee have been given to understand 
that although, the Ministry of Power in a communication dated 27.09.2012 has 
requested the Ministry of Coal to issue orders without furthe r delay, imposing the 
condition in the allocation letters of IPPs/CPPs that they need to participate in the 
bids for power procurements called by Discoms or their authorized state agency 
and enter into long term PPA as per bidding guidelines issued by the Ministry of 
Power under section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 within a stipulated time period 
or face de-allocation of the block and the issue of incorporating a new condition in 
the allocation letter retrospectively is reported to be examined in consult ation with 
the Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee fail to understand as to why this 
condition was not incorporated at the time of allocation of captive coal blocks 
offered to IPPs. Since the very purpose of making available the national property 
free of cost was to ensure that benefits should be passed on to the consumers, the 
Committee feel that there should be no legal consequences even if the condition is 
incorporated retrospectively. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Government should immediately ensure that IPPs who have been allocated coal 
blocks should participate in the bids for power procurements called by Discoms or 
their authorized state agency and enter into long term PPA as per bidding 
guidelines issued by the Ministry of Power. 
Action Taken 
The instructions with regard to compulsory participation by the coal block 
allocattees for IPPs in the bids floated by the DISCOMS or their authorized agency 
for procurement of power as per bidding guidelines issued by the Ministry o f Power 
under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003, have been issued. Further, concerned 
coal bearing State Governments have been asked to incorporate a clause to the 
above effect in the mining lease executed / to be executed with the concerned coal 
block allocattee under the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 
1957. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Recommendation Serial No.12 
The Committee are pained to note that the scarcity of indigenous coal is ba dly 
affecting the power generation forcing the power utilities to go in for imported coal. 
The unduly long time being taken by coal block allottees in the development of coal 
blocks is further aggravating the demand and supply of coal. What is really neede d 

39 
 
is to develop those blocks on fast track basis. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that Certain Coal Mines should be allocated to the State Government / 
State PSUs for power generation only, so that the power can be generated at a 
reasonable ra te, on sustainable basis. The Committee, therefore, would like the 
Ministry to put an effective mechanism in place, as the present mechanism has 
abysmally failed to act in an effective and objective manner. The Committee would 
also like the Ministry to fac ilitate the coal block allottees in obtaining various 
statutory clearances and other requirements for the early development of these 
blocks. 
Action Taken 
In order to bring in demonstrable objectivity and transparency in the coal block 
allocation process, t he Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2010 has been enacted which provides for grant of reconnaissance 
permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of an area containing coal 
and lignite through auction by competitive bidding, on such terms and conditions as 
may be prescribed.  This, would however, not be applicable in the following cases:- 
 where such area is considered for allocation to a Government company or 
corporation for mining or such other specified end use;  
 where such area is considered for allocation to a company or corporation that 
has been awarded a power project on the basis of competitive bids for tariff 
(including Ultra Mega Power Projects). 
 
The Government has notified the “Auction by Competitive Bidding  of Coal Mines 
Rules, 2012” on 2 nd February, 2012 and the notification on the commencement of 
the said Amendment Act, 2010 has also been notified by the Ministry of Mines on 
13th February, 2012  
The Government has also notified the “Auction by Competitive Bidding of Coal 
Mines (Amendment) Rules, 2012” on 27 th December, 2012 regarding the allocation 
of coal blocks to the Government Companies.  It contains detailed terms and 
conditions for selection of Govt. Company for allocation on the basis of pre -
determined criteria and for utilization of coal. 
Further, in order to facilitate development of allocated coal blocks, Ministry of Coal 
has been taking up the matter with the concerned authorities such as Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and State Governments.  In addition, as stated in reply to 
observation no. 7, coal bearing State Governments have been requested to 
constitute a State level monitoring committee headed by Chief Secretary with 
representatives from the concerned Dep artments of State Govt. such as mines, 
forest, revenue as well as representative of Ministry of Coal, CCO and CMPDIL. The 
Committee is expected to monitor progress of coal block as well as end use plant 
and make recommendation as deemed necessary and appropriate to the Ministry of 

40 
 
Coal.  It is expected that the monitoring of development coal block through State 
level monitoring committee would expedite the process as a large number of 
statutory clearances are to be obtained from agencies of the State Govt. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
MONITORING OF COAL BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
The Committee note that the responsibility of developing the coal blocks as per the 
prescribed guidelines and milestones rests entirely with the allottees and in the 
event of willful delay in the development of coal blocks/setting up of the end use 
project, the Government reserves the right to take appropriate action to de-allocate 
the said block. The Committee further note that systematic monitoring of the 
progress has been started since 2005 through a Committee under the chairmanship 
of Addl. Secretary (Coal) and genuine problems of allocatees are highlighted during 
the meeting and efforts are made to sort them out. Since State Govt. 
representatives are also present during these meetings, they are also requested to 
provide all possible help in expediting the process. As regards the major constraints 
being faced by the coal block allottees, the Committee have been given to 
understand that the coal blocks, which have not come into production so far, the 
allottees are in various stages of obtaining statutory c learances and mining lease, 
preparing mining plan, acquiring land, procuring machinery etc. for both mining as 
well as end -use projects. The Committee are, however, perturbed to note that 
though system of submission of bank guarantee by the private sector allocatees 
was introduced from 2005 and under this system 50% of the bank guarantee has 
been linked to the milestones     (time schedule) set for development of captive 
block, and the remaining 50% to the guaranteed production, no bank guarantee 
was deducted from the defaulter allocattees. It is only now, the IMG who has taken 
up review of the 58 cases referred to it for review has recommended the deduction 
of bank guarantee in the case of 14 blocks allocated to 19 companies. This clearly 
indicates that the  monitoring committee has failed to take action against the 
defaulter companies since 2005 and even the loss of royalty to the exchequer due 
to delay in achieving milestones (time schedule) set for development of captive 
block as well as the rated yearly p roduction level as per the approved mine plan 
which was required to be deducted from the bank guarantee were never recovered. 
The Committee observe that the Ministry de -allocated some of the coal blocks only 
recently after the receipt of C&AG Report in the  matter. The Ministry, however, 
choose to sleep over this controversial issue rather than acting on their own. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that this lackadaisical approach of the monitoring 
committee has led to delay in development of coal blocks  and loss to the State 
Exchequer. Although, the committee feel that there is an urgent need to set up the 
institution of Coal Regulator to ensure development and regulation of coal blocks, 

41 
 
they strongly recommend that the IMG which has now been constituted  will 
expeditiously and transparently review all the coal blocks allocated for captive 
mining that have not been developed so far and take immediate and appropriate 
action to ensure that the infrastructure projects based on coal are not further 
hampered due to slow progress of development of these coal blocks. 
 
Action Taken 
 
As indicated in reply to observation no.5, IMG has been monitoring the progress of 
development of coal blocks on a regular basis. Based on the recommendations of 
IMG, 22 coal blocks have already been de-allocated due to unsatisfactory progress.   
Status on Coal Regulator: 
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 27.07.2013 has approved the proposal for 
setting up a Regulatory Authority for Coal Sector.  However, it has been noted by 
the Cabine t that the enactment of the legislation would take some time and 
therefore has directed that a non -statutory regulator be set up through an 
appropriate executive order after carrying out modifications considered necessary in 
consultation the Department of Legal Affairs and after vetting by the Legislative 
Department.  Accordingly, the matter has been referred to the Ministry of Law for 
advice/ consultation for framing the executive order. 
Simultaneously, as per the decision taken by the Cabinet on its meeti ng held on 
27.07.2013, the action was to be taken by the Ministry of Coal to introduce the bill 
in the Parliament.   The Ministry of Coal has forwarded a copy of the Draft 
Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013, signed copy of the Statement of Object and a copy 
of the Recommendations of the President of India to the Ministry of Law & Justice 
for introduction in the Lok Sabha Secretariat.  The recommendation of the President 
of India was received on 6 th September, 2013.  The last day of session of the Lok 
Sabha was 7th September, 2013, due to shortage of time the draft Bill could not be 
sent to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.  Thus the Coal Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013 
will now be introduced in the next session of the Parliament.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
REPRESENTATION OF STATES IN THE INTER-MINISTERIAL GROUP (IMG) 
Recommendation Serial No.14 
The Committee observe that for allocation of coal blocks a Screening Committee 
was constituted under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Coal) with 
representative from other Ministries, State Governments for processing applications 
received for capti ve mining. The Committee are however, pained to note that 
though States are the owner of minerals, their representatives are not 
associated/involved in de -allocation process while constituting Inter -Ministerial 

42 
 
Group (IMG) to review the development of coal /lignite blocks allotted. While 
strongly urging that the advice and consent of respective State Governments must 
be respected and made mandatory for allocation and de -allocation of coal/lignite 
blocks, the Committee recommend that the concerned State Gover nments must be 
associated in IMG meetings in future as they were associated in the Screening 
Committee also.  
Action Taken 
The above recommendation of the Hon‟ble Committee was considered by the IMG in 
its 18th meeting and the IMG agreed that the concerned  State Governments must 
be associated in IMG meetings in future as they were associated in the Screening 
Committee. IMG therefore decided to invite representative of the concerned State 
Government in the meeting. The above recommendation of the IMG has bee n 
accepted by the Government. 
Further, the replies received from the allocattee companies against the show cause 
notices issued on the recommendations of the IMG, have been forwarded to the 
concerned State Govt. with the request to examine the reply submitted by the block 
allocatee and furnish comments thereon to Ministry of Coal. Further, State Govts. 
have been requested to nominate and communicate the name of the State 
Government representative to attend the meeting of IMG, as and when fixed, which 
would be informed to the State Government separately.   
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 

43 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation Serial No.15 
The Committee are surprised to note that though the Screening Committee to 
identify and approve the allocatees for coal blocks allocation was headed by 
Secretary (Coal), the Inter -Ministerial Group constituted to review the allo cations 
and recommend de -allocation of coal and lignite blocks is headed by Additional 
Secretary (Coal). The committee desire that the legality of implementation of 
recommendation for cancellation of coal blocks by Inter -Ministerial Group be 
examined by th e Ministry of Coal before taking a final action in the matter as the 
Inter-Ministerial Group is not headed by a Secretary level officer and they be 
apprised of the same. 
Action Taken 
At the outset, it is stated that committees are generally recommendatory bodies.  
The recommendations of the Screening Committee for allocation of coal blocks were 
placed before the competent authority for approval before the blocks were 
allocated.  Similarly, recommendations of IMG on progress of development of 
allocated coal blocks are also placed before the competent authority for approval. 
Since both the recommendations are approved by the competent authority, there is 
no contradiction or flaw with respect the legality of implementation of 
recommendations made by either of the Committee.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
SCREENING COMMITTEE 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
The Committee note that from 1993 to 2004, applicants used to identify a coal 
block and approach the Ministry of Coal for allocation and their applications were 
considered by Screening Committee consisting of Secretary (Coal) and 
representatives from Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Industry and 
Commerce, Ministry of Environment and Forest, Ministry of Railways, Coal India 
Limited, CIL Subsidiaries, CMPDIL, NLC and the concerned State Governments for 
allocation of coal blocks un der certain broad guidelines framed for selection of 
captive blocks whereas allocation to Government companies were made by the 
Ministry of coal on the basis of recommendations of State 
Government/Administrative Ministry. The Committee observe that most no n-
transparent procedure was adopted from 1993 to 2010 for allocation and supply of 
coal blocks. Several coal blocks were allocated to few fortunate without disclosing 
the same to the public at large. The natural resources and state largesse were 
distributed to few fortunate for their own benefit without following any transparent 
system, was total abuse of power by the Government. The Government cannot give 
largesse on its arbitrary discretion or its sweet will. The Government is still the 
Government when it  acts in the matter of granting largesse and it cannot act 
arbitrarily. It does not stand in the same position as a private individual. It is 
unfortunate that no one who were responsible to run the Ministry have even applied 
their mind to the aforesaid ext ent. The Committee are also surprised to note that 
between 1993-2004, no data was maintained by the Ministry regarding number of 
applications received by the Ministry of Coal and only the minutes of the Screening 
Committee held to consider/reject the appli cation of a particular company were 
made available to them. Though, advertisement calling for application of coal blocks 
were issued in 2005 and 2006 after putting the guidelines on website of the 
Ministry of Coal, no bidding process or auction was held. I t is unfortunate that for 
allocating coal blocks neither any auction was held nor the Central Government 
earned any revenue. Natural resources were distributed without following any 
transparent system and without generating any revenue for the Government. Since 
the Ministry, could not indicate how much coal resources (either in quantum or in 
value) were distributed and since Committee observe that such distribution was 
done in a most unauthorized manner, no one knows for how much loss our country 

45 
 
has suffered for that. The Committee observe that whole procedure adopted by the 
Government for distributing coal blocks betrays the confidence of the people of our 
country reposed in the Government. The Committee feel that entire decision 
making process for distrib ution of coal blocks needs investigation and necessary 
penal steps should be taken against everyone who was directly or indirectly party to 
such decision making process. Since Committee have come to conclusion that 
entire procedure for distribution of coal  was unauthorized, no one should enjoy the 
benefit of distribution/allocation and therefore, recommended that all coal blocks 
allotted to the private coal companies, atleast where coal production has not yet 
started, should be cancelled immediately and the  State and Central Government 
PSUs should be warned to start the mining work at the earliest. The Committee 
observe that distribution of coal block was greatest example of betraying public 
trust by the Government. 
Action Taken 
The Screening Committee was a  broad based body with representation from State 
Governments, concerned Ministries of the Central Government and the coal 
companies. As per the minutes, the procedure adopted for allocation involved wide 
consultations with all stakeholders. All applicants were called for making a 
presentation before the Screening Committee.  The minutes also state that 
comprehensive details about the applicant, the group, performance of the group, 
financial strength, readiness of the end -use plant etc. were placed before th e 
committee so as to enable it to make appropriate recommendations. 
As per the minutes, the Screening Committee assessed the applications having 
regard to the matters such as techno -economic feasibility of the end use project, 
status of preparedness to set up the end use project, past track record in execution 
of projects, financial and technical capabilities of the applicant companies and 
recommendations of the state governments and the administrative Ministry 
concerned.  
The progress of development of all ocated coal blocks was reviewed from time to 
time by the then Review Committee. On the basis of review made by the Review 
Committee, 20 coal blocks were de -allocated due to unsatisfactory progress and 5 
coal blocks surrendered by the allocattees were de-allocated. 
Further, in pursuance of the announcement of the Hon‟ble Finance Minister in the 
budget speech for the year 2012 -13, an Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) headed by 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Coal has been constituted on 21.06.2012 to 
undertake periodic review of the development of coal / lignite blocks allotted by the 
Government with following terms of reference (TOR): 

46 
 
v) The IMG shall undertake periodic review and the progress of allocated coal 
mines / blocks and make recommendations on action to be taken including de -
allocations, if required. 
vi) The IMG may consider the replies where the show cause notices have been 
given and recommend action against the allocate companies including de-allocation, 
wherever necessary.  
vii) The IMG may make its own assessm ent and recommend action as to 
deduction of Bank Guarantee, if required. 
viii) Any matter where a reference is made by the Competent Authority. 
 
The then Review Committee for monitoring of development of captive coal blocks 
and Bank Guarantee stood subsumed in the IMG.   
The IMG has held 21 meetings so far.  It has discussed and finalized the 
guidelines/modalities for conduct of its business and also regarding computation of 
deduction of BG.  The IMG has also decided to give an opportunity of giving 
personal hear ing to the allocatee companies of coal blocks before giving its 
recommendations.  So far, the IMG has recommended de -allocation of 13 coal 
blocks allocated to 29 companies, deduction of Bank Guarantee (BG) in the cases of 
14 blocks allocated to 19 companie s and imposition of BG in case of 1 (one) coal 
block in respect of allocations made to the Private Companies. Further, the IMG 
took up the review of 33 coal blocks allocated to Govt. companies and after hearing 
the allocatees, it recommended de-allocation of 11 coal blocks, deduction of BG in 5 
cases and imposition of BG in 11 cases. Based on the recommendations of IMG, 22 
coal blocks have been de-allocated so far. 
Thus, based on the recommendations of the then Review Committee and of IMG 
now, a total of 47  coal blocks have been de -allocated so far. Subsequently, de -
allocation order in respect of 3 coal blocks allocated to M/s National Thermal Power 
Corporation (NTPC) and 2 coal blocks allocated to Damodar Valley Corporation 
(DVC) and Jharkhand State Electri city Board respectively were withdrawn and 2 
coal blocks were allocated again in the year 1999 and 2005.  Review of progress of 
coal block by IMG is an on-going continuous process. 
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has registered 3 Preliminary Enquiry (PE) 
cases regarding alleged irregularities in allocation of coal blocks – relating to 
allocation of coal blocks to private companies during the period 2006-09, relating to 
allocation of coal blocks to private companies during the period 1993 -2004 and 
relating to allocation of coal blocks to Government companies. As per information 
available, in the PE related to allocations of coal blocks made to private companies 
during 2006-09, 13 FIRs have been lodged by CBI. 

47 
 
Further, a Writ Petition (Criminal) No.120 of 2012 and a few PILs have been filed in 
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India inter -alia challenging the allocations of captive 
coal blocks made.  The matter is sub-judice. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
REVENUE LOSS TO STATE EXCHEQUER DUE TO NON - DEVELOPMENT OF 
COAL BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.8 
The Committee observe that due to a big gap in demand and supply of coal to meet 
power demand, coal blocks were allocated to private companies for enhancing coal 
production. The Committee feel that such allocation of huge natural resources has 
not generated sufficient revenue for the Government and instead it had only 
benefited the private p layers. Since the coal blocks allottees are requested to pay 
royalty / cess to the concerned State on coal production, the non -development of 
coal blocks will mean a big loss to the State exchequer as no royalty will be paid to 
the States. The commencement  of coal production only from 30 coal blocks out of 
total allocated 218, puts a question mark over the performance and efficiency of 
allocatee companies, especially private companies which have a major share in 
allocation. In view of the inordinate delay i n commissioning of these captive 
projects, the Committee are concerned to note that not only the delay has resulted 
in achieving the targets for power production and other end use products but also 
caused revenue loss to the concerned State on account of r oyalty payable to them. 
The Committee feels that the Screening Committee has failed to take into account 
state of project preparedness, track record, etc. of applicant company, which have 
resulted in major setback to the ambitious policy decision to exploi t 44.23 BT of 
Coal by allocation of blocks for captive use. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the present status of coal blocks must be analysed by the 
Government in terms of colossal failure to achieve the target set for end use of coal  
that was targeted to be exploited from these blocks, the resultant revenue loss to 
State Governments and the Committee be apprised of the same. 
Action Taken 
The Screening Committee was a broad based body with representation from State 
Governments, concerned  Ministries of the Central Government and the coal 
companies. As per the minutes, the procedure adopted for allocation involved wide 
consultations with all stakeholders. All applicants were called for making a 

48 
 
presentation before the Screening Committee.  The minutes also state that 
comprehensive details about the applicant, the group, performance of the group, 
financial strength, readiness of the end -use plant etc. were placed before the 
committee so as to enable it to make appropriate recommendations. 
Since September, 2005, the coal blocks used to be advertised calling for 
applications from interested parties. The application was to be filed in five sets.  
One set was to be sent to the concerned State Government, one set to the 
concerned line Ministry in t he Central Government, viz., Power, Steel, Department 
of Industrial Policy and Promotion, one set to CIL/CMPDIL for their examination and 
furnishing comments.  Then, the applicants used to be called for presenting their 
case to the Screening Committee. The reafter, the Screening Committee used to 
deliberate and give recommendations regarding allocation of coal blocks to the 
eligible applicants.  
As per the minutes, the Screening Committee assessed the applications having 
regard to the matters such as techno -economic feasibility of the end use project, 
status of preparedness to set up the end use project, past track record in execution 
of projects, financial and technical capabilities of the applicant companies, 
recommendations of the state governments and the  administrative Ministry 
concerned.  
This explains the various procedures followed by the Screening Committee whilst 
making recommendations.  
 
It may also be pertinent to mention that the Screening Committee In its fifth 
meeting held on 26.5.1994 decided t hat a regular review would be undertaken 
regarding the clearances obtained and action taken for setting up of thermal power 
stations as well as the progress in development of captive mining blocks offered 
and there after reviewed the progress of developmen t of block as well as endues 
plant from time to time.  Further, after the 36 th and the last meeting of the 
Screening Committee, the review process was continued by the Ministry of Coal 
through an Inter -Ministerial Review Committee and later on through an I nter-
Ministerial Group (IMG) . The review process by the IMG is still continuing. The 
details in this regard are given in reply to observation No.5 above. 
In addition, production from the captive coal blocks is also regularly monitored by 
the Coal Controller as indicated in the reply to Question No.2 above.  
 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
 

49 
 
PERSPECTIVE PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF COAL BLOCKS BY CIL 
Recommendation Serial No.11 
The Committee note that initially in 1993 and 1999, coal blocks were identified for 
captive mining after being identified and taking approval of Coal India Ltd. Board. 
Subsequently, in 2006 with the objective of improving the availability of power, 81 
coal blocks which were reserved for Coal India  for production during 12 th Plan 
Period and beyond aggregating to 20 BT of reserves were de-reserved and allocated 
to power developers for captive mining. The Committee further observe that though 
138 coal blocks were asked by CIL for exploitation in 2007,  these were not 
allocated to them. Instead, the Ministry of Coal allocated 119 coal blocks to CIL in 
July, 2012 only after repeated recommendations made by this Committee (16 th 
Report and 24th Report, 15th Lok Sabha). The Committee are, however, dismayed to 
note that project report in respect of only 2 blocks have been prepared and work 
for preparation of project report for 16 blocks is reported to be taken up during 12th 
Plan period i.e. from 2012 to 2017. With such a slow pace of work, the Committee 
are u nable to understand when the actual production from these coal blocks 
allocated to CIL will be started. While strongly urging the Ministry of Coal/CIL to act 
swiftly to ensure that these 119 blocks allocated to CIL start production, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of a perspective plan for development of these 
blocks. 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Coal in May, 2012 has assigned 116 coal blocks to Coal India 
Limited.  In addition to the above, three de -allocated coal blocks viz.  Brahmini, 
Chichro Pastimal and East of Damogoria (from the de -allocated coal blocks) have 
been assigned to CIL for undertaking mining on priority basis. CIL has submitted its 
tentative perspective plan for development of the above coal blocks.  As reported 
by Coal India Limite d (CIL),  project report has been prepared in respect of two 
blocks, geological report is available in respect of 16 coal blocks, exploration 
activities have been completed in 11 coal blocks, exploration activities are in 
progress in 24 coal blocks and exp loration activities are yet to be taken up in 66 
coal blocks.  Once exploration is completed, CIL would plan for starting the mining 
operation.  This would enable CIL to meet the coal requirements in long term 
subject to obtaining various clearances & evacuation constraints. 
Soon after the allocation of the 119 coal blocks to CIL in 2012 -13, a schedule of 
activities including exploration, Project Report (PR) preparation, etc. were prepared 
for development of these blocks as desired by MoC. Most of these blo cks were 
regionally explored, requiring further detailed exploration for formulation of GR and 
PR. Detailed exploration of blocks, where some exploration was undertaken before 
the tentative allocation, has been concluded and GRs prepared in 2012 -13 itself 

50 
 
i.e., within a short period. Out of these 119 blocks, geological reports are now 
available for 25 blocks and detailed exploration is already in progress in 30 blocks. 
Out of the 25 blocks, for which GR is available, PRs have already been prepared for 
2 blocks and will be prepared for 7 more blocks during 2013 -14 and the rest of the 
blocks will be taken up for PR preparation in a phased manner during the balance 
period of XII Plan. PR preparation for the blocks, for which GR is not yet available, 
will be taken up after completion of exploration in these blocks.  
Considering the urgency of development of coal blocks at faster pace, CMPDI has 
considerably increased the outsourcing of drilling by utilizing the capacity of MECL 
and other agencies. The actual drilling through outsourcing has increased from 0.07 
lakh m in 2007 -08 to 2.86 lakh m in 2012 -13 and target for outsourced drilling in 
2013-14 stands at 6.15 lakh m. However, international agencies have not been 
showing interests in CMPDI's global tenders for drilling and limited numbers of 
domestic agencies are available for carrying out this task. Also, out of these 119 
blocks, 27 nos. have been assessed to be worked with Opencast methodology and 
55 nos. with underground methodology, whereas, the balance 37 b locks will have 
mixed (OC+UG) projects. Hence production realization from underground blocks 
would take considerably long in comparison to the opencast blocks/projects.  
 
Also, a large number of these 119 blocks contain forest areas, for which, forest 
permission to drill with adequate number of boreholes (15 to 20 boreholes per sq 
km) is required. It is pertinent to mention here that applications for permission to 
carry out detailed drilling in forest areas of 22 blocks are pending with MOEF and 
state level officials since 3 -4 years; the no. of applications presently pending has 
since increased to 48.  Also, the prevailing law & order condition is adversely 
affecting the performance of drilling. Estimated cumulative loss due to law and 
order problems & non -availability of forest clearance during XI plan period and 
2012-13 was 2.42 lakh meter (approx.), which includes 1.08 lakh during 2012 -13. 
In view of these, all -out effort by CMPDI to carry out the pace of drilling would not 
increase considerably until these constraints are removed.   
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
ROLE OF COAL CONTROLLERS ORGANISATION (CCO) IN MONITORING THE 
CAPTIVE COAL BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.17 
The Committee are dismayed to note that the enormous work such as permission 
for opening and reopening of coal mines, disposal of cases under Coal Bearing 

51 
 
Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, collection of excise duty, inspection 
of coal samples, collection, compilation of coal statistics and monitoring and 
progress of coal blocks has been entrusted to Coal Controllers Organization (CCO) 
and the organization is having field offices at Dhanbad, Ranchi, Bilaspur, N agpur 
and Kothagudem and each field office is to be headed by one GM/DGM level 
executive working in the capacity of officer on Special Duty being supported by 
other technical officers; yet there is only one technical officer posted in the 
organisation and he is holding the post of Coal Controller. The Committee fail to 
understand as to how without having adequate manpower, the organisation can 
carry out inspection for ascertaining quality in selected mines. It will be difficult to 
undertake regular inspections to ensure compliance with specific orders relating to 
coal quality and resolving statutory complaints. The Committee also observe that 
though Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad had reviewed the functioning of CCO and 
submitted a report in 2006 to strength en the organisation, nothing has been done 
by the Ministry of Coal in the matter. Although, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal was 
candid enough to admit that the Ministry has taken note of it and will take steps to 
strengthen the same, the Committee are surp rised the way the Government have 
entrusted so much work to the organisation without providing the requisite staff. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to take immediate 
steps to strengthen the office of CCO to ensure that besides t he various statutory 
functions the organisation could efficiently monitor the progress of work in allocated 
captive coal blocks. 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Coal had engaged Indian Institute of Mines(ISM), Dhanbad to examine 
the issue of restructuring of Coal Controller‟s Organisation (CCO). The ISM, 
Dhanbad submitted its report in November 2006. The coal sector has undergone 
considerable changes  since the submission of the report including allocation of Coal 
Blocks for captive mining. Therefore, the recommendations contained in the Report 
had to be modified/updated keeping in view the changes that have taken place. 
This task has been assigned to I SM, Dhanbad in December 2012 and the revised 
report is expected to be submitted shortly. The recommendations will, thereafter, 
be considered and implemented.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

52 
 
GUIDELINE REGARDING GOVERNMENT/PSU OFFICIALS JOINING PRIVATE 
COMPANIES AFTER RETIREMENT 
Recommendation Serial No.18 
The Committee have been given to understand that Shri R.V. Sahi, a former Union 
Power Secretary, Shri N.C. Jha, former Chairman, Coal India Ltd. and others have 
joined private mining companies after retirement. The Committee express serious 
concern over joining of former Officers of the Ministries of Coal, Power and Mines in 
the companies whic h have been allocated coal blocks. The Ministry of coal has 
informed the Committee that they have not conducted any enquiry regarding 
employees who have retired/taken voluntary retirement from the Ministry of Coal, 
Coal India Ltd., CMPDIL etc. and have joi ned the companies which have been 
offered coal blocks. The Committee also find that according to the guidelines issued 
by Department of Public Enterprises vide their letter DPE OM No. 2(22)/99 -GM-GL-
91 dated 15 th May, 2008, the Director level officers of the coal companies are 
required to intimate / take permission from the Government regarding employment 
after retirement/VRS. The Board level officials of PSUs are also required to seek 
permission from the respecti ve companies to join the private companies after 
retirement. The officers in the Ministries and Public Sector Undertakings directly or 
indirectly connected with the allotment of coal blocks joining the private mining 
companies after their retirement raises  serious doubt about their being impartial 
when they were associated with the process of allotment of coal blocks. The 
Committee fail to understand as to why no inquiry has been conducted so far to 
expose the unholy nexus between such bureaucrats and coal companies who have 
been allotted captive coal blocks. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that to 
put a check and restraint over bureaucrat and coal companies nexus in 
shareholding and profit making, a strong internal vigilance mechanism is required. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Coal should immediately 
conduct an enquiry into the matter and furnish details of the officers of the Ministry 
of Coal, CIL and its subsidiaries and CMPDIL who have joined private companies 
against the guidelines set for the purpose and action may be initiated against those 
offices who have joined the private mining companies without the prior permission 
of the Government or the company as provided in Department of Personnel and 
Department of Public Enterprises guidelines. 
Action Taken 
 As far as Ministry of Coal is concerned, most of the Officers are appointed on 
deputation under Central Staffing Scheme of Department of Personnel and Training 
(DoPT) for a fixed prescribed tenure and after the completion o f tenure these 
officers repatriate to their own cadre.  No such records have been maintained as 

53 
 
most of the officers do not go on retirement from this Ministry but only repatriate to 
their respective cadre.   
However, as regards officers of CIL and its sub sidiaries and CMPDIL, five 
applications were received in the Ministry seeking permission to take up post 
retirement assignment. Out of these, permission was given in two cases, and one 
case was rejected. In the remaining two cases, clarifications were soug ht from the 
concerned officers, however, no reply has been received. 
In any case, Ministry of Coal had expressed concern on this issue especially with 
reference to time limit allowed for giving permission and cooling off period.  Earlier 
there was a time l imit of 30 days for the Ministries to give permission or otherwise 
to the retired officers of PSUs for taking post retirement job. However, This Ministry 
requested the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) to raise this cap to 90 days. 
However, the DPE ag reed for 60 days. This Ministry also requested the DPE to 
revise the time limit of the cooling off period from existing one year to at least two 
years. However, this was not accepted by DPE. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Taken No.19 
The Committee note that though no blocks were de -allocated on the ground that 
the firms misrepresented the eligibility criteria to get the blocks allocated, CBI has 
lodged 9 FIRs in the case related to allotments to private companies during 2006 -
2009 and further investigation is reportedly under progress. The Committee further 
observe that even the sector -wise allocation shows that out of a total of 81 blocks 
allocated to power sector, 27 were allocated to private companies, 12 to UMPPS 
and 42 to Government companies. Similarly, for iron and steel sector, only 2 blocks 
were allocated to Government companies whereas 61 blocks were allocated to 
private sector companies which shows that the allocation of coal blocks was tilted 
towards private sector. Taking not e of the guideline that captive blocks shall 
commence production within 36 months from the date of allocation in respect of 
opencast mines and 48 months for underground mines, the Committee are unable 
to accept the Government‟s contention that the Screening Committee acted in a fair 
and transparent manner for allocating coal blocks during 2004-2009, as coal blocks 
allocatees approved by the Screening Committee have failed to start production so 
far which raises apprehension that they were considered without  taking into 
account the techno-economic feasibility of the end use projects, past track record of 
the developers in execution of projects and their technical and financial capabilities. 

54 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to re -examine and 
comprehensively review all the coal block allocations approved by the Screening 
Committee and furnish a report on action taken on the defaulter allocatees. 
Action Taken 
As indicated in reply to observation no.5, the development of coal blocks has been 
reviewed from time to time by the Review Committee earlier and the Inter -
Ministerial Group now.  Based on the recommendations made by these committees, 
actions such as de -allocation of coal blocks, deduction of bank guarantee and 
imposition of bank guarantee have been taken. 
Further, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is already investigating the issue 
alleged irregularities in the coal block allocations made in the past.  
A Writ Petition (Criminal) No.120 of 2012 and a few PILs have also been filed in the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India inter-alia challenging the allocations of captive coal 
blocks made.  The matter is sub-judice. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 

55 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
ESTIMATED VALUE OF COAL PRODUCED FROM CAPTIVE BLOCKS 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
The Committee are astonished to know that although 195 coal blocks with 
geological reserves of about 44.23 billion tonnes have been allocated by the 
Government for captive mining, the Government have stated that no estimation has 
been made so far as to the value of the coal extracted from 29 coal blocks and the 
total value of coal blocks allocated for captive mining. T he Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend the Ministry to put in place a proper process or mechanism for 
correct evaluation and calculation of value of coal blocks with estimated geological 
and extractable reserves and they be apprised of the same. 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Coal has initiated the process for correct evaluation and calculation of 
value of coal blocks (with estimated geological and extractable reserves) by 
appointing a consultant in May, 2012.  The Consultant, after a series of 
deliberations with stakeholders from power sector, steel sector, cement sector, 
Ministries/Departments of Power, Steel, Economic Affairs and CII have submitted 
its final report in June, 2013. For the explored block, in which extractable reserves 
have been estimated, the consultant suggested use of Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) 
method for arriving at the intrinsic value of coal block. The intrinsic value of the 
coal blocks (regionally explored/explored) to be put on offer will be determined by 
CMPDIL based on the methodolog y suggested and accepted on the basis of the 
report submitted by the consultant M/s. CRISIL Infrastructure Advisory. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
As regards the coal blocks allocated for captive use based on wrong information and 
data about eligibility criteria furnished by the allocatees or subsequently sold to the 
new management, the Committee desire that the matter be enquired into and such 

56 
 
coal blocks be cancelled immediately and the companies be black -listed for future 
allocation of coal blocks and other minerals. 
Action Taken 
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has registered 3 Preliminary Enquiry (PE) 
cases regarding alleged irregulariti es in allocation of coal blocks – relating to 
allocation of coal blocks to private companies during the period 2006-09, relating to 
allocation of coal blocks to private companies during the period 1993 -2004 and 
relating to allocation of coal blocks to Gove rnment companies. As per information 
available, in the cases related to allocations of coal blocks made to private 
companies during 2006 -09, 13 FIRs have been lodged by CBI.  The case is still 
under investigation by the CBI which is being monitored by the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court of India. Due action will be taken in such matters as per the law.  
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT & 
REGULATION) AMENDMENT ACT, 2010 
Recommendation Serial No.20 
In view of the unduly long time being taken by the Ministry in the allotment of coal 
blocks by bidding system despite the Mines and Minerals (Development & 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010 passed by parliament for introduction of  system 
of auction by competitive bidding of coal blocks, the Committee in their earlier 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) had desired the Ministry to immediately implement the Act 
in letter and spirit. The Ministry have now informed the Committee that the 
Government has notified the auction by Competitive Bidding of Coal Mines Rules, 
2012 on 2nd February, 2012 and Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited 
(CMPDIL) after calling bids has selected M/s CRISIL to look into the whole process 
of competitive biddi ng. The Committee observe that though draft Report was 
submitted by the M/s CRISIL on 8 th October, 2012, the Ministry of coal is having 
consultation with State Governments and stakeholders to ensure additional 
safeguards especially with regard to transpare ncy and objectivity to be brought in 
the linkages granted from the allocated coal blocks. The Committee cannot but 
deplore these prolonged consultations delaying the allocation through bidding 
system and strongly recommend the Government to complete the pr ocess of 
consultation without any further delay to ensure early allocation of identified coal 
blocks through competitive bidding process to boost coal production. 
 
 

57 
 
Action Taken 
Under the amended provision of MMDR Act, Government has notified “Auction by 
Competitive Bidding of Coal Mines Rules, 2012.  Accordingly, 17 regionally explored 
Coal Blocks (14 for specified end use i.e. Power and 3 for Mining) have been put on 
offer.  Notice Inviting Applications (NIA) for these 17 coal blocks was issued on 31 -
12-2012.  The date of receipt of application (in 5 sets) was 30 -1-2013, which was 
subsequently extended to 8-2-2013. 
One set of applications received in the Ministry regarding Power have been sent to 
Ministry of Power, CMPDIL, Host States and Applicant States seeking their 
comments.  The last date of receipt of comments was 15 -3-2013.  Comments from 
Ministry of Power in context to Power Purchase Agreement and other relevant 
parameter and this deadline was extended upto 22-4-2013. 
Meanwhile, Ministry of Coal has  constituted an Inter -Ministerial Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary (C) consisting members from D/o Economic Affairs, 
M/o Power, M/o Steel, DIPP, M/o Law & Justice, Planning Commission, CIL, CMPDIL 
and Coal Controller to consider the applicatio ns for allocation of coal blocks, 
received from the Government Companies/Corporations.  So far four meetings have 
been held by the Committee. 
Further, an Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee has also been constituted by MoC 
under the Chairmanship of Advis or (Projects) to examine/evaluate the applications 
received and onward submission to the IMC for recommendation. So far five 
meetings have been held and the Committee has examined the application of the 
Power Sector on the basis of Comments received from Administrative Ministries I.e. 
M/o Power/CEA), CMPDIL, host States and Applicant States etc.  However, the 
applications received for 03 Coal Blocks for Mining are under evaluation. 
With regard to allocation of coal blocks through auction, M/s CRISIL has bee n 
appointed as consultant to suggest methodology for fixing floor/reserve price, 
model tender document and draft agreement to be entered into with the successful 
bidders.  The Ministry is consulting various stakeholders including D/o Economic 
Affairs, M/o Finance in the matter. 
[Ministry of Coal, OM No.13016/32/2013-CA-I dated 26th September, 2013] 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                             KALYAN BANERJEE 
      __ December, 2013                                                                    Chairman 
      __ Agrahayana, 1935(Saka)             Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 

58 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIRST REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made          20     
          
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13 and 14)      10  
     
Percentage of total                    50%  
             
     
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 15)     01 
Percentage of total                          05% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 5, 8, 11, 17, 18 and 19)          06  
       
Percentage of total                                      30%  
              
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 9, 16 and 20)                 03  
         
 Percentage of total                    15%  
     
  

59 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL HELD 
ON 17 DECEMBER, 2013 IN ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Kalyan Banerjee - Chairman 
 
    LOK SABHA  
2.    Shri Hansraj G. Ahir  
3.    Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
4.    Shri Vishwa Mohan Kumar 
5.    Shri Pakauri Lal 
6.    Shri Babu Lal Marandi  
7.    Shri  Govind Prasad Mishra  
8.    Shri Rajaram Pal 
9.    Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
10.    Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11.  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
12.  Shri Jugul Kishore 
13.  Shri Sanjay Raut 
14.  Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
15.  Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Shiv Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Additional Director 

60 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:- 
(i)      Draft Action Taken Repo rt on “Review of Allotment, Development and Performance of 
Coal/Lignite Blocks” pertaining to the Ministry of Coal;  
 
(ii)         **   **   **   ** 
 
(iii)       **   **   **   ** 
 
(iv)       **   **   **   ** 
 
(v)       **   **   **   ** 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports with some minor changes/modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the basis of factual 
verification from the concerned Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report 