1 
 
 
15 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2010-2011) 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)  
on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Steel] 
                 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2011 /   Sravana, 1933(Saka) 
 

2 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel  (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha)  
on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  ________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   __________ 
 
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2011 /  Sravana, 1933(Saka) 

3 
 
CC&S No. _________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110 005. 

4 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
                     
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………………………………………  
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………...………………………………………………………………………………..  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report   ……………………………………………………………………………………… 1 
   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
………………………………………………………………………… 
12 
   
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies……………….. 
 
30 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
31 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respe ct of   which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited……………………………….  
32 
   
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
 
Statement showing the Status of  Mining Lease Applications 
for Iron Ore applied by RINL-VSP…………………………………………….. 
 
33 
II. 
 
Statement showing the status o f forest and environment 
clearances of iron ore mining leases of SAIL……………………………… 
35 
 
III. 
  
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2010-11) held on 05.08.2011…………….……………………………. 
 
42 
 
IV. 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Gover nment on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…. 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2010-11) 
 
    
  Shri Kalyan Banerjee -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
        
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Jaywant Gangaram Awale  
4. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury 
6. Shri Ismail Hussain   
7. Shri Yashbant Laguri 
8. Shri Narahari Mahato 
9. Shri Babu Lal Marandi 
10. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
11. Kumari Saroj Pandey 
12. Shri Ramesh Rathod 
13. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
14. Shri Adhi Sankar 
15. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
16. Smt. Rajesh Nandini Singh 
17. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh (Lalan) 
18. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
19. Shri Shibu Soren 
20. Dr. G. Vivekanand 
21. Vacant 
 
 
 Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Mohd. Amin 
23. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
24. Shri Jugul Kishore 
25. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty  
26. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao 
27. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
29. Shri Nand Kumar Sai  
30. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Singh 
31. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
 
 
(iii) 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shiv Singh   - Director 
3. Md. Aftab Alam    - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, p resent this 
Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2010 -
11)” of the Ministry of Steel.  
 
2.  The Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 nd April, 2010. Replies of the 
Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 15th September, 2010.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on  05.08.2011.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in th e Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-IV.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                       KALYAN BANERJEE 
  August, 2011                                                                               Chairman 
  Sravana, 1933(Saka)                         Standing Committee on Coal and Stee l 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

9 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing C ommittee on Coal and Steel  on 
Demands for Grants (20 10-11) of the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 2010.    
 
2. The Report contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes 
have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorised as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17 and 18. 
           
          Total – 17 
          (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
Sl. No. Nil. 
 Total – 00  
 (Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. No. nil. 
 Total – 00  
 (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. 15. 
  Total – 01  
  (Chapter V) 
 
3.   The Committee hope that utmost importance w ould be given for 
expeditious implementation of their recommendations.  The Committee also 

10 
 
desire that the replies to Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter–I and final reply in respect of Observation s/Recommendations 
given in Chapter–V should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Ministry on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations made in the Sixth Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
 
5. The Committee had noted that for XI Five Year Plan (2007 -12) Planning 
Commission had approved total outlay of Rs. 45607.08 crore. Budgetary support had 
been kept at Rs. 217 crore. The Committee were, however, c oncerned to note that 
cumulative expenditure during XI plan upto January, 2010 had been far from 
satisfactory as was evident from the fact that about 50% of the expenditure was 
likely to be incurred during the first 3 years of plan period as against that o f 60%. 
The Committee desired that the Ministry should endeavour to analyse the reasons for 
inadequate utilization of the funds so far and gear up its monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that by the end of the XI Five Year Plan total allocated funds were fully 
utilized. The Committee also urged upon the Government to expeditiously approve 
the merger of SIIL with NMDC and resolve the financial issues relating to waiver of 
outstanding loans and interest thereon in respect of HSCL for spee dy restructuring of 
the Company. 
 
6. The Ministry in their in their written reply have stated as under:   
 “During the first three years of the XIth Plan, the actual expenditure till 
March, 2010 was Rs. 25685.11crore (56.32%). Keeping in view the progress 
of expansion and modernizat ion plan of SAIL and RINL and schemes of 
smaller PSUs, the approved Outlay Plan will be utilized. However, there may 
be some shortfall in utilization of allocated fund for XIth Plan in case of 
KIOCL, NMDC and Bird Group of Companies because some of their 
projects/schemes are held up or delayed due to non receipt of forest and 
environment clearance, non -renewal of mining leases and land dispute etc. 
The merger process of SIIL with NMDC is completed. All the   proposals for 
expansion projects of SIIL have bee n kept in abeyance. The utilization of 
allocated funds by SIIL for XIth Plan would be reviewed upon completion of 
merger process. HSCL’s revival/restructuring proposal is also under active 
consideration of the Government.  
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL has adequately utilized the funds against the total approved outlay for 
the XI Five Year Plan and has already incurred expenditure to the tune of 
68% by the end of three years and the balance will also be spent by the end 

11 
 
of the XI Five Year Pla n, fulfilling 100% of the target. The amount spent by 
RINL against the approved outlay is indicated below: 
 
              Unit : Rs Crores. 
Approved Plan 
Outlay in XI Five 
Year Plan  
Cumulative  
expenditure till 
2009-10 
%  ulfillment w.r.t 
total outlay 
Balance for 2010 -11 & 
2011-12 
9569.18 6473.40 68 3095.78 
 
Bird Group of Companies (Government Managed Company) 
 
The funds could not be utilized due to delay in renewal of mining leases as 
well as issuance of Forest & Environment clearance of Mines.  Efforts  are 
being made to get the mining leases renewed at the earliest. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
Merger of SIIL with NMDC. 
 
NMDC has filed the Ministry of Corporate Affair’s Order approving Merger of 
SIIL with NMDC Ltd. with Registrar of Companies, Andhra Pradesh on 1 st July, 
2010.  Consequently, SIIL stands dissolved without being wound up.  With 
this, the process of merger of SIIL with NMDC stands completed. 
 
Restructuring of Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL)  
 
The matter relating to financial issues relati ng to waiver of outstanding loans 
and interest thereon in respect of HSCL has been taken up with Ministry of 
Finance.  In this connection, Ministry of Finance has requested, Ministry of 
Steel to submit a revised proposal on restructuring of HSCL, after dis cussion 
with the banks.  HSCL has approached M/s SBI Caps for syndication of roll 
over of bank loan.  After receipt of their report, within 60 days, final proposal 
will be submitted for approval of the Competent Authority.” 
 
7. The Ministry of Steel in the ir action taken reply has admitted that 
there may be shortfall in utilization of allocated funds during XI Plan in case 
of KIOCL, NMDC and Bird Group of Companies(BGC).  The reasons for under -
utilization of fund have been attributed to delay of completion of their 
project(s)/scheme(s) due to non -receipt of forest and environment 
clearance, non -renewal of mining leases and land dispute etc.  The 
Committee deprecate under -utilization of funds by aforesaid PSUs of 
Ministry of Steel by offering these routine re asons. They have been 
repeatedly emphasizing the Ministry to facilitate their PSUs overcome the 
constraints being faced by them in getting the necessary statutory 
clearances.  Obviously, Ministry have failed in discharging their duty as 
facilitator.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to undertake a 

12 
 
comprehensive exercise to identify major constraints faced by NMDC, KIOCL 
and BGC relating to Environment and Forest Clearances and render them 
necessary assistance in resolving the land dispute.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
 
8. The Committee had found that a new scheme i.e. “Scheme for Promotion of 
R&D in Iron and Steel Sector” for XI Plan (2007 -12) with an outlay of Rs. 118 crore 
was approved by the Planning Commission. The objective of the sch eme was stated 
to promote and accelerate R&D activities in development of key raw materials. The 
Committee regretted to observe that no expenditure had  been incurred on any 
research activities in first 2 years of the plan period. Although, 7 R&D projects o f 
national importance were short listed, work on not even a single project could 
commence. The Committee recommend ed that the R&D project s identified by the 
Ministry might be accorded top priority and n ecessary corrective measures might  be 
taken to ensure gainful utilization of the fund allocated for the projects during the 
remaining plan period. The Committee would like the Ministry of steel to complete 
the proposed R&D projects through in -house research instead of depending  on 
imported technology, which was not in the overall interest of steel industry in India. 
 
9. The Ministry in their written reply have stated the following:   
  
“The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and corrective actions 
are being taken by the Ministry. It is submitted that  under the “Scheme for 
promotion of R&D in iron and steel sector” with plan outlay of Rs.118 crore, 
eight R&D projects of national importance have been identified. Total cost of 
these projects is Rs.134.64 crore (approx.) of which the Plan fund component 
is Rs.110 crore (approx.). Out of the eight projects, four projects costing 
Rs.33.41 crore (approx.) with full support from Plan Fund have been 
approved by the Ministry. So far, Rs.4.11 crore being the part of first 
installment has been released. Balance am ount will be released as per the 
requirement of the project. The remaining four projects are at different stages 
of examination.” 
 
10. The Committee find that out of the eight R&D Projects of national 
importance, only four projects costing Rs. 33.41 crore( approx.) have been 
approved so far by the Ministry and a meagre amount to the tune of Rs. 4.11 
crore as the first instalment has been released.  The Committee deplore the 
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in not according utmost importance to 
R&D Schemes according approval to all the projects and timely measures for 

13 
 
their time bound completion. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
make sincere efforts to complete all the R&D Projects at the earliest.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the precise action taken in the 
matter.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
 
11. The Committee regret ted to point out that the RINL had  not been successful 
so far in acquiring captive mines of core raw materials viz. iron ore and coking coal. 
Further, two coal blocks viz. Mahal and Tenughat Jhirki allotted by Coal India Limited 
were not likely to be developed due to operational reasons. The performance of the 
company ha d been adversely affected on this account. Non -availability of iron ore 
and coking coal mines ha d been a major constraint for RINL and the Committee ha d 
been recommending repeatedly to the Ministry to facilitate them in this regard. The 
Ministry were exhorted to take urgent measures to help RINL in acquiring captive 
mines to ensure increased production of steel, in Action Taken Replies. 
 
12. The Ministry in their reply have stated as follows:   
 
 
“Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
1) Iron Ore: 
 
Allocation of Mines : RINL-VSP has been continuously taking up the matter 
of allocation of mines with respect ive State Govt., Central Govt. since 2003 
for allotment of Mines on priority bassis. Details of Mining lease applications 
filed by RINL in the status of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh & 
Rajasthan and their present status is as given in the Annexure-I.  
 
VSP also approached the State Mineral Development Corporations (SMDC) of 
the States of Orissa, Karnataka & Jharkhand for allocation of suitable iron ore 
blocks and also expressed it’s interest for setting up of JVs for projects 
involving value addition in the State.  
 
In connection with the above, RINL and MoS both have taken up with Chief 
Secretary & Chief Development Commissioner, Govt. of Orissa, Chief 
Secretary, Govt. of Karnataka & Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand, at 
various instances, requesting for allocation of suitable iron ore blocks to RINL-
VSP along with SMDC as a Joint Sector project for mine development and 
further value addition. 
 
Help of NMDC would be needed to ensure supply of adequate iron ore slurry 
for the pelletisation plant. 
 

14 
 
A proposal for restructuring of BIRD group of companies, making it a 
subsidiary of RINL has already been approved by Government. Formalities for 
transfer of 51% stake in M/s EIL, the holding company of OMDC & BSLC to 
RINL are in the advanced stage of complet ion.  This would give RINL access 
to around 200 Mt of Iron ore reserves.  
 
b) Coal: 
1) The Ministry of Steel has communicated to the Ministry of Coal indicating 
that due to various constraints, economical mining is not possible in the 
allocated blocks i.e. Ma hal & Tenughat-Jhirki. Hence it has been proposed 
to hand over these blocks back to the Ministry of Coal and to allocate an 
open cast Coking Coal block to RINL. 
 
ii) RINL have also joined ICVL for the purpose of acquisition of coal 
mining assets abroad.  I nternational Coal Ventures Ltd (ICVL) was 
formed with equity participation by NMDC, CIL, NTPC, SAIL & RINL to 
acquire metallurgical and thermal coal assets overseas and was 
incorporated on 20.05.09. ICVL is considering several proposals to 
acquire coal assets abroad.” 
 
13. The Committee note that in order to overcome the difficulty being 
faced by RINL such as non availability of iron ore and coking coal mines , 
RINL-VSP are sta ted to have continuously taking up the matter with 
concerned State Governments. Th e Committee feel that despite these 
States, the desired results have not yet been achieved, the  steps have been 
taken by RINL and Ministry of Steel requesting the concerned State 
Governments to allocate suitable iron ore blocks to RINL -VSP and forming 
Joint Venture with SMDC ( State Mineral Development Corporations ) for 
mine development and value addition.  Consequently, RINL Plan of reducing 
dependence on the external sources for raw material and its techno -
economic parameters will be affected.  In order t o ensure supply of critical 
raw materials viz. iron ore and coking coal to RINL, the Committee would 
like to impress upon the Ministry of Steel to pursue the matter vigorously 
with concerned State Governments for allocation of suitable iron ore/coking 
coal mines so that RINL is able to meet its requirement of raw materials 
which has been necessitated in view of its modernisation and expansion.  
 
 Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
 
14. The Committee were concerned to note that due to limited production of 
indigenous coking coal, domestic steel industry ha d to resort to imported coking coal 
to fulfill its requirement. The Committee had found that 11 coking coal blocks and 56 
non-coking coal had  been allotted to different steel companies for captive use. They 

15 
 
were satisfied to note that government was encouraging the formation of joint 
ventures between steel companies to acquire coking coal blocks abroad. The 
Committee had desired that work on war footing might  be initiated for development 
of the coking coal blocks and non-coking coal blocks allotted to steel  PSUs so that 
these companies could  reap the benefit of having their own captive coal mines. The 
Committee had found that Indian steel Industry did not ha ve adequate sintering and 
Pelletisation facility as a result of which iron ore fines we re exported. The Committee 
felt that steel PSUs should set up sintering and pelletisation facilities which would 
help to promote value addition of iron ore in the country. F urther, the Finance 
Ministry might be persuaded to pro vide fiscal incentives for setting up beneficiation 
and pelletisation plants in the country to make best use of iron ore fines. 
 
15. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:   
“Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
a)  Coking Coal : 
In order to  reduce dependence on purchased coking coal, SAIL has been 
allocated two coking coal blocks at Tasra and Sitanala. All efforts are being 
made for early start of production from these blocks. Status of their 
development is given below : 
 
i) Tasra Coking Coal Block:  
All statutory clearances have been obtained. Planned mine capacity is 4 MTPA 
(ROM) to produce about 2 MTPA of clean coal. Selection of Mine Developer 
cum Operator (MDO) is in progress.  Through tendering process, L -1 bidder 
has been identified an d work order is to be issued shortly. In the meantime, 
small scale production has been started from November’2009. 
 
ii) Sitanala Coking Coal Block:  
Mine planned for production of 0.3 MTPA (ROM) to produce about 0.2 MTPA 
clean coal. Project report has been  prepared, mine plan approved and grant 
of environment clearance is in advance stage. Selection of Mine Developer 
cum Operator (MDO) is also in progress. 
 
In order to further augment captive coking coal production, SAIL has 
identified two potential coking coal blocks namely, Jhirki/ Jhirki West OC & 
Rhone-Routpara West in Jharkhand and requested Ministry of Steel & Ministry 
of Coal for allocation of the blocks. Coal blocks are yet to be allocated to 
SAIL. Hon’ble Minister of Steel has also requested Hon’ble  Minister of State 
for Coal in February’2010 to allocate these coking coal blocks to SAIL through 
Govt. dispensation route. 
 
b) Allocation of thermal coal blocks for captive use 
Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is being met by supplies from 
Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability, 
SAIL has identified six thermal coal blocks namely Tentuloi, Ghogharpalli & 

16 
 
Extension, Bankhui, Gand Bahera Ujheni, Puta Parogia & Pindrakhi and 
requested Ministry of Steel & Minist ry of Coal for allocation of at least 2 -3 
blocks. Hon’ble Minister of Steel has also requested Hon’ble Minister of State 
for Coal in February’2010 to allocate these thermal coal blocks to SAIL 
through Govt. dispensation route. 
 
c) Sintering & Pelletisation 
SAIL already has sintering facility having around 21 million tons per annum 
capacity. As part of expansion plan being implemented by SAIL, sinter 
capacity is also being augmented to the level of around 29 million tons per 
annum. 
 
In order to ensure gainfu l utilization of low grade iron ore fines and slimes 
from tailing ponds, SAIL has planned to install pelletisation plants. In this 
regard, DPR for setting up a 4 mtpa pellet plant at Gua has been prepared 
and tender has been floated for installation of pel let plant. Last date for 
submission of bid is 22.7.2010. 
 
DPR for second Pellet plant is also being prepared. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL-VSP has already two Sinter Machines in the existing plant to produce 
about 5.3 Mt of sinter using iron  ore fines.  New Sinter Plant (SP#3) with 
capacity of 3.25Mt is getting added in the current expansion programme and 
is scheduled for commissioning in 2010 -11. This will further enhance the 
usage of iron ore fines. 
 
To improve usage of lower grade of iron ore fines through beneficiation, RINL 
has also proposed to set up a Pelletisation plant of capacity of around 5 mtpa 
in Visakhapatnam.  It is envisaged that the feed to the pelletisation plant will 
be through a slurry pipeline to carry iron ore slurry from  Bailadilla mines to 
Visakhapatnam. This ensures secured transportation of iron fines to VSP from 
Bailadilla mines and also further value addition in the form of pellets.  
 
Bird Group of Companies (Government Managed Company) 
 
OMDC has already invited expr ession of interest through paper publication for 
setting up a 2 MTPA Beneficiation and Pelletisation Plant and the matter is 
under active consideration. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
Ministry of Steel has been recommending to Ministry of Finance for fiscal 
incentives for setting up beneficiation and pelletisation plants in the country.” 
 
16. Though the coal blocks allotted to Steel PSUs have not yet been 
developed so far thus affecting the sustainable growth of steel companies 
for want of critical raw material.  The Committee would, therefore, like that 
coal blocks already allotted to steel companies should be developed 
expeditiously to meet the impending demand of coking coal essential for  

17 
 
modernisation and expansion of steel PSUs. Further, the Ministry of Steel 
should explore the feasibility of Steel PSUs to acquiring /developing 
economically viable coking coal assets in India and abroad though joint 
venture companies.   
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that SAIL, RINL and Bird Group 
of Companies have started the proc ess of setting up pelletisation plants for 
gainful utilization of low grade iron ore fines and slimes.  The Committee 
would like the steel companies to expedite appropriate steps to install these 
plants.  
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
 
17. The Committee were concerned to note that SAIL wa s having only 5 valid 
leases of iron ore, the remaining 20 leases were either disputed or under deemed 
extension. The Committee were informed that an out of court settlement was likely 
to resolve dispute with Government of Jharkhand in case of two leases i.e. Chiria and 
Gua. The Committee had observed that many proposals of SAIL and NMDC relating 
to iron ore mining leases were pending with Government of Jharkhand, Orissa and 
Ministry of Environment forest for want of environ ment and forest clearances. The 
Committee had desired that mining leases awaiting mandatory statutory clearances 
such as forest clearances and environment clearances might  be accorded top priority 
by taking the matter with the concerned State Government at the highest level. They 
had also recommend ed that a special cell might  be created in the Ministry which 
would address the objections/concerns of the State Government and Ministry of 
Environment and Forest. 
 
18. The Ministry in their reply have stated as follows:   
“Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
a) Out of 26 iron ore mining leases in the states of Jharkhand, Orissa and 
Chhattisgarh, only 5 leases are valid. This includes grant of Mining Lease at 
Rowghat in Chhattisgarh in October’2009. Status of leases is shown below : 
 
Details Orissa Jharkhand Chhattisgarh Total 
No. of leases 07 13 06 26 
Valid NIL NIL 05 05 
Under deemed 
extension 06 05 01 12 

18 
 
In-Principle approval 
by State Govt. NIL 04 NIL 04 
Under dispute 01 04 NIL 05 
 
SAIL possesses 10 mini ng leases in the Chiria -gua belt of Jharkhand, six 
leases (Ajitaburu, Sukri -Latur, Tatiburu, Budhaburu (Mclellan), Dhobil and 
Ankua) are in Chiria and the balance four leases (Dugaiburu, Jhillingburu_I, 
Jhillingburu-II and Topailore) are in Gua. 
 
For early renewal of leases particularly in Jharkhand and Orissa, continuous 
effort is being made by SAIL and Ministry of Steel. In connection with renewal 
of leases for Chiria & Gua, on request of Ministry of Steel, a meeting was held 
by Secretary (Mines), GoI on 5-10-2009 which was also attended by Chief 
Secretary, Government of Jharkhand, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Steel, 
Controller General IBM, Director General, GSI and Chairman SAIL  As decided 
in the meeting, SAIL vide letter dated 19.10.09, requested Chief S ecretary, 
Government of Jharkhand to renew mining leases of Chiria and Gua mine of 1 
billion tonne immediately  and to initiate dialogue for renewal of the balance 
leases to meet the projected requirement for 50 years. After the long 
persuasion, the State G overnment of Jharkhand conveyed its in -principle 
approval on renewal for the Budhaburu lease (823.62 ha) of Chiria iron mine 
on 23.10.09. SAIL vide letter dated 18.11.09 has further requested Jharkhand 
Govt. to renew leases corresponding to 1000 million to nnes keeping all four 
leases of Gua & Ajitaburu of Chiria in the present form and redefining 
Budhaburu lease. Secretary (Steel), GoI has also held meeting with Chief 
Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand on 17-2-2010 on the issue of renewal of mining 
leases including Chiria. 
 
b) With regard to grant of Environment clearance and Forestry clearance, 
matter is continuously being followed up with respective State Govt. and 
Ministry of Environment & Forest (MoEF), GoI. This has enable us to obtain 
Stage-1 Forestry clearance/ Temporary Working permission for Barsua -Kalta, 
Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu and Bolani iron ore mines which were due for 
renewal.   
 
Status of Forest & Environment clearances for iron ore mines of SAIL is as 
given in the Annexure-II.” 
 
19. While appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry of Steel and SAIL 
impressing upon the State Governments and Ministry of Environment and 
Forest to grant statutory clearance for renewal of mining leases, the 
Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry of Steel hav e conveniently 
evaded the issue of creation of special cell in the Ministry which can 

19 
 
exclusively take up the matter with  State Government and Ministry of 
Environment and Forest for  grant of statutory clearances. The Committee 
would like to be informed of  the precise acti on taken by the Ministry in 
response to this specific recommendation . The Committee understand that 
Ministry of Environment and Forest have since granted environment 
clearance for renewal of Chiria mines of SAIL which is the lifeline for i ts 
Bokaro unit. Similarly, NMDC have also received the nod of Ministry of 
Environment and Forest for Greenfield Bailadila iron ore project at 
Dantewada, Chhattisgarh. The Committee desire that Ministry of 
Steel/SAIL/RINL should ma ke sincere  efforts to obta in forest and 
environment clearance for renewal of pending iron ore leases.    
 

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
Keeping in view the significance of steel industry in the ov erall development 
of economy and its contribution in the growth of GDP, it is imperative that the 
Government should endeavour to make a policy framework in the long term interest 
of the Indian steel industry which would help them enhance their production c apacity 
in order to keep pace with the anticipated increase in domestic and overseas 
demands. The Committee would like the Ministry to take appropriate measures to 
enable Indian steel industry to become competitive globally not only in terms of cost, 
quality and product – mix but also in terms of global benchmarks of efficiency and 
productivity, expeditious removal of procedural bottlenecks, availability of critical raw 
material, infrastructure and modern technology. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken/ proposed to be taken in this regard. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Keeping in view the significance of steel industry in the overall development 
of economy and contribution in the growth of GDP, Government of India took 
initiatives to bringing out Nat ional Steel Policy.  The National Steel Policy (NSP) 
envisages a modern and efficient steel industry of world standards to serve as a 
springboard for reaching the National Vision of transforming India into a developed 
economy by 2020.  The focus are [a] Gl obal Competitiveness in terms of cost, 
quality and product-mix [b] Global bench-mark of efficiency and productivity. 
 
In the context where Global crude steel production reached 1220 million 
tonne in 2009, a decline of 8 per cent over 2008 and China remaine d the largest 
crude steel producer in the world with production reaching 567.8 million tonne, a 
growth of 13.5 per cent over 2008, the progress of Indian Steel Industry is 
remarkable.  India once again emerged as the fifth largest producer in 2009 and 
recorded a growth of 2.7 per cent as compared to 2008, the only other country in 
the top 10 bracket to register a positive growth during 2009.  India also emerged as 
the largest sponge iron producing country in the world in 2009, a rank it has held on 
since 2002.  If proposed expansions plans are implemented as per schedule, India 
may become the second largest crude steel producer in the world by 2015-16. 
 
All major steel companies in India are modernizing and expanding their 
capacity to be globally competitive  in terms of cost, quality and product -mix.  They 
are bringing state of art technology so that they are able to achieve efficiency and 
productivity in line with global bench mark.  Steel Authority of India Limited has also 
drawn its modernization and expan sion plan, under which, in first phase, the 
capacity will be increased to about 23 Mt. of hot metal in next 2 -3 years.  The 
strategic intent of the company is to expand the capacity to 60 Mt. by 2020.  All 
additional capacity is planned to be globally comparative in terms of cost, quality and 
product-mix.  The strategy of the company also includes sourcing of critical raw -
materials and modern technology in iron and steel. 
 

21 
 
 As regards monitoring and implementation of steel projects and removing 
bottlenecks, Prime Minister has approved constitution of an Inter Ministerial Group 
(IMG) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Steel) to monitor and coordinate issues 
concerning major steel investments in the country.  The other members are 
Secretaries of Department o f Industrial Policy and Promotion, Department of 
Shipping, Department of Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of Mines, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, Member (Traffic) of the Railway Board and as well as Chief 
Secretaries of the concerned State Government. 
 
 Issues concerning various issues of major steel investment projects, including 
steel PSUs are discussed in the IMG meetings, where the concerned State 
Government as well as Ministries / Departments of the Union Government are 
requested to comment and take note of the issues. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that Budgetary Support (BS) 
is being provided by the Ministry to some of the financ ially weak and loss making 
PSUs and Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) are being raised by profit 
making PSUs for implementing their schemes. As against the proposed annual plan 
outlay of Rs. 17221.82 crore (IEBR: Rs. 17163.82 crore + BS: Rs. 58 .00 crore), the 
Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 17199.82 crore (IEBR Rs. 
17163.82+ BS Rs. 36.00 crore). The Committee note that the outlay for 2010-11 has 
sharply increased to Rs. 17199.82 crore as compared to that of Rs. 13756.66 crore 
in 2009 -10. However, the Revised Estimates (RE) for 2009 -10 was marginally 
reduced to Rs. 13252.46 crore and the actual expenditure upto January, 2010 was 
Rs. 11122.11 crores. The Committee understand that the plan outlay has been 
increased as compared to the preceding year to meet the expenditure on various on -
going projects/scheme of steel PSUs. What the Committee would like the Ministry is 
to ensure that the enhanced allocation is gainfully utilized and the on -going 
projects/schemes are strictly monitored to keep pace with expenditure. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 There has been an increase of 25% in the Plan Outlay for 2010 -11 over Plan 
Outlay of 2009 -10. The increase is basically due to increase in the Plan Outlay of 
SAIL and RINL, whose expansion and modernization p lan is going on. During 2009 -
10 against the approved Outlay of   Rs. 13756.66 crore, the actual expenditure was 
Rs. 13324.75 crore (96.86%). It may be mentioned here that the implementation 
status of projects/schemes and utilization of Plan Outlay by the P SUs is being 
monitored in the Ministry at various levels through performance review meetings of 
PSUs. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
 
 The Committee note that for XI Five Year Plan (2007 -12) Planning 
Commission has approved total outlay of Rs. 45607.08 crore. Budgetary support has 
been kept at Rs. 217 crore. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that 

22 
 
cumulative expenditure during XI plan upto January, 2010 has been far from 
satisfactory as is evident from the fact that about 50% of the expenditure is likely to 
be incurred during the first 3 years of plan period as against that of 60%. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should endeavour to analyse the reasons for 
inadequate utilization of the funds so far and gear up its monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that by the end of the XI Five Year Plan total allocated funds are fully utilized. 
The Committee also urge upon the Government to expeditiously approve the merger 
of SIIL with NMDC an d resolve the financial issues relating to waiver of outstanding 
loans and interest thereon in respect of HSCL for speedy restructuring of the 
Company. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 During the first three years of the XIth Plan, the actual expenditure till March, 
2010 was Rs. 25685.11crore (56.32%). Keeping in view the progress of expansion 
and modernization plan of SAIL and RINL and schemes of smaller PSUs, the 
approved Outlay Plan will be utilized. However, there may be some shortfall in 
utilization of allocated fund f or XIth Plan in case of KIOCL, NMDC and Bird Group of 
Companies because some of their projects/schemes are held up or delayed due to 
non receipt of forest and environment clearance, non -renewal of mining leases and 
land dispute etc. The merger process of S IIL with NMDC is completed. All the   
proposals for expansion projects of SIIL have been kept in abeyance. The utilization 
of allocated funds by SIIL for XIth Plan would be reviewed upon completion of 
merger process. HSCL’s revival/restructuring proposal i s also under active 
consideration of the Government.  
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL has adequately utilized the funds against the total approved outlay for 
the XI Five Year Plan and has already incurred expenditure to the tune of 68% by 
the end of three years and the balance will also be spent by the end of the XI Five 
Year Plan, fulfilling 100% of the target. The amount spent by RINL against the 
approved outlay is indicated below: 
 
               Unit : Rs Crores. 
Approved Plan 
Outlay in XI Five 
Year Plan  
Cumulative  
expenditure till 
2009-10 
% fulfilment w.r.t 
total outlay 
Balance for 2010-11 & 
2011-12 
9569.18 6473.40 68 3095.78 
 
Bird Group of Companies (Government Managed Company) 
 
The funds could not be utilized due to delay in renewal of  mining leases as 
well as issuance of Forest & Environment clearance of Mines.  Efforts are being made 
to get the mining leases renewed at the earliest. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
Merger of SIIL with NMDC. 
NMDC has filed the Ministry of Corporate Affair’s Order approv ing Merger of 
SIIL with NMDC Ltd. with Registrar of Companies, Andhra Pradesh on 1 st July, 2010.  
Consequently, SIIL stands dissolved without being wound up. With this, the process 
of merger of SIIL with NMDC stands completed. 

23 
 
Restructuring of Hindustant Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL) 
 
 The matter relating to financial issues relating to waiver of outstanding loans 
and interest thereon in respect of HSCL has been taken up with Ministry of Finance.  
In this connection, Ministry of Finance has request ed, Ministry of Steel to submit a 
revised proposal on restructuring of HSCL, after discussion with the banks.  HSCL 
has approached M/s SBI Caps for syndication of roll over of bank loan.  After receipt 
of their report, within 60 days, final proposal will b e submitted for approval of the 
Competent Authority. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
 
 The Committee find that a  new scheme i.e. “Scheme for Promotion of R&D in 
Iron and Steel Sector” for XI Plan (2007 -12) with an outlay of Rs. 118 crore was 
approved by the Planning Commission. The objective of the scheme is stated to 
promote and accelerate R&D activities in develop ment of key raw materials. The 
Committee regret to observe that no expenditure has been incurred on any research 
activities in first 2 years of the plan period. Although, 7 R&D projects of national 
importance were short listed, work on not even a single pr oject could commence. 
The Committee recommend that the R&D projects identified by the Ministry may be 
accorded top priority and necessary corrective measures may be taken to ensure 
gainful utilization of the fund allocated for the projects during the remai ning plan 
period. The Committee would like the Ministry of steel to complete the proposed R&D 
projects through in -house research instead of depending on imported technology, 
which is not in the overall interest of steel industry in India. 
  
Action Taken 
 
 The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and corrective actions are 
being taken by the Ministry. It is submitted that under the “Scheme for promotion of 
R&D in iron and steel sector” with plan outlay of Rs.118 crore, eight R&D projects of 
national importance have been identified. Total cost of these projects is Rs.134.64 
crore (approx.) of which the Plan fund component is Rs.110 crore (approx.). Out of 
the eight projects, four projects costing Rs.33.41 crore (approx.) with full support 
from Plan Fund have been approved by the Ministry. So far, Rs.4.11 crore being the 
part of first installment has been released. Balance amount will be released as per 
the requirement of the project.  
 
 The remaining four projects are at different stages of examination. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

24 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that an Inter Ministerial Group  
(IMG) constituted to monitor and coordinate various issues concerning major steel 
investment in the country is striving to resolve issues pertaining to environment and 
infrastructure. The Ministry have admitted that major issues hampering steel 
industry r elate to linkage of iron ore and raw materials. The Committee feel that 
timely completion of ongoing schemes of steel PSUs and full utilization of allocated 
funds in XI Five Year Plan are dependent on statutory environment and forest 
clearances. The Committee would like the Ministry to use IMG as an effective tool for 
resolving the issue relating to environment and forest clearances for various 
schemes of steel PSUs. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) is also represented by Ministry of Environmen t 
& Forest (MoEF) and the concerned State Governments.  Issues concerning 
environment and forest clearance of major steel investment projects, including steel 
PSUs are discussed in the IMG meetings, where the concerned State Government as 
well as Ministry of Environment & Forests are requested to comment and take note 
of the issues. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
 The Committee note that Annual Plan outlay of Steel Authority India Ltd. 
(SAIL) for the year 2010-11 has been increased to Rs. 12254 crore from 10356 crore 
in 2009-10 keeping in view progress of modernization and expansion plan and other 
ongoing projects. The Committee observe that SAIL could not keep its commitment 
as regards com pletion of modernization and expansion plan. As a result thereof 
expected production has been seriously affected.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 During the year 2009 -10, against the budget outlay of Rs 10,356 crore, the 
actual expenditure was Rs 10,606 crore. Keeping in view the envisaged progress 
of execution like civil & structural work, equipment supply & erection, refractory 
supply & erection etc. of the on -going modernization and expansion plan, the 
budgeted estimate of 2010-11 has been kept as Rs. 12254 crore.  
 
 In early 2008, when the major packages of various plants were being finalised, 
the market conditions due to buoyant steel sector scene in the country had 
created an environment of sellers’ market. This situation had pu shed up the price 
scenario for most of the packages and in many cases, the prices received were 
higher than the estimates. In this context there was a need to revisit some of the 
contracts involving large capital investments and in some packages re -tendering 
was resorted to. 
   
 In the light of post global economic melt down and its impact on the domestic 

25 
 
and global steel market situation, the targets were reviewed during Feb -Jun’09 
and it was decided to implement the Modernisation & Expansion plan of SAIL i n 
phases.  
 
 The current phase of modernization and expansion plan is envisaged to be 
completed by 2012-2013.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
 The Committee note that after deregulation of  Steel Sector, capacity creation 
has taken place primarily in the private sector. The reason furnished by the Ministry 
for not keeping pace with the private sector in capacity creation that plants of SAIL 
were undergoing technological upgradation is not co nvincing enough. As a matter of 
fact, modernization of projects such as replacement of obsolete technology and 
introduction of latest technology is a normal process for sustained development of 
steel industry. In this connection, the Committee would like t o point out that in 
2004-05, the share of public sector in total crude steel and finished steel production 
was 36.6 million tonnes and 28.3 million tonnes respectively which came down to 28 
million tonnes and 22.2 million tonnes respectively in 2008 -09. The Committee are 
inclined to conclude that Public Sector is witnessing a declining trend in total crude 
and finished steel output. The Committee therefore recommend that Ministry should 
take necessary remedial measures to help its PSUs to compete with the p rivate 
sector in production and offtake of crude and finished steel. 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
 SAIL has undertaken Modernisation & Expansion of its five integrated steel plants 
at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & IISCO Steel Plants and special Steel Plant 
at Salem.  
 
The current Phase of Modernisation & Expansion Plan envisages increase in 
capacity of hot metal, crude steel & saleable steel as follows: 
(Million Tonne) 
Items Installed 
capacity 
Capacity after 
implementation of current 
programme 
Hot Metal 13.8 23.46 
Crude Steel 12.8 21.40 
Saleable Steel 11.1 20.23 
 
The expansion plans of Steel PSUs embody latest technology and would help 
the PSUs in producing specialized and value added steel and introduce new products 
to allow PSUs to engage in competition with the private sector. 
 

26 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL-VSP registered a growth of 8% & 16 % in Crude steel & Finished steel in 
2009-10 compared to CPLY with production of 3.205 Mt & 2.959 Mt respectively. 
During the year 09-10, the volume of saleable steel sales was 3.132 Mt registering a 
growth of 20% compared to 08-09. 
 
Towards addition of capacity, RINL is already doubling it’s capacity of liquid 
steel from the existing 3.0 Mt to 6.3 Mt by 2011 -12, throug h implementation of 
expansion scheme.   
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
 
 The Secretary, Ministry of Steel admitted during evidence that SAIL and RINL 
have not gone in for specialized and h igh grade steel which is basically a value 
addition. However, the Committee have been now given to understand that that 
SAIL and POSCO have entered into a strategic alliance for information sharing in 
areas related to corporate strategic planning, collabor ation and cooperation in areas 
pertaining to joint research and development projects and joint ventures mutually 
agreed upon. The Committee feel that it is imperative that Indian steel industry 
particularly SAIL should improve the quality of steel to match  international 
standards. The formation of joint venture between SAIL and POSCO is a step in right 
direction and the Committee feel that more such joint ventures would be formed 
between steel PSUs and leading steel producers of the world engaged in product ion 
of specialized steel. The Committee also recommend that Ministry may formulate an 
action plan for the PSUs particularly SAIL and RINL for diversification of their 
products and encourage them to produce specialized steel such as steel used in 
automobile sector, electrical utility, turbine making, nuclear plant etc. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
The modernization & expansion plan envisages installation of facilities for 
Secondary steel facilities alongwith SMS at BSP, RSP and ISP .  With this, SAIL will be 
able to produce higher grades of Steel. Also, the Plan envisages installation of a 4.3 
m wide Plate Mill at RSP and Universal Rail Mill for production of Head hardened rails 
& special heavy rails for high speed tracks at BSP. 
 
At BSL, a new Cold Rolling mill comprising Pickling line, Tandem Mill, Hot Dip 
Galvanising Line, Electrolytic cleaning line, skin pass mill, coil packaging line, etc. is 
being installed which will improve the quality of the Cold Rolled products. 
 
SAIL and RINL formulate their individual action plans for producing diversified 
products keeping in view projected demand and market feedback.  The current 
expansion and modernization plans under implementation provides an opportunity to 
the Plants to revamp their pr oduct mix and cater to specialized products by 
incorporating such shop facilities. 
 
 

27 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
Though RINL was basically designed to produce mild steel grades, innovative 
in-house process improvements in the manufacturing proces ses have enabled RINL -
VSP to continuously develop value added products and is currently producing more 
than 70% of it’s saleable steel as value added steel. 
 
This includes development and production of special grades like High Carbon 
Steel, EN8D, A105, EN9 , SAE1049, EN8, CK45, 35C8 etc., (around 5 lakh tonnes in 
2009-10) to cater to the manufacturing segment including auto sector. RINL’s special 
steels serves several niche engineering sectors viz grade 27C15 used for Anchor 
chain link in the shipping indust ry, CHQ 1010 & CHQ 1018 in Auto sector, C20 MMn 
for elements of Transmission towers and SAE 1524S in Axles and spindles etc.  
 
In the current expansion, for production of very high grades of steel, RINL -
VSP has gone for adoption of state-of-the-art technology which will help in producing 
various grades of special steel which are not manufactured by secondary steel 
producers viz high carbon steel, case hardening steel, cold heading quality steel, 
electrode quality steel, spring steel, bearing steel, free cut ting steel, micro alloy 
steel, alloy steel, boron steel etc. These steels find application in automobile, 
infrastructure, machinery / equipment manufacturing, forging industry, pumps, 
turbines, wind power, oil and gas pipelines, railways, defence etc. 
 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
 The Committee observe that for long term security in supply of metallurgical 
coking coal, SAIL should have acquired coal mines abroad. The Committee are, 
however, distressed to note that so far SAIL has not acquired any oversea coal 
mines. As a matter of fact, SAIL alongwith CIL, RINL and NTPC had formed a joint 
venture company viz. International Coal Ventures Private Ltd. (ICVL) in May, 2009 
for acquisition of  oversea coal mines. However, ICVL is yet to identify a potential 
country for acquisition of coal mines. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to play a 
proactive role for expeditious acquisition of overseas mines for its three PSUs viz. 
SAIL, RINL and NDMC who are the promoters of ICVL.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
ICVL is active and is bidding for the properties in USA, Indonesia, South 
Africa, Australia and Russia. Acquisition of mineral properties abroad is a long term 
process. Not only very few properties are available for JVs/acquisition etc, but there 
are already well established international companies in the field, who almost have a 
monopoly in the business. Moreover, a very high degree of diligence/research is 
required before bidding for any property to ensure that the resources/efforts put on 
acquisition are not wasted.  
 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 

28 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
 
 The Committee note that the annual outlay of RINL was r educed to Rs. 
2224.48 crore at RE stage against that of Rs. 2437 crore of BE 2009. Although, the 
Ministry have admitted that Revised Estimates would not be utilized, the allocation 
has been subsequently increased to Rs. 4049 crore at BE 2010 -11. The Commit tee 
strongly urge upon the Ministry to ensure that all procedural steps are taken well in 
time so that steep increase in budget estimate of 2010-11 would be fully utilised.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
The Budget estimates for 2010 -11 amounts to Rs.4049 Crores, which is 
higher by about Rs.1825 Cores, w.r.t revised estimates of 2009 -10.  Out of this 
Rs.2800 Cores was allocated to expansion, which is higher by Rs.1000 cores 
compared to 2009 -10 budget allocation. This is because, most of RINL’s Stage – I 
units under expansion are expected to be commissioned this year. Remaining 
allocation of Rs.1249 Cores is towards other ongoing modernization and auxiliary 
units like ASP, Oxygen Plant, TG -5 and 330TPH Boiler etc, which will commensurat e 
with the expansion scheme. Besides, VSP is also undertaking other major capital 
repairs in BF and SMS. All necessary steps required for achieving the targeted 
expansion milestones and other schemes have been taken and it is therefore 
expected that the Budget Estimates of 2010-11, would be gainfully utilized.  
 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
 
 The Committee regret to point out that the RINL has not been successful so 
far in acquiring capt ive mines of core raw materials viz. iron ore and coking coal. 
Further, two coal blocks viz. Mahal and Tenughat Jhirki allotted by Coal India Limited 
are not likely to be developed due to operational reasons. The performance of the 
company has been adverse ly affected on this account. Non -availability of iron ore 
and coking coal mines has been a major constraint for RINL and the Committee have 
been recommending repeatedly to the Ministry to facilitate them in this regard. The 
Ministry ought to take urgent me asures to help RINL in acquiring captive mines to 
ensure increased production of steel.  
 
Action Taken 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
a)  Iron Ore: 
 
Allocation of Mines : RINL -VSP has been continuously taking up the matter of 
allocation of mines wit h respective State Govt., Central Govt. since 2003 for 
allotment of Mines on priority bassis. Details of Mining lease applications filed by 
RINL in the status of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh & Rajasthan and their 
present status is as given in the Annexure-I.  
 

29 
 
VSP also approached the State Mineral Development Corporations (SMDC) of 
the States of Orissa, Karnataka & Jharkhand for allocation of suitable iron ore blocks 
and also expressed it’s interest for setting up of JVs for projects involving value  
addition in the State.  
 
In connection with the above, RINL and MoS both have taken up with Chief 
Secretary & Chief Development Commissioner, Govt. of Orissa, Chief Secretary, 
Govt. of Karnataka & Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand, at various instances,  
requesting for allocation of suitable iron ore blocks to RINL -VSP along with SMDC as 
a Joint Sector project for mine development and further value addition. 
 
Help of NMDC would be needed to ensure supply of adequate iron ore slurry 
for the pelletisation plant. 
 
A proposal for restructuring of BIRD group of companies, making it a 
subsidiary of RINL has already been approved by Government. Formalities for 
transfer of 51% stake in M/s EIL, the holding company of OMDC & BSLC to RINL are 
in the advanced stage o f completion.  This would give RINL access to around 200 Mt 
of Iron ore reserves.  
 
b) Coal: 
 
i) The Ministry of Steel has communicated to the Ministry of Coal indicating that 
due to various constraints, economical mining is not possible in the allocated b locks 
i.e. Mahal & Tenughat -Jhirki. Hence it has been proposed to hand over these blocks 
back to the Ministry of Coal and to allocate an open cast Coking Coal block to RINL. 
 
ii) RINL have also joined ICVL for the purpose of acquisition of coal mining 
assets abroad.  International Coal Ventures Ltd (ICVL) was formed with equity 
participation by NMDC, CIL, NTPC, SAIL & RINL to acquire metallurgical and thermal 
coal assets overseas and was incorporated on 20.05.09. ICVL is considering several 
proposals to acquire coal assets abroad.  
 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
 
 The Committee find that an amount of Rs. 700 cro re at BE 2009-10 in respect 
of NMDC was downsized at RE stage to Rs. 543 crore. According to the Ministry, the 
amount provided for development of Bailadila Deposit 11 B projects could not be 
utilized due to delay in procurement of Heavy Engineering Machine s (HEM) 
equipments. Further, there has been inordinate delay in tendering process of 
Integrated Steel Plant (ISP) at Nagarnar. The reasons cited by the Ministry/NMDC 
were not unforeseen and timely action was not taken to plug the loop -holes. The 
Committee desire that necessary corrective measures may now be taken so that 
fund earmarked for 2010-11 is fully utilised. 
 

30 
 
Action Taken 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
Against the RE of Rs. 543 Crore in respect of NMDC in 2009 -10, actual 
expenditure has been Rs. 378.90 Crores.  The  less expenditure was mainly on 
Bailadila Deposit 11-B project, Kumarswamy iron ore mine and acquisition of SIIL. 
 
As regards the tendering for the Integrated Steel Plant, applications for the 
Expression of Interest for 7 major technological packages were scrutinized and short 
listed.  Tender enquiries for 5 of these packages on turnkey basis were issued to the 
short listed parties.  In addition, Open Tender Enquiries for the enabling works like 
Site leveling, Construction water, Construction power, In -plant road network etc 
have also been floated. 
 
Forest land clearance for the 25.72 Hectares of Forest land (falling within the 
land under acquisition) is expected in the 2 nd quarter of 2010 -11 and thereafter, 
construction at site will commence. 
 
  NMDC has conveyed that they are making their best efforts to fully utilize the 
fund earmarked for 2010-11. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
 
 The Committee note that NMDC had signed an MoU with Rio Ti nto in August, 
2008 for acquiring and developing mines in India and abroad. In this connection, 
only so far some projects in India and abroad have been identified and not even a 
single mine has been acquired. The Committee deprecate the casual approach 
adopted by the Ministry which has resulted in inordinate delay in acquiring the 
requisite mines. The Committee desire for NMDC to retain its important entity as a 
global mining giant, it ought to move speedily to acquire as many mines as it can in 
India and abroad. 
 
Action Taken 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
NMDC & Rio Tinto signed a MOU on 18 th August, 2008 to co -operate in 
investigating mutually advantageous potential investment opportunities primarily for 
iron ore and other commodities both in India and globally. The work ing group 
identified some resources to pursue further.  However, Rio Tinto failed to submit 
their proposal saying that the JV proposals in India to jointly follow the RP 
application in Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh are pending at their higher management, 
whereas NMDC did not find any suitable property tabled to it for acquisition 
overseas. Effective 5 th June, 2008, when Rio Tinto signed non -binding agreement 
with BHP Billition, Rio Tinto narrowed down their activities in India and concentrated 
to establish a production joint venture to develop Western Australian iron ore assets. 
  

31 
 
NMDC is making all out efforts for acquisition of mineral assets abroad. It had 
signed MOU with Kopano of South Africa to explore possibilities jointly in South Africa 
and share holders agreement is being finalized.  
  
Further, a MOU has been signed with Arcelor Mittal to jointly develop the 
Falame Deposit in Senegal.  Opportunities across geographies are being evaluated 
for participation and acquisition.  
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
   
 The Committee observe that the amount of Rs. 85 crore earmarked at BE 
2009-10 has been drastically reduced to Rs. 10 crore at RE and the expenditure 
incurred upto January, 2010 is m erely Rs. 1.85 crore. The Committee regret to 
observe that some of the schemes of KIOCL viz. development of permanent Railway 
Sliding at Mangalore, construction of Bulk Material Handling facility for receipt of iron 
ore by rail, Ductile Iron Spun Pipe, eco -Tourism development at Kudremukh are 
hanging fire for quite some time for want of completion of various procedural 
formalities and statuary clearances. KOICL has been facing serious crisis ever since 
the Supreme Court imposed complete ban on mining operat ions at Kudremukh and 
has been struggling hard to sustain itself. The Committee feel that Ministry should 
take proactive steps to overcome difficulties/ constrains as well as to ensure that 
whatever funds made available are timely and fully utilized.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 The observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted by the 
Ministry for compliance.  KIOCL is taking proactive steps to overcome difficulties/ 
constrains as well as to ensure that whatever funds made available are timely and 
fully utilized. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that due to limited production of 
indigenous coking coal, domestic steel industry has to resort to imported co king coal 
to fulfill its requirement. The Committee find that 11 coking coal blocks and 56 non -
coking coal have been allotted to different steel companies for captive use. They also 
note with satisfaction that government is encouraging the formation of joi nt ventures 
between steel companies to acquire coking coal blocks abroad. The Committee desire 
that work on war footing may be initiated for development of the coking coal blocks 
and non-coking coal blocks allotted to steel PSUs so that these companies can  reap 
the benefit of having their own captive coal mines. The Committee find that Indian 
steel Industry do not have adequate sintering and Pelletisation facility as a result of 
which iron ore fines are exported. The Committee feel that steel PSUs should se t up 
sintering and pelletisation facilities which would help to promote value addition of 
iron ore in the country. Further, the Finance Ministry may be persuaded to provide 
fiscal incentives for setting up beneficiation and pelletisation plants in the coun try to 
make best use of iron ore fines. 

32 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
a)  Coking Coal : 
 
In order to reduce dependence on purchased coking coal, SAIL has been 
allocated two coking coal blocks at Tasra and Sitanala. All efforts are being 
made for early start of production from these blocks. Status of their 
development is given below : 
 
i) Tasra Coking Coal Block:  
 
All statutory clearances have been obtained. Planned mine capacity is 4 
MTPA (ROM) to produce about 2 MTPA of clean coal . Selection of Mine 
Developer cum Operator (MDO) is in progress.  Through tendering 
process, L -1 bidder has been identified and work order is to be issued 
shortly. In the meantime, small scale production has been started from 
November’2009. 
 
ii) Sitanala Coking Coal Block:  
 
Mine planned for production of 0.3 MTPA (ROM) to produce about 0.2 
MTPA clean coal. Project report has been prepared, mine plan approved 
and grant of environment clearance is in advance stage. Selection of Mine 
Developer cum Operator (MDO) is also in progress. 
 
In order to further augment captive coking coal production, SAIL has 
identified two potential coking coal blocks namely, Jhirki/ Jhirki West OC & 
Rhone-Routpara West in Jharkhand and requested Ministry of Steel & 
Ministry of Coal for allocation of the blocks. Coal blocks are yet to be 
allocated to SAIL. Hon’ble Minister of Steel has also requested Hon’ble 
Minister of State for Coal in February’2010 to allocate these coking coal 
blocks to SAIL through Govt. dispensation route. 
 
 
b) Allocation of thermal coal blocks for captive use 
 
Presently, major requirement of thermal coal is being met by supplies from 
Coal India Limited. In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability, 
SAIL has identified six thermal coal blocks namely T entuloi, Ghogharpalli & 
Extension, Bankhui, Gand Bahera Ujheni, Puta Parogia & Pindrakhi and 
requested Ministry of Steel & Ministry of Coal for allocation of at least 2 -3 
blocks. Hon’ble Minister of Steel has also requested Hon’ble Minister of State 
for Co al in February’2010 to allocate these thermal coal blocks to SAIL 
through Govt. dispensation route. 
 
c) Sintering & Pelletisation 
 
SAIL already has sintering facility having around 21 million tons per annum 
capacity. As part of expansion plan being impleme nted by SAIL, sinter 
capacity is also being augmented to the level of around 29 million tons per 
annum. 

33 
 
 
In order to ensure gainful utilization of low grade iron ore fines and slimes 
from tailing ponds, SAIL has planned to install pelletisation plants. In this 
regard, DPR for setting up a 4 mtpa pellet plant at Gua has been prepared 
and tender has been floated for installation of pellet plant. Last date for 
submission of bid is 22.7.2010. 
 
DPR for second Pellet plant is also being prepared. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL-VSP has already two Sinter Machines in the existing plant to produce 
about 5.3 Mt of sinter using iron ore fines.  New Sinter Plant (SP#3) with capacity of 
3.25Mt is getting added in the current expansion programme and is schedu led for 
commissioning in 2010-11. This will further enhance the usage of iron ore fines. 
 
To improve usage of lower grade of iron ore fines through beneficiation, RINL 
has also proposed to set up a Pelletisation plant of capacity of around 5 mtpa in 
Visakhapatnam.  It is envisaged that the feed to the pelletisation plant will be 
through a slurry pipeline to carry iron ore slurry from Bailadilla mines to 
Visakhapatnam. This ensures secured transportation of iron fines to VSP from 
Bailadilla mines and also further value addition in the form of pellets.  
 
Bird Group of Companies (Government Managed Company) 
 
OMDC has already invited expression of interest through paper publication for 
setting up a 2 MTPA Beneficiation and Pelletisation Plant and the matter is u nder 
active consideration. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
Ministry of Steel has been recommending to Ministry of Finance for fiscal 
incentives for setting up beneficiation and pelletisation plants in the country. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that SAIL is having only 5 valid leases 
of iron ore, the remaining 20 leases are either disputed o r under deemed extension. 
The Committee are informed that an out of court settlement is likely to resolve 
dispute with Government of Jharkhand in case of two leases i.e. Chiria and Gua. The 
Committee observe that many proposals of SAIL and NMDC relating to  iron ore 
mining leases are pending with Government of Jharkhand, Orissa and Ministry of 
Environment forest for want of environment and forest clearances. The Committee 
desire that mining leases awaiting mandatory statutory clearances such as forest 
clearances and environment clearances may be accorded top priority by taking the 
matter with the concerned State Government at the highest level. They also 

34 
 
recommend that a special cell may be created in the Ministry which would address 
the objections/concerns o f the State Government and Ministry of Environment and 
Forest. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
a) Out of 26 iron ore mining leases in the states of Jharkhand, Orissa and 
Chhattisgarh, only 5 leases are valid. This includes grant of Mining Lease at 
Rowghat in Chhattisgarh in October’2009. Status of leases is shown below : 
 
Details Orissa Jharkhand Chhattisgarh Total 
No. of leases 07 13 06 26 
Valid NIL NIL 05 05 
Under deemed 
extension 06 05 01 12 
In-Principle approval by 
State Govt. NIL 04 NIL 04 
Under dispute 01 04 NIL 05 
 
SAIL possesses 10 mining leases in the Chiria -gua belt of Jharkhand, six 
leases (Ajitaburu, Sukri -Latur, Tatiburu, Budhaburu (Mclellan), Dhobil and 
Ankua) are in Chiria and the balance four leases (Dugaiburu, J hillingburu_I, 
Jhillingburu-II and Topailore) are in Gua. 
 
 
For early renewal of leases particularly in Jharkhand and Orissa, continuous 
effort is being made by SAIL and Ministry of Steel. In connection with renewal 
of leases for Chiria & Gua, on request o f Ministry of Steel, a meeting was held 
by Secretary (Mines), GoI on 5 -10-2009 which was also attended by Chief 
Secretary, Government of Jharkhand, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Steel, 
Controller General IBM, Director General, GSI and Chairman SAIL  As decided 
in the meeting, SAIL vide letter dated 19.10.09, requested Chief Secretary, 
Government of Jharkhand to renew mining leases of Chiria and Gua mine of 1 
billion tonne immediately  and to initiate dialogue for renewal of the balance 
leases to meet the proje cted requirement for 50 years. After the long 
persuasion, the State Government of Jharkhand conveyed its in -principle 
approval on renewal for the Budhaburu lease (823.62 ha) of Chiria iron mine 
on 23.10.09. SAIL vide letter dated 18.11.09 has further requested Jharkhand 
Govt. to renew leases corresponding to 1000 million tonnes keeping all four 
leases of Gua & Ajitaburu of Chiria in the present form and redefining 
Budhaburu lease. Secretary (Steel), GoI has also held meeting with Chief 
Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand on 17-2-2010 on the issue of renewal of mining 
leases including Chiria. 
 
b) With regard to grant of Environment clearance and Forestry clearance, matter 
is continuously being followed up with respective State Govt. and Ministry of 
Environment & Fo rest (MoEF), GoI. This has enable us to obtain Stage -1 

35 
 
Forestry clearance/ Temporary Working permission for Barsua-Kalta, Kiriburu-
Meghahatuburu and Bolani iron ore mines which were due for renewal.   
 
Status of Forest & Environment clearances for iron ore  mines of SAIL is as 
given in the Annexure-II. 
 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 1.19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
 
 The Committee regret to note that although profit making steel PSUs earmark 
2% of their distributable surplus (5% in the case of NMDC) for Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) activities, the allocation under CSR is not being properly 
utilised. The expenditure trend of 2008 -09 and 2009-10 in respect of CSR activities 
of SAIL, RINL and NMDC indicate that these companies have failed to utilise the 
allocated budget on CSR activities. For example in 2008 -09, SAIL had made 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 114 crore, out of which they could ut ilize only Rs. 85.3 
crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that steel PSUs should make sincere 
effort to fully utilize the allocated budget on CSR activities. Further, all the profit 
making PSUs should explore the possibility of enhancing their distrib utable surplus 
for CSR activities from existing 2% to 5%.  The Committee also desire that people’s 
representatives of the concerned area should be associated in identifying the areas 
where the fund meant for CSR activities are to be utilised. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) 
 
SAIL is implementing various schemes in the periphery of steel plants under 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) to improve the Quality of life of the 
local population, with a strong focus on the weaker and vulne rable section of 
the society. 
 
CSR budget is allocated on financial year basis and expenditure is incurred on 
various activities under CSR. In 2008 -09, the allocation was to the tune of 
Rs.117 crore and expenditure made during the year was Rs.83.04 crore.  
However, during 2007 -08, the allocation made was Rs.100 crore but the 
expenditure was Rs.119.61 crore.  Thus, SAIL has made higher expenditure 
than the allocation during 2007 -08, which reflects the commitment to CSR 
cause. 
 
Further, it may be mentioned he re that over and above the utilization of 
allocated CSR funds, SAIL has incurred an expenditure of Rs.163 crore, 
Rs.324 crore and Rs.171 crore during the financial years 2007 -08, 2008-09 
and 2009-10 (April-Dec’2009) respectively, on non-SAIL / non-entitled people 
on account of various on -going schemes pertaining to the areas of Health, 
Education, Township, etc. 

36 
 
 
Therefore, it is pertinent to mention that under these various schemes, a 
number of people living in and around plant townships are being benefited  
directly and indirectly. 
 
Against the budgeted allocation of ` 94 crores for 2010 -11, upto quarter -1 
(April-June, 2010) ` 11 crores has been spent by SAIL on CSR activities. 
 
The system of association of people’s representatives of the concerned area in 
the CSR activities already exists in SAIL Plants. The panchayats of local 
villages, various social organizations, MLAs, MPs and District authorities also 
forward their requirements through various modes (either through meetings 
with Plant Officials or throu gh request memos or through representations).  
The requirements forwarded by them are also considered and after following 
an established system, the job is executed. 
 
The SAIL Board has taken a decision that 2% of budgeted distributable 
surplus of the proj ected profit of financial year is to be allocated for CSR 
activities including Community Development.  In addition, SAIL is also 
incurring huge expenditures on non -SAIL/non-entitled people on account of 
various on -going schemes pertaining to the areas of H ealth, Education, 
Township etc. as mentioned above. This expenditure is over and above the 
2% allocated budget.  
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
 
RINL-VSP has been discharging its duties as a responsible corporate citizen 
since inception. Through it’ s efforts towards Corporate Social Responsibility, 
RINL-VSP has created employment and entrepreneurial opportunities for 
several thousands of people in and around Visakhapatnam. The focus of CSR 
at RINL is on sustained development and inclusive growth of t he surrounding 
Community and some of the major thrust areas include Peripheral 
Development, Education, Medical & Health, People care, Sports & Cultural 
Efflorescence and Help during Natural calamities. 
 
An amount of around Rs. 46 Crores has been spent towa rds CSR activities 
during the last three years. At RINL it is planned that the allocations to CSR 
are spent in totality.  The budget allocated and committed in a particular year 
is carried forward as the projects taken up under CSR may be completed in 
subsequent years, thereby ensuring that the amount allocated and committed 
is fully spent only on CSR activities. 
 
While selecting the CSR activities, the requests of Peoples’ Representatives, 
Government Authorities etc., are considered on priority basis. CSR Committee 
consists of Representatives from Management & Unions. 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
The CSR Budget of NMDC for the year 2009 -10 was Rs. 80 Crores.  This 
budget was fully utilized.  The actual expenditure was Rs. 83.07 Crores. 
 

37 
 
Due to the high value and long ter m CSR programme of social engineering 
nature being initiated, the gestation period from evaluation to execution is 
usually long. 
 
The constraints being faced by NMDC due to resistance from Maoists etc. 
have already been explained (ref. page 32 of the repor t).  The cumulative 
carry forward funds i.e. funds budgeted but not committed since 2006 -07 till 
2008-09 were Rs. 51.53 Crores.  During the year 2009 -10, NMDC has 
committed all the carry forwarded funds.  Infact, a total commitment of Rs. 
226.58 Crores was  made during the year 2009 -10 which is in excess of the 
carried forward funds and the budgeted amount for the year. 
 
NMDC has also informed that discussions are held with Sarpanchs’ and other 
village representatives of the surrounding villages for short -listing of the 
requirements based on priority. The consolidated list is sent to District 
Authorities seeking permission to take up the identified works in these 
villages.  Normally, the process takes place once in a year.  However, the 
specific needs that cr op up in between are also taken care of. The requests 
made by the District/State Authorities for developmental activities in line with 
the CSR Policy of the NMDC in the surrounding areas of NMDC Projects are 
also funded by NMDC directly to the respective authorities. 
 
Manganese Ore (India) Limited (MOIL) 
 
For the year 2010-11, MOU Target on CSR expenditure in respect of MOIL has 
been fixed at Rs.5.42 crores and the company is making all efforts to utilize 
the amount under CSR as per MOU Target.  As advised by the Committee, 
MOIL is associating people’s representatives from mines areas, in identifying 
the activities for utilizing the funds meant for CSR activities. 
 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

39 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

40 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that the production of iron ore 
is much more than the domestic consumption as a result of which more than half the 
production of iron ore is exported. The Committee are concerned to note that reserve 
of the iron ore may last till 2021-22. With a view to conserving iron ore for long term 
use of domestic steel industry and also to ensure its availability to them at a 
affordable/reasonable price, the Government must explore the possibility of 
restricting the export of iron ore. For this, the Ministry of Steel should take up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance so as to impress  upon them to levy suitable ad -
valorem duty on iron ores. 
  
Action Taken 
 
NMDC Limited 
 
Ministry of Steel has taken up the matter of imposition of levying an 
appropriate duty on export of iron ore as well as other measures to effectively 
discourage the exp ort of iron ore with Ministry of Finance as well as Ministry 
of Commerce at the highest level. 
 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.H-11014(3)/2010-Parl. dated 15/09/2010] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                       KALYAN BANERJEE 
   August, 2011                                                                             Chairman 
   Sravana, 1933 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 

41 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
Status of  Mining Lease Applications for Iron Ore applied by RINL-VSP 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
S 
No 
Lease 
Name 
Type of 
Ore 
Area        
(Ha) 
Reserve of Ore in 
the Mining Lease                           
(in Million 
Tonnes) 
Background/ 
History of the 
Mining Lease 
Present Status  (where the 
proposal is pending for what and 
since when, date) 
I ORISSA      
1 Mankarnach
a and 
Badamgarh 
Pahar in 
Sundargarh 
District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
939.14 71.00 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 19.11.2003 vide 
application 8No.1387 
Govt. of Orissa informed vide Lr.No. 
III(B)SM 5/05/18638/SM, dt.30.12.06 
that the matter is under process for 
Disposal due to (1) RINL does not 
have any proposal for value addition 
in that state (2) the area is located 
inside dense forest & (3) the area is 
earmarked for earlier applicants i.e, 
TISCO and L&T. (*) 
2 Khajurdihi 
RF, Koida 
Block in 
Sundargarh 
District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
569.56 150.00 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 19.11.2003 vide  
application No.1386 
Govt. of Orissa informed vide Lr.No. 
III(B)SM 5/05/18640/SM, dt.30.12.06 
that the matter is under process for 
Disposal due to (1) RINL does not 
have any proposal for value addition 
in that state, (2) the area is located 
inside dense forest & (3) the area is 
earmarked for earlier applicants i.e, 
TISCO and L&T. (*) 
3 Khajurdihi 
RF, Jaldihi 
and 
Tantigram in 
Sundargarh 
District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
1246.0
9 
120.00 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 13.01.2004 vide  
application No.1419 
The application has been rejected 
by the Govt. of Orissa vide 
proceeding No.III(AB)SM 
44/06/11189/SM, Dated 27.07.2006 
as (1) the area falls under Forest 
land, (2) the area overlaps with prior 
mineral concession applications, (3) 
RINL does not have any proposal for 
value addition in that state. (*) 
4 Kadakala, 
Marsuan, 
Tiriba  and 
Rakam 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
1300.9
3 
120.00 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 16.01.2004 vide 
application No.1025 
The application has been rejected 
by the Govt. of Orissa vide 
proceeding No.III(A)SM 
34/05/7073/SM, Dated 02.05.2006 
as (1)  the area overlaps with prior 
mineral concession applications, (2) 
RINL does not have any proposal for 
value addition in that state. (*) 
5 Khajurdihi 
RF, Kensara 
and 
Batagaon in 
Keonjhar 
District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
360.15 50.00 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 06.08/2004 vide 
application No.1555. 
The application has been rejected 
by the Govt. of Orissa vide 
proceeding No.III(AB)SM 
29/06/5951/SM, Dated 10.04.2006 
as (1) the area falls under Forest 
land, (2) the area overlaps with prior 
mineral concession applications, (3) 
RINL does not have any proposal for 
for establishment of steel plant in 
that state. (*) 
* Taken up with Chief Secretary, Govt. of Orissa vide Lr.No. CMD/08-09-67, dt. 25.02.2009 by CMD/RINL and D.O.No. 6(5)/2009-
VSP, dt. 16.04.2009 by Secretary, Ministry of Steel/GoI, with a proposal to have JV with Orissa State Govt. for setting up value 
addition projects like Benificiation Plant, Pellet Plant, Steel plant etc 

42 
 
Status of  Mining Lease Applications for Iron Ore applied by RINL-VSP 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
S 
No 
Lease Name Type of Ore Area        
(Ha) 
Reserve of 
Ore in the 
Mining Lease                           
(in Million 
Tonnes) 
Background/ History 
of the Mining Lease 
Present Status  (where the proposal 
is pending for what and since when, 
date) 
II CHHATTISGARH  
6 Raoghat, 
Narayanpur 
Division,Bastar 
District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
3975.00 255.00 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 09.12.2003 vide  
application No.8 
The application has been rejected by 
the Govt. of Chhattisgarh vide Order 
No.2-10/2007/12 (3), Dated 
31.01.2007 since exploration was not 
conducted by Govt. Agencies / Non -
Govt. Agencies. 
7 Bailadilla, 
Dantewada District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
631.34 327.24 Mining Lease 
application was filed 
on 23.09.2005 vide  
application No.21 
The application has been rejected by 
the Govt. of Chhati sgarh vide Order 
No.F.3-84/96/12, Dated 10.11.2006 
since it was prematured. A Lr. 
addressed to the Secretary, Mineral 
Resource Dept, Govt. of Chhattisgarh, 
Raipur vide Lr.No. Mines/H/IOM/2 -
06/07/2211, dt. 20.08.07 for revoking 
Rejection Order and considera tion for 
allocation. 
III ANDHRA PRADESH 
8 Konijedu, 
Marlapadu, 
Sarvareddy palem 
and Errajerla 
villages in 
Tanguturu and 
Ongole Mandal of 
Prakasam District. 
Iron Ore 
(Magnetite) 
1307.27 52.00 A Mining Lease 
application was filed on  
23.05.2004 vide  
application No.1416 
Govt. of A P rejected the said 
application vide .Memo No.3510/M -
II(2)/2007-2, Dated 02.02.2009 as it 
was granted to earlier applicant ie., 
M/s APMDC.   
9 Vemparala village, 
Addanki Mandal, 
Prakasam District. 
Iron Ore 
(Magnetite) 
77.00 5.00 A Mining Lease 
application was filed on  
20.06.2005 vide  
application No.1733 
Govt. of A P rejected the said 
application vide .Memo No.3505/M -
II(2)/2007-2, Dated 02.02.2009 as it 
was granted to earlier applicant ie., 
M/s APMDC.   
10 Raidurg Section of 
Obulapuram 
village in 
Ananthapur 
District. 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite) 
304.19 To be  
prospected  
Prospecting License 
has been filed vide 
application 
No.4844/PL/06 Dated 
30th October, 2006. 
Prospecting License application is 
pending in the office of Secretary, 
Industries & Commerce Department, 
Govt. of A P, Secretariat, Hyderabad. 
The issue is in High Court as M/s VM 
Minerals, Bellary have filed a WP in 
High Court against Govt. of AP, DMG, 
APMDC and RINL. 
IV Rajahstan           
11 Village Pur-
Benera, Tahasil 
Bhilwada, Dist 
Bhilwara 
Iron Ore 2303.8 522 A Mining Lease 
application was filed on 
02.09.2009 by CSM 
Department 
The proposal is pending for allotment 
with Govt. of Rajasthan. 
12 25 Villages in 
Banera & Bhilwara 
Tahasils of  
Bhilwara  
Iron Ore  2948.5 700 A Mini ng Lease 
application was filed on 
29.01.2010 by Mines 
Department 
The proposal is pending for allotment 
with Govt. of Rajasthan. 
13 25 Villages in 
Banera & Bhilwara 
Tahasils of  
Bhilwara  
Iron Ore  2948.5 700 A Mining Lease 
application was filed on 
28.04.2010 by Mines 
Department 
The proposal is pending for allotment 
with Govt. of Rajasthan. 

43 
 
ANNEXURE- III 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL (2010-11) HELD ON 05.08.2011 IN COMMITTEE ROOM B, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee- Chairman 
 
      MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4. Shri Ismail Hussain 
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
6. Shri Govind Prasad Mishra 
7. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
   
   
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Kishore Kumar Mohanty 
10. Shri Nand Kumar Sai 
11. Shri R.C. Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Singh    - Director 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports:- 
(i) **   **   **   ** 
 
 (ii) **   **   **   ** 
 
(iii)  Action Taken  Report on observations/recommendations contained in the 6 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Steel. 

44 
 
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft reports without any changes/modifications  
and authorized the Chairman to present these Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
**Do not pertain to this Report. 

45 
 
 ANNEXURE- IV 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made        18 
   
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
(vide recommendation at S1. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13, 
14,16,17 and 18)          17 
                 
Percentage of total             94.44% 
              
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies                00 
          
Percentage of total        Nil 
          
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee             00 
     
Percentage of total        Nil 
            
      
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited          
(vide recommendation at S1. No. 15)     01 
    
Percentage of total             5.55% 
            

46 
 
  
 