STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
“COAL PRICING AND ISSUES RELATING
TO THE COAL ROYALTY”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in
the Forty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
10


TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COAL
“COAL PRICING AND ISSUES RELATING TO
THE COAL ROYALTY”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations
contained in the Forty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.04.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.04.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

CC&S No. 96
Price : Rs. 55.00
© 2015 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) ........................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 16
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 33
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 36
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 39
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 22.04.2015 .............. 46
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Ninth
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ..................................................... 48

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2014-15)
Shri Rakesh Singh* — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Shailesh Kumar
7. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
8. Shri Godam Nagesh
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
(iii)
* Shri Rakesh Singh appointed w.e.f. 27.11.2014 vice Shri Hansraj G. Ahir has been appointed
Minister.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
@24. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
25. Shri B.K Hariprasad
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Avinash Pande
# 28. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
@ Shri Md. Nadimul Haque nominated w.e.f. 08.01.2015 vice Shri Srinjoy Bose.
# Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Basawaraj Patil.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in
the Forty-ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Coal Pricing and Issues Relating to the Royalty”.
2. The Forty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 6th February,
2014. Replies of the Government to all the observations/recommendations
contained in the Report were received on November, 2014.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 22.4.2015.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Ninth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
23 April, 2015 Chairperson,
03 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals
with Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-ninth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on “Coal Pricing
and Issues Relating to Coal Royalty” of the Ministry of Coal which was
presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 6.02.2014.
2. The Report contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Coal in respect
of all the 18 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on
2nd December, 2014. These have been categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12 and 18
Total : 09
(Chapter - II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 3 and 10
Total : 02
(Chapter - III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 2 and 5
Total : 02
(Chapter - IV)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17
Total : 05
(Chapter - V)
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be
given to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations
accepted by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for
the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the
Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee
desire that further Action Taken notes on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished
to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Ministry on some of their observations/recommendations made in the
Forty-ninth Report.
FUTURE INVESTMENT COSTS AS A FACTOR FOR DETERMINING
COAL PRICE
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
5. The Committee had noted that the requirement of funds for
additional resource mobilization for fresh investments in new coal
projects and modernization of existing mines for augmentation
of production to achieve planned production target, is also added as
a factor for determining the coal prices by the Coal PSUs. The
Committee were not convinced with the argument put forward by
the Government/CIL that investment in the new projects is one of
the factors in coal price fixation. The Committee failed to understand
as to how CIL and its subsidiaries can add estimated cost of a future
project which has not yet started and may take years together to complete
in fixing coal prices which ultimately put extra burden on consumers.
The Committee felt that considering investments in future projects as
one of the factors for determining coal price is against the sound
principles of logic and economics. The Committee, therefore, had
strongly recommended that such cost estimations for new projects be
kept out for fixation of coal price so as to secure the interest of common
consumers.

3
6. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“ As per guidelines of Government of India, Internal Rate of Return
( IRR) of minimum 12% is required to be ensured for opening up
a new mine. In practice, some mines, specially UG mines, are being
operated despite incurring losses. It is necessary for CIL that coal
prices are set at a level at which the financial viability of new coal
projects and CIL is ensured as per the Government guidelines.
Further, modernization of existing mines for augmentation of
production to achieve planned production involves additional
investment for which surpluses generated from profit is utilized.”
7. While observing that the cost of investment in new projects
was one of the factors taken into account for coal price fixation by coal
PSUs, the Committee had recommended that such cost estimation for
new projects be kept out for fixation of coal price to secure the interest
of the common consumers. The Ministry in their Action Taken note
have informed the Committee that as per Government guidelines, it
is necessary for CIL to set coal prices at a level where financial viability
of new coal projects are ensured. It has further been stated that
modernization of existing mines for augmentation of production to
achieve planned production involves additional investment for which
surplus generation from profit is utilized. The Committee, however,
find the reply silent on any kind of formula/methodology which in
followed is determining the price component which is used for ensuing
financial viability of new coal projects. In the absence of such
information, the Committee find the justification put forth by the
Ministry far from convincing and therefore reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire that the Ministry should review the present
methodology of Coal Pricing by addition of cost estimate of future
investment in coal projects to coal prices, unnecessarily increasing the
burden to coal consumers. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken in the matter.
COAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
8. The Committee had observed that in a de-regulated regime of
coal prices, the coal companies are free to revise the rates at will without
having any consultation with different stakeholders, particularly , the

4
consumers. The latest revision in coal rates by Coal India Limited is
bound to impact steel and cement industries which have been put under
non-regulated sector. Steel companies which use sponge iron as raw
material are also likely to be affected as 30% increase in non-coking coal
price will adversely affect the profitability of sponge iron producers.
Since the Government has no control over coal price, the need for having
a regulatory mechanism for coal sector has been felt since long. The
Committee observed that the Planning Commission had also
recommended creation of an independent coal regulatory authority which
would have power to comprehensively handle coal resource development,
regulation on extraction, end use, etc. including pricing and mine safety
issues. In any event Central Government must constitute one coal pricing
Regulatory Committee consisting of representatives of Coal companies,
Central Government, each State which produces coal, representatives of
customer, power generation and an expert. The expert should head the
Committee. The Committee were apprised that creation of a permanent
Coal Regulator Authority had been approved by the Cabinet and a Bill
would be introduced soon in Parliament in this regard to give it a statutory
status. The Committee had desired the Ministry of Coal to bring in the
much needed coal regulator for coal sector or at least coal pricing
regulatory Committee expeditiously in the interest of all stakeholders.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry within three months.
9. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
follows:—
“Various committees like the Energy Coordination Committee, the
Sankar Committee, Working Group on Coal for XI Plan
recommended for setting up of an independent regulatory authority
for coal sector. Based on these recommendations and after due
consultations with all concerned Ministries/Departments, the draft
Bill was approved by the Cabinet on 27.06.2013. The same has been
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 13.12.2013.
Major functions envisaged for the proposed Coal Regulatory
Authority are:—
• Specify by regulation methods of testing for declaration of
grades or quality of coal.
• Monitor and enforce closure of mines as per approved mine
project plan towards closure of mine.

5
• Ensure adherence to the approved mining plans.
• Specify the principles and methodology for determination of
price of raw coal and washed coal or any other by-product
generated during the process of washing.
• Call for information, record or the documents from the entities
and publish statistics and other data in relation to the coal
industry .
• Specify the standards of performance and norms of
operational efficiency except in the area related to mines
safety.
• Specify procedure for automatic coal sampling and
weighment.
• Have an advisory role on formulation of policies in coal sector.
On the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha, the Coal Regulatory
Authority Bill, 2013 has lapsed as per the provisions of Article
107(5) of the Constitution of India. It is proposed to hold
further Inter-Ministerial consultations in the matter.
Also pending legislation of ‘The Coal Regulatory Authority Bill,
2013 a non-statutory Coal Regulatory was proposed to be set up
and a Government Resolution was published in the Gazette of India
on 04.03.2014. Since the non-statutory Coal Regulator, is having
only advisory role and none of the statutory or adjudicatory powers
has been assigned to it, it has also been decided by the Competent
Authority that the Government resolution dated 04.03.2014 may be
rescinded.”
10. The Committee are unhappy to note that although the
Coal Regulatory Authority Bill, 2013 introduced in Lok Sabha
had lapsed due to the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha, the Bill
has not been re-introduced so far in the 16th Lok Sabha. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take necessary
steps to bring the new legislation to accommodate the current
challenges faced in this sector due to the recent Supreme Court
Judgement on de-allocation of Coal Blocks and other consequent
ramifications thereof. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in the matter.

6
REDUCTION IN PRODUCTION COST OF COAL
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
11. As regards production cost of coal, the Ministry of Coal
informed the Committee that about 81% of the total cost of production
is fixed and the balance 19% is variable. Controllable items are mainly
the expenditure incurred on account of over time paid to the workers,
under loading/over loading, demurrage and power. Though the coal
companies have taken measures to bring down the cost of production
of coal and lignite by increasing production and productivity by
rationalizing machine utilization and deployment of manpower, the
Committee felt that the result in terms of cost reduction is not forthcoming.
The Committee, therefore, had recommended that more concrete measures
including austerity measures by Coal Companies need to be taken not
only to bring down the cost of production but also to enhance the reserves
and profitability of the coal companies.
12. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Coal have stated as
follows:—
“The suggestion is noted and CIL will be advised to bring down
the cost of production and also to enhance the reserves and
profitability of the coal companies.”
13. As regards Committee’s recommendation that more corrective
measures including austerity measures by coal companies need to be
taken not only to bring down the cost of production but also to enhance
the reserves and profitability of the coal companies, they are concerned
to note that the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry have merely stated
that the suggestion of the Committee has been noted and CIL will be
advised for the same. The Committee expect the Ministry to come out
with a road map highlighting the concrete measures to be taken up
for drastically cutting down the cost of production of coal. The
Committee desire that a systematic and holistic study may be carried
out on this aspect and desire that they be apprised of the progress
made in the matter.
REVIEW OF POLICY OF E-AUCTION OF COAL
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
14. The Committee had observed that due to lower coal production
against the targeted production there is shortage of coal in the country.

7
The small scale industries as well as mega industries including the power
companies are heavily dependent on coal for their survival. Demand of
the coal outstrips the supply. The coal demand in the country during
year 2012-13 was estimated at 772.84 million tonnes as against domestic
production of 574 million tonnes leaving a gap of 198.44 million tonnes
of the targeted demand. Coal India Limited has failed time and again
to meet the domestic demand for coal, and to meet the same, it imports
the coal. The Committee were surprised to note what exactly prompts
CIL to go for e-auction of coal despite the coal shortage in the country
and that too nearly 10% of the total coal produced in the country is sold
through e-auction. The Committee, had observed that e-auction by CIL
does not give a fair chance of participation to the end-users and benefits
only the big traders and influential parties. The big traders may purchase
through e-auction at comparatively cheaper rates by forming cartel and
make small scale industries to purchase coal from them at higher rates.
The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the whole procedure
of e-auction should be made more transparent which can also subserve
the interest of small scale industries. The Ministry of Coal and CIL should
ensure that small scale industries, small traders and end-users are not
put at a disadvantageous position in the process of e-auctioning under
the New Coal Distribution Policy. The monopoly of big traders which
deprives the small traders and users of a fair chance of participation in
coal e-auction need to be checked through a more transparent regulatory
and monitoring mechanism. The Committee had observed that the process
of e-auction which though generates good revenue for Coal India Limited
is also a big tool for manipulation and therefore, should be checked
immediately. While reiterating their earlier recommendation (24th and
33rd Reports, 15th Lok Sabha) to review the present policy of e-auction
to safeguard the interest of end-users, the Committee had also desired
that the extent of quantity of coal reserved for e-auction should be kept
at a bare minimum so as to meet the domestic demand of coal of the
end-users, and small scale industries in the country .
15. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
follows:—
“The Coal India is putting all efforts to increase the production but
due to the following reasons the desired level of production
achievement is getting affected:
(i) Delay in forest clearance and environmental clearance which
has held up opening up of a number of new coal projects.

8
(ii) Difficulty in getting physical possession of tenancy land is
also severely affecting opening of new mines and expansion
of existing mines.
(iii) Law and order problem in some of the mining areas.
(iv) Non-availability of adequate logistics viz. railway transport
facility for coal evacuation in certain coalfields.
As per NCDP , small and medium sector consumers are to
be supplied coal by State nominated agencies. In order to
facilitate coal availability to consumers whose requirements
are seasonal and who cannot access coal through institutional
process, NCDP mandates for supply of coal to such consumers
through e-auction of coal.
E-Auction Scheme has been introduced as per NCDP guidelines
and accordingly CIL has framed e-auction schemes which are as
follows:—
(i) Spot e-auction Scheme 2007—Under this scheme any Indian
Buyer viz. individual, personal firm, company etc. can
participate in e-auction for procurement of coal.
(ii) E-Auction Scheme 2007 for Forward e-auction (for sale of
coal over a long period)—All consumers of coal located in
India viz. proprietorship/partnership firm registered in Indian
Company incorporated in India etc. desirous of getting coal
supply over a long period can participate in Forward
e-auction for procurement of coal for own consumption and
not for transfer or resale.
It may be seen from the above that Government of India/CIL has
formulated the e-auction scheme to facilitate coal to even single
users and the process of e-auction is transparent and open to one
and all. The Bid Price of e-auction is the prerogative of the Bidders
and the same is market driven.
As per NCDP , “around 10% of estimated annual production of CIL
would initially be offered under e-auction and the quantity to be
offered under e-auction would be reviewed from time to time by
Ministry of Coal”. Under e-auction coal companies of CIL have
been offering around 10% of estimated annual production. As per
Presidential Directive dated 04.04.12, CIL was advised to reduce
e-auction of coal from 10% to 7% of its production progressively
till the end of 12th Plan.

9
In order to meet the demand of power sector, it has now (2014)
been decided to reduce the quantity of e-auction coal. The coal so
released could be made available in the linkage pool which could
be supplied to the power sector.”
16. The Committee were concerned to observe that inspite of
coal shortage in the country, nearly 10% of the total coal produced in
the country is sold through e-auction. The Committee had felt that in
e-auction, the CIL does not give a fair chance of participation to the
end-users and benefits only the big traders and influential parties.
They also observed that the big traders may purchase through e-auction
at comparatively cheaper rates by forming cartel and leaving small
scale industries to purchase coal from them at higher rates. The
Committee therefore, had recommended that the whole process of
e-auction be made more transparent to ensure that small scale industries,
small traders as well as actual end users are not put at a disadvantageous
position in so far as the supply of coal is concerned. The Committee
are happy to note that as per the New Coal Distribution Policy (NCDP),
the quantity offered under e-auction is being reviewed from time to
time and as per Presidential directive, CIL has been advised to reduce
e-auction of coal from 10% to 7% by the end of 12th plan. The
Committee, however, desire that more stringent monitoring mechanism
be put in place for effective implementation of such changes in the
policy so that interests of small traders and actual consumers are
adequately protected.
COAL THEFT AND ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF COAL
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
17. The Committee took a serious note of the rampant incidents
of coal theft in coal mining areas. There were also complaints regarding
misuse of coal and diversion of coal from end-users. The Committee had
felt that coal thefts and black marketing of coal had a direct bearing on
the coal distribution in the country and had also been responsible in
some way for coal shortage in country. Coal theft, directly or indirectly,
disturbs the demand-supply equation of coal in the country which is
reflected in coal price dynamics also in a subtle and latent manner. The
Ministry of Coal and CIL have submitted before the Committee about
their limitation and difficulty to check and monitor the same. The
Committee had observed that the actions are taken only when there are
complaints. The Committee were of the opinion that there was an urgent
need to keep strong vigilance and there should be a monitoring mechanism

10
put in place as far as this issue is concerned. The end-user verification
and checking on coal theft from coal mines is a joint responsibility of
coalfield managers and State enforcement authorities. The Committee
had felt that coalfield managers should have better coordination with the
State enforcement authorities in this regard and wherever irregularities
are found, strict action must be taken as per law. The Committee had
strongly recommend that Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs should set up
a sophisticated and integrated Global Positioning System (GPS)/General
Packet Radio Service (GPRS)/Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) and
Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) Camera mechanism in all their
coalfields so as to monitor and check the coal theft from coal mines and
end-user verification on continuous basis and more effectively.
18. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
follows:—
“The Coal mines are widely scattered and located in different
geographical states. The mining operations are being carried out
by the field Managers with very little or negligible administrative
control over the surrounding areas. Generally local people or
somewhere organized groups are involved in coal theft at different
locations. Illegal mining is a problem being faced by coal producing
units and it can be checked only with the effective State intervention
as law and order is a State subject.
As regards verification of end-use of coal by allottees of coal, it
is to inform that NCDP of the Government of India has already
recognized the menace posed by diversion of coal and has advised
that coal be used efficiently and economically so as to avoid wastage
of the fuel. To abide by this direction, elaborate provision has been
kept in the Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) to ensure that the
consumer does not divert any coal and use it only for their
consumption in their units. A verification process through detailed
document verification to ensure end-use of coal has been approved
by CIL Board which has been implemented by all coal supplying
companies.
To prevent theft of coal, different subsidiaries of CIL have taken
initiatives to install more number of electronic weighbridges and
GPS based truck monitoring system.
Present status of operating weighbridges against required number
of weighbridges and additional action taken to install weighbridges

11
and installation of GPS system on trucks transporting coal is given
below:—
ECL
Status of installation of Electronic Weighbridge:
Requirement - 117
Total on roll - 85
Work order placed and under execution - 27
Tender invited - 5
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
GPS/GPRS based tracking of coal trucks movement system has been
implemented at Salanpur Area. Geo-fencing for all units of Salanpur
Area is being incorporated in application software.
BCCL
Existing Rail weighbridge - 19 Nos.
Additional proposed to be installed -  4 Nos.
Existing Road weighbridge - 43 Nos.
Additional proposed to be installed - 54 Nos.
CCTV camera proposed to be installed - 40 Nos.
in Road weighbridges
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
Work order issued 29.12.2012
Current status—The system has been installed and made operative
in all areas of BCCL—Till date 620 vehicles have been fitted with
VMUs.
CCL
Status of installation of Electronic Weighbridge:
Rail Weighbridges
Total Requirement - 40

12
No. in use - 35
Under installation and commissioning - 2 nos.
(will be commissioned by Mar. ’14)
Supply order released - 2 nos.
Under procurement - 1 no.
Road Weigh Bridges
Total Requirement - 131
No. in use - 97
Installation completed and stamping is
awaited. Commissioning in Feb. ’14 - 2 nos.
by Mar. ’14 - 7 nos.
Supply order released - 5 nos.
Under procurement (Tendering done) - 20 nos.
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
(1) GPS/GPRS based Vehicle Tracking System has been installed
in 47 nos. of HEMM at Piparwar OCP .
(2) The work order of RFID based Vehicle Tracking and Weighing
Control system alongwith CCTV has been placed for Ashoka
OCP . Two nos. weigh bridges (new) have been arranged for
installation at Ashoka OCP . New WB installation at RCM
siding and Asoka siding is completed. At both the ends one
dummy weigh bridge has also been installed for trial run of
the RFID system. The installation and commissioning of RFID
based weighing control has been done on two nos. of Weigh
Bridges and two nos. of Dummy Weigh Bridges along with
control centre at GM (PPR) office. The system is under testing
phase and trial run has started from January, 2014.
(3) A detailed scheme for GPS/GPRS based vehicle tracking and
RFID based weighing control system along with CCTV was
approved by CCL Board in a meeting held on 21.05.2013.
Tendering has been done for entire CCL command area and
implementation shall be done in two phases. Piparwar and
NK area shall be covered during 1st phase.
(a) Date of Implementation at NK and Piparwar Area:
31.05.2014

13
(b) Date of complete installation and commissioning:
30.11.2014 (All Areas)
NCL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Weigh bridges installed at par with its requirement - 32 nos.
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
Work order for GPS based Vehicle Tracking System has been placed
on 16.01.2014. The delivery of equipment is expected by 31.03.2014.
The expected date of full implementation after trial period of
3 months is 31.07.2014. As Road Weigh Bridges are installed in the
projects of NCL, coal is being transported through weigh bridges.
WCL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Rail Weigh Bridges install - 26
Road Weigh Bridges
(i) Total Road Weigh Bridges installed - 113
(ii) Under installation - 22
Status of GPS based vehicle tracking system:
1. Supply order has been placed for implementation of 140 Nos.,
GPS units for Nagpur Area.
2. Work is under progress for GPS system alongwith weight
meters/load sensors to be fitted with 39 vehicles at Gondegaon
OC Nagpur area as pilot project on CIL R&D fund.
SECL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Existing - 178
Under installation - 08
Requirement (new projects) - 21
Nos. of equipment‘s placed during year - 04

14
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
i. 05 nos. RF-ID based Boom Barrier System installation at Gevra
and Dipka Areas.
ii. 03 nos. GPS based OITDS already installed at Kusmunda,
Dipka and Gevra Areas.
iii. Vehicle tracking system alongwith Boom Barrier, RFID and
CCTV Cameras is operational in four mines of SECL on trial
run basis.
iv. Vehicle tracking system for all mines of Sohagpur Area to
be operational by December, 2014.
v . Action for other mines based on performance of trial run and
modification needed.
MCL
Existing Rail Weigh Bridge - 32
120 T Rail Weigh Bridge under process of - 3
procurement
Existing Road Weigh Bridge (static) - 83
60 T, Static Road Weigh Bridge under - 5
process of procurement
Status of installation of 100 T in motion Road Weigh Bridge:
Existing - 27
Under Installation - 3
Under Commissioning - 10
Status of installation of GPS based truck monitoring system:
Tendering has been done for supply, installation, commissioning
and integration of the following:
GPS/GPRS based Vehicle Tracking System alongwith onboard load
censors on trucks/tippers used for Coal Production/internal
Transportation (for 1500 Vehicles),
RFID based Reader with Fixed IP Camera at Road Weigh Bridges
for capturing image of the vehicles and vehicle details alongwith
weighment data (96 locations), and CCTV surveillance system at
Railway sidings for continuous video recording – 22 locations.

15
19. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Coal
have come out with a number of initiatives to tackle the serious issue
of coal theft and illegal diversion of coal. While appreciating that
provisions have been made in the Fuel Supply Agreement (FSA) to
prevent consumers from diverting coal for any other use than for
consumption in their units alongwith a detailed verification regime.
The Committee also note that initiatives have been taken up by CIL
and its subsidiaries to prevent theft of coal by installation of electronic
weigh bridges and GPS based truck monitoring system. The Committee
earnestly hope that the Ministry of Coal/Coal India Ltd. will make all
efforts to implement the planned initiatives in a time bound manner.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by all
subsidiaries of CIL and SCCL regarding installation of electronic weigh
bridges, GPS on trucks transporting coal so as to curtail cases of theft
and illegal diversion of coal.

16
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
COAL PRICING
The Committee note that the Central Government was empowered
by the Colliery Control Order, 1945 to fix the grade-wise and colliery-
wise prices of coal. The pricing of coal was fully de-regulated after the
Colliery Control Order, 2000 was notified with effect from 1st January ,
2000 in supersession of the Colliery Control Order, 1945. Under the
Colliery Control Order, 2000 the Central Government has no power to
fix the prices of coal. Further, coal has also been removed from the list
of essential commodities through an amendment in the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955. While fixing the prices of coal, the coal companies
take into consideration general increase in price of commodities in the
market leading to increase in the cost of input in the production of coal
as reflected in Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and All India Consumer
Price Index (AICPI), capacity of the company to absorb the increase in
cost, landed cost of imported coal, impact of revision in wages of non-
executive employees and revision in pay of executives as per Government
guidelines as and when such revision takes place, requirement of
additional resources mobilization for fresh investments in new projects
to augment coal production to achieve planned production target. The
Committee have been given to understand that coal prices were revised
w.e.f. 16.10.2009 by Coal India Limited when the basic prices of F&G
grades of coal (ROM-Run of Mine) were increased by 8% to 10% over
the previous revision. While Coal India subsidiaries except ECL and BCCL
have increased the coal price by 10%, the increase in coal price by ECL
and BCCL was 15%. Further, Grade A and B coal of underground mines
of ECL is being supplied to specific consumers i.e. National Thermal
Power Corporation, Damodar Valley Corporation and State power utilities
at negotiated prices. Singareni Colliery Company Limited (SCCL), has
revised the prices of coal of various grades in 2004 for F&G grade coal
and in 2009 for B, C, D and E grade coal. The coal prices were again
revised on 01.01.2012 and 28.05.2013. The Committee feel that the increase
in the price of different grades of coal adversely affect the end users

17
including power sector and the impact of coal price increase has to be
passed on to the consumers. The Committee, therefore, expect the coal
companies to go in for a minimum coal price increase so that a balance
could be struck between the coal price and proposed capital investment
but certainly not with a view to achieving maximum profit for the
organization.
Action Taken
CIL is a Public Sector Undertaking and the profit earning is not
its sole objective. The pricing of coal and revision of coal prices from
time to time is resorted to only when revision of coal prices becomes
necessary.
At the first instance the coal companies put their best efforts to
increase the efficiency to absorb the increase in input costs of coal
production.
Also while revising the prices of coal, the CIL considers its impact
on overall economy particularly the impact on Power Sector is worked
out separately and it is ensured that the impact is minimum.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that though the regulated sector including
power and fertilizers have largely been spared from price hike, the
rationale behind price hike for non-regulated sector is beyond
comprehension and rather discriminatory to this sector and to the end-
consumers in particular. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a
principled parity may be established as far as the coal price fixation is
considered for regulated and non-regulated sectors. The Committee would
like to be informed of the precise reasons and justification for having
different price for different sectors, i.e. regulated and non-regulated in
this regard.
Action Taken
Since the prices of end products of power utilities and fertilizer
units are regulated by Government/regulator, any increase in the price
of coal in such regulated sectors will directly hit the consumers and the
common people at large, hence the price is kept low as compared to non-

18
regulated sectors. In the non-regulated sectors viz. steel, cement etc., the
end products are not regulated by the Government and the producing
units are free to sell their end products on the rates decided in open
market.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee observes that the freight rates also impact the coal
prices. It is necessary that rail freight rates for coal transport are
rationalized and for this the Ministry of Coal/Coal companies should
have proper coordination at sufficiently higher level in the Ministry of
Railways. In this regard, the Committee would like the Ministry of Coal
and CIL to explore other modes of transport also so as to ensure speedy
and cost effective movement of coal.
Reply of the Government
CIL and Ministry of Coal (MoC) have been regularly raising all the
important commercial issues for discussion in the Rail-Coal Interface
meetings with Railway Board and coal loading Zonal Railways. Since,
coal is dispatched by CIL on FOR colliery basis, CIL neither has direct
say in the choice of modes of transportation by the consumers, nor is
consulted by Railways to decide the freight structure. Nevertheless,
alongwith various commercial decisions of Railways, like chargeable
carrying capacity, demurrage charges etc. having direct bearing on the
interest of CIL, issues relating to introduction of telescopic freight to
provide relief to distant consumers have also been brought for discussion.
Railway is the mainstay of transportation of coal in the Country
and is destined to continue in the foreseeable future. However, there is
constant endeavour for developing alternative mode of transportation.
Consumers in the vicinity of coalfields have been extensively using
various captive modes of transportation which account for about 21% of
the total dispatch of CIL. However, such alternative modes of
transportation can be utilized within the vicinity of the coalfield only.
Road transportation is not encouraged for various reasons including
environmental impact and it cannot be an alternative mode of
transportation for long-haul distance. (Presently contributing about 25%
of the total dispatch of CIL.)

19
However the suggestion of the Committee has been noted and
MoC will follow up the same with CIL and its subsidiary companies.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
As regards production cost of coal, the Ministry of Coal have
informed the Committee that about 81% of the total cost of production
is fixed and the balance 19% is variable. Controllable items are mainly
the expenditure incurred on account of over time paid to the workers,
under loading/over loading, demurrage and power. Though the coal
companies have taken measures to bring down the cost of production
of coal and lignite by increasing production and productivity by
rationalizing machine utilization and deployment of manpower, the
Committee feels that the result in terms of cost reduction is not
forthcoming. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more concrete
measures including austerity measures by Coal Companies need to be
taken not only to bring down the cost of production but also to enhance
the reserves and profitability of the coal companies.
Action Taken
The suggestion is noted and CIL will be advised to bring down
the cost of production and also to enhance the reserves and profitability
of the coal companies.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee observe that due to lower coal production against
the targeted production there is shortage of coal in the country. The small
scale industries as well as mega industries including the power companies
are heavily dependent on coal for their survival. Demand of the coal
outstrips the supply. The coal demand in the country during year
2012-13 was estimated at 772.84 million tonnes as against domestic
production of 574 million tonnes leaving a gap of 198.44 million tonnes
of the targeted demand. Coal India Limited has failed time and again
to meet the domestic demand for coal, and to meet the same, it imports
the coal. The Committee is surprised to note what exactly prompts CIL
to go for e-auction of coal despite the coal shortage in the country and

20
that too nearly 10% of the total coal produced in the country is sold
through e-auction. The Committee finds that e-auction by CIL does not
give a fair chance of participation to the end-users and benefits only the
big traders and influential parties. The big traders may purchase through
e-auction at comparatively cheaper rates by forming cartel and make
small scale industries to purchase coal from them at higher rates. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the whole procedure of e-auction
should be made more transparent which can also sub-serve the interest
of small scale industries. The Ministry of Coal and CIL should ensure
that small scale industries, small traders and end-users are not put at a
disadvantage position in the process of e-auctioning under the New Coal
Distribution Policy. The monopoly of big traders which deprives the small
traders and users of a fair chance of participation in coal e-auction need
to be checked through a more transparent regulatory and monitoring
mechanism. The Committee recommends that the process of e-auction
which though generates good revenue for Coal India Limited is also a
big tool for manipulation and therefore, should be checked immediately.
While reiterating their earlier recommendations (24th and 33rd Reports,
15th Lok Sabha) to review the present policy of e-auction to safeguard
the interest of end-users, the Committee also desire that the extent of
quantity of coal reserved for e-auction should be kept at a bare minimum
so as to meet the domestic demand of coal to the end-users, and small
scale industries in the country.
Action Taken
The Coal India is putting all efforts to increase the production but
due to the following reasons the desired level of production achievement
is getting affected:
(i) Delay in forest clearance and environmental clearance which
has held up opening up of a number of new coal projects.
(ii) Difficulty in getting physical possession of tenancy land is
also severely affecting opening of new mines and expansion
of existing mines.
(iii) Law and order problem in some of the mining areas.
(iv) Non-availability of adequate logistics viz. railway transport
facility for coal evacuation in certain coalfields.
As per NCDP , small and medium sector consumers are to be
supplied coal by State nominated agencies. In order to facilitate coal

21
availability to consumers whose requirements are seasonal and who cannot
access coal through institutional process, NCDP mandates for supply of
coal to such consumers through e-auction of coal.
e-Auction Scheme has been introduced as per NCDP guidelines
and accordingly CIL has framed e-Auction schemes which are as follows:—
(i) Spot e-Auction Scheme 2007—Under this scheme any Indian
Buyer ( viz.) individual, personal firm, company etc. can
participate in e-Auction for procurement of coal.
(ii) e-Auction Scheme, 2007 for Forward e-Auction (for sale of
coal over a long period)—All consumers of coal located in
India ( viz.) proprietorship/partnership firm registered in
Indian Company incorporated in India etc. desirous of getting
coal supply over a long period can participate in Forward
e-Auction for procurement of coal for own consumption and
not for transfer or resale.
It may be seen from the above that Government of India/CIL has
formulated the e-Auction Scheme to facilitate coal to even single users
and the process of e-Auction is transparent and open to one and all. The
Bid Price of e-Auction is the prerogative of the Bidders and the same
is market driven.
As per NCDP , “around 10% of estimated annual production of CIL
would initially be offered under e-auction and the quantity to be offered
under e-auction would be reviewed from time to time by Ministry of
Coal”. Under e-auction coal companies of CIL have been offering around
10% of estimated annual production. As per Presidential Directive dated
04.04.2012, CIL was advised to reduce e-auction coal from 10% to 7%
of its production progressively till the end of 12th Plan.
In order to meet the demand of power sector, it has now (2014)
been decided to reduce the quantity of e-auction coal. The coal so released
could be made available in the linkage pool which could be supplied to
the power sector.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The information and data provided by Ministry of Coal and Coal
India Limited and its subsidiaries to the Committee clearly reveal that

22
there have been different coal rates for different coal grades across different
subsidiaries of CIL earlier in Useful Heat Value (UHV) based system of
pricing of coal. Though, CIL has submitted before the Committee that
now the prices of the given grade of coal is same for most of the companies,
it is really ironical that the same grade of coal is being sold at different
prices even today in Gross Calorific Value (GCV) based system for
Rajmahal of Eastern Coalfields Ltd.(ECL) and Western Coalfields Limited
(WCL). The Committee observes that there is no Common Policy for
fixation of Coal prices in the country like the petroleum companies which
sell petrol and diesel at almost same rates across different petroleum
companies.
Also, this ambiguity regarding different coal prices across different
coal companies is a reason for dissatisfaction and unfairness to
end-users. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that having
uniform prices across all grades of coal by all the coal companies is
essential not only from point of marketing and linkages, but also for
protecting the interests of the end-users. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommends that CIL should come up with a National Policy
for Coal Prices applicable to all Coal Companies and the Committee be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
Action Taken
While switching over from UHV based system to GCV based system
of grading and pricing, efforts were made to ensure that the pricing of
coal by CIL is uniform for all the subsidiaries by and large. However,
there were two exceptions: Rajmahal Coalfields of ECL and WCL coal
which is justified on the grounds as mentioned below:—
Differential prices of Rajmahal coal
The ECL is under BIFR and maximum coal is produced from
Rajmahal OC Mine, which contribute 39% of total projected coal
production for the financial year 2013-14 as such a considered view was
taken to give additional price weightage @ Rs.300/- per ton to Rajmahal
coal so that there may be rational pricing and also ECL may get reasonable
revenue to come out of BIFR.
Pricing in respect of WCL
The WCL mines are situated in the nearby vicinity of SCCL.
Historically, the Notified Prices of WCL coal were kept by and large at

23
par with the Prices applicable for the Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd. (SCCL),
in view of the similarity of the geographical, Seam, Geo-Mining condition
and market conditions between these two neighbouring coal companies.
Secondly the stripping ratio at WCL is comparatively higher than other
subsidiaries and also coal production is being done from small patches
due to which the cost of production becomes higher. The O.B. ratio is
also not favourable in general. Considering above the WCL coal prices
were fixed at a price higher than the prices notified for other
subsidiaries.This was also applicable during the UHV regime.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee has been apprised that the new coal price policy
approved by the Government allows power companies to pass on burden
of expensive imported coal on to the consumers. To meet its balance Fuel
Supply Agreements (FSAs) with power companies, CIL may import coal
and supply the same to the willing Thermal Power Plants on cost plus
basis. Under the proposed pass-through mechanism, approved by Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), the entire additional cost of
imported coal would be passed on to consumers as against averaging
of prices of imported and domestic coal under the earlier planned
price-pooling mechanism. The Committee feels that this decision of the
Government is likely to increase electricity tariffs further. The Committee
are perturbed to note that the decision will only help the power companies,
especially in private sector, who will be the main beneficiary of the decision
as they will not pass on the benefits to the consumers. The interests of
the consumers have thus been ignored and an additional burden of higher
coal price subsequently resulting in higher electricity tariffs have been
put on them. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
review this new coal price policy in the interest of consumers so as not
to pass this additional burden on to them.
Action Taken
A proposal was placed before the Cabinet Committee of Economic
Affairs (CCEA) to consider various options to augment coal supplies to
the Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) in the country. The proposal of Pooling
of Price of domestic Coal with imported Coal was considered by the
CCEA in its meeting held on 21.06.2013. The Government had approved

24
supply of coal to the identified 78,000 MW power plants commissioned
or to be commissioned during the period between 01.04.2009 and
31.03.2015. The supply of overall domestic coal to these project was
restricted to 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% during remaining 4 years of the
12th Plan, subject to the availability of coal. Actual supplies would,
however, be available when the required long term Power Purchase
Agreements (PPAs) are tied up. To meet the balance Fuel Supply
Agreement (FSA) obligations, Coal India Limited (CIL) was to import
coal and supply the same to the willing TPPs on cost plus basis. The
TPPs can also import coal themselves. Accordingly, CIL was directed to
implement the decisions of CCEA vide Presidential directive issued on
17.07.2013.
While approving the proposal for import of coal, the CCEA had
also approved that pass through mechanism would be as per the modalities
suggested by CERC. Based on advisory of MoP to CERC/SERCs, including
modifications if any, in the bidding guidelines, the appropriate
Commission would decide the pass through of higher cost of imported
coal/market fuel on a case to case basis based on the pleadings of the
parties and provisions of the concerned PPA after hearing all the
stakeholders. Thus, appropriate safeguards were built in the mechanism
so that additional cost of imported coal would be passed on to consumers
only after strict scrutiny by appropriate Commissions.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
COAL ROYALTY
Royalty is an amount payable by a lessee to the lessor for removing
or consuming a mineral. Section 9 (1) of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act requires the holder of a mining lease
or his agent, manager, employee, contractor or sub-lessee to pay royalty
in respect of any mineral removed or consumed from the leased area at
the rate specified in the Second Schedule of the Act. Section 9(3) of the
MMDR Act, empowers the Central Government to enhance or reduce the
royalty rates in respect of any mineral by notification. For fixing the rate
of royalty on coal/lignite. The Ministry of Coal constitutes a study group
headed by the Additional Secretary for fixing the rate of royalty on coal.
The Study Group takes the views of all the stakeholders like the coal

25
producing and consuming States and the major consumer sectors such
as power, iron and steel, cement etc. After taking the views of all the
stakeholders and other relevant factors, the study group makes its
recommendations to the Ministry. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that a Study Group was constituted in 2005 under the
Chairmanship of Addl. Secretary (Coal) with the representatives of
Ministries of Mines, Power, Coal Companies, CMPDIL and Federations
of industries like FICCI and FIMI to decide the rates of royalty. Considering
complexities involved in the issue of payment of royalty on ad-valorem
basis vs tonnage basis, the issue was referred to the Economic Advisory
Council to the Prime Minister (EAC). Based on the recommendations of
Economic Advisory Council of the Prime Minister the rates of royalty
on coal and lignite have been revised with effect from 01.08.2007.
The royalty rates were last revised w.e.f. 10.05.2012. These are being
calculated as a combination of specific and ad-valorem rates of royalty i.e.
R(Royalty Rupees/tonne)= a+bP where ‘P’ (price) shall mean basic pithead
price of ROM(run-of-mine) coal and lignite as reflected in the invoice,
excluding taxes, levies and other charges; ‘a’ represents the fixed
component and ‘b’ represents the variable or ad-valorem component. The
value of ‘b’ has been fixed as 5% and the value of ‘a’ fixed for different
grades of coal. The representative of the Ministry of Coal tried to explain
the formula worked out by the Economic Advisory Committee of the
Prime Minister on Payment of Royalty to the Committee during the course
of evidence but failed to convince the Committee the justification for
having such a formula. According to the Committee, the formula evolved
is not only ambiguous but has been worked out without any sound basis.
The Committee would like the Ministry to have a relook at this
cumbersome formula and come out with a simpler and workable formula.
The Committee observe that EAC to Prime Minister had also
recommended that the parameters of ‘a and ‘b’ in the suggested formula
have to be set so as to moderate the variation in the royalty on account
of variation in price. It was also suggested that ‘b’ be kept at 5% for all
grades of coal. The Committee has failed to understand the justification
for keeping ‘b’ at 5% for all grades of coal. The fact remains that the
formula suggested is devoid of clarity. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the rationale for keeping ‘b’ at 5% for all grade of coal.
Action Taken
The matter regarding determination of royalty on ad-valorem basis
was referred for study to two Committees, namely, the Economic Advisory

26
Council to Prime Minister (EAC) and the Committee on Royalty set up
by the Ministry of Coal in the year 2005. Both these Committees had
examined this issue at length in consultation with all stakeholders. Taking
into consideration, the submissions made by all stakeholders, the interest
of the coal producing States, the consumers and the economy as a whole,
the two Committees have concluded that since it is not the right time
to switch over to full-fledged ad-valoraem regime of royalty, adaptation
of a formula, which has a combination of specific and ad-valoraem rates
of royalty would be best sub-serve the interest of all the stakeholders as
well as the country.
Accordingly, the rates of royalty on coal and lignite were revised
with effect from 01.08.2007 on a hybrid formula, based on combination
of specific and ad-valorem rates of royalty. The formula stipulated is as
under:—
R (Royalty Rupees/tonne) = a + bP
Where ‘P’ (price) shall mean basic pithead price of ROM (run-of-
mine) coal and lignite as reflected in the invoice, excluding taxes, levies
and other charges and the values of ‘a’ (fixed component) and ‘b’ (variable
or ad-valorem component).
As regards keeping the variable or ad-valorem component i.e. ‘b’ at
5%, it is stated that royalty rates in India at that time were already higher
than prevailing in other major coal producing countries. The Committee
on royalty felt that the value of ‘b’ be kept at 5% and the fixed component
may be calibrated so that the weighted royalty rates may continue to be
about 15% of the pithead coal price. The recommendations were accepted
by the Government.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
The Committee take a serious note of the rampant incidents of coal
theft in coal mining areas. There are also complaints regarding misuse
of coal and diversion of coal from end-users. The Committee feel that
coal thefts and black marketing of coal has a direct bearing on the coal
distribution in the country and is also responsible in some way for coal
shortage in country. Coal theft, directly or indirectly, disturbs the demand-
supply equation of coal in the country which is reflected in coal price

27
dynamics also in a subtle and latent manner. The Ministry of Coal and
CIL have submitted before the Committee about their limitation and
difficulty to check and monitor the same. The Committee observe that
the actions are taken only when there are complaints.
The Committee are of the opinion that there is an urgent need to
keep strong vigilance and there should be a monitoring mechanism
put in place as far as this issue is concerned. The end-user verification
and checking on coal theft from coal mines is a joint responsibility of
coal field managers and State enforcement authorities. The Committee
feel that coal field managers should have better coordination with
the State enforcement authorities in this regard and wherever
irregularities are found, strict action must be taken as per law.
The Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of Coal and Coal
PSUs should set up a sophisticated and integrated Global Positioning
System (GPS)/General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)/Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) and Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) Camera
mechanism in all their coal fields so as to monitor and check the coal
theft from coal mines and end-user verification on continuous basis and
more effectively.
Action Taken
The Coal mines are widely scattered and located in different
geographical states. The mining operations are being carried out by the
field Managers with very little or negligible administrative control over
the surrounding areas. Generally local people or somewhere organized
groups are involved in coal theft at different locations. Illegal mining is
a problem being faced by coal producing units and it can be checked
only with the effective State intervention as law and order is a State
subject.
As regards verification of end-use of coal by allottees of coal, it
is to inform that NCDP of the Government of India has already recognized
the menace posed by diversion of coal and has advised that coal be used
efficiently and economically so as to avoid wastage of the fuel. To abide
by this direction, elaborate provision has been kept in the Fuel Supply
Agreement (FSA) to ensure that the consumer does not divert any coal
and use it only for their consumption in their units. A verification process
through detailed document verification to ensure end-use of coal has
been approved by CIL Board which has been implemented by all coal
supplying companies.

28
To prevent theft of coal, different subsidiaries of CIL have taken
initiatives to install more number of electronic weighbridges and GPS
based truck monitoring system.
Present status of operating weighbridges against required
number of weighbridges and additional action taken to install
weighbridges and installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal is given below:—
ECL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Requirement - 117
Total on roll - 85
Work order placed and under execution - 27
Tender invited - 5
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
GPS/GPRS based tracking of coal trucks movement system has been
implemented at Salanpur Area. Geo-fencing for all units of Salanpur
Area is being incorporated in application software.
BCCL
Existing rail weigh bridge - 19 Nos.
Additional proposed to be installed -  4 Nos.
Existing road weigh bridge - 43 Nos.
Additional proposed to be installed - 54 Nos.
CCTV camera proposed to be installed - 40 Nos.
in road weighbridges
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
Work order issued 29.12.2012
Current status - The system has been installed and made operative
in all areas of BCCL—Till date 620 vehicles have been fitted with
VMUs.

29
CCL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Rail Weigh Bridges
Total Requirement - 40
No. in use - 35
Under installation and commissioning - 2 nos.
(will be commissioned by Mar. 14)
Supply order released - 2 nos.
Under procurement - 1 no.
Road Weigh Bridges
Total Requirement - 131
No. in use - 97
Installation completed and stamping is
awaited. Commissioning in Feb. 14 - 2 nos.
by Mar. 14 - 7 nos.
Supply order released - 5 nos.
Under procurement (Tendering done). - 20 nos.
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
(1) GPS/GPRS based Vehicle Tracking System has been installed
in 47 nos. of HEMM at Piparwar OCP .
(2) The work order of RFID based Vehicle Tracking and Weighing
Control system along with CCTV has been placed for Ashoka
OCP . Two nos. weighbridges (new) have been arranged for
installation at Ashoka OCP . New WB installation at RCM
siding and Asoka siding is completed. At both the ends one
dummy weighbridge has also been installed for trial run of
the RFID system. The installation and commissioning of RFID
based weighing control has been done on two nos. of
Weighbridges and two nos. of Dummy Weighbridges along
with control Centre at GM (PPR) office. The system is under
testing phase and trial run has started from January-2014.
(3) A detailed scheme for GPS/GPRS based vehicle tracking and
RFID based weighing control system along with CCTV was

30
approved by CCL Board in a meeting held on 21.05.2013.
Tendering has been done for entire CCL command area and
implementation shall be done in two phases. Piparwar and
NK area shall be covered during 1st phase.
(a) Date of Implementation at NK and Piparwar Area :
31.05.2014
(b) Date of complete installation and commissioning:
30.11.2014 (All Areas)
NCL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Weigh bridges installed at par with its requirement - 32 nos.
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
Work order for GPS based Vehicle Tracking System has been placed
on 16.01.2014. The delivery of equipment is expected by 31.03.2014.
The expected date of full implementation after trial period of
3 months is 31.07.2014. As Road Weigh Bridges are installed in the
projects of NCL, coal is being transported through weigh – bridges.
WCL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Rail Weigh Bridges installed - 26
Road Weigh Bridges
(i) Total Road Weigh Bridges installed - 113
(ii) Under installation - 22
Status of GPS based vehicle tracking system:
1. Supply order has been placed for implementation of 140 Nos.,
GPS units for Nagpur Area.
2. Work is under progress for GPS system along with weight
meters/load sensors to be fitted with 39 vehicles at Gondegaon
OC Nagpur area as pilot Project on CIL R&D fund.

31
SECL
Status of installation of Electronic Weigh Bridge:
Existing - 178
Under installation - 08
Requirement (new projects) - 21
Nos. of equipment‘s placed during year - 04
Action taken for installation of GPS system on trucks transporting
coal:
i. 05 nos. RF ID based Boom Barrier System installation at Gevra
and Dipka Areas.
ii. 03 nos. GPS based OITDS already installed at Kusmunda,
Dipka and Gevra Areas.
iii. Vehicle tracking system along with Boom Barrier, RFID and
CCTV Cameras is operational in four mines of SECL on trial
run basis.
iv. Vehicle tracking system for all mines of Sohagpur Area to
be operational by December, 2014.
v . Action for other mines based on performance of trial run and
modification needed.
MCL
Existing Rail Weigh Bridge - 32
120 T Rail Weigh Bridge under process of - 3
procurement
Existing Road Weigh Bridge (static) - 83
60 T, Static Road Weigh Bridge under - 5
process of procurement
Status of installation of 100 T in motion Road Weigh Bridge:
Existing - 27
Under Installation - 3
Under Commissioning - 10

32
Status of installation of GPS based truck monitoring system:
Tendering has been done for supply, installation, commissioning
and integration of the following:
GPS/GPRS based Vehicle Tracking System along with onboard load
censors on trucks/tippers used for Coal Production/internal
Transportation (for 1500 Vehicles),
RFID based Reader with Fixed IP Camera at Road Weigh Bridges
for capturing image of the vehicles and vehicle details along with
weighment data (96 locations), and CCTV surveillance system at
Railway sidings for continuous video recording – 22 locations.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]

33
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee are of the view that the philosophy behind
nationalization of coal sector was to ensure the availability of coal to
power sector and other end-users to boost the national economy rather
than making huge profits by coal companies by frequent revisions in coal
rate. The Committee understands that while meeting the coal demand
from different sectors, CIL and its subsidiaries have to make profit for
its sustainability . Therefore, there is a need to strike a balance between
coal production and coal price. The Committee strongly recommend that
while calculating the coal prices or going in for revision of coal prices,
CIL and its subsidiaries should endeavour for revenue neutrality as far
as possible so as to put minimum burden on coal consumers thus securing
their interest and welfare.
Action Taken
Budgetary support from Government of India to CIL has been
withdrawn long back and it has to sustain its operations with its own
generated resources. While considering revision in coal prices, CIL
interalia considers increase in input costs, compensate the additional cost
due to revision of pay of executives and wages of non-executives as per
National Coal Wage Agreement and maintain reasonable level of overall
profitability of CIL so that there is adequate reserve and surplus available
for new investments.
After 10% disinvestment of shares of CIL, it is now a listed company,
accountable to its shareholders and to have to perform at optimum level
to have the confidence of investors.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]

34
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of Coal and
CIL that international prices are also one of the factors in coal price
fixation and therefore domestic coal prices are increased or decreased
accordingly as per increase or decrease in international coal prices, now
and then. But, Committee notice that there is no clarity, rules or guidelines
regarding immediate calling of Board Meeting of CIL so as to quickly
catch up with the trends in international market and commensurate it
with the domestic market in case of sudden increase or decrease in
international coal prices. The Committee also observe that though the
Ministry of Coal/CIL are very prompt to review or revise the domestic
coal prices in case of any increase in international price of coal but the
same exercise of discretionary powers for short term period review of
coal prices are hardly practised so far as the issue of decreasing domestic
coal price in tune with decreasing international coal prices are concerned.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that CIL Board should have
meetings for immediate review of domestic coal prices in tune with trends
in international market, both in cases of increase and decrease in
international coal prices as it has a direct bearing on the consumers and
other stakeholders. The Committee desire that CIL should lay down clear
guidelines in this regard.
Action Taken
The prices of Higher Grades of non-coking coal are by and large
maintained at import parity prices, in line with the guidelines of the
Government of India as envisaged in the Integrated Energy Policy, as
reproduced below:
High quality coking and non-coking coal which is exportable should
be sold at export parity prices as determined by import price at the
nearest port minus 15%.
In this regard it is stated that recently during the price revision
applicable w.e.f. 28.05.2013 the prices of higher grades of coal i.e. G3 and
G4 have been decreased in line with the decreasing trend of the equivalent
grade of imported coal prices.
For the lower GCV coals, which are mainly supplied to regulated
sector where the price is low in comparison to the equivalent imported
coal price, the price was increased for the GCV band w.e.f. 28.05.2013 to
maintain the overall revenue neutrality to the extent possible.

35
If all the GCV bands of coal are priced on import parity prices,
the prices of lower grades of coal will increase abnormally and may
impact the regulated sectors like power.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]

36
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that the requirement of funds for additional
resource mobilization for fresh investments in new coal projects and
modernization of existing mines for augmentation of production to achieve
planned production target, is also added as a factor for determining the
coal prices by the Coal PSUs. The Committee are not convinced with the
argument put forward by the Government/CIL that investment in the
new projects is one of the factors in coal price fixation. The Committee
fail to understand as to how CIL and its subsidiaries can add estimated
cost of a future project which has not yet started and may take years
together to complete in fixing coal prices which ultimately put extra
burden on consumers. The Committee feel that considering investments
in future projects as one of the factors for determining coal price is against
the sound principles of logic and economics. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that such cost estimations for new projects be kept
out for fixation of coal price so as to secure the interest of common
consumers.
Action Taken
As per guidelines of Government of India, Internal Rate of Return
(IRR) of minimum 12% is required to be ensured for opening up a new
mine. In practice, some mines, specially UG mines, are being operated
despite incurring losses.
It is necessary for CIL that coal prices are set at a level at which
the financial viability of new coal projects and CIL is ensured as per the
Government guidelines.
Further, modernization of existing mines for augmentation
of production to achieve planned production involves

37
additional investment for which surpluses generated from profit is
utilized.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee notes that in a de-regulated regime of coal prices,
the coal companies are free to revise the rates at will without having any
consultation with different stakeholders, particularly , the consumers. The
latest revision in coal rates by Coal India Limited is bound to impact
steel and cement industries which have been put under non-regulated
sector. Steel companies which use sponge iron as raw material are also
likely to be affected as 30% increase in non-coking coal price will adversely
affect the profitability of sponge iron producers. Since the Government
has no control over coal price, the need for having a regulatory mechanism
for coal sector has been felt since long. The Committee observes that the
Planning Commission had also recommended creation of an independent
coal regulatory authority which would have power to comprehensively
handle coal resource development, regulation on extraction, end use, etc.
including pricing and mine safety issues. In any event Central Government
must constitute one coal pricing Regulatory Committee consisting of
representatives of Coal companies, Central Government, each State which
produces coal, representatives of customer, power generation and an
expert. The expert should head the Committee. The Committee has been
apprised that creation of a permanent Coal Regulator Authority has been
approved by the Cabinet and a Bill is going to be introduced soon in
Parliament in this regard to give it a statutory status. The Committee
desire the Ministry of Coal to bring in the much needed coal regulator
for coal sector at least coal pricing regulatory committee expeditiously
in the interest of all stakeholders. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken by the Ministry within three months.
Action Taken
Various committees like the Energy Coordination Committee, the
Sankar Committee, Working Group on Coal for XI Plan recommended
for setting up of an independent regulatory authority for coal sector.
Based on these recommendations and after due consultations with all
concerned Ministries/Departments, the draft Bill was approved by the
Cabinet on 27.06.2013. the same has been introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 13.12.2013.

38
Major functions envisaged for the proposed Coal Regulatory
Authority are:—
• Specify by regulation methods of testing for declaration of
grades or quality of coal;
• Monitor and enforce closure of mines as per approved mine
project plan towards closure of mine;
• Ensure adherence to the approved mining plans;
• Specify the principles and methodology for determination of
price of raw coal and washed coal or any other by-product
generated during the process of washing;
• Call for information, record or the documents from the entities
and publish statistics and other data in relation to the coal
industry;
• Specify the standards of performance and norms of
operational efficiency except in the area related to mines
safety;
• Specify procedure for automatic coal sampling and
weighment;
• Have an advisory role on formulation of policies in coal sector.
On the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha, the Coal Regulatory
Authority Bill, 2013 has lapsed as per the provisions of Article 107(5) of
the Constitution of India. It is proposed to hold further Inter-Ministerial
consultations in the matter.
Also pending legislation of ‘The Coal Regulatory Authority Bill,
2013’ a non-statutory Coal Regulatory was proposed to be set up and
a Government Resolution was published in the Gazette of India on
04.03.2014. Since the non-statutory Coal Regulator, is having only advisory
role and none of the statutory or adjudicatory powers has been assigned
to it, it has also been decided by the Competent Authority that the
Government resolution dated 04.03.2014 may be rescinded.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]

39
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee note that State of West Bengal has strongly opposed
the differential treatment meted out to the State in matters of royalty,
etc. In the Mines and Minerals Development and Regulation Bill,
2011(MMDR), the rates of royalty on major minerals have been specified
in the Second Schedule to the bill. In the Bill, rates of royalty proposed
for different grades of coal produced in West Bengal are different from
other States. While the rates of royalty for West Bengal are specific, the
rates of other States are a combination of specific and ad valorem  rates
of royalty and much higher than the rates proposed for West Bengal. The
State of West Bengal has been treated differently from other States since
the year 1991 in the matter of rate of royalty to be charged on coal
because the State of West Bengal imposes cess on coal. The Committee
in their Report on MMDR Bill, 2011 submitted to Parliament on 8.5.2013
have observed that this differential treatment to West Bengal in the matter
of fixation of rates of royalty vis-à-vis other States, who do not impose
cess, is unjustified, as the State Government is empowered under the
Constitution to impose cess on coal. The royalty on coal and cess on coal
bearing land are levied and collected on the basis of powers assigned
to the States under two different entries in Constitution, namely, Entry
No. 49 – Taxes on lands and buildings and Entry No. 50 – Taxes on
mineral rights, subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law
relating to mineral development. The Parliament has not imposed any
limitation on the taxing power on the mineral rights which the State can
impose under Entry No. 50 of the State List. The Committee are also
apprised that the issue of propriety of imposition of cess on coal bearing
land by the Government of West Bengal has been settled by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in favour of the State in Civil Appeal Nos. 1532-33/93
in the matter of State of West Bengal versus Kesoram Industries and
Others in January, 2004. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation (36th Report on MMDR Bill, 2011) and desire that the

40
royalty for different grades of coal should be kept same in all States
including State of West Bengal in all fairness and the Government in this
regard may take appropriate action to amend Schedule-II of the MMDR
Bill, 2011 by fixing rate of royalty same to all States.
Action Taken
The Economic Advisory Council (EAC) to the Prime Minister in
October, 2005 had recommended that any revision in royalty should not
be made applicable automatically to the States, which levy their own
cesses. It is due to this that the State of West Bengal who levied cess has
not been given the benefit of increasing rates of royalty since 1981. The
seventh Study Group set up by Ministry of Coal in 2010 to revise the
rates of royalty, also could not get any assurance from the Government
of West Bengal regarding withdrawal of cess, as such the benefit of present
rates of royalty on coal @14% ad-valorem on price of coal was not extended
to the State of West Bengal.
As far as cesses levied by the State Governments is concerned, the
respective High Court and the Supreme Court had struck down in 1989
and 1991 the cesses levied by many State Governments on Minerals or
mining rights as well as other taxes of the State Governments, which
were in the nature of tax on royalty. The cess Acts of the Government
of West Bengal were challenged in a petition of M/s. Kesoram Industries
Ltd. before the High Court of Calcutta. The High Court passed an order
on 25.11.1992 holding the provisions relating to levy and collection of
cesses under the Cess Act, 1880, the West Bengal Primary Education Act,
1973 and the West Bengal Rural Employment and Production Act, 1976
as ultra vires of the Constitution. Against this order, the Government of
West Bengal field an SLP in the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court held
that the State is competent to levy the impugned cess in as much as the
levy of said cess is not on coal but on coal bearing land. Hence, the West
Bengal Government has continued to collect cess on coal. At one point
of time it was as high as 45%. Since the coal produced in West Bengal
was getting priced out and the coal companies in the State were facing
severe financial crisis, the State Government had scaled down the rates
of cess to 25% ad-valorem. During the 1994 revision as well, the State of
West Bengal had been kept out of the enhanced royalty rates because the
State Government continued to levy and collect cesses. They continue to
levy cess at these rates at present.
However, on the question of leving of a cess/taxes on mineral
bearing land by State Legislature, the matter has been referred to

41
a nine judge bench in Supreme Court. The said case is pending in the
Supreme Court.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee observe that the issue of levy of cess on coal by
different States continues to remain a bone of contention between Centre
and States and remain a cause of concern for the coal industry. The
Committee feel that excepting coal mines and lignite, State Government
is the owner of the mines. Therefore, free hands should be given to the
State Government for imposing cess. The Committee while reiterating
their earlier recommendation regarding collection of cess by States in
36th Report [“The Mines and Mineral (Development and Regulation)
Bill, 2011”] recommend that the State Government may by notification
specify the rate of Cess to be levied in case of major minerals and minor
minerals excepting coal and lignite and minor mineral according to the
State Governments’ wisdom and in case of coal and lignite at a rate not
exceeding fifty per cent by introducing appropriate legislation in States.
The Committee would like the Ministry to come out with a permanent
solution to the issue of levying cess by different States after having due
consultations with all the concerned States. Irrespective of charging cess
by different States, the Committee feel that royalty of each State should
be equal and on the basis of grades of coal. The Committee feel that share
of royalty which States be entitled to be paid to them immediately after
receiving it by the coal companies from the Central Government.
Action Taken
The issue of levy of cess on coal continues to remain a cause of
concern for the coal company as any cess over and above royalty distorts
coal pricing significantly. As stated earlier, the Economic Advisory Council
(EAC) to the Prime Minister in October, 2005 had recommended that any
revision in royalty should not be made applicable automatically to the
States, which levy their own cesses.
In the wake of a judgment passed by the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court in State of West Bengal vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd. and
Others, a number of States have re-introduced cess or other statutory
levies on mineral bearing land. The decision of the Supreme Court in
the above matter along with the decision in India Cement Ltd. vs. The

42
State of Tamilnadu, on the question of leving of a cess/tax on mineral
bearing land by State Legislature, has been referred to a nine judges
bench in Supreme Court. The matter is pending in the Supreme Court.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee note that low royalty rates and their infrequent
revision has become an important irritant in the realm of Centre-State
Financial Relations. The Committee are constrained to observe that one
of the major factors for the downward trend of royalty is the absence
of a clear cut policy on the subject. The system of royalty as prevailing
in the country is riddled with complications. The Committee has been
informed that though coal and lignite minerals belong to States, the royalty
rates are fixed by the Central Government and the grievances of the
concerned States are not adequately addressed by the Central Government
before taking a final decision in this regard. There are several grades of
coal and royalty rates differ from one category to another. Sometimes,
rates differ from one company to another.
The lignite rates also differ from coal rates. Since the issue of royalty
is riddled with complexities, the committee feels that there is a greater
need that the issue be looked at in a larger perspective keeping in view
the growing needs of the States. The rationalization of royalty rates and
the timely revision will not only help the backward mineral rich States
to improve their non-tax revenues but will also go a long way in improving
Central-State Financial Relations. The Ministry of Coal ought to adopt
a holistic approach of the problem and work out a plausible solution.
It is pertinent to note that non-revision of royalty rates for many years
has led to decline in the royalty income of the States. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should bring out a clear cut
policy on royalty acceptable to coal producing States which could be
revised at periodical intervals. The Committee, therefore, urges the
Ministry of Coal to address the grievances of affected States by having
frequent interactions with the concerned States at the appropriate level.
Action Taken
The Section 9(3) of the MMDR Act, 1957 empowers the Central
Government to enhance or reduce the royalty rates in respect of any
mineral by notification in the Official Gazette with effect from such date

43
as may be notified. The provision to Section 9(3) of the Act prevents the
Central Government from enhancing the rate of royalty in respect of any
mineral more than once during any period of three years and there is
no power to the Central Government to revise royalty rates during such
period.
Ministry of Coal constitutes a Study Group from time to time for
revision of rates of royalty on coal under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary with representatives from Ministry of Mines, Power, Coal India
Limited (CIL), Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited
(CMPDIL), Federation Chamber of Commerce of India (FICCI) and
Federation of Indian Mineral Industries (FIMI). The Committee holds
consultations with all the stakeholders which include coal producing/
consuming States, major coal consumers viz. NTPC, Cement manufactures
etc. and their grievances/suggestions are duly addressed.
The 8th Study Group has been constituted on 21.07.2014 to consider
revision of rates of royalty on coal under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Coal with representatives from Ministries of Power,
Mines, Coal India Limited (CIL), Federation Chamber of Commerce of
India (FICCI), Federation of Indian Mineral Industries (FIMI) and Central
Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) as members of
the Study Group. First meeting of the Study Group was held on 09.10.2014.
The revision of royalty is not due before 10.05.2015
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
The Committee observes that while the prices of coal have been
revised quite frequently, (nearly 7 times since deregulation) the rates of
royalty have not been revised simultaneously. The plea of the coal
producing States for an upward revision of the rate of royalty merits
consideration on the ground that they lose heavily if the rates of royalty
are not commensurate with revision in the administered price of coal and
lignite. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in case royalty cannot
be revised for some reasons, the Centre should compensate the States
through an equivalent matching grant.
Action Taken
The Government has notified a new royalty rate structure on coal
and lignite w.e.f. 10.05.2012 @ 14% ad-valorem on the price of coal, as
reflected in the invoice, excluding taxes, levies and other changes and

44
the rate of royalty on lignite has been revised @ 6% ad-valorem on transfer
price of lignite as ratified by the Central Electricity Regulation Commission
and if lignite sold to other consumers the royalty shall be 6% ad-valorem
on the price of lignite as reflected in the invoice excluding taxes, levies
and other charges.
Thus the amount of royalty will automatically get revised as and
when the prices of coal are revised.
The 8th Group has been constituted on 21.07.2014 to consider
revision of rates of royalty on coal under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Coal with representatives from Ministries of Power,
Mines, CIL, FICCI, FIMI and CMPDIL as members. First meeting of the
study Group was held on 09.10.2014. The revision of royalty is not due
before 10.05.2015.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that a need was
felt for quite some time, to determine a methodology for calculation of
royalty, chargeable on coal produced from captive mines/blocks. The
Government also included another term of reference viz “to determine
the basis of fixation of royalty on the coal produced from captive blocks”.
The Ministry are reported to have sought the views of stakeholders, coal
producers, consumers and coal bearing States. The replies on the
questionnaire from the concerned stakeholders were examined in detail
by a Study Group who has submitted its report to the Government. The
Committee would like the Ministry to announce new royalty rates only
after the suggestions/views from different stakeholders are taken into
consideration and a balance should be maintained as far as securing the
interests of the various stakeholders is concerned.
Action Taken
As stated earlier, Ministry of Coal constitutes a Study Group from
time to time for revision of rates of royalty on coal under the Chairmanship
of Additional Secretary with representatives of the Ministry of Mines,
Power, CIL, CMPDIL, FICCI, FIMI. The Committee seeks comments of
all the stakeholders which includes coal producing/consuming States,
major coal consumers viz. NTPC, Cement manufactures etc. and after
duly addressing their grievances/suggestions a balance is maintained as

45
far as securing the interests of the various stakeholders is concerned
regarding the fixation of royalty rates.
The 8th Group has been constituted on 21.07.2014 to consider
revision of rates of royalty on coal under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Coal with representatives from Ministries of Power,
Mines, CIL, FICCI, FIMI and CMPDIL as members. First meeting of the
study Group was held on 09.10.2014. The revision of royalty is not due
before 10.05.2015.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/3/2013-CA-II
dated November, 2014]
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
23 April, 2015 Chairperson,
03 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

46
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 22 APRIL, 2015 IN
ROOM NO. ‘112’, FIRST FLOOR, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
4. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
5. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
6. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
14. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
#
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
16. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey

47
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on 49th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on the subject “Coal Pricing and Issues relating to Coal
Royalty” of the Ministry of Coal;
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.*** Do not pertain to this Report.

48
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FORTY-NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made: 18
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12 and 18)
Total : 09
Percentage : 50%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3 and 10)
Total : 02
Percentage : 11.11%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2 and 5)
Total : 02
Percentage : 11.11%
V . Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17)
Total : 05
Percentage : 27.77%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”