FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-first Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject,
“Service  Conditions of Workers in
Public Sector Steel Companies ”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2014
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 22.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Pausa, 1936 ( Saka)


CC&S No. 91
Price : R  47.00
© 2014 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 10
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 18
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................... 22
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 29
ANNEXURES
I. Department of Public Enterprises, Government of India
guidelines on “Policy of the 7th round (2nd part) of Wage
Negotiations for unionized workers in Central Public
Sector Enterprises w.e.f. 01.01.2012”....................... 30
II. The detailed Memorandum of Agreement of National Joint
Committee for Steel Industry (NJCS) signed on 25.1.2014
for settlement of Wage Agreement, 2012 .................. 32
III. Copy of the judgement of the Supreme Court dated
28.7.2011 .......................................................... 34
IV . Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 19.12.2014 ............. 38
V . Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the  Fifty-first Report of
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) ......................................................... 40
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2014-15)
Shri Rakesh Singh* — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Shailesh Kumar
7. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
8. Shri Godam Nagesh
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
(iii)
*Shri Rakesh Singh appointed w.e.f. 27.11.2014 vice Shri Hansraj G. Ahir appointed Minister.

(iv)
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Shri B.K Hariprasad
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
#
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
3. Smt. Vandana P . Guleria — Sr. Exe. Assistant
#Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated  w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Basawaraj Patil.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their
behalf, present this Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained
in the Fifty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Service Conditions of Workers in Public Sector
Steel Companies” relating to the Ministry of Steel.
2. The Fifty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on
6th February, 2014. Replies of the Government to all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 6th June,
2014.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 19.12.2014.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-first Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-V.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Chapter-I of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
19 December, 2014 Chairperson,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals
with Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-first Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on “Service
Conditions of Workers in Public Sector Steel Companies ” relating to the
Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya
Sabha on 06.02.2014.
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry
of Steel in respect of all the 14 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report on 6th June, 2014. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 9, 10, 13 and 14
Total – 06
(Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. No. 1 and 8
Total – 02
(Chapter III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 3, 5, 6, 7, 11 and 12
Total – 06
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. Nil
Total – 00
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Ministry on some of their observations/recommendations made in the
Fifty-first Report.
MINIMUM WAGES TO CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
5. The Committee have noted that as per Contract Labour
(Regulation and Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, Rule 25(2)(4), the rates
of wages payable to the workmen by the contractor should not be less
than the rates prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of
1948), for such employment where applicable and where the rates had
been fixed by agreement, settlement or award, not less than the rates
so fixed. The Committee, however , observed that the minimum wages
paid per day to contract labour were not only uneven amongst the SAIL
Plants in different States but there was disparity in wages between
different steel PSUs. The minimum wages per day for unskilled workers
in Integrated Steel Plant (ISP), Burnpur is Rs. 269.46/- against
Rs. 441.43/- in Durgapur Steel Plant of SAIL. As regards RINL, the
minimum wages paid to contract workers per day were Rs. 257/- only.
The Committee did not agree with the present different wage structure
for contract workers by different units of SAIL and RINL and desired
that a separate wage policy should be made for the contract labourers
in the entire steel sector. The Committee felt that the Government/
Steel Companies should take appropriate steps so that this disparity in
minimum wages was removed and reduced to the minimum.
6. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have stated as
under:-
“I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
The wages paid by the contractors to the contract workers
engaged at SAIL Plants are governed in terms of the Minimum
Wages Act, 1948 wherein Appropriate Government for each
plant is the respective State Government. As Principal
Employer, SAIL Plants/Units ensure that the wages paid by

3
the Contractors to their Contract labours are over and above
the minimum wages notified by the respective State/
Appropriate Governments.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL) RINL-VSP has adopted
wages notified by Government of India w.e.f. 01.10.2010.
Accordingly, the Minimum Wages as notified for contract
labour by the authority under minimum wages i.e., the
Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad are
implemented by the various contracting agencies and RINL-
VSP , as Principal Employer , monitors payment of the same.
The variable DA (cost of living allowance) is revised by the
Central Government twice in a year i.e., in April and October.
RINL-VSP being the Principal Employer is ensuring the
compliance of the same. ”
7. Taking note of the huge disparity between minimum wages
paid to contract labour in different States and even by different
Steel PSUs, the Committee had desired that this disparity be removed
by formulating a separate wage policy for the entire steel sector.
Although, the Government have informed the Committee that wages
paid to contract workers are governed in terms of Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 wherein the ‘appropriate Government’ which decides wages
to be paid for various plants is the respective State Government,
where the plant is located, the Committee observe that the varying
wages paid to contract labour in different States and by different
Steel PSUs is not only disadvantageous to lesser paid contract labours
but also discriminating. Therefore, framing of a separate wage policy
for contract workers in Steel Sector is the need of the hour. The
Committee urge the Steel PSUs to revisit the issue and come out
with a common wage structure for all contract workers all over the
country who are engaged in similar kind of works by making the
highest wage offered by any State as the criteria.
METHODOLOGY FOR PAYMENT OF WAGES
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
8. The Committee have noted that SAIL had made mandatory
requirement of PF code and ESI code for contractors, photo I cards/
gate pass for contract labourers and online attendance system had
also been initiated by the company. The company was reportedly
facilitating bank payment to workers. As regards RINL, the Committee
observed that 50% of the workers were being paid wages through Bank
Accounts. The Committee were not happy as even today about 50% of
the workers in RINL were being paid wages in cash which may cause
malpractices and exploitation of contract workers regarding payment

4
of minimum wages. The Committee, therefore, recommended that all
the contract workers in SAIL and RINL should be paid their wages
through cheques or their bank accounts and the companies should
ensure that contractor bills were settled only after ascertaining the
compliance of payment of wages, PF and ESI remittances.
9. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have stated as
follows:—
“I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL) Efforts are being
made for ensuring that the contractors make payment to
their contract labour through banks. The Contract Labour at
Bokaro Steel Plant, IISCO Steel Plant, Visvesvaraya Iron &
Steel Plant and SAIL Refractory Unit are mostly being paid
wages through bank while at Bhilai Steel Plant, contract
labour working in the Works area & township are being paid
through banks. At other major plants, steps have been taken
to convince the Unions, Contractors and their labour for
bank payment. Payment through banks has been partially
implemented at RSP , SSP , CMO, RMD, Collieries etc. There is
a well laid down procedure for ensuring that the wage sheet,
deposit challan of payment of PF and ESI dues etc., are
checked before release of the bills of the contractor. The
Contract Labour Cells at Plants/Units verify such documents
and issue mandatory No Dues Certificate/Statutory Dues
Clearance for release of the running/final bills of the
contractors.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL) RINL-VSP is striving
to ensure implementation of payment of wages to contract
labour by the contracting agencies through Banks. Due to
the unstinted efforts, around 60% of the contract labour are
being paid wages through Banks. Continuous efforts are being
made for achieving 100% implementation of payment of
wages through Banks in RINL-VSP . ”
10. Although, the Committee had recommended that the system
of payment of wages to workers be done through cheques or through
their bank accounts, they find that SAIL is reported to be making
efforts to ensure this and the process to convince Unions, Contractors
and labours for payment through banks is going on. In RINL too,
around 60% of contract labours are reported to be paid through
banks. The Committee feel that unless the payment to workers is
completely made through their bank accounts, they will continue to
be exploited by the contractor. The Committee are not satisfied
with the system of payment of wages through bank accounts partially

5
being implemented in both the Steel PSUs so far. The Committee,
therefore, desire that there is an imperative need that the system
of payment of wages to contract labours through cheques or through
their bank accounts should be made mandatory. The Committee
would like to make serious efforts by Steel PSUs to achieve 100%
wage payment to contract labours through cheques/bank accounts
in the next six months and the Committee be apprised of the same.
COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENTS
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
11. The Committee have observed that SAIL was uniformly
implementing employment to dependent of contract workers across
the company’s plants and units w.e.f. 01.04.2009 in case the worker ’s
death happened to be in the steel plant. According to the Ministry of
Steel, SAIL has provided employment on compassionate ground to
49 dependents of contract labourers. According to the Ministry of
Steel, 9 cases were under process and in 8 cases, there was no eligible
dependent of the deceased contract labourer. The Committee while
appreciating the SAIL decision, desire that the same be implemented
in other PSUs like RINL also and a proper system with clear cut guidelines
for the management to follow should be put in place so that the
bereaved family of the worker did not have to run from pillar to post
to obtain benefits dully entitled and the benefits to be accrued in such
cases including compassionate appointment to his kin, educational
facilities for his children, amount of compensation to be awarded etc.
should be decided and paid in a fixed time period.
12. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL) Plants/Units of
SAIL provide employment on compassionate grounds to one
of the direct eligible dependent in case of death of a contract
labour due to accident arising out of and in course of
employment within the Works premises (including those
engaged for Project work). A well laid procedure exists at
plants/units to process such cases expeditiously. Assistance
is also rendered to contractor & their labour for expediting
early settlement of benefits under PF and ESI Scheme/
compensation under Employees Compensation Act.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL) In case of fatal
accident arising out of and in the course of Rs. 5.00 Lakhs
is being paid to the dependants of the deceased contract
labour by the Contractor through Group Personal Accident
Insurance Scheme. In addition, all efforts are made to ensure

6
that the dependants of the deceased labour receive all
statutory benefits in time. Further, the concerned agency
usually provides employment to a dependant on
compassionate grounds. ”
13. While appreciating the plants/units of SAIL who are providing
employment to the eligible dependent of contract labour in case of
his death due to accident within the work premises, the Committee
note that RINL, on the other hand provides Rs. 5 lakh to dependents
of contract labours in case of any fatal accident during work hours.
Taking note of different guidelines being adopted by Steel PSUs for
employment on compassionate grounds, the Committee feel that
Ministry of Steel should ensure a uniform policy regarding
compassionate appointment to eligible dependents of contract labours
in case of their death while on duty for all steel PSUs.
LOCAL PEOPLE FOR CONTRACT WORKS IN STEEL PLANT
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
14. The Committee have noted that the works outsourced by SAIL
and RINL were not given to local peoples and the contractors employ
and bring workers from outside and paying them lower wages. The
Committee have time and again recommended that local/displaced
persons should be given preference for recruitment and even for
contract jobs. While appreciating that RINL has employed 7223 displaced
persons against the commitment of 5000, the Committee felt that SAIL
and RINL should ensure that local people be given preference by
contractors for engaging workers in mining, works and non-works areas
of steel plants.
15. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL) Contractors engage
labours to execute the job contracts awarded to them through
tendering & such labours are employees of the respective
contractors. SAIL, as a principal employer , has no say in the
engagement of contract labours.
However , it is understood that the contractors are mostly
employing contract labour from the local peripheral
population.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL) While it is the
prerogative of the Contractors to engage their workers, they
normally engage labour only from the nearby villages/
colonies. In addition, RINL/VSP has made it mandatory for
the Contractors to deploy 50% of their manpower requirement
in unskilled category from the Displaced Persons of VSP . ”

7
16. The Committee feel that anywhere in the country, wherever
a PSU has started its operations, the local people displaced due to
the ongoing project should have the first right over any employment
opportunity arising on the land. The Committee had stressed the
need for providing employment opportunity by Steel PSUs to local
people to ensure smooth land acquisition process and assuring them
of a livelihood even after loss of land. The Committee are, however,
unhappy to note that SAIL being the principal employer cannot
absolve itself of this responsibility by merely stating that labourers
are employees of respective contractors and SAIL has no say in their
engagement. For this, the Committee feel that sustained efforts
have to be made by the PSUs concerned to ensure that the contractor
hire the local people. At the same time, the Committee are happy
to note that RINL/VSP has made it mandatory for contractors to
deploy 50% of their manpower requirement in unskilled category
from displaced persons of Visakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP). Rather,
the Committee would like that in case of unskilled category, the
mandatory stipulation to give first preference to the local displaced
population. The Committee also desire that the concerned PSU should
open a training centre near the project for the displaced persons
for skill development to ensure that the displaced population is
given every opportunity for a livelihood after loss of their land.
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 11 & 12)
17. The Committee have noted that contract labourers in SAIL and
RINL were covered under ESI, Act. Free medical treatment at ESI
dispensaries and hospitals were provided to the contract workers and
their dependents. First aid medical facilities were also provided to
contract labourers at the occupational health centres within plant
premises. The Committee felt that the Ministry of Steel should also
take up the matter of setting up of ESI dispensaries and hospitals near
the steel plants and whenever needed referral to corporate hospitals/
higher medical centres for treatment shall also be made for contract
workers. The Committee also recommended that periodical medical
examination of workers employed in hazardous sectors and immediate
medical relief in case of any exigency should be the topmost agenda
to ensure faith of workers in the organisation. Further, the Committee
desired that it should be ensured that each employee working in
hazardous sectors should be covered under personal accident insurance
scheme and Mediclaim Insurance Scheme, etc.

8
18. The Committee were concerned to note that though employees/
contract workers deployed in hot, hard and hazardous areas like coke
ovens, sinter plant, blast furnace and steel melting shop were given
incentives or extra allowance such as height allowances, heat allowance,
etc. The Committee felt that though the workers had been offered
incentives, they were deprived of the proper treatment, rehabilitation
and compensation. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended
that management of Steel PSUs should accord top priority to the safety
and security of the workers in iron ore mines and Steel plants and in
this direction adequate, budgetary provisions should be made, vigilance
and statutory compliances should be strictly implemented.
19. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have stated
as under:—
“I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 is applicable at SAIL ’s
major plant locations. Compliance of various provisions under
the ESI Scheme including contributions towards ESI Scheme
by the contractors is ensured. Medical facilities under ESI
Scheme are provided by ESIC.
ESI hospitals are available at most of the locations. Locations
where full fledged hospitals are not available, various efforts
have been made by the plants to facilitate the same. Some
of the efforts include:
• Bhilai Steel Plant has entered into tie-up arrangements
with ESIC wherein cashless facilities are provided to
contract labour at BSP Hospital. At present, ESIC is
running only a small dispensary at Bhilai and has
approved the setting up of a 100 bedded specialty
hospital.
• At Bokaro Steel Plant, after sustained dialogue & follow
up, ESIC has made tie-up arrangements with two
hospitals in the vicinity of Bokaro Steel City.
• Rourkela Steel Plant has provided building to ESIC for
office which has and has been found to be very helpful
in providing services related to contract labours and
contractors.
• After continuous follow-up with ESI Authorities, one of
the major hospitals near Bhadravathi has been made
ESI referral hospital which has benefited the contract
labours engaged at Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant of
SAIL.

9
Immediate medical relief in the form of first aid is provided
to contract labours in case of accident in Works area at
occupational health centres/hospitals of SAIL Plants.
Safety is accorded top priority at Steel Plants/Mines of SAIL.
Robust mechanisms have been put in place for ensuring
adherence to safety norms through regular inspections &
periodic safety audits.
SAIL plants and units are ensuring compliance of statutory
provisions both under the Factories Act, 1948 as well as the
Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970. Adequate
budget is made available for meeting the statutory
requirements.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
ESI authorities had requested for Land for construction/
establishment of ESI Hospital near RINL-VSP for which it was
indicated to them that 5 Acres of Land could be spared. ESI
authorities are yet to respond to this offer . Contractors in
RINL-VSP are paying heat, dust and height allowances to the
contract labour engaged by them as per need. ”
20. The Committee observe that medical facilities to contract
workers are provided under ESI Act, 1948 and are made available
at most of the plant locations of SAIL and where full fledged hospitals
are not available, various efforts have been made by SAIL plants to
facilitate the same. The Committee have also been informed that
on request of ESI authorities, RINL/VSP had indicated about 5 acres
of land for establishment of ESI hospital, but ESI authorities are yet
to respond to this offer. The Committee desire that the matter be
pursued vigorously to ensure timely and swift action for construction
of ESI hospital and would like to be apprised of the latest position
in this regard.
21. While taking note of the medical facilities provided to the
contract workers, the Committee had also suggested that periodical
medical examination of workers employed in hazardous sectors
should be done by Steel PSUs and they be covered under personnel
accident and medical insurance schemes. The Committee note that
the reply of the Ministry is silent in this regard. The Committee feel
that a time schedule of 6 months/one year should mandatorily be
fixed so that all employees including contract workers who are
engaged to work in hazardous sectors undergo compulsory medical
examination for timely detection and treatment of ailment due to
hazardous condition at work place. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of any compulsory personnel accident and medical
insurance schemes initiated by the Steel PSUs for contract workers.

10
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
WAGE REVISION IN STEEL PSUs
Recommendation Serial No. 2
The Committee note that new pay scales for steel workers were
to be implemented  w.e.f. 01.01.2012. The Committee observe that
though discussions have reportedly taken place many times but even
after lapse of 2 years, wage revision is yet to be finalized. The Ministry
of Steel have informed the Committee that more than 15 rounds of
discussions have been held with the Unions and the Committee were
assured that presently the negotiations are going on in a very advanced
stage and wage settlement can be expected anytime soon. The
Committee have come to know that some of the workers unions of
Steel PSUs desire wage settlement and pension scheme on the lines of
Coal India Ltd. During discussions, the Management have reportedly
offered 16% of Minimum Guarantee Benefit (MGB) for employees and
6% for pension. The Committee were further apprised that wage revision
for other PSUs like Coal India was finalized with 25% MGB and of HPCL,
BHEL, NTPC & MOIL with 30% MGB. The Committee have been given to
understand that the SAIL management is in the process of finalizing
the wage agreement and desire that while setting the wage revision,
it should be ensured by steel PSUs that settlement should be done
keeping in view the wages of other Maharatna PSUs and the rising cost
and inflation should also be kept in mind.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
In SAIL, Wage Revision for the non-executive employees is finalized
through negotiation at the national level bi-partite forum, namely,
National Joint Committee for Steel Industry (NJCS). SAIL plants and
RINL are the Member plants of the said Committee. The issue of Wage
Revision was deliberated upon in NJCS at length taking into account
the financial condition of the Company, rising employment cost and
expectation of workers. After protracted negotiations in NJCS, MoU was
arrived at between the entire Workers’ and Management Representatives

11
on 25.1.2014 at New Delhi. The detailed Memorandum of Agreement
based on the MOU shall be entered into after the approval of the
competent authority.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
Vide its Office Memorandum No. 2(110)/11-DPE(WC)-GL-XVI/13
dated.13.06.2013, Department of Public Enterprises, Government of
India  has given guidelines on “Policy of the 7th round (2nd part) of
Wage Negotiations for unionized workers in Central Public Sector
Enterprises w.e.f. 01.01.2012. (Copy enclosed as Annexure-I)
Wage revision in RINL is being carried out in pursuance of the
Memorandum of Agreement of National Joint Committee for the Steel
Industry (NJCS). The Memorandum of Agreement signed on 29.04.2010
was valid upto 31.12.2011 and wage revision is due from 01.01.2012
in case of workers. Several negotiations were held between
representatives of Workers and Management and MOU has been arrived
on 25.01.2014. Both the parties have agreed upon the coverage of
MOU, validity period of the agreement, guaranteed benefit, dearness
allowance, perks and allowances, pension etc. The detailed
Memorandum of Agreement for settlement of Wage Agreement, 2012
would be worked out after finalization of Scales of Pay. (Copy enclosed
as Annexure-II)
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
NUMBER OF CONTRACT WORKERS IN SAIL AND RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that there are 93654 (works – 19462, non-
works – 7908, projects – 60771, Mines -5513) contract labourers engaged
by SAIL in different areas other than projects. Similarly, the number
of contract labourers engaged by RINL is reported to be 5834 whereas
Trade Unions have claimed that there are 13000 contract labourers in
RINL. As a principal employer SAIL and RINL are required to ensure
implementation of Employees’ Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1952; Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 1948, Factories Act, 1948;
Minimum Wages Act 1948; Employees ’ Compensation Act, 1923 etc.
The Committee observe that the exact number of contract workers in
an organization are always challenged by the Trade Unions. The
Committee feel that such situation arises due to non-maintenance of
records of contract workers. The Committee, therefore, recommend

12
that it should be made mandatory for contractors to maintain plant-
wise records of contract workers to ensure proper implementation of
all the above referred labour laws so that the interests and rights of
the contract workers are protected. The Committee also expect Steel
PSUs to develop foolproof mechanism to monitor the same.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Register of Workers having details of contract labour is maintained
by the contractor. This is normally checked at the time of issue of gate
pass/release of contractors ’ bills. Periodic checking of contractors ’
establishment is done by the Contract Executing Authorities to enforce
proper maintenance of Registers. All contractors are required to
maintain Muster roll, wage register, deduction register & overtime
register under the Contract Labour (R & A) Act, 1970.
A well laid mechanism exists in SAIL to ensure implementation of
statutory provisions under the various applicable Labour laws.
Compliance to statutory provisions is ensured by way of recurrent site
visits and through the executing authorities as well as contract labour
cell at respective plant/unit. There is a designated welfare officer to
ensure compliance as per the Acts.
Before issue of Entry Gate Passes to the contract workers it is
ensured that they are covered under Employees ’ Provident Fund &
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and Employees ’ State Insurance Act,
1948. Random checking of all details is carried on thereafter with help
of Contract Executing Authorities. Specific terms & conditions like
possession of PF code etc. by the contractor are also incorporated in
the tender document for ensuring social benefits & welfare of contract
labour by the contractors. In addition to benefits as extended under
ESI Act, indoor medical treatment facilities in plant hospitals/medical
centres are also provided in case of exigencies/emergencies.
Regular & correct payment by contractor to the contract labour
under Minimum Wages Act 1948 is ensured by following the below
mentioned mechanism:
• Payment of wages to contract labour is witnessed and certified
by Contract Operating Authorities (COAs) as a representative
of Principal Employer at the time of disbursement of wages
by the contractors.
• In case of default by the contractor , as the Principal Employer,
SAIL pays wages to contract labour directly and the amount
so paid is recovered against contractor ’s pending bills/any
payment due to the contractor.

13
• Payment of prescribed wages and compliance of other
statutory dues are further ensured to the contract labour at
the time of issuing Statutory Dues Clearances (SDCs) to the
contractor for release of their running bills.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
The contract labour strength reported as 5834 represents the
strength in Plant. The number of contract labour in other areas such
as Projects varies depending upon volume of the Project work
undertaken where the work is of one time in nature and the contract
labour are retrenched/terminated by the contracting agencies soon
after the completion of Expansion/Project activities. VSP being the
Principal Employer , is strictly ensuring the implementation of various
provisions of different statutes viz., Contract Labour (Regulation &
Abolition) Act, 1970; Factories Act, 1948; Minimum Wages Act, 1948;
ESI Act, 1948; the Employees’ Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1952, etc. RINL-VSP has established a exclusive contract labour
cell to conduct periodical inspections for monitoring the implementation
of the above statutes.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
FACILITIES FOR WOMEN WORKERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee have been given to understand that the permanent
women employees of RINL are working in the administrative buildings
where the toilet facility is there. But there are women workers who
work at plant and toilet facilities are not made available to them.
Further , no change rooms/rest rooms are provided to women workers.
The Committee are concerned to the poor working conditions,
particularly for women workers and strongly recommend that SAIL and
RINL should immediately take cognigence of this complaint of trade
unions and establish rest rooms, change rooms and women toilets at
all the steel plants/work place with 3 months and apprise the Committee
action taken in this regard.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Separate toilets and rest rooms have invariably been provided at
all locations where women employees are posted/engaged both in
technical as well as non-technical areas. Constant efforts are made for

14
improving the hygiene conditions at workplace for all employees
especially the women employees.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
Exclusive rest rooms/toilets have been provided in the offices and
work sites in the Plant where female employees are deployed. The
sites include Area Shop Offices, Administrative Building and a few
control rooms etc.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
SAFETY, SECURITY OF CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee feel that another important aspect for workers
welfare which should not be overlooked at any cost is the health
sector. The Committee note that the contract labourers in steel sector
are engaged in various flexible jobs like operation and maintenance,
housekeeping etc. These workers are exposed to high amounts of heat
and dust generated during the operation. The various trade unions
representing contract workers have, therefore, demanded safety,
security, better working conditions for these workers. The Committee
feel that due care should be given to their demands as health and
general well being of the employees should be the priority of any
organisation. Taking note of the demands of trade unions that workers
engaged in hazardous zones, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) like
safety shoes, helmet, hand gloves, goggles, fire resistance coats should
be in adequate supply and of proper quality and provided by the
company and not through the contractor , the Committee recommend
that the companies should take note of this serious demand of trade
unions. The Committee also desire that time to time inspections should
be carried out by the companies to ensure that these equipments are
being worn by the workers and are of desired standards.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Safety & Security of Contract Labour is one of the prime focus
areas in SAIL aiming for Accident Free Workplaces. SAIL ’s Plants and
Units are ensuring that contract labour is provided with General Safety
Induction Training & Specific on-the-job training before start of the

15
job. Specialized trainings viz. training on working at heights, electrical
safety, gas safety, material handling etc., are also provided as per
requirement before their actual deployment.
It is ensured that Personal Protective Equipments of proper quality
and in adequate quantity are provided to contract labours for their
safety at work place, a clause for compliance is also inserted in the
Notice Inviting Tenders (NITs). Periodic Safety Audits and regular
inspections are carried out to ensure usage of PPEs and strict adherence
to safety norms.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
An exclusive Safety Engineering Department is looking after all the
safety aspects of both regular employees and contract labour. With
regard to contract labour, all contract labour are being provided with
safety induction training at the time of commencement of work. In
addition, the Zonal Safety Officers (ZSO) are ensuring implementation
of all safety related aspects. Contractors are providing safety appliances
(personal protective equipment) like safety shoes, safety helmet, safety
belts, fire retardant coats, gum boots, gloves, dust-masks, goggles to
all the contract labour and the usage of the same is being monitored
by VSP . Further , VSP is certified under the OHSAS-18001 and all
requirements under OHSMS are adhered to.
Contract labour are subjected to various training programmes in
addition to mandatory general safety training such as: Site-specific,
job-specific, Fire, Height, Gas, Electrical, Confined Space, Chemical,
Behavioral Based, Hazards training, Mock Drills etc. Further , awareness
through safety films on material handling, electrical safety, road safety,
use of PPEs etc.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
As regards the training to workers, RINL has informed the Committee
that contract labour is subjected to various training programmes in
addition to mandatory general safety training, site-specific, job-specific,
fire, height, gas, electrical, confined space, chemical, behavioral based,
hazards training, mock drills etc. Further as training and skill
development lays foundation of long term sustainability of an

16
organization, the Committee while appreciating the regular training
programmes arranged by RINL, feel that all regular employees and
contract workers be given greater exposure to safety measures and
advance technology in mining sector and operation of steel plants. The
Committee would, therefore, stress the need for more innovative and
compulsory training programmes for all the staff at various levels after
every 3 to 5 years and contract workers by Steel PSUs.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Plants and Units of SAIL ensure that the regular employees are
provided requisite safety training as well as training pertaining to their
area on regular basis. Refresher programmes are also held regularly.
For Contract labour , General Safety Induction Training & Specific
on-the-job training is provided before start of the job. Specialized
trainings viz. training on working at heights, electrical safety, gas
safety, material handling etc., are also provided as per requirement
before their actual deployment.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
An exclusive Safety Engineering Deptartment is looking after all
the safety aspects of both regular employees and contract labour. With
regard to contract labour, all contract labour are being provided with
safety induction training at the time of commencement of work. In
addition, the Zonal Safety Officers (ZSO) are ensuring implementation
of all safety related aspects. Contractors are providing safety appliances
(personal protective equipment) like safety shoes, safety helmet, safety
belts, fire retardant coats, gum boots, gloves, dust-masks, goggles to
all the contract labour and the usage of the same is being monitored
by VSP . Further , VSP is certified under the OHSAS-18001 and all
requirements under OHSMS are adhered to.
Contract labour are subjected to various training programmes in
addition to mandatory general safety training such as: Site-specific,
job-specific, Fire, Height, Gas, Electrical, Confined Space, Chemical,
Behavioral Based, Hazards training, Mock Drills etc. Further , awareness
through safety films on material handling, electrical safety, road safety,
use of PPEs etc.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]

17
SERVICE CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYEES OF MSTC LTD.
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee observe that MSTC Service Rule for Non-Executive
employees has been construed as per the service condition of SAIL/
CMO for city based non executive employees. The pay structure and
other related service condition have also been followed in line with
SAIL/CMO. This is as per the Government approval in principle while
delinking from SAIL. The Committee also note that All India Association
of MSTC Ltd. — Employees Unions, the only registered union by MSTC
Ltd. has not voiced any objection regarding industrial relation problem
in MSTC Ltd. and the organization is also maintaining the service
condition in the desired path. As a result there is a reasonably disciplined
working atmosphere in the Company. The Committee are happy to
observe that the union is maintaining the tradition of co-operation, in
upbringing the welfare and professional competencies of its members
and has been co-operating consistently with the management towards
development of a healthy working environment in the company along
with active participation in the developmental needs of the organization.
The Committee expect that the same tradition of co-cooperativeness
and mutual beneficial relationship inter-se will continue and bring
more efficiency and healthy working environment in the company.
Action Taken
Service Conditions of Employees of MSTC Ltd. The contents of the
report have been noted and shall ensure compliance with the
recommendation in future.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol. I)
dated 6.6.2014]

18
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
EQUAL PAY FOR EQUAL WORK
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee observe that both the regular employees and
contract labourers are being engaged in coke oven battery, sinter
plant blast furnace, steel melting shop, etc. in steel plants of SAIL and
RINL. Although, Rule 25(2) (5A) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and
Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, states that in cases where the workman
employed by the contractor perform the same or similar kind of work
as the workmen directly employed by the principal employer of the
establishment, the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other
conditions of service of the workmen of the contractor shall be the
same as applicable to the workmen directly employed by the principal
employer of the establishment on the same or similar kind of work,
the Committee note that the wages to unskilled workers in SAIL vary
from Rs. 229.82/- to Rs. 441.43/- per day against the minimum wages
of Rs. 8630/- per month fixed for employees of SAIL alongwith other
admissible allowances. The Committee have been given to understand
that job contracts are awarded with respect to fabrication, mechanical
and transportation units where SAIL also have permanent workers. The
Committee are surprised to note that though the contract workers are
engaged in such works which are perennial in character and they are
regularly engaged by the contractor for the last 20-30 years but they
are still not provided a permanent job to feel themselves to be part
of the organisation. While deploring the attitude of Public Sectors
Companies like SAIL and RINL to engage contract workers in such
activities which are not only the core activities of the company but
help the company to improve their production and profits, the
Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of Steel should issue
necessary directions to the PSUs under their administrative control to
implement Rule 25(2)(5A) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and
Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, in letter and spirit and wages and
allowances paid to regular workers be also paid to contract workers
engaged in similar work. The Committee recommend that wherever
Contract Workers are engaged for more than 5 years at a stretch, in
that places Contract Workers be made permanent by framing a policy.

19
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Plants and Units of SAIL award job contracts for jobs of specialised
and intermittent nature as well as for various ongoing project activities
under the Modernisation & Expansion Programme through tendering
process. Sporadic jobs, periodic Capital Repairs & intermittent
maintenance jobs for Plant & equipment, jobs pertaining to new projects
as well as Addition, Modification and Rectification (AMR) of existing
facilities, housekeeping, painting of buildings & structural etc. are
contracted out.
Contractors engage labours to execute the job awarded to them &
Contract Labours are their employees. The Service conditions of these
contract workers are governed under the Contract Labour (R&A) Act,
1970 and other applicable Labour Laws which does not envisage
regularisation.
The contract workers who are employees of the contractor are not
working against a definite post of the establishment. They cannot be
treated at par with regular employees as the contract labours do not
undergo rigorous selection process in the manner regular employees
are selected. They also do not fulfil the criteria of qualifications and
age etc. They cannot, therefore, be equated with regular workmen for
the purposes for their wages.
The position has also been endorsed by the Hon ’ble Supreme Court
in numerous decisions. Recently, Hon ’ble High Court of Delhi in the
matter of Air India Ltd. versus Presiding Officer , CGIT & anr [W. P . (C)
1987/1991] on 28.7.2011 relying on the various decisions of the Apex
Court held that, “Merely because the casually employed workmen are
performing the same tasks as their regularly employed counterparts
cannot by itself constitute a legal justification for application of the
principle of ‘Equal Pay for Equal Work ’. The above decisions of the
Supreme Court cast a burden on the workmen to show that there is
total parity in the nature of the functions performed by regularly
employed workmen and the daily wagers/casual workers. ” Copy of the
judgment is placed at Annexure-III.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
In RINL-VSP , contracts are awarded for activities which are
temporary in nature like Capital Repairs, Emergency Breakdown jobs,
Supply-cum-Application jobs, Piece-rated works, One time jobs, Jobs
under AMR (Addition, Modification & Repairs), Project/Expansion works,
Technological assistance and upkeep services etc.

20
Contract labour is deployed/engaged only those kinds of activities
where regular/permanent employees of RINL are not employed. The
work performed by the regular employees are primarily not comparable
with the work on which the contract labour are engaged. The contract
labour are paid as per the category of work in which they are deployed
viz. un-skilled, semi-skilled or skilled.
The period of engagement of contract labour is co-terminus with
the completion of the contract period and hence the question of
permanency does not arise.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl. (Vol. I)
dated 6.6.2014]
CANTEEN FACILITIES AT WORKPLACE
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee observe that canteen facility at Visakhapatnam
Steel Plant of RINL has been outsourced. The Committee are concerned
that though the Factories Act 1948, provide that a canteen should be
provided and maintained in plant by the occupier for use of workers
and not by outsourcing and engaging contract workers, instead of
maintaining the canteen for a large workforce , in RINL, the same has
been outsourced to a contractor. During evidence, the CMD, RINL had
assured the Committee that he will look into the matter and ensure
that the canteen is managed by the Company and the employees
working in the canteen are regularized. The Committee expect that
necessary action in the matter has already been taken. The Committee
also desire similar practice to be in vogue in all steel plants of SAIL
and would like to be apprised of the same.
Action Taken
I. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
The contract labour also avail the subsidized canteen facilities in
all the 17 canteens which are available to the employees of the
Company. All these canteens are operated in conformity with the
provisions of the Factories Act, 1948.
II. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
The statutory canteens facilities are provided at all plants of SAIL
in terms of the Factories Act, 1948 and are being supervised by the
representatives of management for ensuring strict control on quality,
service and prices.

21
Pertinent to mention that in the case of Ferro Alloy Corporation
Ltd. Vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh Labour Employment & Technical
Education (Labour-II) Deptt., 2003 (96) FLR 160, the Hon ’ble Court has
held that there is nothing in section 46 of the Factories Act, which
provides for the mode in which the specified establishment must set
up a canteen where it is left to the discretion of the concerned
establishment to discharge its obligation of setting up a canteen either
by way of direct equipment or by employment of contractor, it cannot
be postulated in the latter event, the persons working in the canteen
would be the employees of the establishment.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]

22
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
MINIMUM WAGES TO CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that as per Contract Labour (Regulation and
Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, Rule 25(2)(4), the rates of wages payable
to the workmen by the contractor shall not be less than the rates
prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948(11 of 1948), for such
employment where applicable and where the rates have been fixed by
agreement, settlement or award, not less than the rates so fixed. The
Committee, however, observe that the minimum wages paid per day
to contract labour are not only uneven amongst the SAIL Plants in
different states but there is disparity in wages between different steel
PSUs. The minimum wages per day for unskilled workers in Integrated
Steel Plant (ISP), Burnpur is Rs. 269.46/- against Rs. 441.43/- in Durgapur
Steel Plant of SAIL. As regards RINL, the minimum wages paid to
contract workers per day are Rs. 257/- only. The Committee do not
agree with the present different wage structure for contract workers
by different units of SAIL and RINL and desire that a separate wage
policy should be made for the contract labourers in the entire steel
sector. The Committee feel that the Government/Steel Companies
should take appropriate steps so that this disparity in minimum wages
is removed and reduced to the minimum.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
The wages paid by the contractors to the contract workers engaged
at SAIL Plants are governed in terms of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
wherein Appropriate Government for each plant is the respective State
Government. As Principal Employer , SAIL Plants/Units ensure that the
wages paid by the Contractors to their Contract labours are over and
above the Minimum wages notified by the respective State/Appropriate
Governments.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
RINL-VSP has adopted wages notified by Government of India w.e.f.
01.10.2010. Accordingly, the Minimum Wages as notified for contract

23
labour by the authority under minimum wages i.e., the Regional Labour
Commissioner (Central), Hyderabad are implemented by the various
contracting agencies and RINL-VSP , as Principal Employer, monitors
payment of the same. The variable DA (cost of living allowance) is
revised by the Central Govt. twice in a year i.e., in April and October.
RINL-VSP being the Principal Employer is ensuring the compliance of
the same.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
METHODOLOGY FOR PAYMENT OF WAGES
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that SAIL has made mandatory requirement
of PF code and ESI code for contractors, photo I cards/gate pass for
contract labourers and online attendance system has also been initiated
by the company. The company is reportedly facilitating bank payment
to workers. As regards RINL, the committee observe that 50% of the
workers are being paid wages through Bank Accounts. The Committee
are not happy as even today about 50% of the workers in RINL are
being paid wages in cash which may cause malpractices and exploitation
of contract workers regarding payment of minimum wages. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that all the contract workers in
SAIL and RINL should be paid their wages through cheques or their
bank accounts and the companies should ensure that contractor bills
are settled only after ascertaining the compliance of payment of wages,
PF and ESI remittances.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Efforts are being made for ensuring that the contractors make
payment to their contract labour through banks. The Contract Labour
at Bokaro Steel Plant, IISCO Steel Plant, Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel
Plant & SAIL Refractory Unit are mostly being paid wages through bank
while at Bhilai Steel Plant, contract labour working in the Works area
& township are being paid through banks. At other major plants, steps
have been taken to convince the Unions, Contractors and their labour
for bank payment. Payment through banks has been partially
implemented at RSP , SSP , CMO, RMD, Collieries etc.

24
There is a well laid down procedure for ensuring that the wage
sheet, deposit challan of payment of PF and ESI dues etc., are checked
before release of the bills of the contractor. The Contract Labour Cells
at Plants/Units verify such documents and issue mandatory No Dues
Certificate/Statutory Dues Clearance for release of the running/final
bills of the contractors.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
RINL-VSP is striving to ensure implementation of payment of wages
to contract labour by the contracting agencies through Banks. Due to
the unstinted efforts, around 60% of the contract labour are being paid
wages through Banks. Continuous efforts are being made for achieving
100% implementation of payment of wages through Banks in RINL-VSP .
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENTS
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee observe that SAIL is uniformly implementing
employment to dependent of contract workers across the company ’s
plants and units w.e.f. 01.04.2009 in case the worker ’s death happens
to be in the steel plant. According to the Ministry of Steel, SAIL has
provided employment on compassionate ground to 49 dependents of
contract labourers. According to the Ministry of Steel, 9 cases are
under process and in 8 cases, there was no eligible dependent of the
deceased contract labourer. The Committee while appreciating the
SAIL decision, desire that the same be implemented in other PSUs like
RINL also and a proper system with clear cut guidelines for the
management to follow should be put in place so that the bereaved
family of the worker do not have to run from pillar to post to obtain
benefits dully entitled and the benefits to be accrued in such cases
including compassionate appointment to his kin, educational facilities
for his children, amount of compensation to be awarded etc. should
be decided and paid in a fixed time period.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Plants/Units of SAIL provide employment on compassionate grounds
to one of the direct eligible dependent in case of death of a contract
labour due to accident arising out of and in course of employment

25
within the Works premises (including those engaged for Project work).
A well laid procedure exists at plants/units to process such cases
expeditiously.
Assistance is also rendered to contractor & their labour for
expediting early settlement of benefits under PF and ESI Scheme/
compensation under Employees Compensation Act.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
In case of fatal accident arising out of and in the course of
employment. Rs. 5.00 Lakhs is being paid to the dependants of the
deceased contract labour by the Contractor through Group Personal
Accident Insurance Scheme. In addition, all efforts are made to ensure
that the dependants of the deceased labour receive all statutory benefits
in time. Further , the concerned agency usually provides employment
to a dependant on compassionate grounds.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
LOCAL PEOPLE FOR CONTRACT WORKS IN STEEL PLANT
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that the works outsourced by SAIL and RINL
are not given to local peoples and the contractors employ and bring
workers from outside and paying them lower wages. The Committee
have time and again recommended that local/displaced persons should
be given preference for recruitment and even for contract jobs. While
appreciating that RINL has employed 7223 displaced persons against
the commitment of 5000, the Committee feel that SAIL and RINL
should ensure that local people be given preference by contractors for
engaging workers in mining, works and non-works areas of steel plants.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Contractors engage labours to execute the job contracts awarded
to them through tendering & such labours are employees of the
respective contractors. SAIL, as a principal employer , has no say in the
engagement of contract labours.

26
However, it is understood that the contractors are mostly employing
contract labour from the local peripheral population.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
While it is the prerogative of the Contractors to engage their
workers, they normally engage labour only from the nearby villages/
colonies. In addition, RINL/VSP has made it mandatory for the
Contractors to deploy 50% of their manpower requirement in unskilled
category from the Displaced Persons of VSP .
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee note that contract labourers in SAIL and RINL are
covered under ESI, Act. Free medical treatment at ESI dispensaries
and hospitals are provided to the contract workers and their dependents.
First aid medical facilities are also provided to contract labourers at
the occupational health centres within plant premises. The Committee
feel that the Ministry of Steel should also take up the matter of setting
up of ESI dispensaries and hospitals near the steel plants and whenever
needed referral to corporate hospitals/higher medical centres for
treatment shall also be made for contract workers. The Committee
also recommend that periodical medical examination of workers
employed in hazardous sectors and immediate medical relief in case
of any exigency should be the topmost agenda to ensure faith of
workers in the organisation. Further, the Committee desire that it
should be ensured that each employee working in hazardous sectors
should be covered under personal accident insurance scheme and
Mediclaim Insurance Scheme, etc.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 is applicable at SAIL ’s major
plant locations. Compliance of various provisions under the ESI Scheme
including contributions towards ESI Scheme by the contractors is
ensured. Medical facilities under ESI Scheme are provided by ESIC.

27
ESI hospitals are available at most of the locations. Locations where
full fledge hospitals are not available, various efforts have been made
by the plants to facilitate the same. Some of the efforts include:
• Bhilai Steel Plant has entered into tie-up arrangements with
ESIC wherein cashless facilities are provided to contract labour
at BSP Hospital. At present, ESIC is running only a small
dispensary at Bhilai and has approved the setting up of a
100 bedded specialty hospital.
• At Bokaro Steel Plant, after sustained dialogue & follow up,
ESIC has made tie-up arrangements with two hospitals in
the vicinity of Bokaro Steel City.
Rourkela Steel Plant has provided building to ESIC for office which
has and has been found to be very helpful in providing services related
to contract labours and contractors.
After continuous follow-up with ESI Authorities, one of the major
hospitals near Bhadravathi has been made ESI referral hospital which
has benefited the contract labours engaged at Visvesvaraya Iron &
Steel Plant of SAIL.
Immediate medical relief in the form of first aid is provided to
contract labours in case of accident in Works area at occupational
health centres/hospitals of SAIL Plants.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
ESI authorities had requested for Land for construction/
establishment of ESI Hospital near RINL-VSP for which it was indicated
to them that 5 Acres of Land could be spared. ESI authorities are yet
to respond to this offer.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee are concerned to note that though employees/
contract workers deployed in hot, hard and hazardous areas like coke
ovens, sinter plant, blast furnace and steel melting shop are given
incentives or extra allowance such as height allowances, heat allowance,
etc. The Committee feel that though the workers have been offered

28
incentives, they are deprived of the proper treatment, rehabilitation
and compensation. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that management of Steel PSUs should accord top priority to the safety
and security of the workers in iron ore mines and Steel plants and in
this direction adequate, budgetary provisions should be made, vigilance
and statutory compliances should be strictly implemented.
Action Taken
I. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED (SAIL)
Safety is accorded top priority at Steel Plants/Mines of SAIL. Robust
mechanisms have been put in place for ensuring adherence to safety
norms through regular inspections & periodic safety audits.
SAIL plants and units are ensuring compliance of statutory provisions
both under the Factories Act, 1948 as well as the Contract Labour
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970. Adequate budget is made available
for meeting the statutory requirements.
II. RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL)
Contractors in RINL-VSP are paying heat, dust and height allowances
to the contract labour engaged by them as per need.
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(12)/2013-Parl.(Vol.I)
dated 6.6.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 21 of Chapter I of the Report)

29
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
19 December, 2014 Chairperson,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

30
ANNEXURE I
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, GOI GUIDELINES ON “POLICY
OF THE 7TH ROUND OF WAGE NEGOTIATIONS
No. 2 (110)/11-DPE (WC) – GL-XVI /13
Government of India
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
Department of Public Enterprises
Block No. 14, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi
Dated 13th June, 2013
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Policy for the 7th Round (2nd part) of Wage Negotiations
for unionized workers in Central Public Sector Enterprises
w.e.f. 01.01.2012.
The undersigned is directed to convey the decision of the
Government that the next round of wage negotiations (which falls due
on a general basis from 01.01.2012) with the workers of Central Public
Sector Enterprises (CPSE) may be undertaken by the Management of
the Enterprises with the Trade Unions/Associations.
2. The wage negotiation and finalization will be subject to the
following conditions:—
(i) Management of the CPSEs would be free to negotiate the
wage revision of workmen where the periodicity of wage
settlement of five years has expired generally on 31.12.2011
keeping in view the affordability and financial sustainability
of any such wage revision of the CPSEs concerned.
(ii) No budgetary support for any  wage increase shall be provided
by the Government. The entire burden would be borne by
the respective CPSEs from their internal resources.
(iii) To avoid conflict of pay scales of executives/non-unionized
supervisors with that of their workmen, CPSEs may consider
adoption of graded DA neutralization and/or graded fitment
during the wage negotiations.
(iv) The management of the CPSEs concerned have to ensure
that negotiated scales of pay would not come in conflict
with the existing scales of pay of executives/officers and
non-unionized supervisors of respective CPSEs.

31
(v) CPSEs must ensure that any increase in wages after
negotiations does not result in increase in administered prices
of their goods and services.
(vi) The wage revision shall be subject to the condition that
there shall be no increase in labour cost per physical unit of
output. In exceptional cases where CPSEs are already working
at optimum capacity considering industry norms, the
administrative Ministry/Department concerned may consult
DPE.
(vii) As regards sick CPSEs registered with BIFR/BRPSE, no revision
of wage would be allowed to the workmen of such CPSEs
until the provision for additional expenditure on account of
such wage revision is approved by BIFR/BRPSE in the revival
plan of such CPSEs.
(viii) The validity period of wage settlement would be for a
minimum period of five years w.e.f. 01.01.2012. The workmen
of only those CPSEs who have opted for five year periodicity
of wage negotiations w.e.f. 01.01.2007 may go for another
wage negotiation of a minimum five year periodicity
(generally from 01.01.2012).
(ix) The CPSEs would implement the negotiated wages after
confirming to their administrative Ministry/Department that
the wage settlement is in conformity with the approved
parameters.
3. In the light of the above decision of the Government, all the
administrative Ministries/Departments are requested to issue suitable
instructions to the CPSEs under their administrative control under
intimation to this Department.
sd/-
(M. Subbarayan)
Director
To
All the administrative Ministries/Departments of the Government
of India.
Copy to:—
1. Chief Executives of Central Public Sector Enterprises.
2. Financial Advisers in the Administrative Ministries.
3. The Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 9, Deen Dayal
Upadhayay Marg, New Delhi.
4. Department of Expenditure, E-II Branch, North Block, New Delhi.
5. NIC, DPE with the request to upload this OM on to the DPE
website.

32
ANNEXURE II
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT OF NATIONAL JOINT
COMMITTEE FOR STEEL INDUSTRY (NJCS)
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
The Memorandum of Agreement signed on 29th April, 2010 was
valid upto 31.12.2011 and Wage Revision as due w.e.f. 1.1.2012 in case
of workers. After protected negotiations, understanding has been arrived
at between representatives of Workers and Management on 25th January,
2014 at New Delhi.
While the detailed Memorandum of Agreement would be worked
out and signed subsequently, following have been agreed upon (on
which the detailed Memorandum of Agreement shall be based) by both
parties, subject to approval of the Government of India.
1.0 Coverage
1.1 This MOU shall cover all the regular workers on the rolls of SAIL
& RINL as on 31.12.2011 and continued to be on the rolls on
1.1.2012.
2.0 Validity of the Agreement
2.1 The Agreement shall be valid for 5 years  w.e.f. 1.1.2012.
3.0 Guaranteed Benefit
3.1 The workers covered by this MOU would be entitled to a
guaranteed benefit @ 17% of Pay (Basic+DA).
4.0 Dearness Allowance
4.1 100% DA neutarlization would be linked to AICPI 198.00 as on
1.1.2012 (Base 2001=100) and shall be revised quarterly ( i.e. on
1st April, 1st July, 1st October and 1st January every year)
based on the increase/decrease in the quarterly average of AICPI
for the quarters December-February, March-May, June-August and
September-November respectively, over AICPI 198.00 (Base
2001=100). Other provisions for payment of DA shall remain
unchanged.
5.0 Perks & Allowances
5.1 A new allowance @ 6% of revised Basic Pay shall be paid w.e.f.
1.1.2014.

33
5.2 HRA: A committee consisting of four representatives each from
Union and Management side shall be constituted to unanimously
finalise HRA (House Rent Allowance) and HRR (House Rent
Recovery) on a prospective basis. The committee may endeavour
to finalise the same prior to signing of Memorandum of
Agreement. Till such perid, HRA would continue to be paid on
the present basic based on 2007 scales and HRR will also remain
unchanged.
5.3 Existing allowances shall continue to be paid at the existing
rates.
6.0 Pension
6.1 Pension Scheme shall be introduced w.e.f. 1.1.2012 and
Management contribution towards the same shall be @ 6% of Pay
(Basic+DA) per month.
7.0 Scale of Pay
7.1 It is also agreed that the Scales of Pay will be finalised before
the settlement of Wage Agreement, 2012.
8.0 Miscellaneous
8.1 It is also agreed that if SAIL achieves average Profit After Tax
(PAT) of Rs. 5000 crore for the last three years during the validity
of this Agreement, one additional increment shall be given to
the employees.
9.0 Payment of Arrears:
Payment of wage arrears as above, shall be made in two equal
installments. The first installment shall be paid within one month
from the date of signing of the Memorandum of Agreement and
the second installment within one year. However, in case of
employees separating in between, the balance amount shall be
paid at the time of final settlement.
Management Representatives Workers Representatives

34
ANNEXURE III
COPY OF THE JUDGEMENT OF THE SUPREME COURT
DATED 28.7.2011
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P . (C) 1987/1991
Reserved on: July 14, 2011
Decision on: July 28, 2011
AIR INDIA LTD.
......Petitioner
Through : Mr. Lalit Bhasin with Ms. Ratna Dhingra
and Ms. Shreya S. Dabas, Advocates.
versus
PRESIDING OFFICER,
CGIT & ANR.
.....Respondents
Through : Mr. S.P . Sharma, Advocate for R-2.
CORAM: JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be No
allowed to see the judgement?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgement should be reported in Digest? Yes
judgement
28.07.2011
1. Air India Limited ( ‘AIL’) challanges an Award dated 4th March
1991 passed by the Central Government Industrial Tribunal ( ‘CGIT’)
holding that the workmen represented by the Air India Workers ’ Union
(‘AIWU’), Respondent No. 2, appointed on casual basis were entitled to
the same wages as payable to their regularly appointed counterparts
from the date of their initial appointment on the principle of ‘equal
pay for equal work ’.

35
2. Notice in the present writ petition was issued on 19th June
1991. By an order dated 21st April, 1992 while directing rule to issue,
this Court stayed para 20 of the impugned Award insofar as it granted
relief to the workmen retrospectively subject further to the condition
that in case the writ petition was dismissed, the Petitioner would pay
the workmen such interest on the delayed amount as maybe ordered
by the court. At one stage the writ petition was dismissed for non-
prosecution on 22nd February, 2001. Thereafter the Petitioner filed CM
No. 9757 of 2009 for restoration of the writ petition W.P . (C) No. 1987
of 1991.
By a detailed order dated 26th February 2010, this Court condoned
the delay in filing the application for restoration and recalled the
order dated 22nd February 2001, dismissing the writ petition for non-
prosecution and restored the writ petition to its original number subject
to the Petitioner paying Rs. 10,000/- as costs to Respondent No. 2. The
interim order dated 21st April 1992 was also restored.
3. Mr. Lalit Bhasin, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner
pointed out that the very basis on which CGIT had proceeded to treat
casual workmen and regularly appointed workmen on the same footing
for the purposes of application of the principle for ‘equal pay for equal
work’ is legally flawed. Referring to the decisions of the Supreme
Court in State of Odisha v. Balaram Sahu (2003) 1 SCC 250, State of
Haryana v. Tilak Raj 2003 (3) LLJ 487, Uttar Pradesh Electricity Board
v. Aziz Ahmad (2009) 2 SCC 606 and Official Liquidator v. Dayanand
(2008) 10 SCC 1, it is submitted that simply performing the same tasks
for duties as those regularly employed, would not entitle the casual
workers to parity of pay with regular employees.
4. On behalf of Respondent No. 2, which incidentally is now
substituted by the Aviation Industry Employees ’ Guild, Mr. S.P . Sharma
learned counsel supported the impunged Award of the CGIT by pointing
out that the evidence was led by both the parties before the CGIT to
show that casual workers were performing similar tasks as their
counterparts who were regularly employed. The evidence of Mr. B.S.
Kohli, a management witness confirmed that the work done by casual
workers was not in any way different from the work of the regular
employees.
5. The above submissions have been considered by the Court. The
recent decisions of the Supreme Court have restricted the application
of the principle of equal pay for equal work to those caes where two
sets of posts are indentical in nature and function. In State of Haryana

36
v. Tilak Raj, daily wage helpers working in Haryana Roadways claimed
regularization of their services and parity of pay with regular employees
on the ground that the nature of work done by both sets of employees
were similar. The High Court disposed of the writ petition by directing
that the daily wage workers would not be paid the regular pay scale
but would be entitled to “minimum pay scale with dearness allowance
alone”. Reversing the judgment of the High Court, it was explained by
the Supreme Court in paras 10 and 11 as under: (LLJ, p. 490)
“10. A scale of pay is attached to a definite post and in case of
a daily wager , he holds no posts. The respondent workers cannot
be held to hold any posts to claim even any comparison with the
regular and permanent staff for any or all purposes including a
claim for equal pay and allowances. To claim a relief on the basis
of equality, it is for the claimants to substantiate a clear cut basis
of equivalence and a resultant hostile discrimination before
becoming eligible to claim rights on a par with the other group
vis-a-vis an alleged discrimination. No material was placed before
the High Court as to the nature of the duties of either categories
and it is not possible to hold that the principle of “equal pay for
equal work ” is an abstract one.
11. “Equal pay for equal work ” is a concept which requires for its
applicability complete and wholesale identity between a group of
employees claiming identical pay scales and the other group of
employees who have already earned such pay scales. The problem
about equal pay cannot always translated into a mathematical
formula.”
6. In State of Odisha v. Balaram Sahu,  The Supreme Court set
aside the decision of the High Court of Odisha which granted non-
muster roll workers, daily wage helpers and casual workers parity of
pay with the regularly employed workmen. It was observed that “the
respondent workers cannot be held to hold any posts to claim even any
comparison with the regular and permanent staff, for any or all purposes
including a claim for equal pay and allowances ”.
7. After the judgment in State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (2006)
4 SCC 1  by the Constitution Bench, the Supreme Court reiterated the
principles laid down therein in Official Liquidator v. Dayanand. One of
the questions that arose for consideration was whether on account of
the similarity in the nature of work employees in the offices of the
Official Liquidators attached to different High Court engaged by the
OLs pursuant to sanction accorded by the Court (known as ‘company

37
paid staff’) and whose salaries and allowances were paid from the fund
created by the sale of the assets of the company in liquidation could
claim parity of pay with employees regularly appointed against posts
sanctioned by the Government of India in the Department of Company
Affairs. The decision of the High Court granting such parity of pay by
invoking the principle of ‘equal pay for equal work ’ was set aside by
the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court referred to its earlier decision
in State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh (1996) 11 SSC 77  where, in para
8, it was held as under (SCC, p. 81)
“The respondents, therefore, in the present appeals who are
employed on daily wages cannot be treated as on par with persons
in regular service of the State of Haryana holding similar posts.
Daily-rated workers are not required to possess the qualifications
prescribed for regular workers, nor do they have to fulfill the
requirement relating to age at the time of recruitment. They are
not selected in the manner in which regular employees are selected.
In other words the requirements for selection are not as rigorous.
There are also other provisions relating to regular service such as
the liability of a member of the service to be transferred, and his
being subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the authorities as
prescribed, which the daily-rated workmen are not subjected to.
They cannot, therefore, be equated with regular workmen for the
purposes for their wages. Nor can they claim the minimum of the
regular pay scale of the regularly employed. ”
8. In light of the above law, as explained by the Supreme Court,
the impugned order of the CGIT cannot be sustained. Merely because
the casually employed workmen of Respondent No. 2 Union are
performing the same tasks as their regularly employed counterparts
cannot by itself constitute a legal justification for application of the
principle of ‘equal pay for equal work ’. The above decisions of the
Supreme Court cast a burden on the workmen to show that there is
total parity in the nature of the functions performed by regularly
employed workmen and the daily wagers/casual workers. That burden
the workmen have been unable to discharge in the present case.
9. For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition is allowed
and the impugned order of the CGIT to the extent in grants the relief
of parity in pay scale to daily wage workmen with regularly employed
workmen is hereby set aside. Any proceedings instituted under Section
33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 consequent upon the
impugned Award will abide the present order.
July 28, 2011 S. MURALIDHAR, J

38
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2014 IN ROOM ‘C’, GROUND
FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Godam Nagesh
7. Shri Devji M. Patel
8. Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan
10. Shri Neiphiu Rio
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
14. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
16. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary

39
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) ** ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** **
(iv) ** ** ** ** **
(v) Draft Action Report on 51st Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the
subject “Service Conditions of Workers in Public Sector Steel
Companies” of the Ministry of Steel; and
(vi) ** ** ** ** **
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.

40
ANNEXURE V
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 14
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 9, 10, 06
13 and 14)
Percentage of total 42.86%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1 and 8) 02
Percentage of total 14.28%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3, 5, 6, 7, 11 06
and 12)
Percentage of total 42.86%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. NIL) 00
Percentage of total 0%