FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fiftieth Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, “Service
Conditions of Workers including Contract Workers in
Coal India Ltd. and its Subsidiaries ”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2014
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 22.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Pausa, 1936 ( Saka)


CC&S No. 90
Price : R  38.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 21
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................... 24
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 27
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 19.12.2014 ............. 29
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ........................................... 31
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2014-15)
Shri Rakesh Singh* — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Shailesh Kumar
7. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
8. Shri Godam Nagesh
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
(iii)
*Shri Rakesh Singh appointed w.e.f. 27.11.2014 vice Shri Hansraj G. Ahir appointed Minister.

(iv)
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Shri B.K Hariprasad
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
#
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
#Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated  w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Basawaraj Patil.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their
behalf, present this Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Fiftieth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Service Conditions of Workers
including Contract Workers in Coal India Ltd. and its Subsidiaries ”
relating to the Ministry of Coal.
2. The Fiftieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on
6th February, 2014. Replies of the Government to all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on
14th October , 2014.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 19.12.2014.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Chapter-I of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
19 December, 2014 Chairperson,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals
with Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on “Service Conditions
of Workers including Contract Workers in Coal India Ltd. and its
Subsidiaries” relating to the Ministry of Coal which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.02.2014.
2. The Action Taken replies have been received from the Ministry
of Coal in respect of all the 21 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report on 14th October , 2014. These have been
categorised as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 20 and 21
Total–14
(Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. Nos. 3 and 15
Total–02
(Chapter III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 5, 14 and 19
Total–03
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 7 and 8
Total–02
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Ministry on some of their observations/recommendations made in the
Fiftieth Report.
PROVIDENT FUND COVERAGE FOR CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
5. The Committee have come across facts put forward by
representatives of Trade Unions over the issue of Provident Fund (PF)
coverage for contract workers. The committee observed that there
have been grievances among workers regarding non-membership of
Provident Fund. The committee had been told that normally a contract
worker’s PF should be deducted after 30 days work, but the same does
not seems to be implemented actually in CIL. The committee noted
that official figures state that there were 64842 contract workers, but
out of that only 43846 were found qualified for coverage under Coal
Mines Provident Fund/EPF . Again, there were only 35785 workers
reported to be a member of CMPF/EPF . The committee were surprised
to see the big gap of nearly 12000 contract workers between workers
qualified for Provident Fund and the workers actually member of CMPF/
EPF and getting PF deductions. The reason put forward by CIL that
they were in the process of making them members of CMPF/EPF , was
not convincing. It clearly pointed to the failure of the CIL management
and of CMPFO towards full coverage of contract workers under social
security benefits like Provident Fund. The Committee, therefore
recommended that CIL management and CMPFO should work sincerely
towards bringing all the contract workers qualified for Provident Fund
benefits under the umbrella of CMPF/EPF scheme as a matter of social
security measure for worker ’s benefit.
6. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“The coverage of Contractor ’s worker under the provisions of CMPF
Act, 1948 is reviewed regularly in BoT meeting of CMPFO and all

3
concerned had been directed to ensure the coverage of all the
contract workers qualified for provident fund benefits under the
umbrella of CMPF/EPF Scheme. There has been incremental increase
in the number of workers covered under the CMPF/EPF Scheme to
the tune of 52,342 as on 31.03.2014 against 35,785 as on 01.04.2013.
Further , Ministry had directed CIL to bring all eligible contractors ’
worker under the ambit of CMPFO. ”
7. The Committee observed that against the official figure of
64,842 contract workers, only 43,846 were found to be qualified
for coverage under Coal Mines Provident Fund. While pointing out
to the failure of the Coal India Ltd. management and the CMPFO
towards giving full coverage to contract workers, the Committee
had recommended that CIL and CMPFO should work sincerely towards
bringing all the contract workers qualified for Provident Fund benefits
under the umbrella of CMPF/EPF scheme. Although, the Committee
find an increase in the number of workers covered under the CMPF/
EPF Scheme to the tune of 52,342 as on 31.03.2014, the Committee
are concerned to note that even after lapse of more than 8 months,
12,500 workers are still to be covered under CMPF/EPF. As the
Ministry had reportedly directed CIL to bring all eligible contract
workers under the ambit of CMPFO, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the time by which all these eligible contract workers
will be covered.
IMPLEMENTATION OF LABOUR LAWS IN PRIVATE COAL BLOCKS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
8. In the captive coal blocks regime, today, the Committee observed
that the Ministry of Coal had allocated many of the coal blocks to
private companies for development and production of coal. Out of
total 218 coal blocks allocated, a majority share of blocks has gone to
private companies. The Committee were very much concerned about
the regulation and implementation of labour laws by the Ministry of
Coal in such private coal blocks. The Ministry had assured the Committee
about their responsibility and legal obligation towards maintaining legal
standards and ensuring implementation of labour laws and minimum
wages to regular employees and contract workers in coal mining and
other activities in coal mines/coal blocks operated by CIL and its
subsidiaries, which the Committee was appreciative of. But, the
Committee strongly felt that Ministry of Coal should in coordination
with Ministry of labour must establish and develop an enforcement and
regulatory machinery to ensure that all labour laws were being observed

4
with regard to payment of minimum wages, provident fund, accidental
compensation, social security measures and other welfare provisions
to all the workers including contract labourers in private coal blocks/
mines without violation.
9. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“All the captive coal blocks that have come under production have
been brought under Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provision Act, 1948 and list of all such producing coal blocks
indicating jurisdiction of Regional offices has been uploaded on
the website of CMPFO. With regard to enforcement and regulation
of labour laws, it is submitted that it is obligatory on the part of
private coal companies to comply with all applicable labour laws.
The field establishment of Ministry of Labour and Employment and
State Governments already exists to ensure the compliance of
payment of minimum wages, accidental compensation and other
welfare provisions. ”
10. Taking note of the captive coal blocks, majority of which
have gone to private companies, the Committee were concerned
about the implementation of labour laws in such private coal blocks.
The Committee had felt that in addition to coal blocks operated by
CIL and its subsidiaries, the Ministry of Coal should in coordination
with Ministry of labour must establish and develop an enforcement
and regulatory machinery to ensure that all labour laws are observed
with regard to payment of minimum wages, provident fund,
accidental compensation, social security measures to workers in
private coal blocks/mines. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry
of Coal have informed that the all captive coal blocks that have
come under production were brought under the Coal Mines Provident
Fund and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1948 and are under the
jurisdiction of Regional Office of CMPFO. The argument put forward
by the Ministry of Coal that enforcement and regulation of labour
laws by private coal companies have to be complied with by them
and Ministry of Coal have no role to get them implemented is not
acceptable to the Committee. The Committee therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation and desire that the Ministry of Coal
in coordination with Ministry of Labour should establish enforcement
and regulatory machinery to ensure that contract labourers in private
coal blocks are not exploited and denied compliance of payment of
minimum wages, accidental compensation, provident fund, etc.

5
JOB CARD AND BANK ACCOUNT FOR CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
11. The Committee observed that most of the contract workers
engaged in mining, non-mining or other outsourcing jobs do not have
any job card unlike MGNREGA labourers, and neither do they have any
bank account number for salary transfer. The Committee took a serious
note of the cash payment to contract workers for their work and
strongly feel that this was the breeding ground for corruption,
malpractices and exploitation as regards payment of minimum wages
to them. The cash payment to contract workers not only gone
unaccounted but made way for a non-transparent and manipulative
administrative system. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommended that Ministry of Coal/CIL should ensure that all contract
workers had their job card and all payments as regards their wages
should be directly transferred in their bank account. It should be made
mandatory for all contractors to make payment to the workers through
cheque or bank account only. This would be very helpful in keeping
record of all wage transactions and putting a check of any violation of
minimum wages or delayed payments to workers. The Committee would
like to be apprised of action taken in this regard by Ministry of Coal/
CIL.
12. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“Coal India Ltd. has advised its subsidiaries to ensure that the
Contract Workers are provided with Identity Cards and proper
records kept. Efforts have been made for ensuring payment of
salary to Contract Workers through Bank. The High Power Committee
has also recommended the payment to Contract Workers through
Bank and necessary instructions have been given for implementation
of the above recommendation. ”
13. As regards the Committee ’s recommendation that Ministry
of Coal/CIL should ensure that all contract workers be issued their
job card and their wages be directly transferred in their bank
account, they are unhappy to note that in spite of their
recommendation to take immediate action for issue of job cards
and payment of wages direct in the bank account of contract workers,
CIL has only issued an advisory to its subsidiaries to ensure that
contract workers are provided with identity cards and proper records
be kept. Efforts have also been reportedly made for ensuring payment

6
of salary to contract workers through bank. As the Committee ’s
recommendation has not been implemented in letter & spirit, they
would like to be apprised of the present status of issue of job cards
and payment of wages through bank to contract workers, subsidiary-
wise.
FILLING OF BACKLOG VACANCIES OF SC/ST ’s
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
14. The Committee noted that there were many backlog vacancies
in CIL and it subsidiaries for SC/ST ’s which are lying unfilled. The
Committee found that there was a backlog of nearly 585 vacancies for
SC’s and 646 for ST ’s in Group A, B, C and D services as on 01.01.2013
in CIL and its subsidiaries. As CIL had offered no explanation or reason
as regards non-filling of this backlog quota for these communities, the
Committee, recommended that CIL management should review the
process of filling up of the backlog quota for SCs/ST ’s at different
levels/positions in services as a part of ensuring their greater
representation and their overall welfare.
15. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“Filling upbacklog vacancies of SCs/ST’s through direct recruitments
a continuous process. The position is being reviewed and all the
subsidiaries of CIL are resorting to direct recruitment as per their
requirement for backlog vacancies of SCs/STs also. ”
16. While observing that there is a backlog of 585 vacancies for
SCs and 646 for STs in Group A, B, C and D services as on 01.01.2013
in CIL and its subsidiaries, the Committee had recommended that
process of filling up of this backlog quota for SCs and STs at different
levels be completed at the earliest. The Committee are unhappy to
note that instead of furnishing information regarding filling up of all
this backlog quota for these communities, the Ministry of Coal have
stated that filling up of backlog vacancies for SCs and STs is a
continuous process and the position is being reviewed and all the
subsidiaries of CIL are resorting to direct recruitment for backlog
vacancy of SCs and STs. As the reply of the Government is silent on
the present status of filling of 585 vacancies for SCs and 646 for
STs, the Committee would like to be apprised of the present status
of filling up of above referred vacancies by CIL and its subsidiaries.

7
ACCIDENT IN COAL MINES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19)
17. The Committee were deeply concerned about the safety of
workers engaged in coal mining and other activities in CIL. The
Committee observed that the safety condition of the mines, both in
underground and surface, were a grey area and need improvement.
The recent incidents of deaths of many villagers in coal dumping site
in Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. should be an eye opener for CIL
management. The Committee noted that the role of DGMS and such
other statutory authorities were getting dwarfed due to dearth of
manpower, lack of proper inspection and various other reasons. Want
of Statutory manpower , deficiency in utilization of budgetary provision
for safety, violation of safety provision due to increase in target
production, illegal mining in abandoned mines were the prime reasons
for accidents. What was even more worrying and deplorable was that
safety condition in privately managed companies was miserable and
even reporting of accidents was often evaded by them. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by Ministry of Coal, CIL
and DGMS to ensure non-repetition of accident like Mahanadi Coalfields
Ltd. and the penal action taken against all those responsible and found
guilty for the accident.
18. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have stated as
under:—
“In the subsidiaries of CIL, efforts are being made to improve and
ensure safety in mines as well as for persons employed thereat. To
prevent recurrence of accidents all the recommendations of the
enquiry committee are implemented. Workers are being trained as
per the need to make them aware of the new technologies and
methods of working with due consideration to safety norms. Regular
and surprise inspections are being carried out by senior officers of
the company and DGMS in addition to routine inspection carried
out by mine and area officials. The suggestions given to them to
ensure safety and stability are being implemented.
All the provisions of Mines Act, 1952, Rules and Regulations and
Circulars issued by DGMS from time to time, in this regard, are
being complied with to ensure occupational safety of the employees/
workers at their workplaces. Safety gadgets are also provided to
the employees/workers at free of cost.

8
There is a Tri-partite Safety Board consisting of representatives of
management, representatives of workers & representatives of
Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) for taking decisions in the
matter of safety measures. Such Safety Board functions in addition
to the Pit Safety Committee and Area Safety Committee functioning
in the mine of the subsidiary in which representatives of workers
& management take decision jointly, as per the statutory provisions.”
19. The Committee had observed that the safety condition of
mines both in underground and surface are a grey area and need
improvement. Pointing out to the incident of deaths of many villagers
at coal dumping site in Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., the Committee had
desired to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry of Coal/
CIL/MCL and DGMS to ensure non-repetition of accidents like
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. and the penal action taken against all those
found guilty for the accident. The Committee note that inspite of
giving information regarding the steps taken by the Ministry of Coal/
CIL/MCL and DGMS to ensure non-repetition of much accidents and
penal action taken against those found guilty for the accident in
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., the Ministry have just stated that to prevent
recurrence of accidents, the recommendations of the Enquiry
Committee are implemented. As reply of the Government is silent
on penal action taken against those who were negligent and
responsible for the accident, the Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken by the Government to prevent non-repetition of
accidents like Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. and the penal action taken
against those responsible for the accident.

9
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
IDENTIFYING EXACT NUMBER OF CONTRACT WORKERS IN CIL
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The Committee observe that there have been various contentions
regarding the estimation of exact number of contract workers engaged
in different activities in CIL. There have been different versions from
the official side and from Trade Union representatives in this regard.
The worker ’s representatives hold that there may be around one lakh
contract labourers working in CIL in mining, non-mining, outsourcing
and other civil and peripheral jobs. It is noted that difficultly to
estimate exact number of contract workers in CIL has arisen due to
non-maintenance of any records in this connection. The Committee
are of the view that to ensure proper implementation of labour laws
and enforcement of minimum wages to contract workers and protecting
their interests and rights, the first and foremost task should be of
identifying the exact number of contract workers actually engaged in
different activities in CIL. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
Ministry of Coal must give a direction to CIL and its subsidiaries to
maintain and keep updated records of contract workers actually working
in different activities including mining, non-mining, outsourcing and
others. The Committee also desire that not only it should be made
mandatory for contractors to maintain accurate records but time to
time inspection and surveys may also be conducted by CIL in this
regard.
Action Taken
CIL and its subsidiaries ensure proper implementation of labour
laws like minimum wages for contract workers and protecting their
interests and rights by making necessary provisions in the Notice Inviting
Tender (NIT) as well as in the Agreement. There is a Nodal Officer who
has been entrusted with the job of verifying/inspection of all the
statutory records maintained by the contractors in regard to minimum
wages as well as other labour laws applicable. As per the reports
received from the different subsidiaries, the exact number of

10
contractors’ workers engaged in different jobs as on 31.03.2014 is
69,267 as per break-up given below:—
Nature of job Number of contract workers
Mining activities 21885
Transportation of coal 19281
Civil Work 10986
Watch & Ward 11546
Others 5569
Total 69267
Various Registers viz. Registers for Muster Roll, Registers of Wages,
Register of Deduction, Register of Overtime, Register of Fine, Register
of Advance, as well as Wage Slip are maintained by the contractors,
as per the statute. Contractors have to issue ‘Employment Cards ’ to
the contract workers based on the record maintained in these Registers
which are inspected by the Nodal Officers nominated by the coal
companies. These Registers are also verified by the Relations/Labour
Enforcement Machinery of respective regions. Apart from these registers
being maintained by the Contractors, subsidiary companies of CIL are
also maintaining statutory Registers like Form ‘B’, Form ‘C’, Form ‘D’
and Form ‘E’, which ensure deployment of persons in the mine as per
provisions of the Mines Act/Rules and these registers are verified by
the representative of the Director of the General of Mines Safety.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
PROVIDENT FUND COVERAGE FOR CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
The Committee have come across facts put forward by
representatives of Trade Unions over the issue of Provident Fund (PF)
coverage for contract workers. The Committee observe that there
have been grievances among workers regarding non-membership of
Provident Fund. The committee have been told that normally a contract
worker’s PF should be deducted after 30 days work, but the same does
not seems to be implemented actually in CIL. The Committee note
that official figures state that there are 64842 contract workers, but
out of that only 43846 are found qualified for coverage under Coal
Mines Provident Fund/EPF . Again, there are only 35785 workers reported

11
to be a member of CMPF/EPF . The committee are surprised to see the
big gap of nearly 12000 contract workers between workers qualified
for Provident Fund and the workers actually member of CMPF/EPF and
getting PF deductions. The reason put forward by CIL that they are in
the process of making them members of CMPF/EPF , is not convincing.
It clearly points to the failure of the CIL management and of CMPFO
towards full coverage of contract workers under social security benefits
like Provident Fund. The Committee, therefore recommend that CIL
management and CMPFO should work sincerely towards bringing all the
contract workers qualified for Provident Fund benefits under the
umbrella of CMPF/EPF scheme as a matter of social security measure
for worker ’s benefit.
Action Taken
The coverage of Contractor ’s worker under the provisions of CMPF
Act, 1948 is reviewed regularly in BoT meeting of CMPFO and all
concerned had been directed to ensure the coverage of all the contract
workers qualified for provident fund benefits under the umbrella of
CMPF/EPF Scheme. There has been incremental increase in the number
of workers covered under the CMPF/EPF Scheme to the tune of 52,342
as on 31.03.2014 against 35,785 as on 01.04.2013. Further, Ministry
had directed CIL to bring all eligible contractors ’ worker under the
ambit of CMPFO.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
STRICT ENFORCEMENT OF MINIMUM WAGES TO CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
The Committee are very much concerned and worried about the
plight of many contract workers in CIL who are being denied even the
minimum wages prescribed for them. The Committee note that there
are widespread incidents of violations of minimum wages to contract
workers in coal mines operated by CIL and its subsidiaries. Though, the
Ministry of Coal have denied any such violation of minimum wages to
contract workers, but the worker ’s representatives i.e. Trade Unions
have a different version to offer, clearly stating that minimum wages
are not paid to many of the contract workers. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Coal and CIL should

12
enforce timely payments of minimum wages to outsourced contracts
workers engaged in mining and non-mining activities. The Committee
also recommend that the Ministry of Coal should ensure that there is
a labour officer on every 500 employees in CIL and its subsidiaries for
taking care of welfare of workers.
Action Taken
In line with the recommendation of the Standing Committee
regarding enforcement of timely payment of minimum wages to
outsourced contractors ’ workers engaged in mining and non-mining
activities, mechanism like deployment of the officials who are
authorized under Section 21(2) of Contract Labour(Regulation &
Abolition) Act, 1970 by the principal employer to carry out checking
of Wage Rolls & Wage Register at the time of witnessing the payment/
signing labour payment certificates, is ensured. In addition, surprise
checks are also carried out by Personnel Executives posted in mines/
sub-area/area/headquarter. The contractors are also directed under
provisions of Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) to maintain all the statutory
registers. The site in-charge of the work place is also directed to
ensure compliance of the provisions which are made in the NIT . CIL has
advised its subsidiaries to ensure timely payment of minimum wages
to outsourced contractors ’ workers. As regard recommendation of the
Committee for ensuring employment of labour officer on every
500 employees in CIL and its subsidiaries for taking care of welfare of
workers, CIL has informed that it had already posted welfare officers
in its subsidiaries as per the statute.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
LOWER REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN IN SERVICES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee take a critical note of less number of regular
women employees in services in CIL and its subsidiaries at executive,
non-executive positions. The Committee are disappointed to find that
out of the total working strength of 357926 employees in CIL and its
subsidiaries, the representation of women is just 27239, which is a
meager 7.6 %. In a country like India where nearly 50 % of population
are women, where gender budgeting is being promoted by Government
of India and where women are being encouraged in all kind of jobs as
a matter of women ’s empowerment initiative, the on-record
performance of CIL as regards women ’s representation in services is
very poor. What is more worrying is that women ’s representation in

13
executive positions where policies are made and implemented is also
low. Taking note of lower representation of women in various positions
in service in CIL and its subsidiaries, the Committee strongly recommend
the Ministry of Coal and CIL to take necessary action to create and
promote greater job opportunities for women in Coal PSU ’s as a part
of Gender empowerment policy of CIL.
Action Taken
CIL has stated that inspite of restriction on the deployment of
women under Mines Act 1952, there are opportunities of employment
of women in CIL & its subsidiaries in Technical posts i.e. Para-medical
staff, computer training, besides un-skilled female workers deployed
on compassionate grounds. In executive cadre also, women are being
deployed. As regards empowerment & upgrading their skills, various
in-house & external training programmes are organized for female
employees.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
COMPULSORY CANTEEN IN WORKPLACES AT SUBSIDIZED RATES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
The Committee found that many of the Worker ’s Associations of
CIL, have complained that canteen facility, restroom and shelter are
not made available for workers at workplaces in many coal mines in
CIL and its subsidiaries. The Committee feel that for the workers doing
hard physical labour in coal mines and other such activities, the provision
of tea, snacks and other refreshment is very necessary for energizing
them. The Committee, would like to remind the Ministry of Coal/CIL
that it is the statutory obligation of the Coal Companies to make
canteen and shelter facilities available to workers at the workplace,
which has not been followed in letter and spirit. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that CIL and its subsidiaries must ensure that
decent canteen facilities and shelters are made available to the workers
at the workplace and there should be no discrimination in regular and
contract workers for availing these facilities.
Action Taken
The subsidiaries of CIL have canteen facilities, rest rooms/shelters.
While extending such facilities, no discrimination is made between
regular & contractor ’s workers. At present there are 446 Canteens
wherein tea, snacks & other refreshments are provided at subsidized

14
rate and 530 Rest Rooms/Shelters are also available at work places.
However , efforts are being made to upgrade such canteens & rest
shelters by providing more amenities.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
CONTRACTING BUSINESS BY TRADE UNION LEADERS TO BE CHECKED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee take note of the repeated complaints and deep
concerns over practice and monopoly of Trade Union leaders resorting
to taking on contracting business in their own hand in coal mining
areas, especially in Jharkhand and thus controlling and many a times
exploiting the contract workers. It is often alleged that most of the
trade union leaders have a close nexus with other contractors too and
take a heavy share of profit out of contract workers wages in their
pocket to whom they hire on job. They have their own commercial
interests and are least concerned with workers interests. The Committee
also came across the complaints regarding non-holding of elections in
many of the Trade Unions and monopoly of the same set of leaders
getting elected as worker’s representatives riding on their money power
and their crucial links. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Ministry of Coal and CIL should put in place a mechanism to put a
check on the practice of Trade Union leaders resorting to contracting
business because it comes as a clear conflict of interest of Trade Union
leaders vis-à-vis contract workers interests. Also, some rule or guideline
may be issued to the registered Trade Unions of CIL to hold regular
elections for electing worker’s representatives in a fair and transparent
manner.
Action Taken
CIL informed that contracts are awarded through Notice Inviting
Tender (NIT) and mechanism has already been developed for awarding
the contract i.e. screening of the tender documents with regard to
eligibility, by a Committee and based on the recommendations of the
Committee, the works were awarded. Further , most of the trade union
leaders at the subsidiaries are employees of CIL and in order to check
such activity (contracting business), an affidavit is taken from the
contract workers to the effect that they are not related to any employee
of the respective subsidiary. So far as holding of an election by registered
trade union is concerned, it is regulated as per the Bye-laws/Rules
framed by Trade Union concerned.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]

15
LOCAL PEOPLE TO BE GIVEN PREFERENCE IN OUTSOURCING WORK
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
The Committee observes that in many of the jobs/activities
outsourced by CIL and its subsidiaries to outside agencies, the local
people are not given preference while employing workers on contract
job. The outsourced companies in coal mine areas often employ workers
from outside at their own terms and conditions at cheaper wage rates.
The Committee, feel that the local people or the land oustees have
the first right to get opportunity in outsourced activities in local mining
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that CIL and its
subsidiaries should ensure that local people be given preference while
employing contract workers in mining, non-mining and other outsourcing
activities.
Action Taken
Most of the contractors ’ workers engaged in non-mining, civil and
other peripheral jobs are from the local population. However , in
outsourcing jobs like overburden removal, transportation of Coal and
other mining activities, as per the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) the
Contractor concerned has to engage his permanent employees, as these
jobs are in the prohibited category u/s 10 of CL (R&A) Act, 1970.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
INHABITABLE QUARTERS IN DILAPIDATED CONDITION BE
RECONSTRUCTED/DEMOLISHED
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 12 and 13)
The Committee observe that housing facilities for regular employees
of CIL are existing but the same are not available to all the workers.
The worker ’s representatives have submitted that the new colonies
which have been constructed recently are in good condition, but the
quarters of ECL and BCCL are not good. In fact, most of the old
colonies are in dilapidated conditions. The Committee were apprised
that the quarters of ECL are inhabitable and lie in poor condition.
Also, for people living in Raniganj, and in quarters along side railway
tracks from Dhanbad to Asansol, though the quarters are constructed
but they are in inhabitable conditions. The area where quarters are
constructed are full of coal dust, dirt and pollution. The Committee
further note that CIL has not constructed enough new quarters for
workers in the last 20 years. The Committee express their deep concern
to the facts and observations that the inhabitable houses in dilapidated
condition in many coal mine areas of CIL and its subsidiaries which
have either been lying vacant or have been abandoned have become

16
den/hub for criminals and anti-social elements. The criminals often
stay overnight there and the workers families staying there in nearby
quarters often fear to venture outside in night. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that such quarters in dilapidated
conditions be either demolished immediately so as to throw out criminals
staying there or should be reconstructed to benefit the workers.
The Committee observe that particularly in ECL and BCCL, the
quarters are old and in bad condition. The Committee therefore
recommend that the management should demolish the old quarters
and make new buildings for workers.
Action Taken
There are 3,99,354 quarters available for manpower of 3,46,638 of
CIL as on 30.06.2014 which shows 100% satisfaction in housing. Out of
the total number of quarters, 3,14,982 quarters are standard ones and
84,372 quarters are non-standard ones.
The renovation of existing old quarters has already been taken up
in a phased manner. Moreover , the quarters, which are in dilapidated
and uninhabitable condition, are being demolished phase-wise and
new residential quarters are being constructed.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
OVERHAULING AND REJIG OF DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16)
The Committee observe that though top management of CIL and
its subsidiaries seem to be sincere and honest towards welfare of the
workers, the major problem as regards various grievances, service
conditions, social security benefits and other welfare measures are
directly concerned with the mismanagement, mishandling, non-sincerity
and callous attitude of the Department of Personnel of CIL and its
subsidiaries in lower levels. It seems like all the good work, initiatives,
welfare measures taken by CIL top management for the benefit of its
employees are spoiled and made to bite dust by the callousness of
officials of Department of Personnel in lower levels. The Committee
feel that Department of Personnel of CIL and its subsidiaries are playing
with the image and reputation of CIL which is a schedule ‘A’, Maharatna
Company. The Committee therefore, recommend that there is an urgent
need to overhaul and rejig the Department of Personnel in CIL and all
its subsidiaries. A more dedicated, committed, sincere and honest
team of officers should be deputed there for the larger welfare and
benefits of employees.

17
Action Taken
Coal India Limited has stated that the Personnel Department of CIL
and its subsidiaries have a dedicated team of Executives who are
working for effective implementation of various welfare schemes in
the company, ensuring that various social security benefits reach the
employees and their families. It is worthwhile to mention that
subsidiaries of Coal India Ltd. are spread over 8 States with manpower
above 3.42 lakhs resulting in various kinds of disputes/grievances. The
Personnel Division has always been coming forward to resolve these
disputes/grievances of employees in bilateral negotiations and individual
grievances of the employees, too, are also addressed on priority basis.
This Ministry is also reviewing the grievances to ensure timely redressal
of the same.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
COMPENSATION FOR ACCIDENTAL DEATHS OF CONTRACT WORKERS
BE INCREASED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17)
The Committee observe that there are huge differences and
distinctions as regards compensation to regular workers and contract
workers during accidental deaths, disabilities or injuries at workplace.
The Committee have been informed by CIL management that they are
governed by workmen compensation Act in the compensation matters
of their regular workers and it is also legally binding upon them. But
in the case of contract workers, the compensation depends on the
contractor as per their contract with CIL. Some of the contractors pay
accordingly to their own negotiation between their unions and them
outside the Act. The Committee are deeply concerned with the
inadequate compensation to contract workers during accidental deaths
and find that as much as 50% of the workers who died during mining
accidents are contract workers, but they have been left at the mercy
of the contactors. The Committee, therefore strongly recommend that
Ministry of Coal and CIL management should take appropriate measures
so as to ensure that the amount of compensation to the contract
workers are paid, as far as possible at par with the regular company
workers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps/
initiatives take by CIL in this regard.
Action Taken
CIL has informed that Compensation is paid in the subsidiaries of
CIL, to the legal dependents of contractor workers as per Employees
Compensation Act at par with the permanent employees. To ensure

18
payment of such compensation to the dependents of contractor workers,
there is a clause in the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) to adhere to the
provision of all the statutory laws applicable to the contractors. In
addition to that, the Site In-charge of the workplace ensures the
payment of such compensation.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
MEDICAL REFERRAL AND HEALTH FACILITIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18)
The Committee take note that the diseases/treatment covered
under medical facilities to the workers are very limited. There are
many treatments and diseases for which the medical facilities are not
available in CIL hospitals/dispensaries. Also, there have been repeated
complaints that the medical referral service in CIL hospitals is not
good. The Committee also observe that even at the places where CIL
hospitals are available, the doctors, nurses, specialists and ICCU facilities
are not available on time. There is also an apathy as regards medical
treatment of contract workers in CIL hospitals and dispensaries. The
Committee, therefore recommend that the list of diseases/treatments
covered under the medical benefits should be enlarged and it should
be ensured that adequate number of doctors, specialist and ICCU
facilities are available on time in all the CIL hospitals for the benefit
of workers including contract workers. The medical referral service
also needs to be improved and made more feasible.
Action Taken
CIL informed that there was no restriction in treatment of any
disease for employees and their eligible dependents at companies ’
hospitals & dispensaries. Those patients who need treatment, usually
not available at companies ’ hospitals/dispensaries are referred to
hospitals empanelled with CIL and its subsidiaries. At present 215
reputed hospitals situated in different States are empanelled by the
CIL & its subsidiaries for providing better healthcare facility to its
workers.
In-house medical facilities available in CIL & its subsidiaries are as
under:—
a. Hospitals — 80
b. Dispensaries — 398
c. Hospital beds — 5739
d. Ambulance — 642
e. Doctors — 12239 including 339 specialists.

19
To assist in extension of medical facilities to employees effectively,
Para-Medical staffs are also deployed in hospitals/dispensaries in
adequate number. Medical care is also extended to the contractors ’
workers as available in CIL ’s hospitals/dispensaries.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20)
There are inadequate arrangements for detecting occupational
diseases/health hazards in both the nationalized and private coal
companies. Most of the Pneumoconiosis cases are diagnosed as TB and
the worker concerned are deprived of the proper treatment,
rehabilitation and compensations. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that CIL management should accord top priority to the
safety and security of the workers in coal mining and in this direction
timely inspections, budgetary provisions, vigilance, security beef up
and statutory compliances should be made compulsorily without any
fail.
Action Taken
In the subsidiaries of CIL, Occupational Health Centers are
functioning at each Area, looked after by Medical Officers trained in
detecting Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis (CWP). A Pneumoconiosis Board
is also functioning for confirming CWP cases and determining
compensations. The medical examination of employees and contractors’
workers are being done as per the recommendations of the 10th Safety
Conference.
All possible measures are being adopted for safety in mines as well
as the persons employed threat. All efforts are also made for
implementation of the recommendations of various committees of
Safety. The findings of the enquiries and deliberation of the same in
the Safety Committee Meeting and at Pit Top are also ensured. All the
provisions of Mines Act & Rules and Circulars issued there under in this
regard are being complied with to ensure occupational safety at the
work place. Rigorous inspections of the Mines are carried out by Senior
Management, Trade Union Representatives and Pit Safety Committee
to check and review the safety status and rectification of deficiencies,
if any. Sufficient budgetary provisions are made on safety head every
year.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]

20
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21)
The Committee are of the opinion that training and skill
development form an integral part of Human Resource Management of
any organization. It lays foundation of skill/knowledge transmission,
intellectual integrity and long term sustainability of an organization in
today’s competitive market. The Committee appreciate the regular
training programmes arranged by CIL management for enriching the
knowledge and fine tuning the skills further , but feel that there is
further need and scope for improving and redesigning these training
modules on the front of hiring specialist and expert trainers, giving the
workers including contract workers greater exposure to advance
technology in coal mining sector including operation of Heavy Earth
Moving Machinery. The Committee would, therefore, like the CIL
management to make training programmes more innovative and
compulsory for all the staff at various levels after every 5-7 years and
contract workers to enrich their skill further.
Action Taken
For improvement in production & productivity, CIL has always
adopted modern techniques. Deployment of manpower on these modern
machineries requires training as well as skill development of the existing
employees. Therefore, each subsidiary has Human Resource Development
Department (HRD Deptt.) to impart proper training to the employees.
Contract workers are also being trained before their engagement on
need basis. In addition to above, Compulsory vocational training as
well as on job training is given to new incumbents.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]

21
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
WAGE REVISION FOR CONTRACT WORKERS AND UNIFORMITY IN
MINIMUM WAGES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
The Committee observe that after nationalization, a Bi-Partite
Committee, known as JBCCI, was constituted consisting of the
representatives of four Central Trade Unions namely, INTUC, AITUC,
HMS & CITU and representatives of Management of Coal Industry on
14.08.1973 to negotiate National Coal Wage Agreement. The
representative of BMS was included later on. Besides, law of the land
applicable to the Workers of the Coal Industry, wages, dearness
allowance, service conditions, fringe benefits, welfare, social securities,
safety & others are decided under National Coal Wage Agreement
(NCWA). First NCWA was signed on 11.12.1974 for the period of four
years w.e.f. 01.01.1975. At present, NCWA-IX is in vogue for the period
of 05 years w.e.f. 01.07.2011 till 30.06.2016. The Committee is,
however, dismayed to note that there are huge variations as regards
wage revision policy and revision of minimum wages between contract
labourers and regular workers in CIL. The Committee note that the
minimum wages to workers for coal mining was Rs. 472 for unskilled;
Rs. 504 for semi-skilled; Rs. 536 for skilled, and Rs. 568 for highly
skilled. But, contract labourers engaged in scheduled employment are
getting minimum wages as per rates prescribed for the state. The
contract workers deployed in the job relating to mining activities as
mentioned under Section 2(h), (g), (k) of Mines Act-1952 including
washery, CHP and Railway sliding, are being paid mid-way between the
wages prescribed by the Central Govt. under Minimum wages Act, 1948
and wages payable to Cat.-I of National Coal Wage Agreement-IX. The
wages for contract workers varies from state to state for non-mining
jobs. It was Rs. 294 in West Bengal, Rs. 211 in Jharkhand, Rs. 190 in
Chhattisgarh and M.P . and Rs. 160 in Odisha. The Committee, therefore
observe huge variations in minimum wages for the contract workers in
different states. The Committee also feel that the minimum wages for
contract workers prevailing in many of the states is very low and not
sufficient for a decent living. The Committee recommend that the
wages of contract labourers should be nearer to the minimum wages

22
for unskilled workers of Coal India and its subsidiaries. The Committee
observes that the contract labourers who are working for more than
5 years at a stretch, the Coal India and its subsidiaries should absorb
them by forming a scheme.
Action Taken
The formula of mid-way wages between the wages prescribed by
the Central Government under Minimum Wages Act 1948 for the workers
employed in scheduled employment to non-coal mines and wage payable
to the lowest category of regular workers of CIL i.e. Category I of
National Coal Wage Agreement ( NCWA)-IX to arrive at minimum wages
of the contract workers deployed in jobs relating to mining activities
as mentioned under Section 2(h), (g), (k) of Mines Act 1952 including
Washeries, CHP and Railway Sliding is already in operation. Every
six months, D.A. notified by the Government for non-coal mines contract
workers is merged with the amount so derived.
The resulting minimum wages are applicable with effect from
01.10.2013 are as under:—
Un-skilled : Rs. 478/- per day
Semi-skilled : Rs. 511/- per day
Supervisor/Skilled : Rs. 544/- per day
Highly skilled : Rs. 577/- per day
The observation of the Committee in regard to huge variation in
minimum wages for scheduled employment in different States is the
subject matter of State Governments concerned. As regards observation
of the Committee for formation of a scheme for absorption of contract
labourers who are working for more than five years at a stretch, it is
submitted that it is neither feasible nor legally tenable as no such
contract for engaging such workers has continued for more than five
years at a stretch.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
REGULARIZATION OF CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15)
The Committee observe that there are a large number of contract
workers in various coal mines in CIL and its subsidiaries working for
more than 10 to 20 years, but still they are not getting job protection

23
or other service benefits as are entitled to regular employees. Such
workers still after working for so long period are still struggling to get
minimum wages and other social security benefits. The situation is
even worse in Dankuni Coal Complex where despite repeated demands
by such contract workers for regularization of their jobs in CIL is not
being considered. The Committee are deeply concerned with the plight
and struggle of such contract workers working in coal mining and other
activities in CIL for a period of more than 10 years. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the contract workers who have
been working in CIL for more than 10 to 15 years continuously and
have good experience may be given a sympathetic consideration for
regularization of their jobs in services.
Action Taken
Coal India Limited has informed that regularization of contract
workers after working 10–15 years continuously is not feasible or legally
tenable. However , efforts are being made to provide all applicable
social security benefits.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]

24
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
IMPLEMENTATION OF LABOUR LAWS IN PRIVATE COAL BLOCKS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
In the captive coal blocks regime, today, the Committee observe
that the Ministry of Coal have allocated many of the coal blocks to
private companies for development and production of coal. Out of
total 218 coal blocks allocated, a majority share of blocks has gone to
private companies. The Committee are very much concerned about
the regulation and implementation of labour laws by the Ministry of
Coal in such private coal blocks. The Ministry have assured the
Committee about their responsibility and legal obligation towards
maintaining legal standards and ensuring implementation of labour
laws and minimum wages to regular employees and contract workers
in coal mining and other activities in coal mines/coal blocks operated
by CIL and its subsidiaries, which the Committee is appreciative of.
But, the Committee strongly feel that Ministry of Coal should in
coordination with Ministry of labour must establish and develop an
enforcement and regulatory machinery to ensure that all labour laws
are being observed with regard to payment of minimum wages, provident
fund, accidental compensation, social security measures and other
welfare provisions to all the workers including contract labours in
private coal blocks/mines without violation.
Action Taken
All the captive coal blocks that have come under production have
been brought under Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provision Act, 1948 and list of all such producing coal blocks indicating
jurisdiction of Regional offices has been uploaded on the website of
CMPFO. With regard to enforcement and regulation of labour laws, it
is submitted that it is obligatory on the part of private coal companies
to comply with all applicable labour laws. The field establishment of
Ministry of Labour and Employment and State Governments already
exists to ensure the compliance of payment of minimum wages,
accidental compensation and other welfare provisions.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 10 of Chapter I of the Report)

25
FILLING OF BACKLOG VACANCIES OF SC ’S/ST’S
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
The Committee note that there are many backlog vacancies in CIL
and it subsidiaries for SC/ST ’s which are lying unfilled. The Committee
find that there is a backlog of nearly 585 vacancies for SC ’s and 646
for ST ’s in Group A, B, C and D services as on 01.01.2013 in CIL and
its subsidiaries. As CIL has offered no explanation or reason as regards
non-filling of this backlog quota for these communities, the Committee,
recommend that CIL management should review the process of filling
up of the backlog quota for SCs/ST ’s at different levels/positions in
services as a part of ensuring their greater representation and their
overall welfare.
Action Taken
Filling up backlog vacancies of SC/ST ’s through direct recruitment
is a continuous process. The position is being reviewed and all the
subsidiaries of CIL are resorting to direct recruitment as per their
requirement for backlog vacancies of SCs/ST ’s also.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
ACCIDENT IN COAL MINES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19)
The Committee are deeply concerned about the safety of workers
engaged in coal mining and other activities in CIL. The Committee
observe that the safety condition of the mines, both in underground
and surface, are a grey area and need improvement. The recent
incidents of deaths of many villagers in coal dumping site in Mahanadi
Coal fields Ltd. should be an eye opener for CIL management. The
Committee note that the role of DGMS and such other statutory
authorities are getting dwarfed due to dearth of manpower , lack of
proper inspection and various other reasons. Want of Statutory
manpower, deficiency in utilization of budgetary provision for safety,
violation of safety provision due to increase in target production,
illegal mining in abandoned mines are the prime reasons for accidents.
What is even more worrying and deplorable is that safety condition in

26
privately managed companies is miserable and even reporting of
accidents is often evaded by them. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken by Ministry of Coal, CIL and DGMS to
ensure non-repetition of accident like Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. and
the penal action taken against all those responsible and found guilty
for the accident.
Action Taken
In the subsidiaries of CIL, efforts are being made to improve and
ensure safety in mines as well as for persons employed there at. To
prevent recurrence of accidents all the recommendations of the enquiry
committee are implemented. Workers are being trained as per the
need to make them aware of the new technologies and methods of
working with due consideration to safety norms. Regular and surprise
inspections are being carried out by senior officers of the company and
DGMS in addition to routine inspection carried out by mine and area
officials. The suggestions given to them to ensure safety and stability
are being implemented.
All the provision of Mines Act,1952, Rules and Regulations and
Circulars issued by DGMS from time to time, in this regard, are being
complied with to ensure occupational safety of the employees/workers
at their workplaces. Safety gadgets are also provided to the employees/
workers at free of cost.
There is a Tri-partite Safety Board consisting of representatives of
management, representatives of workers and representatives of Director
General of Mines Safety (DGMS) for taking decisions in the matter of
safety measures. Such Safety Board functions in addition to the Pit
Safety Committee and Area Safety Committee functioning in the mine
of the subsidiary in which representatives of workers and management
take decision jointly, as per the statutory provisions.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No.  54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 19 of Chapter I of the Report)

27
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
CHILD CARE LEAVE TO WOMEN EMPLOYEES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
The Committee observe that there is a discrimination as regards
extending Child Care Leave to women in Coal India Ltd., wherein the
women at executive positions are entitled for availing it, but the same
have been denied to the women at non-executive positions. The
Committee fail to understand the logic and criteria behind such
distinction between women at executive and non-executive position.
The committee feel that non-extension of Child Care Leave to women
at non-executive positions is a matter of discrimination to them. A
woman is a woman and child-care is simply child care, irrespective of
any categorization, class, caste or distinction. If it is being granted to
one section of women employees, there is no reason as to why it
cannot be granted to other regular women employees. The Committee
therefore, strongly recommend that CIL Management should extend
the benefit of Child Care Leaves to all regular women employees
without any distinction of their executive or non-executive position.
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee to extend the benefit of
Child Care Leave to all the women employees without any distinction
of executive or non-executive positions is under deliberation and
consideration.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
JOB CARD AND SALARY ACCOUNT FOR CONTRACT WORKERS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
The Committee observe that most of the contract workers engaged
in mining, non-mining or other outsourcing jobs do not have any job
card unlike MGNREGA labourers, and neither do they have any bank
account number for salary transfer. The Committee take a serious note
of the cash payment to contract workers for their work and strongly

28
feel that this is the breeding ground for corruption, malpractices and
exploitation as regards payment of minimum wages to them. The cash
payment to contract workers not only goes unaccounted but makes
way for a non-transparent and manipulative administrative system.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry of Coal/
CIL should ensure that all contract workers have their job card and all
payments as regards their wages should be directly transferred in their
bank account. It should be made mandatory for all contractors to
make payment to the workers through cheque or bank account only.
This will be very helpful in keeping record of all wage transactions and
putting a check of any violation of minimum wages or delayed payments
to workers. The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken
in this regard by Ministry of Coal/CIL.
Action Taken
Coal India Ltd. has advised its subsidiaries to ensure that the
Contract Workers are provided with Identity Cards and proper records
kept. Efforts have been made for ensuring payment of salary to Contract
Workers through Bank. The High Power Committee has also
recommended the payment to Contract Workers through Bank and
necessary instructions have been given for implementation of the above
recommendation.
[Ministry of Coal O.M. No. 54012/5/2014-PRIW II dated 14.10.2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
19 December, 2014 Chairperson,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

29
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2014 IN ROOM ‘C’, GROUND
FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Godam Nagesh
7. Shri Devji M. Patel
8. Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan
10. Shri Neiphiu Rio
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
14. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
16. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary

30
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) ** ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** **
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on 50th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on the subject “Service conditions of workers including
contract workers in Coal India Limited and its Subsidiaries ”
of the Ministry of Coal;
(v) ** ** ** ** **
(vi) ** ** ** ** **
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.

31
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FIFTIETH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 21
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 10, 14
11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 20 and 21)
Percentage of total 66.67%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 3 and 15) 02
Percentage of total 9.52%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 5, 14 and 19) 03
Percentage of total 14.29%
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited
(vide recommendation Sl. Nos. 7 & 8) 02
Percentage of total 9.52%