STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COAL
“DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)]
FIFTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
15


FIFTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2015-2016)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COAL
“DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Seventh Report of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

CC&S No. 101
Price : Rs. 83.00
© 2015 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2015-16 .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 21
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 46
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 49
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 50
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2015-16) held on 19.11.2015 .............. 58
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Seventh
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) .................................................... 60

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2015-16)
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Nagesh Godam
6. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
7. Shri Shailesh Kumar
8. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
9. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri M. J. Akbar
23. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
24. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
25. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
26. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
27. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
28. Shri Jugul Kishore
29. Shri Avinash Pande
30. Shri Sanjay Raut
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ravindra Garimella — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2015-16)” of the Ministry of Coal.
2. The Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 24.4.2015.
Replies of the Government to all the observations/recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 20.7.2015.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 19.11.2015.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter I of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
03 December, 2015 Chairperson,
12 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals
with Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on “Demands for Grants
(2015-16)” of the Ministry of Coal which was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.4.2015.
2. The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Coal in respect
of all the 16 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on
20th August, 2015. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 16
Total : 11
(Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:
Sl. No. 14
Total : 01
(Chapter III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
-Nil-
Total : -Nil-
(Chapter IV)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos. 6, 8, 12 and 15
Total : 04
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I
of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Ministry on some of their observations/recommendations made in the
Seventh Report.
Research and Development (R&D)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
5. The Committee noted that Research and Development Projects
were not allocated specific to companies but were covered under four
thematic areas viz. improvement in production; productivity and safety
in coal mines; coal beneficiation and utilization; and protection of
environment and ecology. Further, Standing Scientific Research Committee
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal) was the Apex Body to
administer coal related research activities from budgetary Support and
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd (CMPDIL), was the nodal
agency for coordination and monitoring of Science and Technology plan
schemes and of CIL’s R&D Projects. The Committee also noted that the
cutting edge projects were implemented by pioneering research and
academic institutes related to Coal and allied industries with active
participation of coal and lignite mining companies. Some of the coal S&T
projects which were completed during 2014-15 include Development of
Self Advancing (mobile) Goaf Edge Supports (SAGES) for depillaring
operations in underground coal mines; Development of Software for
prediction of subsidence by 3D numerical modelling for SCCL mines and
Development of customized organic coatings for corrosion protection of
special mining equipment. The Committee however, noted with concern

3
that for the year 2015-16, all the 12 projects included under R&D were
the spillover projects from the previous year and no new project had
been sanctioned for the year 2015-16. Admittedly, though the results cannot
be quantified in terms of enhanced production and turnover, many of
the R&D studies had a seminal impact on production, energy efficiency
and operational costs. The Committee noted that the BE allocated for the
year 2015-16 is Rs. 18.00 crore. In this regard, the Committee were happy
to observe the increasing utilization of S&T funds over the last three
years with utilization of Rs. 9.66, Rs. 11.53 and Rs. 11.76 crore for the
corresponding years 2011-12; 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. For the
year 2014-15, out of the RE of Rs. 20 crore, funds amounting to Rs. 12.95
crore have been disbursed till 13.3.15. The Committee, therefore, desired
that earnest efforts for technology up-gradation in underground and
opencast mines in CIL to achieve production/productivity be continued
with added fervor for a time bound implementation of R&D projects for
more impact on energy efficiency and operational cost.
6. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply informed the
Committee as under:—
“ At present, there are 12 ongoing S&T projects which were spill
over from the previous year i.e. 2014-15. Also, 3 new projects have
been recommended by the Technical sub-Committee of SSRC in its
Meeting held on 08.05.2015 at CIL, Kolkata, for consideration and
approval of the Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC).
Therefore, it is expected that the budget provision of Rs. 18.0 crore
for 2015-16 will be utilized, fully.
To obviate the delay in executing the projects and also for full
utilization of funds, the following steps are being followed:—
a. Progress of research projects is being monitored by CMPDI
and is also being reviewed by the various Committees of CIL
and MoC.
b. Progress of these projects is also monitored by periodic visits
to the implementing institutes by the officials of CMPDI to
extend help to the implementing agencies to solve some of
the administrative and technical problems faced by them.
c. Quarterly progress reports of the projects are being received
from the implementing agencies and the status of these
projects is being placed before the various Committees of
CIL and MoC.”

4
7. The Committee note with appreciation that the Ministry have
taken necessary steps for obviating delays in execution of R&D Projects
and also for full utilization of funds, in accordance with their
observations and recommendations. The Committee, however, wish to
re-emphasize that the R&D is a very important component and utmost
priority needs to be given to R&D Projects especially those which will
have a seminal impact on productivity, energy efficiency and operational
costs.
Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control Scheme
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
8. The Committee noted that the objective of the Environmental
Measures and Subsidence Control (EMSC) Scheme was to improve the
environmental conditions in the old mined out areas of Jharia and Raniganj
coalfields by addressing fire and subsidence problems. The Committee
further noted that the Major thrust areas in EMSC during XII Plan period
were control of subsidence in the old, abandoned, waterlogged workings
in Raniganj coalfields, control of mine fires and subsidence in Jharia
coalfields besides rehabilitation of persons residing in these areas. All
EMSC Schemes have subsequently being merged in a Master Plan dealing
with Fire, Subsidence, Rehabilitation and Diversion of surface
infrastructure within the leasehold areas of BCCL and ECL. It had been
brought out to the notice of the Committee that BCCL and ECL were
making all out efforts for the implementation of the Master Plan. The
Committee while observing that a meager amount of only Rs. 0.40 crore
had been allocated under BE/RE for the year 2015-16 note from the
explanation furnished by the Ministry that as per the tenets of the Master
Plan, the CIL needs to first spend from its own resources upto Rs. 350
crore per year and the additional funds required, if any, were to be made
available from the Budget. According to the Ministry, the expenditure
during the last few years had remained less than CIL’s mandatory
contribution and as such, ‘NIL’ or near ‘NIL’ expenditure has been reflected
in the Ministry’s Budget. The Committee noted that BCCL and ECL were
making all out efforts for the implementation of Master Plan dealing
with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation in Jharia coalfields as well as
Raniganj Coalfields with rehabilitation of both BCCL and non-BCCL
families going on. The Committee were happy to note that BCCL has
already shifted 2162 families from fire affected projects to safe colonies
in non-coal bearing areas and another 7000 houses to be allocated shortly.
The Committee desired that the inherent problems pertaining to land
acquisition which were statedly the major constraints impeding
implementation of the EMSC Scheme needed to be tackled seriously. The
Committee also felt that such an important scheme having ramification

5
on the environment as well as rehabilitation of persons residing in these
locations should be given priority. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that efforts made by the Ministry for the implementation
of Master Plan dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation in Jharia
and Raniganj Coalfields be accelerated to achieve the targets set.
9. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed
the Committee as under:—
“Keeping in mind the importance of the Scheme having ramification
on the environment as well as rehabilitation of persons residing
in these location, Ministry of Coal has given highest priority in
monitoring this Scheme. Accordingly, a High Powered Central
Committee (HPCC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry
of Coal has been constituted with representatives from different
Ministries and State Governments concerned (viz. Jharkhand and
West Bengal) for speedy implementation of the Scheme. This
Committee regularly meets to monitoring the progress of
implementation of scheme.
Further, Secretary (Coal) has discussed the issue of land acquisition
with Chief Secretary of Jharkhand during various meetings at Ranchi
to expedite acquisition of land for rehabilitation of the affected
persons.
The issue of permission of Government of West Bengal for
construction of houses by ADDA has also been taken up with
Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal.
Secretary (Coal) has written to Chairman Railway Board regarding
diversion of railway lines in the affected area. Chairman, Railway
Board has constituted a Committee to examine the issue whose
report is expected to be finalized by August 2015.”
10. The Committee in their original Report while acknowledging
the importance of Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control
(EMSC) scheme having ramifications on the environment as well as
rehabilitation of persons had recommended for accelerated efforts on
the part of the Ministry for implementation of the Master Plan dealing
with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation in Jharia and Raniganj
Coalfields. On a perusal of the action taken reply of the Government,
the Committee note with satisfaction that a High Powered Central
Committee (HPCC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of
Coal has been constituted for speedy implementation of the EMSC
Schemes. The Committee have been further apprised that another

6
Committee to examine the issue of diversion of Railway Lines to the
affected area have been constituted by the Railway Board. The
Committee desire that they may be kept abreast of the tangible outcomes
of deliberations of these Committees.
North Eastern Region (NER)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
11. The Committee were concerned to note that the North-Eastern
Region remains a totally neglected area with the lowest implementation
record as exuded by the fact that year after year, the budget provisions
pertaining to development of NER/Sikkim remained totally unutilized
till 2012-13. Regarding this low utilization of funds, the Committee noted
that hindrances in exploration work viz. difficult geological characteristics,
large forest covers, adverse law and order conditions and land issues,
very low estimates of coal resources in the region (0.5% of total reported
coal reserves of India) coupled with non-implementation of S&T schemes
viz. complete lack of research proposals for NER were the major constraints
responsible for such dismal performance. Admittedly, despite the
constraints, efforts had been made to utilize this fund as an amount of
Rs. 1.77 crore had been spent from the budgetary provisions during 2013-14
with Rs. 0.70 crore on procurement of drilling rigs for exploration in NE
Regions by DGM Nagaland and Assam under promotional exploration
and Rs. 1.07 crore for development of transportation infrastructure in
coalfields by North Eastern Coalfields. The Committee, however, found
that the Budget Estimates for 2014-15 have further raised the amount to
Rs. 29 crore whereas expenditure upto December, 2014 is nil, the BE
made for the year 2015-16 stands at Rs. 30.60 crore. The Committee,
while taking cognizance of the difficult constraints, however, desired that
the Ministry need to work harder for a holistic approach. The Committee,
therefore, recommended the Ministry to provide needed incentives for
evoking adequate response on R&D proposals for effective exploration
of Coal reserves in the area. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the tangible efforts in terms of concrete deliverables made in this
regard.
12. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed
the Committee as under:—
“Promotional (Regional) Exploration
DGM (Nagaland) and DGM (Assam) are doing regional coal
exploration under Central Sector Scheme of MoC. Under this
scheme, 1 (one) rig each was sanctioned to both the agencies. DGM

7
(Nagaland) has purchased the rig but DGM (Assam) is facing
constraints. About 427.00 metre were drilled by DGM (Nagaland)
during April’ 14 – March’ 15.
Research and Development Projects
In spite of continuous efforts by Coal India Limited (CIL), Ministry
of Coal (MoC), CMPDI, quality proposals are not being received
from the core research/academic institutes of North Eastern Region
(NER). Very limited number of research proposals are being
submitted by various institutes located in NER, although the request
letters inviting research proposal sent to these institutes and the
thrust areas of research for coal industry were widely circulated.
As a matter of fact, recently two research proposals were received
from the research/academic institutes of NER. One is related to
beneficiation of NER coals, which was not agreed by the Technical
Sub-Committee of Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC)
as the earlier studies concluded that no substantial removal of
organic sulphur could be achieved through beneficiation. The other
one received from IIT, Guwahati and CMERI, Durgapur is under
scrutiny.
Efforts are continued to increase expenditure on R&D in the NER
by way of inviting R&D proposals from academic institutes/research
organisations from NER for effective exploitation of coal deposits
and other issues related to North Eastern Region.”
13. The Committee are constrained to note with concern that while
the reply of the Ministry highlights the constraints faced in Production
(Regional), Exploration and R&D Projects in North Eastern Regions
(NER), the reply is silent on their observation regarding low utilization
of budget provisions pertaining to development of NER/Sikkim. The
Committee therefore desire that a detailed analysis on the reasons for
total non-utilization of funds be made and reply furnished on this
aspect. The Committee note from the action taken reply that continuous
and consistent efforts are being made to increase expenditure on R&D
in the NER by way of inviting R&D proposals from academic institutes/
research organizations from NER for effective exploration of coal
deposits in NER. In this context the Committee would like to be
apprised of the latest status in this regard and the requests so achieved
in terms of concrete deliverables.

8
Delay in Implementation of Projects
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
14. The Committee noted that the various reasons cited by the
Ministry for delay in implementation of projects include delay in grant
of Forest Clearances and Environmental Clearances; delays in finalization
of global tender for deployment of needed equipments and machineries
and consequent delay in their procurement and commissioning; delays
in rehabilitation; problem of land acquisition/possession; lack of coal
evacuation facility; delay in construction of needed infrastructure such
as Rail links, pucca roads etc.; delays in settlement of compensation for
land acquisition; Law and Order problems, etc. The Committee viewed
these delays seriously as these delays lead to not only time overrun but
also consequent cost-overrun of projects running into thousands of crore
of rupees. The Committee were however, happy to note that earnest
efforts were now being made by the Ministry at all levels viz. Project
Level; Corporate Level and State Government Level through regular site
level follow up as well as putting into place a Central Project Monitoring
Division (CPMD) for continuous monitoring of progress of all projects
and reporting to the top management besides holding regular meetings
with Chief Secretaries of concerned States. The Committee also noted
that a web portal namely online Coal Projects Monitoring portal (e-CPMP)
had been created for regular monitoring of project related issues connected
with different Ministries and State Authorities. The Committee trusted
and expected that the Ministry continue the reform process being set in
with vigor so that the country attains self sufficiency in coal production
and the benefits accrued from coal production were equitably shared.
15. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply informed the
Committee as under:—
“ A growth in production of about 7% during 2014-15 over the
previous year as compared to a growth of 2.2% during the year
2013-14 has been registered by CIL.
An incremental EC of about 30 Mty was granted by MoEF during
the year 2014-15. 5 nos. final (Stage II) Forestry approvals and
7 nos. in-principle (Stage I) Forestry approvals have also been
accorded during the year.
CIL is making an all out effort to ensure that there is no
further delay in project implementation. The following actions

9
are already in place for sorting out the constraints involved
therein.
(a) Issues related to Land acquisition/possession, R&R, EC, FC
and Law and order are being taken up at all levels by CIL
with respective State Governments and Central Ministries.
(b) Issues related to EC, FC, Land acquisition and rail
infrastructure projects are regularly highlighted at all levels.
Matter now being monitored by PMO for expediting the same.
(c) Crucial issues are being uploaded by CIL and its subsidiary
companies on the MoC e-CPMP portal and MoC is vigorously
following up with the State governments and other associated
ministries by holding meetings with concerned officials to
expedite and facilitate acquisition/possession of land, and
expediting EC and FC issues.
(d) Enhanced land compensations are being paid as per the
revised rates notified by the State Governments. In States
where the rates have not been revised the compensation is
being paid as per the revised rates of the neighbouring States.
(e) A PAP friendly R&R policy has been framed by CIL which
is also amended as per the needs of the time.
(f) Affected parties/villagers are consistently persuaded for
accepting compensation and early hand over of land.
(g) Dedicated departments headed by the subject experts and
officials from the Railway, Forest Service’s and Land and
Revenue cadre have been appointed in the capacity of
Advisors by CIL and its subsidiaries for suitable advice,
scrutiny and expediting related proposals.
(h) CIL has already started investing in the three major rail
infrastructure projects in order to streamline the output and
coal evacuation from three coalfields with high growth
potential. Special Participative Vehicles/JVs have been formed
in the State of Chhattisgarh. MoU to form JVs have been
signed in the State of Odisha and Jharkhand for efficient
implementation of the various existing and proposed rail
infrastructure projects of CIL.

10
(i) The bidding process has been made more participative and
transparent in order to ensure successful and timely
conclusion of the bids.
Actions initiated at the Ministry level for ensuring effective projects
implementation—
(j) MoC has started an e-portal (e-CPMP) on the Cab-Sec website
where crucial issues are being uploaded by CIL and its
subsidiary companies and MoC is vigorously following up
with the State Governments and other associated Ministries.
Issues related to Land acquisition/possession, R&R and Law
and order are being regularly taken up at highest level by
MoC with respective State Governments. MoC is holding
regular meetings with MoEF& CC and Ministry of Railways
regarding issues related EC-FC and all major rail
infrastructure projects.
(k) Issues related to EC, FC, Land acquisition and rail
infrastructure projects are now being monitored by PMO for
expeditious resolution of related issues as a consequence of
actions initiated by CIL and MoC.
(l) MoC also routinely reviews all projects with capacities 3 Mty
and above or Rs. 500 crore and above on Quarterly basis to
fast track the development of ongoing projects and expedite
execution of delayed projects.
(m) CCI-Projects Monitoring Group reviews all coal projects
costing Rs. 1000 crore and above at regular intervals. The
institution of PMG has extended the facilities of their
portal for online monitoring of coal projects. The issues/
constraints faced in implementation of coal projects are being
regularly uploaded on the portal for subsequent follow up.
PMG has vigorously taken up issues related to land
acquisition, law and order, EC and FC with the highest levels
of the respective State governments and other concerned
agencies.
(n) The Ministry of Statistics & Programme implementation
monitors implementation of projects costing Rs. 150 Crs and
above at regular intervals.”

11
16. The Committee are indeed happy to note that major
constraints leading to delays in project implementation viz. issues
related to Environmental Clearance, Forest Clearance, Rail Infrastructure
Projects, etc. are being monitored by the PMO for expeditious resolution
of related issues as a consequence of actions initiated by CIL and
Ministry of Coal. The Committee wish to reemphasize that the reform
process, which has been set in motion with vigor is further accelerated
and the bottlenecks and constraints holding up speedy implementation
of Coal Mining Projects, are eliminated so that the country attains self
sufficiency in coal production and also that the benefits accrued
therefrom are equitably shared.
Coal Theft and Pilferages
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
17. The Committee noted that the vigilance milestones statedly
achieved pertaining to vigilance activities undertaken by the Ministry of
Coal inter-alia include collecting data on real time basis; equipping all
projects with electronic weigh-bridges; Operator Independent Truck
Dispatch System (OITDS) expected to be operational from March 2015;
online file and bill tracking system; Information Technology initiatives;
installation of in-motion road weigh-bridges with requisite software for
Coal stock measurement, on-line Truck Despatch system put in place in
vulnerable areas; Implementation of e-tendering solution for ‘works and
services’ done in all areas except Rajmahal; Online complaint handling
system made fully functional; e-tendering and e-procurement made fully
implemented; GPS-based vehicle-tracking system installed in 270 vehicles
etc. The Committee, during their study tour to Talcher, Odisha in the
Mahanadi Coalfields (MCL) on 11.2.2015 observed that the MCL had
achieved the laudable completion of installation of Global Positioning
System (GPS)/General Packet Radio Services (GPRS) based Vehicle
Tracking System on trucks/tippers and for coal production/internal
transportation with a view to curb the menace of coal theft and pilferage.
Keeping in view the deep concerns that the Committee had expressed
time and again on the aspect of illegal mining as well as pilferage of coal
causing great loss to the national exchequer, the Committee desired that
the laudable step taken by MCL be replicated throughout so that the
menace of coal theft and pilferage is checked effectively. The Committee
also hoped that as assured to by Secretary, Ministry of Coal, during oral
evidence on 1.4.2015, the monitoring mechanism put in place in
Talcher be also replicated to all coal bearing areas by the end of the

12
financial year 2014-15. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken in the matter thereon within 3 months of presentation of
the Report.
18. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed
the Committee as under:—
“ As the coal mines have large number of entry/exit points, physical
surveillance of the area is almost impossible. Coal India and its
subsidiary companies are emphasising electronic surveillance to
obtain accurate data of production, dispatch, etc. Large numbers
of such points are required to be connected in a Wide Area Network
to obtain data on real time basis.
To check the theft and pilferage of coal at Coal dumps and sidings,
it was decided to set up a truck monitoring system for coal
transportation through GPS/GPRS in all mines of CIL. The
implementation of the IT initiatives is being reviewed from time
to time. The main objectives of different IT initiatives are of two
folds, i.e.:—
(i) Electronic surveillance to check theft and pilferage; and
(ii) Capture of real time data of production, dispatch, stores etc.
to improve operational efficiency.
(iii) An integrated system has been conceived consisting of
GPS/GPRS based vehicle tracking system with RFID,
CCTV , boom barrier connected through a wide area
network connecting all vulnerable points like weigh bridges,
material stores, entry/exit points, stock yards, sidings,
explosive magazines etc. The objective is to track the
movement of vehicles from the time it enters the mine area,
i.e. coal dump/store yard to sidings along its route. Alerts are
received in the form of exception report when a vehicle
violates defined routes, e.g. stoppage for longer time en-route,
deviation from the designated route, etc. The status of
different IT initiatives along with their implementation time
lines for all subsidiaries Coal India Ltd., and its subsidiaries
have been fixed.
(iv) In the recently held review meeting taken by Secretary (Coal) it
was decided to implement the IT initiatives by September 2015.

13
The status of implementation of IT initiatives as on
31st May, 2015 is as below:—
Sl. Name of the item Requirement Implementa-
No. tion status
as on date
1. GPS/GPRS based Vehicle 8865 3516
Tracking System
2. Electronic Surveillance by 1904 432
CCTV
3. RFID based Boom Barriers and 430 50
Readers
4. Weigh Bridge Status 969 829
5. Wide Area Networking 912 223
6. Coal Net Implementation Status 48 27
e-Procurement has been implemented in CIL and all its subsidiaries.
Reverse e-auction have been started for HIRED HEEM and coal
transportation in BCCL, CCL. Other subsidiaries are in the process
of adopting the same. Reverse e-auction for procurement of
explosives has been adopted in CIL.”
19. The Committee are gravely concerned over the illegal mining
as also in regard to pilferage of coal which causes great loss to the
national exchequer. The Committee, therefore, feel the imperative need
for an effective systemic mechanism to curb and check the menace.
In this regard, the Committee in their original Report had appreciated
the installation of GPS by MCL on trucks/tippers for coal transportation
with a view to curb the menace of coal theft and pilferage and desired
that the same may be replicated in all coal bearing areas by the end
of financial year 2014-15. The Committee note from the action taken
reply of the Ministry that during the review meeting undertaken by
Secretary (Coal), it was decided to implement the IT initiatives in all
coal mining areas by September, 2015. In this regard, the Committee
are concerned to note that as on 31 May, 2015, as against the requisite
of 8865 GPS/GPRS based vehicles tracking system, the achievement
is only 3516. Similarly, as against the requirement of 1904 electronic
surveillance by CCTV , only 432 have been implemented. The

14
implementation of most of the other items like Boom Barrier, Weighing
Bridge, Wide Area Networking, etc. also presents a very dismal progress.
The Committee express their unhappiness over this tardy pace of
implementation of the crucial IT initiatives and strongly recommend
that the process of implementation of the proposed IT initiatives be
accelerated so as to ensure their completion by the stipulated time i.e.
by September, 2015. The Committee may be apprised of the latest status
in this regard.
Corporate Social Responsibiltiy (CSR) Fund
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
20. The Committee noted that under the CSR policy , CIL and its
subsidiaries Companies and Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
undertake different welfare activities with allocation of funds as per DPE
Guidelines effective from 1.4.2014 based on Section 135 (1) of Companies
Act, 2013 which stipulates to spend at least 2% of the average net profit
of the Company for the three immediate preceding financial years. The
Committee further noted that Coal India Limited (CIL) follows its own
policy in this regard and funds based on 2% of the average net profit
of the Company for the three immediate preceding financial years or
Rs. 2 per tonne of coal production of previous year whichever is higher
was earmarked for CSR activities. The Committee were happy to note
the quantum jump in utilization of CSR funds by CIL and its subsidiaries.
In this regard, the Committee noted that while there was a dismal
performance for the year 2012-13 with utilization standing over Rs. 149.55
crore against allocation of Rs. 595.74 crore, there had been a significant
improvement during the year 2013-14 wherein Rs. 409.37 crore were
utilized out of the Rs. 474.36 crore allocated. The utilization of CSR fund
for year 2014-15 upto September, 2014 stood at 111.22 crore out of
Rs. 471.65 allocated for the purpose and the Committee hoped and
expected that CIL and its subsidiaries gear-up the activities under the
CSR funds so that the intended benefits were optimally derived by the
beneficiaries. The Committee also appreciated the optimal utilization of
CSR funds by NLC during the the last three years with expending of
Rs. 14.26 crore out of Rs. 13.00 crore allocated in the year 2012-13; Rs.
26.30 crore utilized out of Rs. 26.04 crore allocated in 2013-14 and Rs.
30.60 crore utilized upto December, 2014 against allocation of Rs. 41.42
crore in the year 2014-15. The Committee felt satisfied to note that almost

15
50% of the total CSR Budget for the year 2014-15 amounting to Rs. 235
crore had been earmarked for construction of 52,036 school toilets in
35224 schools in six States viz Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal under the Swachh Bharat/Swachh
Vidyalaya Abhiyan. The Committee also observed that under the CSR
funds of Coal PSUs, welfare measures for SC&ST and disabled persons
had also been put into place. Keeping in view the laudable objectives
of the provision of CSR funds, the Committee emphasized that all coal
PSUs should strive for optimal utilization of such funds and ensure that
no earmarked funds remain unutilized.
21. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply have informed
the Committee as under:—
Coal India Limited
“It is a fact that CIL and its subsidiaries have achieved a significant
improvement in utilizing CSR fund during 2013-14 in comparison
to earlier years. Presently CIL has revised its CSR Policy based on
the New Companies Act, 2013 and the Revised Policy has been
effective from April, 2015. As per the said policy, CIL is committed
to spend at least 2% of the average net profit of the Company for
the three immediate preceding financial years or Rs. 2.00 per tonne
of Coal Production of previous year whichever is higher.
CSR activities undertaken/being undertaken by CIL and its
subsidiaries as per CIL’s CSR Policy broadly covers the
following:—
(a) Welfare measures for the community at large, so as to ensure
the poorer section of the Society derived the maximum
benefits.
(b) Contribution to the society at large by way of social and
cultural development, imparting education, training and social
awareness specially with regard to the economically backward
class for their development and generation of income to avoid
any liability of employment.
(c) Protection and safeguard of environment and maintaining
ecological balance.

16
During the year 2014-15 CIL and its subsidiaries have spent an
amount to the tune of Rs. 329.82 crore (Provisional) against budget
allocation of Rs. 471.65 crore. Besides CIL subsidiaries have also
kept provision for expenditure towards construction and renovation
of school toilets separately for Boys and Girls as per the list of
schools given on the website of MHRD, in six different States
towards contribution under Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan. Further
all the Boards of different CIL subsidiary companies have been
empowered to sanction additional budget on CSR for Swachh
Vidyalaya Abhiyan. The total number of toilets to be constructed/
renovated by CIL’s subsidiaries is 48,735 in 30,340 schools.
Construction/Renovation work for the toilets has already started
and the work will be complete by 30.06.2015 tentatively.
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL)
As regards SCCL, CSR Budget, 2014-15 for an amount of Rs. 15.56
crore (equivalent to 3% of average Net Profits of the company
made during the three immediately preceding financial years) was
approved by the Board of SCCL. Out of CSR Budget of Rs. 15.56
crore for the year 2014-15, an amount of Rs. 12.85 crore (provisional)
has already been appropriated.
CSR activities being undertaken
SCCL is discharging its Corporate Social Responsibility by taking
up various Community Development activities in Coal belt Areas
and also taking up self-employment generation programmes
through Singareni Seva Samithi (SSS).
• Providing Drinking Water Supply by drilling Bore-wells in
the surrounding villages/hamlets of coal fields.
• Providing infrastructure i.e. , laying approach roads,
constructing drains etc. in the surrounding villages.
• Taking up sanitation in the villages/towns of coal belt areas.
• Promoting Sports in the rural areas.
• Contributing for providing Road Side Bus Shelters in
Bhupalapalli Assembly Constituency, Warangal District.

17
• Financial Assistance to JNTU-H, Manthani for providing
infrastructure.
• Financial assistance was provided to the District Authority
of Adilabad for conducting Army recruitment rally.
• Providing Central Lighting system between Chelpur and
Bhupalapalli, Warangal District.
• Skill Development for the Rural unemployed youth for self-
employment through Singareni Seva Samithi.
• Conducting Mobile Medical Camps for the benefit of the
people living in the peripheral areas. 3422 Mega/Mobile
Medical Camps were conducted and medicines supplied free
of cost from the year 2003 till date and 2,52,737 villagers of
surrounding areas of collieries benefited.
• SCCL introduced “SPANDANA” mobile hospital services,
especially for the benefit of villagers of Tiryani Mandal.
• This mobile hospital is run by a male and one female doctor
along with 2 technicians, male and female Nurses.
• Diagnostic facilities like Complete Blood Picture, X-Ray, ECG
etc., are provided in the mobile vehicle for providing instant
results.
• This mobile vehicle covers 35 villages to serve 900 to 1000
persons by making 25 camps in a month and supplies drugs
free of cost.
• As recommended by World Health Organisation, 12X12
programme was launched by Singareni with aim to achieve
12% of Hb in girl children of 12 years age. Under this
programme, parents, teachers and children are educated about
the impact of malnutrition and Iron tablets are distributed
on Monday which is observed as “Iron Day”. Considerable
improvement is observed in Hb% levels. This is first
programme of its kind conducted in the State. 34270 children
of Government and Company schools have been covered
under this programme.

18
Self-employment training programmes through Singareni Seva
Samithi
• 15361 persons including 2043 Project Affected Persons were
trained in different vocational/self-employment courses out
of which 7622 secured employment/earning and 1761 have
established their units.
• About 300 persons are sanctioned loans with 35% (Rural)—
25% subsidy under PMEGP (Prime Minister’s Employment
Generation Programme).
• 224 PAP/local people were trained on “Volvo” vehicles at
Bangalore and Manuguru. All secured employment.
• Training to Project Affected People and their children and
local children to enable them to compete in police/
para-military recruitment. 1397 candidates were selected
in Police/Army recruitment out of the 14270 candidates
trained.
• Two major Army Recruitment Rallies were conducted with
the logistic support from SCCL in Prakasam Stadium grounds,
Kothagudem during 2014 and 2015 in which 40,000 candidates
participated and 8291 candidates have been selected in the
physical endurance test.
• To provide Self-employment, SCCL is helping the children
of SCCL and local children to start Ancillary Units. SCCL is
extending all forms of support including placing orders for
their products. At present, 11 Ancillary Units are functioning
in Mandamarri Area.
Other initiatives under CSR
• Support to three S.T. orphan homes—One each at Bellampalli,
Manuguru and Kothagudem in the form of providing school
uniforms, school bags, shoes, books free of cost and also
provision of better facilities in the homes including
accommodation etc.

19
• Assistance is being given to 3 special schools for the benefit
of 300 differently abled children. SCCL has identified 742
special children and is supporting them and in addition
supporting similar service institutions in this coal belt area.
• Infrastructure provided to school for differently abled children
‘MANOCHAITANYA’ in Godavari Khani.
• Providing employment opportunities in outsourced vacancies
like transport, security, Guest houses etc. Extending medical
facilities in Colliery hospitals for all employees outsourced.
Introduced system of medical attendance books for the benefit
of PAPs and their family members.
• For Tiryani Mandal which had been adopted by SCCL, an
amount of Rs. 31.30 crore has been sanctioned for carrying
out various CSR activities.
• Provision of infrastructure to the schools located near Coal-
fields.
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
• The CSR funds utilised by NLC in the year 2014-15 is
Rs. 47.49 crore (provisional and unaudited) as against the
earmarked amount of Rs. 41.60 crore.
• The CSR fund is being optimally utilised for community
development in the sectors of health care, sanitation,
education, skill, and other sectors identified in Schedule VII
of the Companies Act, 2013. In fact, CSR is a continuing
commitment of NLC to the Society and no earmarked CSR
funds of NLC remain unutilized.”
22. The Committee commend the fact that CIL and its subsidiaries
have achieved a significant improvement in utilization of the CSR
funds during the year 2013-14 as compared to earlier years. The
Committee find it significant to note that during the year 2014-15, CIL
and its subsidiaries spent an amount of Rs. 329.82 crore against Budget
allocation of Rs. 471.65 crore, keeping provisions for expenditure

20
towards construction and renovation of school toilets under Swachh
Vidyalaya Abhiyan. While underscoring the imperative to percolate
down for the intended benefits of the CSR fund to the community
welfare activities, the Committee do trust that the Ministry would
relentlessly strive for ensuring optimal utilization of CSR funds for
community development.

21
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee are happy to observe the earnest efforts made by
the Ministry of Coal consequent to the Supreme Court Judgment cancelling
allocation of 204 Coal Blocks out of 218 Blocks allocated since 1993 with
the enactment of the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015 with effect
from 30.3.2015. The Committee, therefore, put on record their appreciation
for the endeavours made by the Ministry of Coal in this regard with the
reported estimated amount of revenue likely to be raised in respect of
33 Coal Mines/Blocks already auctioned standing at Rs. 209740.25 crore
with the auction proceeds to be transferred to the respective State
Governments. The Committee trust that the Ministry will continue the
good work to achieve the various targets set within timelines particularly
the momentous milestone set for a projection of coal production of one
Billion Tonnes by 2019-2020.
Action Taken
The Committee has appreciated the enactment of the Coal Mines
(Special Provisions) Act, 2015 with effect from 30.03.2015 to ensure
smooth transfer of rights, titles and interest in the mines/blocks to new
allottees and for the revenue generated to the tune of Rs. 209740.25 crore
in respect of Coal Mines/Blocks already auctioned. Hence, no action is
required.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Plan Outlays of Ministry of Coal and PSUs
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that the total Budgetary Support to the Ministry
of Coal for the year 2015-16 is Rs. 606.00 crore (Plan Rs. 551.00 crore and

22
Non-Plan Rs. 55.00 crore) against Rs. 600.00 crore (Plan Rs. 550.00 crore
and Non-Plan Rs. 50.00 crore) during 2014-15. The Committee also note
that a provision of Rs. 1100 crore has been made for Acquisition of Coal
Bearing Areas. The Committee also observe that six centrally sponsored
schemes viz. Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines and Development
of Transportation Infrastructure under the Coal Mines (Conservation and
Development) Act, 1974 (CCDA), Research and Development Projects;
Promotional (Regional) Exploration in coal and lignite; Detailed
Exploration in non-CIL blocks; Environmental Measures and Subsidence
Control and Development of North Eastern Region/Sikkim are being
implemented for coal and lignite sector with the help of Gross Budgetary
Support. The Committee note that during the financial year 2014-15, out
of the budgeted amount of Rs. 550 crore, an amount of Rs. 427.53 crore
has been utilized upto December, 2014, amounting to 85.51% of the total
plan allocations. The Committee further note that the overall Plan
Expenditure of Rs. 522.70 crore in 2013-14 reflects a 33.77% increase over
the overall expenditure of RS. 390.76 crore in 2012-13 representing a
tangible scaling up of operation in all major schemes as per the Ministry’s
submission. The Committee are also happy to note that utilization of
funds allocated for various Central Sector Schemes undertaken with
Budgetary support has been satisfactory with a total Plan Expenditure
of Rs. 426.51 crore upto December, 2014 which accounts for 77.54% and
85.30% of BE 2014-15 and RE respectively. Reportedly, the Central Sector
Scheme on ‘Development of Transport Infrastructure’ showed 100 %
utilization of funds (BE 2014-15—Rs. 75.00 crore; Actual upto December
2014- Rs. 75.00 crore); Promotional (Regional) Exploration in Coal and
Lignite Scheme showed 90% utilization (BE-2014-15: Rs. 56.65 crore; Actual
upto December, 2014—Rs. 56.70 crore); ‘Conservation and Safety in Coal
Mines’ showing 100% utilization (BE 2014-15 of Rs. 185.00 crore, Actual
utilization upto December, 2014—Rs. 185 crore) and ‘Research and
Development’ showing 85% utilization (BE 2014-15—Rs. 19.95 crore,
Actual utilization upto December, 2014—Rs. 17.00 crore). The Committee
desire that the Ministry should strive for full utilization of funds so as
to ensure that the scarce funds made available are fully utilized to derive
the intended benefits therefrom.
Action Taken
The Budget allocation of Rs. 550 crore for the financial year
2014-15 was reduced to Rs. 500 crore in RE against which the
actual expenditure was Rs. 473.87 crore indicating about 95% of RE
allocation.

23
The scheme-wise details of allocation and actual expenditure are
given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Scheme BE RE Actual %
No. utiliz-
ation in
respect
to RE
1. Research and Development 17.95 17.95 17.95 100.00
2. Regional Exploration 56.65 56.65 58.82 104.00
3. Detailed Drilling 184.45 139.45 135.71 97.31
4. Environmental Measures and 0.40 0.40 0.00 0.00
Subsidence Control
5. Conservation and Safety in 185.00 185.00 185.00 100.00
Coal Mines
6. Development of T ransport 75.00 75.00 75.00 100.00
Infrastructure in Coal Mines
7. North Eastern Region Component ** 29.00 24.00 1.77* 7.40
*Included in the expenditure shown against the scheme of Regional Exploration.
** Schemes at Sls. Nos. 1 to 4 have provision for North East Component.
• The allocations under the schemes of Conservation and Safety
in Coal Mines and Development of Transport Infrastructure
in Coal Mines have been fully utilized.
• There is 100% utilization of funds in rest of the schemes
except North East Component.
The observation of the Committee to utilize the funds fully during
2015-16 in all the above schemes have been noted for compliance.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Research and Development (R&D)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that Research and Development Projects are
not allocated specific to companies but are covered under four thematic
areas viz. improvement in production; productivity and safety in coal
mines; coal beneficiation and utilization; and protection of environment

24
and ecology. Further, Standing Scientific Research Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal) is the Apex Body to administer coal
related research activities from budgetary Support and Central Mine
Planning and Design Institute Ltd (CMPDIL), is the nodal agency for
coordination and monitoring of Science and Technology plan schemes
and of CIL’s R&D Projects. The Committee also note that the cutting edge
projects are implemented by pioneering research and academic institutes
related to Coal and allied industries with active participation of coal and
lignite mining companies. Some of the coal S&T projects which were
completed during 2014-15 include Development of Self Advancing
(mobile) Goaf Edge Supports (SAGES) for depillaring operations in
underground coal mines; Development of Software for prediction of
subsidence by 3D numerical modeling for SCCL Mines and Development
of customized organic coatings for corrosion protection of special mining
equipment. The Committee however, note with concern that for the year
2015-16, all the 12 projects included under R&D are the spillover projects
from the previous year and no new project has been sanctioned for the
year 2015-16. Admittedly, though the results cannot be quantified in terms
of enhanced production and turnover, many of the R&D studies have
had a seminal impact on production, energy efficiency and operational
costs. The Committee note that the BE allocated for the year 2015-16 is
Rs. 18.00 crore. In this regard, the Committee are happy to observe the
increasing utilization of S&T funds over the last three years with utilization
of Rs. 9.66, Rs. 11.53 and Rs. 11.76 crore for the corresponding years 2011-12,
2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. For the year 2014-15, out of the RE of
Rs. 20 crore, funds amounting to Rs. 12.95 crore have been disbursed
till 13.3.2015. The Committee, therefore, desire that earnest efforts for
technology up-gradation in underground and opencast mines in CIL to
achieve production/productivity be continued with added fervor for a
time bound implementation of R&D projects for more impact on energy
efficiency and operational cost.
Action Taken
At present, there are 12 ongoing S&T projects which were spill
over from the previous year i.e. 2014-15. Also, 3 new projects have been
recommended by the Technical Sub-committee of SSRC in its Meeting
held on 08.05.2015 at CIL, Kolkata, for consideration and approval of the
Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC). Therefore, it is expected
that the budget provision of Rs. 18.00 crore for 2015-16 will be utilized,
fully.

25
To obviate the delay in executing the projects and also for full
utilization of funds, the following steps are being followed:—
(a) Progress of research projects is being monitored by CMPDI
and is also being reviewed by the various Committees of CIL
and MoC.
(b) Progress of these projects is also monitored by periodic visits
to the implementing institutes by the officials of CMPDI to
extend help to the implementing agencies to solve some of
the administrative and technical problems faced by them.
(c) Quarterly progress reports of the projects are being received
from the implementing agencies and the status of these
projects is being placed before the various Committees of
CIL and MoC.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Promotional (Regional) Exploration in Coal and Lignite
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Coal Plan Scheme on
Promotional Exploration for Coal and Lignite is being implemented by
various agencies viz. (CMPDIL, GSI, MECL and State Governments
concerned), with the aim to undertake preliminary drilling to assess
availability of Coal in various areas. The Committee are happy to note
that a higher allocation of Rs. 103.50 crore has been sought for in the
BE 2015-16 compared to the RE 2014-15 of Rs. 56.65 crore. At the same
time, looking at the overall projected performance of exploratory drilling
in 2014-15, the Committee find that against a target of 165000 metre, the
actual achievement was 140364 metre which comes to 85% of the projected
target. The drilling target for the year 2015-16 has been fixed as 175000
metres. The reasons attributed by the Ministry for shortfall in targets
include non-availability of permission to explore in forest areas as well
as the local law and order problems. In this regard, the Committee note
that in order to remove such hurdles, many meetings were held between
the Secretary/Additional Secretary of Ministry of Coal with the Chief
Secretary of the concerned States. The Committee desire that such

26
sustained efforts be continued to be made to realize the drilling targets
of 1.75 lakh metre set for the year 2015-16.
Action Taken
The achievement of drilling during April’ 14-March’ 15 is 1.40 lakh
metre which is 85% of the target and has shown positive growth of 6%.
The slippage in achievement is due to delay in forest permission, local
law and order problems and priority drilling in detailed exploration.
The sustained efforts are continuing to achieve the drilling targets
of 1.75 lakh metre set for the 2015-16 subject to early forest permission,
favourable law and order and positive response from drilling agencies
i.e. MECL, GSI and State Governments.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Detailed Exploration in Non-CIL Blocks
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that the scheme of detailed exploration was
aimed at bringing resources falling in indicated and inferred category
into the proven category is taken up under the Ministry of Coal’s Plan
Scheme of Detailed drilling in the Non-CIL Blocks. The Scheme is carried
out through departmental and contractual modes. The Committee note
that while the actual drilling in metres for the year 2014-15 (upto
December, 2014) was 190100 metre, the proposed BE for 2015-16, stands
at 481850 metre indicating a very high quantum jump. The Committee
further note that while the RE for 2014-15 stands at Rs. 139.45 crore, the
actual expenditure upto December, 2014 was only Rs. 92.81 crore and the
BE for 2015-16 stands at Rs. 151.20 crore. In view of this shortfall in
performance, the Committee desire that the Ministry need to augment
its efforts for achieving better utilization of funds already allocated for
implementation of this Scheme. The Committee observe that the measures
are being taken up by CMPDIL for improving the drilling capacity during
the last three years. In this direction, the Committee note that the drill
deployment has increased from 53 in 2012-13 to 57 in 2013-14 and specific
measures have also been taken to improve existing machineries with
total capital investment of Rs. 13.20 crore and another Rs. 13.30 crore for
procurement of drills. To this end, the Committee recommend the Ministry
to accelerate needed procurement of new drills and other essential
machineries and also explore the idea of increasing outsourcing the work
of drilling to potential private agencies with accredited track record for

27
ensuring timely achievement of targets set so that funds are optimally
utilized.
Action Taken
The achievement of CMPDI departmental drilling in CIL and Non-
CIL blocks during Apr.’ 14-Mar.’ 15 was 3.56 lakh metre which is 102%
of the target and has shown positive growth of 10% over the achievement
of 2013-14. The achievement through outsourced drilling was 4.72 lakh
metre and has shown positive growth of 27%. The overall achievement
was 8.28 lakh metre with positive growth of 19%.
The slippage in achievement through outsourcing is due to local
(Law and Order) problem and delay in Forest Clearance. About 3.61 lakh
metre of drilling could not be carried out due to delayed forest permission
and adverse law and order condition during April, 2014 to March, 2015
in outsourced blocks.
The drill deployment has increased from 57 in 2013-14 to 61 in
2014-15 and specific measures have also been taken to improve existing
machineries.
All out efforts are being made to achieve the target of detailed
drilling of 4.82 lakh metres in Non-CIL blocks. To enhance drilling capacity
by departmental resources, supply order has been placed for 5 new Hi-
Tech drills and other essential machineries. To increase outsourcing work
of drilling, potential private agencies with accredited track record for
timely achievement are invited to participate in pre-bid meeting.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Conservation of Safety in Coal Mines and Development of Transport
Infrastructure under CCDA
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that under the schemes for Conservation of
Safety in Coal Mines and Development of Transport Infrastructure under
Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 (CCDA), the
expenditure incurred by Coal Companies are reimbursed partially as per
the statutory provisions under the Coal Mines (Conservation and
Development) Act, 1974, the principal objective of which is to collect
excise duty on coal for disbursing the same to the coal mines for

28
conservation and development related works including infrastructure
development. Accordingly, budget provisions for the scheme are made
taking into account existing commitment/liability of the preceding financial
year. The Committee while observing that the Ministry of Coal achieved
100% utilization of funds in both the Central Sector Schemes on
Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines (RE 2014-15; Rs. 185 crore;
Expenditure upto December, 2014—Rs. 185 crore) and Development of
Transport infrastructure under CCDA (RE 2014-15; Rs. 75 crore;
Expenditure upto December, 2014—Rs. 75.00 crore) are surprised to find
that the BE for 2015-16 has been reduced to Rs. 170 crore in respect of
Conservation and Safety in Coal Mines Schemes and have remained
unchanged at Rs. 75 crore in respect of Development of Transport
infrastructure. The Committee are not satisfied with the justification given
by the Ministry that it is due to reduction of funds in total plan allocation
of the Ministry of Coal by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee expect
the Government to extend full support to such important schemes of the
coal sector and recommend that more thrust be given on creation of
transport infrastructure, an important and essential component for more
speedy delivery of coal to defined destination for specified end use.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee to extend full support to such
schemes of coal sector has been noted for compliance.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Financial and Physical Performance of Coal PSUs
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee are concerned to note that there has been under
utilization of funds by all the Coal PSUs viz. CIL, SCCL and NLC. The
Committee find that while the total RE 2014-15 of all Coal PSUs stood
at Rs. 11505.00 crore, the actual expenditure upto December, 2014 was
only Rs. 5836.20 crore. The Committee further note that the percentage
utilization of funds upto December, 2014 for all the Coal PSUs viz. CIL,
SCCL and NLC vis-a-vis RE 2014-15 stands at 53.9% in respect of CIL
(RE Rs. 5225.00 crore; Actual Expenditure—Rs. 2815.58 crore) 49.7% in
respect of SCCL (RE Rs. 3760.00 crore; Actual Expenditure—Rs. 1867.74
crore) and 45.7% in respect of NLC (RE Rs. 2520.00 crore; Actual
Expenditure Rs. 1152.88) respectively. The Committee also note that in

29
terms of company-wise physical targets set for the Coal PSUs, as against
the target set in BE 2014-15 (CIL—Rs. 507.00MT; SCCL—55 MT and Others
68.25 MT) the actual achievement of targets upto December, 2014 for CIL,
SCCL and others stand at 342.386 MT, 35.238 MT and 49.10 MT indicating
a poor percentage achievement of 67.5%, 64% and 71.9% respectively.
While not satisfied with the physical and financial performance of PSUs,
the Committee note that the Ministry of Coal have given assurance that
it will conduct regular monitoring for ensuring timely implementation
of various schemes by the Coal PSUs so that the funds earmarked for
them are properly utilized during the year 2015-16 and both the financial
and physical targets are achieved. The Committee may be apprised of
the additional measures taken in this regard.
Action Taken
Company–wise Physical and Financial parameters for the year 2014-
15 and target for the year 2015-16 is stated as under:—
Coal India Limited (CIL)
Item 2014-15 2015-16
(Actual) Prov. (Tgt.)
Physical Parameters
Production (in MT ) 494.23 550.00
Off-take I (in MT ) 489.34 550.00
OMS (Tonnes) 6.20 6.65
Capital Expenditure/Outlay (Rs. in Cr)
Domestic 5100.38 5990.50
Overseas 50.78 500.00
In order to achieve the planned growth in production and evacuation
in future, CIL has undertaken the following major Railway Infrastructure
Projects to be executed by Indian Railway Authority:—
1. Tori-Shivpur-Kathotia new BG Line for North Karanpura
Coalfields of Central Coalfields Limited, Ranchi, Jharkhand.
Construction is being implemented in two phases viz.
Tori-Shivpur & Shivpur-Kathotia. The work is under
execution in Tori-Shivpur Section by East Central Railway,
Patna. Tori-Shivpur segment is expected to be completed by
2016-17.

30
2. Jharsuguda-Barpalli Railway Infrastructure Project for
IB Coalfields of Mahanadi Coalfields Limited, Sambalpur,
Odisha. The work is under execution by South
Eastern Railway, Kolkata. Expected to be completed by
2016-17.
3. To cater to evacuation of coal from Mand-Raigarh and Korba-
Gevra Coalfields of SECL, following 2 SPVs for two Railway
Corridors have been formulated:—
(a) East Corridor (Bhupdeopur-Gharghoda-Dharamjaigarh
upto Korba with a spur from Gharghoda to Donga
Mahua to connect mines of Gare-Pelma Block).
(b) East-West Corridor (Gevra Road via Dipka, Kathghora,
Sindurgarh, Pasan). The first phase of the project is
expected to be commissioned by 2017-18.
Further, CIL has planned to invest about Rs. 515 crore in procuring
a mix of BOB-R and Box-N wagons of 2000 nos. The proposal is under
consideration of Indian Railway Authority.
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL)
Coal produced by SCCL was 52.54 MT during 2014-15 against the
target of 55 MT with 96% achievement. The shortfall is mainly due to
delay in commissioning of Adriyala Long wall Project; premature closure
of Blasting Gallery panels and shortage of sand for stowing in semi-
mechanized mines. However, Adriyala LW commenced from 15th October,
2014 and 0.57 MT coal is produced from the LW panel during 2014-15.
SCCL is putting all efforts to achieve the target of 56MT for the year
2015-16 by stabilizing the production from Adriyala LW, expediting the
Forest Land diversion, Non-forest land acquisition, R&R and creation of
infrastructure for coal evacuation.
Capital Outlay
Capital expenditure during 2014-15 is Rs. 3085.78 crore against the
BE of Rs. 3850 crore and RE of Rs. 3760.00 crore.
2014-15 (Fig. in Rs. Crore)
BE RE Provisional Shortfall over BE
3850.00 3760.00 3085.78 764.22

31
Main reasons of less expenditure by Rs. 764.22 crores during
2014-15 are:—
(i) Delay in procurement of HEMM due to delay in grounding
of new projects:—
• An amount of Rs. 661.98 crore were provided for Plant
and Machinery in 2014-15. The expenditure incurred
is Rs. 446.77 crore. Hence, there is a short spending to
the tune of Rs. 221.22 crore.
• Purchase Orders are placed on the Vendors for supply
of different HEMM for Open Cast Projects viz., Shovels,
Dumpers and Drills. Supplies of these items are under
process. The supplies will be received during the
current year.
(ii) Delay in land acquisition due to delay in grounding of new
projects:—
i. An amount of Rs. 451.29 crore were projected for
Land acquisition, against which the allocations made
under the head is Rs. 221.72 crore (but, the actual
expenditure incurred for the year 2014-15 is Rs. 183.38
crore).
ii. The less expenditure of Rs. 229.57 crore was due to
delay in the proceedings of Land Acquisition cases as
operational guidelines for acquisition of Non-Forest
land by the New State Government were formulated
in September, 2014.
(iii) 2x600 MW Singareni Thermal Power Project (STPP)
i. An amount of Rs. 2397.16 crore were projected for
STPP . The expenditure incurred for the 2014-15 is
Rs. 2307.11 crore.
ii. Reason for less expenditure of Rs. 90.05 crore is due
to delay in major capital works such as Balance of
Plant works (BoP), Railway siding works and
construction of Reservoir etc.
Rs. 2390.00 crore is planned capital outlay for the year 2015-16. All
efforts are being made to expedite the grounding of new projects and
commencement of Singareni Thermal Power Plant for 100% utilization
of the fund.

32
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
Financial Performance: The financial performance of NLC for the
year 2014-15 upto December 2014 is furnished below:—
(Rs. in Crore)
Sales PBT PAT
Target (BE) 5994.34 1099.48 769.64
Target (RE) 6251.30 1452.39 958.72
Actual upto 2014 4405.59 1333.81 902.87
December
CAPEX: actual Expenditure of NLC up to March 2015 is Rs. 1969.76
crore as against RE 2014-15 of Rs. 2520 crore. The shortfall is due to delay
in implementation of ongoing projects viz., TPS II Expn., NNTPP and
Wind Power Project. The percentage of utilisation for 2014-15 is 78.16%
with respect to RE 2014-15.
1. TPS –II Expansion (TPS at Neyveli 2 x 250 MW)
RE: 2014-15 Rs. 462.48 crore
Actual: 2014-15 Rs. 281.51 crore
Percentage of Achievement: 61%
The shortfall is due to delay in commissioning owing to Technical
snag and hence the balance payments could not be effected. One unit
has achieved Commencement of Commercial Operation on 22.04.2015
and the other unit is expected to achieve commencement of commercial
operation in June 2015.
2. NNTPP (TPS at Neyveli 2x500 MW)
RE: 2014-15 Rs. 580.26 crore
Actual: 2014-15 Rs. 445.60 crore
Percentage of Achievement: 77%
The shortfall is on account of slow progress in submission of
drawings and slow progress of civil works due to poor mobilization of
resources by BHEL. Commencement of supply of Boiler main columns
was originally scheduled for December 2014 by BHEL but now expected
only from June 2015 with a delay of 6 months.
3. Wind Power Project.
RE: 2014-15 Rs. 241.36 crore
Actual: 2014-15 Rs. 86.99 crore
Percentage of Achievement: 36%

33
Shortfall is mainly due to delay in land registration and delay in
supply of material.
4. Solar Power Project, Neyveli.
RE: 2014-15 Rs. 72.27 crore
Actual: 2014-15 Rs. 30.63 crore
Percentage of Achievement: 42%
The delay is due to slow progress in submission of drawings by
the contractor M/s. BHEL, delay in start of civil works, poor mobilization
of resources and delay in supply of various main equipments.
Physical Performance: During 2014-15, Lignite production of 26.54 MT
has been achieved against the target of 25.60 MT with a percentage
achievement of 104%.
In respect of power generation 19729.39 MU have been achieved
against the target of 20285.00 MU, which is 97.26% of the target. The
reason for non-achievement of the target is due to delay in commissioning
of the new projects and less generation in five decades old TPS-I due
to ageing of the plant.
Additional Measures being taken by Ministry of Coal for monitoring
to ensure timely implementation of various schemes by Coal PSUs
In order to ensure timely implementation of various schemes/
projects by Coal PSUs, some additional measures are being taken to ensure
timely completion of coal projects and physical targets of existing mines
can be achieved on time. Additional measures are as under:—
i. Portal based monitoring and reporting:—
A Coal Project Monitoring Portal (CPMP) has been developed
to resolve the pending issues of ongoing projects/schemes of
various coal companies/PSUs. Coal companies can update
the status of the pending issues at State level as well as at
Central Ministries which is then followed up for getting it
resolved at the earliest. Further Coal Companies have been
asked to upload major activities of the ongoing and future
project on the CPMP portal for monitoring at MoC level.
ii. Regular meetings of Quarterly Performance Report (QPR):—
QPR meeting is being held under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (Coal) at every quarter at New Delhi in order to

34
monitor the progress of various projects/schemes of Coal PSUs
costing more than 500 crore or 3 MTY.
iii. Meetings with Chief Secretaries of the States concerned:—
A number of issues/clearances viz. EC, FC, acquisition of Land,
etc. are pending with concerned State Government. These
issues are drawn from CPMP portal and are placed as agenda
during the visit of Secretary (Coal) to various States in the
meeting with Chief Secretary and Senior officials of the
concerned State.
iv. Meeting with MoEF, Railways:—
A monthly review meeting is being taken by Secretary (Coal)
with the officers of MoEF & CC to resolve the various issues/
clearances of EC, FC and with officers of Railways to resolve
the various issues pertaining to Railway projects of Coal
companies.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Delay in Implementation of Projects
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee note that the various reasons cited by the Ministry
for delay in implementation of projects include delay in grant of Forest
Clearances and Environmental Clearances; delays in finalization of global
tender for deployment of needed equipments and machineries and
consequent delay in their procurement and commissioning; delays in
rehabilitation; problem of land acquisition/possession; lack of coal
evacuation facility; delay in construction of needed infrastructure such
as Rail links, pucca Roads etc.; delays in settlement of compensation for
land acquisition; Law and Order problems, etc. The Committee view
these delays seriously as these delays lead to not only time overrun but
also consequent cost-overrun of projects running into thousands of crore
of rupees. The Committee are however, happy to note that earnest efforts
are now being made by the Ministry at all levels viz. Project Level;
Corporate Level and State Government Level through regular site level
follow up as well as putting into place a Central Project Monitoring
Division (CPMD) for continuous monitoring of progress of all projects

35
and reporting to the top management besides holding regular meetings
with Chief Secretaries of concerned States. The Committee also note that
a web portal namely online Coal Projects Monitoring portal (e-CPMP)
has been created for regular monitoring of project related issues connected
with different Ministries and State Authorities. The Committee trust and
expect that the Ministry continue the reform process being set in with
vigor so that the country attains self sufficiency in coal production and
the benefits accrued from coal production are equitably shared.
Action Taken
A growth in production of about 7% during 2014-15 over the
previous year as compared to a growth of 2.2% during the year 2013-14
has been registered by CIL.
An incremental EC of about 30 Mty was granted by MoEF during
the year 2014-15. 5 nos. final (Stage II) Forestry approvals and 7 nos.
inprinciple (Stage I) Forestry approvals have also been accorded during
the year.
CIL is making an all out effort to ensure that there is no further
delay in project implementation. The following actions are already in
place for sorting out the constraints involved therein.
(a) Issues related to Land acquisition/possession, R&R, EC, FC
and Law and order are being taken up at all levels by CIL
with respective State Governments and Central Ministries.
(b) Issues related to EC, FC, Land acquisition and rail
infrastructure projects are regularly highlighted at all
levels. Matter now being monitored by PMO for expediting
the same.
(c) Crucial issues are being uploaded by CIL and its subsidiary
companies on the MoC e-CPMP portal and MoC is vigorously
following up with the State governments and other associated
ministries by holding meetings with concerned officials to
expedite and facilitate acquisition/possession of land, and
expediting EC and FC issues.
(d) Enhanced land compensations are being paid as per the
revised rates notified by the State governments. In States
where the rates have not been revised the compensation is
being paid as per the revised rates of the neighbouring States.

36
(e) A PAP friendly R&R policy has been framed by CIL which
is also amended as per the needs of the time.
(f) Affected parties/villagers are consistently persuaded for
accepting compensation and early hand over of land.
(g) Dedicated departments headed by the subject experts and
officials from the Railway, Forest Service’s and Land and
Revenue cadre have been appointed in the capacity of
Advisors by CIL and its subsidiaries for suitable advice,
scrutiny and expediting related proposals.
(h) CIL has already started investing in the three major rail
infrastructure projects in order to streamline the output and
coal evacuation from three coalfields with high growth
potential. Special Participative Vehicles/JVs have been formed
in the State of Chhattisgarh. MOU to form JVs have been
signed in the State of Odisha and Jharkhand for efficient
implementation of the various existing and proposed rail
infrastructure projects of CIL.
(i) The bidding process has been made more participative and
transparent in order to ensure successful and timely
conclusion of the bids.
Actions initiated at the Ministry level for ensuring effective projects
implementation:—
(a) MoC has started an e-portal (e-CPMP) on the Cab-Sec website
where crucial issues are being uploaded by CIL and its
subsidiary companies and MoC is vigorously following up
with the State Governments and other associated Ministries.
Issues related to Land acquisition/possession, R&R and Law
and order are being regularly taken up at highest level by
MoC with respective State Governments. MoC is holding
regular meetings with MoEF & CC and Ministry of Railways
regarding issues related EC-FC and all major rail
infrastructure projects.
(b) Issues related to EC, FC, Land acquisition and rail
infrastructure projects are now being monitored by PMO for
expeditious resolution of related issues as a consequence of
actions initiated by CIL & MoC.

37
(c) MoC also routinely reviews all projects with capacities 3 Mty
and above or Rs. 500 crore and above on Quarterly basis to
fast track the development of ongoing projects and expedite
execution of delayed projects.
CCI-Projects Monitoring Group reviews all coal projects costing
Rs. 1000 crore and above at regular intervals. The institution of PMG has
extended the facilities of their portal for online monitoring of coal projects.
The issues/constraints faced in implementation of coal projects are being
regularly uploaded on the portal for subsequent follow up. PMG has
vigorously taken up issues related to land acquisition, law and order, EC
and FC with the highest levels of the respective State governments and
other concerned agencies.
The Ministry of Statistics & Programme implementation monitors
implementation of projects costing Rs. 150 crore and above at regular
intervals.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Coal Block Auction Process
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee are happy to note that the Government has enacted
the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015 with effect from 30.3.2015
to ensure smooth transfer of rights, titles and interest in the mines/blocks
to new allottees selected through auction or allotment to Government
Company , as the case may be. The Committee also appreciate that the
process of Coal Blocks auction has been made transparent by live
webcasting of Auction. The Committee are particularly satisfied to note
that the total estimated amount of revenue likely to be raised in respect
of 33 Coal Mines/Blocks already auctioned which is Rs. 209740.25 crore
is to be transferred to respective State Governments. The Committee
reiterate their trust that the Ministry will continue the good work to
achieve the various targets set within time lines particularly the
momentous milestone set for a projection of coal production of one Billion
Tonnes by 2019-2020.

38
Action Taken
The Committee has appreciated the enactment of the Coal Mines
(Special Provisions) Act, 2015 with effect from 30.03.2015 to ensure smooth
transfer of rights, titles and interest in the mines/blocks to new allottees
and for the revenue generated to the tune of Rs. 209740.25 crore in respect
of Coal Mines/Blocks already auctioned. Hence no action is required.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Fund
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee note that under the CSR policy, CIL and its
subsidiaries Companies and Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
undertake different welfare activities with allocation of funds as per DPE
Guidelines effective from 1.4.2014 based on Section 135 (1) of Companies
Act, 2013 which stipulates to spend at least 2% of the average net profit
of the Company for the three immediate preceding financial years. The
Committee further note that Coal India Limited (CIL) follows its own
policy in this regard and funds based on 2% of the average net profit
of the Company for the three immediate preceding financial years or
Rs. 2 per tonne of coal production of previous year whichever is higher
is earmarked for CSR activities. The Committee are happy to note the
quantum jump in utilization of CSR funds by CIL and its subsidiaries.
In this regard, the Committee note that while there was a dismal
performance for the year 2012-13 with utilization standing over Rs. 149.55
crore against allocation of Rs. 595.74 crore, there has been a significant
improvement during the year 2013-14 wherein Rs. 409.37 crore were
utilized out of the Rs. 474.36 crore allocated. The utilization of CSR fund
for year 2014-15 upto September, 2014 stands at 111.22 crore out of
Rs. 471.65 allocated for the purpose and the Committee hope and expect
that CIL and its subsidiaries gear-up the activities under the CSR funds
so that the intended benefits are optimally derived by the beneficiaries.
The Committee also appreciate the optimal utilization of CSR funds by
NLC during the last three years with expending of Rs. 14.26 crore out
of Rs. 13.00 crore allocated in the year 2012-13; Rs. 26.30 crore utilized
out of Rs. 26.04 crore allocated in 2013-14 and Rs. 30.60 crore utilized
upto December, 2014 against allocation of Rs. 41.42 crore in the year
2014-15. The Committee feel satisfied to note that almost 50% of the total

39
CSR Budget for the year 2014-15 amounting to Rs. 235 crore has been
earmarked for construction of 52, 036 school toilets in 35224 schools in
six States viz. Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal under the Swachh Bharat/Swachh Vidyalaya
Abhiyan. The Committee also observe that under the CSR funds of Coal
PSUs, welfare measures for SC&ST and disabled persons have also been
put into place. Keeping in view the laudable objectives of the provision
of CSR funds, the Committee emphasize that all coal PSUs should strive
for optimal utilization of such funds and ensure that no earmarked funds
remain unutilized.
Action Taken
Coal India Limited
It is a fact that CIL and its subsidiaries have achieved a significant
improvement in utilizing CSR fund during 2013-14 in comparison to
earlier years. Presently CIL has revised its CSR Policy based on the New
Companies Act, 2013 and the Revised Policy has been effective from
April, 2015. As per the said policy, CIL is committed to spend at least
2% of the average net profit of the Company for the three immediate
preceding financial years or Rs. 2.00 per tonne of Coal Production of
previous year whichever is higher.
CSR activities undertaken/being undertaken by CIL and its
subsidiaries as per CIL’s CSR Policy broadly covers the following:—
(a) Welfare measures for the community at large, so as to ensure
the poorer section of the Society derived the maximum
benefits.
(b) Contribution to the society at large by way of social and
cultural development, imparting education, training and social
awareness specially with regard to the economically backward
class for their development and generation of income to avoid
any liability of employment.
(c) Protection and safeguard of environment and maintaining
ecological balance.
During the year 2014-15 CIL and its subsidiaries have spent an
amount to the tune of Rs. 329.82 crore (Provisional) against budget
allocation of Rs. 471.65 crore. Besides CIL subsidiaries have also kept

40
provision for expenditure towards construction and renovation of school
toilets separately for Boys and Girls as per the list of schools given on
the website of MHRD, in six different States towards contribution under
Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan. Further all the Boards of different CIL
subsidiary companies have been empowered to sanction additional budget
on CSR for Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan. The total number of toilets to
be constructed/renovated by CIL’s subsidiaries is 48,735 in 30,340 schools.
Construction/Renovation work for the toilets has already started and the
work will be completed by 30.06.2015 tentatively.
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL)
As regards SCCL, CSR Budget, 2014-15 for an amount of Rs. 15.56
crore (equivalent to 3% of average Net Profits of the company made
during the three immediately preceding financial years) was approved
by the Board of SCCL. Out of CSR Budget of Rs. 15.56 crore for the year
2014-15, an amount of Rs. 12.85 crore (provisional) has already been
appropriated.
CSR activities being undertaken
SCCL is discharging its Corporate Social Responsibility by taking
up various Community Development activities in Coal belt Areas and
also taking up self-employment generation programmes through Singareni
Seva Samithi (SSS).
• Providing Drinking Water Supply by drilling Bore-wells in
the surrounding villages/hamlets of coal fields.
• Providing infrastructure  i.e. , laying approach roads,
constructing drains etc. in the surrounding villages.
• Taking up sanitation in the villages/towns of coal belt areas.
Promoting Sports in the rural areas.
• Contributing for providing Road Side Bus Shelters in
Bhupalapalli Assembly Constituency, Warangal District.
• Financial Assistance to JNTU-H, Manthani for providing
infrastructure.
• Financial assistance was provided to the District
Authority of Adilabad for conducting Army recruitment
rally .

41
• Providing Central Lighting system between Chelpur and
Bhupalapalli, Warangal District.
• Skill Development for the Rural unemployed youth for self-
employment through Singareni Seva Samithi.
• Conducting Mobile Medical Camps for the benefit of the
people living in the peripheral areas. 3422 Mega/Mobile
Medical Camps were conducted and medicines supplied free
of cost from the year 2003 till date and 2,52,737 villagers of
surrounding areas of collieries benefited.
• SCCL introduced “SPANDANA” mobile hospital
services, especially for the benefit of villagers of Tiryani
Mandal.
• This mobile hospital is run by a male and one female doctor
along with 2 technicians, male and female nurses.
• Diagnostic facilities like Complete Blood Picture, X-Ray, ECG
etc., are provided in the mobile vehicle for providing instant
results.
• This mobile vehicle covers 35 villages to serve 900 to 1000
persons by making 25 camps in a month and supplies drugs
free of cost.
• As recommended by World Health Organisation, 12x12
programme was launched by Singareni with aim to achieve
12% of Hb in girl children of 12 years age. Under this
programme, parents, teachers and children are educated about
the impact of malnutrition and Iron tablets are distributed
on Monday which is observed as “Iron Day”.
• Considerable improvement is observed in Hb% levels. This
is first programme of its kind conducted in the State. 34270
children of Government and Company schools have been
covered under this programme.
Self-employment training programmes through Singareni Seva
Samithi:
• 15361 persons including 2043 Project Affected Persons were
trained in different vocational/self-employment courses out

42
of which 7622 secured employment/earning and 1761 have
established their units.
• About 300 persons are sanctioned loans with 35% (Rural)—
25% subsidy under PMEGP (Prime Minister’s Employment
Generation Programme).
• 224 PAP/local people were trained on “Volvo” vehicles at
Bangalore and Manuguru. All secured employment.
• Training to Project Affected People and their children
and local children to enable them to compete in police/
para-military recruitment. 1397 candidates were selected
in Police/Army recruitment out of the 14270 candidates
trained.
• Two major Army Recruitment Rallies were conducted with
the logistic support from SCCL in Prakasam Stadium grounds,
Kothagudem during 2014 and 2015 in which 40,000 candidate
participated and 8291 candidates have been selected in the
physical endurance test.
• To provide Self-employment, SCCL is helping the children
of SCCL and local children to start Ancillary Units. SCCL is
extending all forms of support including placing orders for
their products. At present, 11 Ancillary Units are functioning
in Mandamarri Area.
Other initiatives under CSR
• Support to three S.T. orphan homes – One each at Bellampalli,
Manuguru and Kothagudem in the form of providing school
uniforms, school bags, shoes, books free of cost and also
provision of better facilities in the homes including
accommodation etc.
• Assistance is being given to 3 special schools for the
benefit of 300 differently abled children. SCCL has
identified 742 special children and is supporting them and
in addition supporting similar service institutions in this coal
belt area.
• Infrastructure provided to school for differently abled children
‘MANOCHAITANYA’ in Godavari Khani.

43
• Providing employment opportunities in out-sourced vacancies
like transport, security, guest houses etc. Extending medical
facilities in Colliery hospitals for all employees out sourced.
Introduced system of medical attendance books for the benefit
of PAPs and their family members.
• For Tiryani Mandal which had been adopted by SCCL, an
amount of Rs. 31.30 crore has been sanctioned for carrying
out various CSR activities.
• Provision of infrastructure to the schools located near coal
fields.
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
The CSR funds utilised by NLC in the year 2014-15 is Rs. 47.49
crores (provisional and unaudited) as against the earmarked amount of
Rs. 41.60 crore.
The CSR fund is being optimally utilised for community
development in the sectors of health care, sanitation, education,
skill, and other sectors identified in Schedule VII of the Companies
Act, 2013. In fact, CSR is a continuing commitment of NLC to
the Society and no earmarked CSR funds of NLC remain
unutilized.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Need for Development of Rail Infrastructure for Coal Evacuation
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
The Committee note that the CIL has set up for itself an ambitious
plan of one billion tonne coal production by the year 2020. The Committee
feel that to achieve this target, it is equally important to put into place
a matching evacuation of coal mechanism by simultaneous development
of Rail Infrastructure. The Committee note that in order to achieve the
planned growth in production and evacuation in future, CIL has

44
undertaken few major Railway Infrastructure Projects to be executed by
Indian Railways which include Tori-Shivpuri-Khatotia new BG line with
length of about 93.45 km. for North Karanpura Coalfields of CCL in
Jharkhand; Jharsuguda-Barpalli Railway 52.4 km. line for IB coalfields of
MCL and for evacuation of coal from Mand-Raigarh and Korba Gevra
coalfields of SECL. In this regard, the Committee note from the
submissions made by the Secretary , Coal, during evidence before the
Committee that an institutional arrangement has been made under which,
meetings are held every month on pre-fixed dates for sorting out the
bottlenecks in respect of 3 major lines one each in Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh
and Odisha which were hampering the coal evacuation plans. According
to him, the initial clearances have now been obtained and these projects
are likely to be completed by December, 2017. The Committee were also
apprised that an MoU is being signed under which Railways, CIL and
the respective State Government will form SPV which to a great extent
will take care of the hurdles on account of State Government issue by
making them partners under such arrangement. The Committee express
their satisfaction at the proposed initiatives being undertaken by the
Government for development of required Railway Infrastructure for coal
evacuation. The Committee, however, at the same time emphasize that
constant monitoring must be maintained by the Ministry for ensuring
that the projects are not delayed on account of avoidable hurdles/
bottleneck.
Action Taken
Three major critical rail projects namely Tori-Shivpur-Kathotia in
Jharkhand, Jharsuguda-Barpalli in Odisha and Baroud-Bijari EW corridor
in Chhattisgarh has already been taken up by CIL wherein CIL plans to
invest about Rs. 12000 crore. An expenditure of about Rs. 1400 crore have
already been incurred. These three lines are envisaged to facilitate the
evacuation of about 180 Mt of coal from the coal projects involved therein.
Special Participative Vehicles/JVs involving CIL, Railways and State
Government have been formed in the State of Chhattisgarh. MoU to form
such JVs have been signed in the States of Odisha and Jharkhand for
efficient implementation of the various existing and proposed rail
infrastructure projects of CIL.
CIL has appointed ex-Railway Services officer of senior rank
as Advisor (Railways) for effective implementation of these Rail
infrastructure projects. MoC is all holding monthly meetings with the
Sub Group consisting of CIL, Ministry of Railways, RITES and

45
IRCON for review of status of the three major railway lines. Meetings
are also being regularly held with MoEF&CC and State Governments
regarding issues related EC-FC and other related issues involved in these
projects.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]

46
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Outstanding Dues of Coal PSUs
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee are concerned to note that there are large amount
of outstanding dues of all Coal PSUs viz. CIL and SCCL standing at
Rs. 8452.98 crore and Rs. 2198.56 crore respectively as on 28.02.2015 and
for Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC), Rs. 2216.08 crore as on
31.3.2014. The Committee note that a number of steps are being taken
for regular follow up to realize outstanding dues with concerned
Ministries/parties which inter-alia include putting in a system of issue of
coal only against advance deposit in all CIL subsidiaries; levy of late
payment surcharge etc. are being taken up to recover outstanding dues
in a time bound manner. The Committee desire that the coal PSUs should
not undermine this important aspect of recovery of outstanding dues and
take more proactive steps to considerably bring down the due amount.
Action Taken
Coal India Limited
The outstanding dues of various subsidiaries of CIL receivable on
account of sale of Coal were Rs. 10,830.04 crore as on 31.03.2014. The
total outstanding coal sale dues of CIL came down to Rs. 8452.98 crore
(provisional) as on 28.02.2015, reduced by Rs. 2377.06 crore (provisional)
compared to the total outstanding dues as on 31.03.2014.
Continuous efforts are being made at the subsidiary level and the
CIL level to realize the coal sale dues from debtor/parties. The following
actions have been taken for recovery of outstanding dues:—
1. The party-wise outstanding dues are being reviewed by the
subsidiary companies from time to time. The General Manager

47
(S&M) of concerned subsidiaries follows-up regularly with
concerned parties to realize the outstanding dues.
2. Regional Sales Offices under Sales and Marketing (S&M)
Division, CIL also pursue towards realization of outstanding
dues.
3. CMDs of subsidiary companies also communicate with
Chairman/MDs of the defaulting power-houses/parties.
4. At CIL level, GM (S&M) also communicates with the major
defaulting power-houses to clear the outstanding dues.
5. Director (Marketing), CIL has also taken up the issue of non-
payment with major defaulting power-houses/parties.
6. Chairman, CIL has also communicated with Chief Secretaries
of States so that dues of major defaulting parties are cleared.
Singareni Collieries Company Limited
The details of outstanding dues from various major parties for coal
supply as on 31.05.2015 are as below:—
(Rs. in Crores)
Sl. Name of the Party Current Dues Representing No.
No. of Days
1. APGENCO 204.99 25
2. TSGENCO 1651.13 224
3. NTPC 73.33 6
4. MSEB 168.52 52
5. KPCL-Undisputed 438.31 73
6. KPCL-Disputed 9.31 -
7. FCI 2.60 -
TOTAL 2548.19
The outstanding dues are on high side from Power customers like
TSGENCO, APGENCO, KPCL and MSEB. In addition to the regular follow
up in writing, matter is brought to the notice of C&MDs of respective
power customers by highest Authority of the company . Though, as per
terms of agreement, SCCL has liberty to withhold coal supplies if the
bills are not paid within 7 days from due date, it could not be exercised

48
as they are engaged in generation of Power and are Government
companies.
In addition to the above, two Committees of Alternate Dispute
Resolution Mechanism (ADRM) for resolving disputes between claims
of CIL’s subsidiaries/Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) and other PSUs
have been formed as per detailed below:—
(i) The ADRM Committee having members of JS level officers
from MOC and MOP has been assigned to resolve the disputes
between CIL and its subsidiaries/NLC and National Thermal
Power Corporation (NTPC)/Damodar Valley Corporation
(DVC).
(ii) The ADRM Committee having members as Adviser (P),
JS (MOC) and JS from Department of Heavy Industries has
been assigned for resolving the disputes between CIL and its
subsidiaries/NLC and Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL)/
Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd. (HECL).
The ADRM Committee at Sl.No. (ii) in its meeting held on 2.6.2015
decided to constitute a Technical Committee comprising officials from
CIL, CEA and NTPC to discuss the disputes/claims in detail and submit
a report.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]

49
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
-Nil-

50
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Environmental Measures and Subsidence Control Scheme
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that the objective of the Environmental
and Subsidence Control (EMSC) Scheme is to improve the environmental
conditions in the old mined out areas of Jharia and Raniganj
coalfields by addressing fire and subsidence problems. The
Committee further note that the Major thrust areas in EMSC during
XII Plan period are control of subsidence in the old, abandoned,
waterlogged workings in Raniganj coalfields, control of mine fires
and subsidence in Jharia coalfields besides rehabilitation of
persons residing in these areas. All EMSC Schemes have
subsequently being merged in a Master Plan dealing with Fire,
Subsidence, Rehabilitation and Diversion of surface infrastructure
within the leasehold areas of BCCL and ECL. It has been brought
out to the notice of the Committee that BCCL and ECL are making
all out efforts for the implementation of the Master Plan. The
Committee while observing that a meager amount of only Rs. 0.40 crore
has been allocated under BE/RE for the year 2015-16 note from
the explanation furnished by the Ministry that as per the tenets of the
Master Plan, the CIL needs to first spend from its own resources
upto Rs. 350 crore per year and the additional funds required,
if any, are to be made available from the Budget. According to the
Ministry, the expenditure during the last few years has remained
less than CIL’s mandatory contribution and as such, ‘NIL’ or
near ‘NIL’ expenditure has been reflected in the Ministry’s Budget.
The Committee note that BCCL and ECL are making all out efforts
for the implementation of Master Plan dealing with fire, subsidence
and rehabilitation in Jharia coalfields as well as Raniganj Coalfields
with rehabilitation of both BCCL and non-BCCL families going on.
The Committee are happy to note that BCCL has already shifted
2162 families from fire affected projects to safe colonies in non-coal

51
bearing areas and another 7000 houses to be allocated shortly.
The Committee desire that the inherent problems pertaining
to land acquisition which are statedly the major constraints
impeding implementation of the EMSC Scheme need to be
tackled seriously. The Committee also feel that such an important
scheme having ramification on the environment as well as
rehabilitation of persons residing in these locations should
be given priority. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
efforts made by the Ministry for the implementation of Master
Plan dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation in Jharia
and Raniganj Coalfields be accelerated to achieve the targets
set.
Action Taken
Keeping in mind the importance of the Scheme having
ramification on the environment as well as rehabilitation of
persons residing in these location, Ministry of Coal has given
highest priority in monitoring this Scheme. Accordingly, a High
Powered Central Committee (HPCC) under the Chairmanship of
Secretary, Ministry of Coal has been constituted with representatives from
different Ministries and State Governments concerned (viz. Jharkhand
and West Bengal) for speedy implementation of the Scheme. This
Committee regularly meets to monitoring the progress of implementation
of scheme.
Further, Secretary (Coal) has discussed the issue of land acquisition
with Chief Secretary of Jharkhand during various meetings at
Ranchi to expedite acquisition of land for rehabilitation of the affected
persons.
The issue of permission of Government of West Bengal for
construction of houses by ADDA has also been taken up with
Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal.
Secretary (Coal) has written to Chairman Railway Board regarding
diversion of railway lines in the affected area. Chairman, Railway Board
has constituted a Committee to examine the issue whose report is expected
to be finalize by August, 2015.
[Ministry of Coal, File No. 20011/09/2015-IFD,
dated 20/07/2015]

52
North Eastern Region (NER)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee are concerned to note that the North-Eastern Region
remains a totally neglected area with the lowest implementation record
as exuded by the fact that year after year, the budget provisions pertaining
to development of NER/Sikkim remain totally unutilized till 2012-13.
Regarding this low utilization of funds, the Committee note that
hindrances in exploration work viz. difficult geological characteristics,
large forest covers, adverse law and order conditions and land issues,
very low estimates of coal resources in the region (0.5% of total reported
coal reserves of India) coupled with non-implementation of S&T schemes
viz. complete lack of research proposals for NER were the major constraints
responsible for such dismal performance. Admittedly, despite the
constraints, efforts have been made to utilize this fund as an amount of
Rs. 1.77 crore has been spent from the budgetary provisions during
2013-14 with Rs. 0.70 crore on procurement of drilling rigs for exploration
in NE Regions by DGM Nagaland and Assam under promotional
exploration and Rs. 1.07 crore for development of transportation
infrastructure in coalfields by North-Eastern coalfields. The Committee,
however, find that the Budget Estimates for 2014-15 have further raised
the amount to Rs. 29 crore whereas expenditure upto December, 2014
is NIL, the BE made for the year 2015-16 stands at Rs. 30.60 crore. The
Committee, while taking cognizance of the difficult constraints, however,
desire that the Ministry need to work harder for a holistic approach. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to provide needed
incentives for evoking adequate response on R&D proposals for effective
exploration of Coal reserves in the area. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the tangible efforts in terms of concrete deliverables made
in this regard.
Action Taken
Promotional (Regional) Exploration
DGM (Nagaland) and DGM (Assam) are doing regional
coal exploration under Central Sector Scheme of MoC. Under this scheme,
1 (one) rig each was sanctioned to both the agencies. DGM (Nagaland)
has purchased the rig but DGM (Assam) is facing constraints.
About 427.00 metre were drilled by DGM (Nagaland) during April 14—
March 15.

53
Research and Development Projects
In spite of continuous efforts by Coal India Limited (CIL), Ministry
of Coal (MoC), CMPDI, quality proposals are not being received from
the core research/academic institutes of North-Eastern Region (NER). Very
limited number of research proposals are being submitted by various
institutes located in NER, although the request letters inviting research
proposal sent to these institutes and the thrust areas of research for coal
industry were widely circulated.
As a matter of fact, recently two research proposals were
received from the research/academic institutes of NER. One is related
to beneficiation of NER coals, which was not agreed by the
Technical Sub-Committee of Standing Scientific Research Committee
(SSRC) as the earlier studies concluded that no substantial removal
of organic sulphur could be achieved through beneficiation. The
other one received from IIT, Guwahati and CMERI, Durgapur is under
scrutiny.
Efforts are continued to increase expenditure on R&D in the NER
by way of inviting R&D proposals from academic institutes/research
organisations from NER for effective exploitation of coal deposits and
other issues related to North Eastern Region.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
Coal Theft and Pilferage
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee note that the vigilance milestones statedly achieved
pertaining to vigilance activities undertaken by the Ministry of Coal
inter-alia include collecting data on real time basis; equipping all projects
with electronic weigh-bridges; Operator Independent Truck Dispatch
System (OITDS) expected to be operational from March, 2015; online file
and bill tracking system; Information Technology initiatives; installation
of in-motion road weigh-bridges with requisite software for Coal stock
measurement, on-line Truck Despatch system put in place in vulnerable
areas; Implementation of e-tendering solution for ‘works and services’
done in all areas except Rajmahal; Online complaint handling system
made fully functional; E-tendering and e-procurement made fully
implemented; GPS-based vehicle-tracking system installed in 270 vehicles

54
etc. The Committee, during their study tour to Talcher, Odisha
in the Mahanadi Coalfields (MCL) on 11.2.2015 observed that
the MCL has achieved the laudable completion of installation
of Global Positioning System (GPS)/General Packet Radio Services (GPRS)
based Vehicle Tracking System on trucks/tippers and for coal
production/internal transportation with a view to curb the
menace of coal theft and pilferage. Keeping in view the deep
concerns that the Committee had expressed time and again on the
aspect of illegal mining as well as pilferage of coal causing
great loss to the national exchequer, the Committee desire that the
laudable step taken by MCL be replicated throughout so that the
menace of coal theft and pilferage is checked effectively. The
Committee also hope that as assured to by Secretary , Ministry
of Coal, during oral evidence on 1.4.2015, the monitoring mechanism put
in place in Talcher be also replicated to all coal bearing areas by the end
of the financial year 2014-15. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken in the matter thereon within 3 months of presentation of
the Report.
Action Taken
As the coal mines have large number of entry/exit points, physical
surveillance of the area is almost impossible. Coal India and its subsidiary
companies are emphasising electronic surveillance to obtain accurate data
of production, dispatch, etc. Large numbers of such points are required
to be connected in a Wide Area Network to obtain data on real time
basis.
To check the theft and pilferage of coal at Coal dumps
and sidings, it was decided to set up a truck monitoring system
for coal transportation through GPS/GPRS in all mines of CIL.
The implementation of the IT initiatives is being reviewed from
time to time. The main objectives of different IT initiatives are of two
folds, i.e.:
(i) Electronic surveillance to check theft and pilferage; and
(ii) Capture of real time data of production, dispatch, stores etc.
to improve operational efficiency.
3. An integrated system has been conceived consisting of
GPS/GPRS based vehicle tracking system with RFID, CCTV , boom barrier

55
connected through a wide area network connecting all vulnerable
points like weigh bridges, material stores, entry/exit points, stock
yards, sidings, explosive magazines etc. The objective is to
track the movement of vehicles from the time it enters the
mine area, i.e.  coal dump/store yard to sidings along its route.
Alerts are received in the form of exception report when a vehicle
violates defined routes, e.g. stoppage for longer time en-route,
deviation from the designated route, etc. The status of
different IT initiatives along with their implementation time
lines for all subsidiaries Coal India Ltd., and its subsidiaries have been
fixed.
4. In the recently held review meeting taken by Secretary (Coal)
it was decided to implement the IT initiatives by September, 2015. The
status of implementation of IT initiatives as on 31st May, 2015 is as
below:—
Sl. Name of the item Requirement Implement-
No. ation status
as on date
1. GPS/GPRS based Vehicle 8865 3516
Tracking System
2. Electronic Surveillance by 1904 432
CCTV
3. RFID based Boom Barriers 430 50
and Readers
4. Weigh Bridge Status 969 829
5. Wide Area Networking 912 223
6. Coal Net Implementation 48 27
Status
e-Procurement has been implemented in CIL and all its subsidiaries.
Reverse e-auction have been started for HIRED HEEM and coal
transportation in BCCL, CCL. Other subsidiaries are in the process of
adopting the same. Reverse e-auction for procurement of explosives has
been adopted in CIL.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]

56
Delay in Getting Environmental and Forestry Clearances
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee note that a total of 187 forestry clearance
proposals and 22 Environmental Clearance proposals are pending
for CIL; 5 forestry clearance proposals and 11 Environmental
Clearance proposals are pending for SCCL and 3 Environmental
clearance proposals are pending for NLC as on March, 2015. In this
regard, the Committee note that the Ministry have opined that
a single window clearance mechanism may not be feasible
in granting these clearances as the statutory EC&FC clearances
require many agencies including State Governments as well as
Central Ministries. The Committee were, however, apprised
that the Cabinet Secretariat have started a Project Monitoring
Group to monitor such issues online for all major projects
and critical projects with the Ministry of Coal launching a web
based portal for resolving pending issues for all coal mining projects
to help resolve and expedite clearances. The Committee while
emphasizing that the Ministry should not ignore the Environmental
and Forestry requirements, recommend that in addition to the
initiatives statedly being taken up on these fronts, the Ministry
should explore the feasibility of creating a mechanism for streamlining
the process of obtaining environmental and forest clearances in a
coordinated manner.
Action Taken
During the XII Plan period, Stage II clearance for 20 forestry
proposals, involving an area of 1891.72 Ha., has been approved by
MoEF&CC up to May, 2015.
At present, 183 forestry proposals are awaiting clearances at various
levels. Out of these, 120 proposals, involving an area of about 15838.20
Ha., are awaiting clearances at Stage-I level and 63 proposals, involving
an area of about 16116 Ha., are awaiting clearances at Stage-II level.
Similarly, 89 environmental clearance proposals for an effective
incremental capacity of 132 Mty. have been approved by MoEF&CC during
the XII Plan up to May 2015.
At present 22 EC proposals, involving an incremental EC capacity
of 102 Mty. are pending for clearances at various levels. Out of these

57
6 are awaiting for TOR, 10 proposals are awaiting for gates of EAC
meeting, 3 are awaiting dates for public consultation and 3 proposals are
awaiting final clearance.
[O.M. No. 20011/09/2015-IFD, dated 20/07/2015 of
Ministry of Coal]
NEW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
03 December, 2015 Chairperson,
12 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

58
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 19 NOVEMBER, 2015 IN HON’BLE
CHAIRPERSON’S CHAMBER, ROOM NO. ‘112’, FIRST FLOOR,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI.
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
3. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
4. Shri Shailesh Kumar
5. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel
6. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
7. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
8. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
9. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
10. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
12. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
14. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
15. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque

59
16. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
17. Shri Jugul Kishore
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the 7th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on “Demands for Grants
(2015-16)” relating to the Ministry of Coal.
(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
5. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Do not pertain to this Report.

60
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made: 16
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:
(Vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13
and 16)
Total : 11
Percentage of total : 68.75%
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 14)
Total : 01
Percentage of total : 6.25%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee:
(Vide recommendation at Sl. No. NIL)
Total : 00
Percentage of total : 0%
V . Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
(Vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 6, 8, 12, and 15)
Total : 04
Percentage of total : 25.00%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”