MINISTRY OF STEEL

Action Taken by the Government on the Qbservations/Recommendations contained
in the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on “Research and Development in Iron and Steel Sector”

THIRTIETH REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2017/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)



THIRTIETH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2016-2017)

( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )

MINISTRY OF STEEL

Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Research and
Development in Iron and Steel Sector”

Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.03.2017
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.03.2017

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2017/Phalguna 1939 (Saka)


CC&S No. 116

Price : Rs. 74,00

© 2017 By Lox SasHa Secerrariat

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.


ComrositioN OF THE COMMITTEE

INTRODUCTION

Cuarter I

Cuapter ID

CxapTer UE

Cuapter IV

Cuapter V

TL.

CONTENTS

Report...

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ......

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's replies...

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee.......

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ......
ANNEXURES

Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2016-17) held on 02.03.2017

Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

40

43

48

50

52


COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2016-17)

Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson.
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
Shri Kalyan Banerjee
Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
Shri Nagesh Godam.
Shri Shailesh Kumar
Dr. Banshilal Mahato
Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi
Shri Ajay Nishad
Shrimati Riti Pathak

. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan

. De. Ravindra Kumar Ray

Shri Chandu Lal Sahu

Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu

Shri Tathagata Satpathy

Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
Shri Rama Kishore Singh

. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
. Shri Krupal Balaji Tamane

(i)


(५)

22.

24.
25.
26,
27,
28.
29.
30.
31.

Rajya Sabha
Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
Shri Ranjib Biswal
Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
Shri B.K Hariprasad
Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
Shri Ram Vichar Netam
Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey

Vacant
Vacant

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri UBS. Negi नर
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg -
3. Shri Arvind Sharma -
4. Smt. Vandana P.Guleria —

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director
Executive Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action ‘Taken by
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Research and Development in Iron and Steel
Sector” pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.

2. The Twenty-First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2016.
Replies of the Government to all the observations/recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 28.10.2016.

3, The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 02.03.2017.

4, An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.

5, For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.

New Detur; RAKESH SINGH,
2 March, 2017 Chairperson,
11 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

)


CHAPTER I

REPORT

This Report of the Standing Committee deals with Action

Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Twenty-First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2015-16) on the subject, “Research
and Development in Iron and Steel Sector” relating to the Ministry of
Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
10.08.2016.

2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry

of Steel on 28.10.2016 in respect of all the 18 observations/
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised
as follows: —

(i)

i)

Gi)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Serial Nos. : 2, 3, 5, 6 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 18

Total : 13
Chapter-II

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:

Serial No. : 1, 13

Total : 02
Chapter-Iil

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:

Serial Nos. : 7 and 17

Total : 02
Chapter-V


(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:

Serial No. : 4

Total : 01
Chapter-V

3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that final Action Taken replies
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapters-I and V
of this Report be furnished ta them within three months.

4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their observations/recommendations made in
the Twenty-First Report.

Steel Development Fund
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)

5. The Committee were unhappy to note that Steel Development
Fund which was set up in 1997-98 for R&D initiatives with an annual
expenditure target of Rs. 150 crore to be pursued by public and private
steel companies for development of innovative/path breaking technologies,
beneficiation/upgradation of low grade iron ore, achieving, global
benchmarks in productivity, quality, etc. had failed to yield desired results
even after funding of 91 R&D projects costing Rs, 950.75 crore under the
scheme, Although, 55 of these 91 R&D projects had been completed and
24 projects are in progress, the Committee were concerned to note that
even after expending Rs. 950.75 crore on these 91 R&D activities, during
2014-15, 9.32 MT of finished steel was imported. While deprecating the
non-focused approach on R&D activities by the Government and domestic
steel Industry during the last 2 decades, the Committee felt that it is high
time now that Indian Steel Industry focus on R&D on better resource
utilization, better cost efficiency and production of world class products.
The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the sustained
efforts made by the Ministry of Steel and domestic steel companies to
produce quality steel for automotive sector, electrical equipment and ship
building etc,

2


6. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under: —

“In the xecent past, the country has been producing normal grades
of automotive steels and also CRNO electrical steels for quite some
time. The steel companies are also engaged in development and
production of steel required for the strategic sector like ship
building, oil and gas, defence sector etc. Of late, several steel
companies are engaged in production of most of the auto grade
steel sheets as well as CRNO steel sheets. However, CRGO electrical
steel is hardly produced in the country as the technology is closely
held by a handful of leading steel manufacturers worldwide. One
company produce around 10,000 tonnes of CRGO steel based on
imported inputs.

Government has accordingly decided to pursue an R&D project
namely “Development of Technology for Cold Rolled Grain
Oriented (CRGO) Electrical Steel Sheets”, for indigenous
development of the technology for CRGO steel sheets. Salient
features of the project are given below:—

e This is a joint collaborative research project by NML,
Jamshedpur (CSIR), Tata Steel, RINL and Ministry of Steel.

. The estimated cost of the CRGO Pilot project is Rs. 494.63
crore out of which Rs. 117.65 crore is to be provided from
Plan Fund.

° MECON has prepared the DPR of the project which has been
approved by stakeholders in September, 2016.

e A Memorandum of Agreement is expected to be signed by
the stakeholders shortly.

° Project is likely to be in initiated in 2016-17 after necessary
final approval in Ministry of Steel and giving go ahead to
MECON fer the Project Management Consultancy and
Supervision services.”

7. To the recommendation of the Committee that domestic steel
industry should make sustained efforts to produce quality steel for
automotive sector and electrical equipment, etc., the Ministry of Steel
in their action taken reply have submitted that the country has already
been producing normal grades of automotive steels and CRNO electrical
steels but Cold Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) electrical steel is hardly
produced in the country as the technology is closely held by a handful

3


of leading steel manufacturers worldwide. In this regard, the Committee
are happy to note that the Government has decided to pursue an R&D
project namely “Development of Technology for Cold Rolled Grain
Oriented (CRGO) Electrical Steel Sheets”, for indigenous development
of the technology for CRGO steel sheets for which a joint collaborative
research project is being undertaken by National Metallurgical
Laboratory (NML), Jamshedpur (CSIR), Tata Steel, RINL and Ministry
of Steel. The estimated cost of the CRGO Pilot project is Rs. 494.63
crore out of which Rs. 117.65 crore is to be provided from Plan Fund.
The Committee are further apprised that MECON has prepared the
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of the project which has been approved
by stakeholders in September 2016 and a Memorandum of Agreement
is expected to be signed by the stakeholders shortly. As the Committee
are very keen to see these sustained efforts by the Ministry to fructify,
they would like to be apprised of the latest status in this regard
including signing of the Memorandum of Agreement by the
stakeholders concerned.

Need for Higher Investments in R&D
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)

8. The Committee noted that steel PSUs like NMDC Ltd., MECON
Lid,, MOIL Ltd. and KIOCL Ltd. also carry out independent R&D works
in the field of ore beneficiation, mineral processing and safety and
productivity in mines etc, The Steel Companies like SAIL, TATA Steel,
JSW Steel and ESSAR Steel had accomplished some significant R&D works
in the area of raw material beneficiation, agglomeration and product
development. However, the actual investment on R&D by the Steel
Companies in India had remained very low in the range of 0.05-0.5% of
the sales turnover compared to R&D investments in Steel Companies
abroad, For instance, in the countries like China, Japan and South Korea
ete, annual R&D investments were very high and varies in the range of
1-2% of their sales turnover whereas during the year 2014-15, the SAIL’s
share of expenditure was only 0.56% of the turnover of the company.
Similarly, the expenditure on R&D by RINL, NMDC Ltd., MOIL Ltd. and
MECON Ltd. during 2014-15 was 0.28 %, 0.15%, 0.73% and 0.53%
respectively of their total turnover. The Committee noted that as per
Department of Public Enterprises guidelines, Maharatna and Navratna
category of CPSEs were required to invest 1% of their PAT and Miniratna
Companies had to invest 0.5% of their PAT in R&D. Besides that, the
Working Group on Steel Industry for the 12th Five Year Plan had also
recommended a minimum 1% investment in R&D by the steel companies
of their sales turnover. While the main focus of R&D by Indian Steel
Companies had remained on improving internal processes like saving

4


costs and improving plant efficiency, want of adequate R&D investments
for development of high end technologies and products remains a major
concern for the Committee. The Committee felt that enhanced R&D
investments and adoption of new technologies were imperative for
competitiveness of Indian Steel Industry. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that taking into account the requirement of laying focus
on indigenous development of technology, continuous and augmented
efforts should be made for R&D initiatives by all concerned including
the Ministry of Steel, Public and Private Sector Companies, Institutes of
Technological Research and Advancements, etc. The Committee also
recommended that the Indian Steel Companies, both public and private
enterprises should make an attempt to benchmark their R&D spending
with internationally prevalent best practices in the Sector. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by all Steel PSUs and private
sector companies in this regard.

9. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:—

“Mh addition to the present R&D schemes pursued by Ministry of
Steel, to augment the R&D initiatives of the Indian Steel Sector,
Ministry of Steel is facilitating the setting up of an Industry led
Institutional Mechanism to pursue joint collaborative research in
the Iron and steel sector and spearhead Ré&D of national importance.

With regard to benchmarking R&D investments by the Indian steel
companies to the global best practices, it is submitted that setting
up of SRTMI which is an industry led mechanism for joint
collaborative research, and will run from the contributions of the
steel companies, will facilitate increasing the R&D investment.
Besides, the PSU steel companies individually are also giving more
thrust on R&D and have set up strategies to enhance the R&D
investment. The steel companies in the private sector also are
engaging in enhancing their R&D capabilities which are expected
to enhance the R&D investment.

There has been a significant increase in R&D expenditure of SAIL
from Rs. 110.43 crore in 2013-14 to Rs, 264.20 crore in 2014-15,
further to Rs. 277 crore in 2015-2016, In terms of tumover net of
excise, R&D expenditure has increased from 0.24% (2013-14) to
0.58% (2014-15), further to 0.72% in 2015-16, which is the highest
among all steel plants in the country.

SAIL has undertaken R&D Master Plan programme with an aim
to increase the R&D Expenditure to 1% of tumover. Under R&D

5


Master Plan, new innovation projects have been undertaken in SAIL
Steel Plants and Units.

RINL strives for indigenous development of technology through
R&D spending to match with the international practices in the Iron
and Steel Sector. Major R&D initiatives to achieve an R&D
expenditure of 1% of Sales Turnover at RINL-VSP are given as under:

1. A collaborative R&D program on “Development of the
technology and produce CRGO steel and other value added
steels” with CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory,
Jamshedpur, Tata Steel, Jamshedpur and Ministry of Steel at
an estimated cost of Rs. 495 crore over a period of five years.
RINLs contribution for this project is Rs. 129.4 crore.

2... Setting up additional facilities for existing R&D Centre at an
expenditure of Rs. 3.4 crore towards infrastructure and with
additional research equipment of Rs. 15 crore.

3. Setting up a separate R&D Centre over a period of six years
with a proposed expenditure of about Rs. 150 crore
(Rs. 25 crore per year).

4, — Participation in “Steel Research and Technology Mission of
India” (SRTMI) involving an expenditure of approx. Rs. 8
crore per year.”

10. Taking note of the fact that investment in R&D by major
steel PSUs are much below the R&D investment by major steel
producing companies in the world, the Committee had emphasized on.
the need for both private and public enterprises to benchmark their
R&D investments with international standards where companies annual
R&D investments vary in the ratio of 1-2% of their sales turnover. The
Committee appreciate the fact that there has been a significant increase
in R&D expenditure of SAIL from Rs. 110.43 crore in 2013-14 to
Rs. 264.20 crore and Rs, 277 crore in 2014-15 and 2015-2016 respectively
whereby the R&D expenditure of SAIL increased in terms of turnover
net of excise from 0.24% in 2013-14 to 0.58% in 2014-15, further to 0.72%
in 2015-16, which is the highest among all steet companies in the
country. Further, SAIL has also reported to undertake R&D Master
Plan programme with an aim to increase the R&D Expenditure to 1%
of turnover wherein new innovation projects have been undertaken in
SAIL Steel Plants and Units. Similarly, RINL has also enumerated major
R&D initiatives taken up by it to achieve R&D expenditure of 1% of
sales turnover. Although, the Committee appreciate that sustained

6


efforts are being made to raise the R&D investment benchmark by
steel PSUs by setting up institutional mechanism like SRTML, they
would like to be apprised of the details of the master plan of the steel
PSUs as well as private sector steel companies to achieve minimum
1% investment in R&D in a time bound manner as recommended by
Working Group on Steel Industry.

Need for Fresh Mapping for Iron Ore Deposits
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)

11. Considering the prospects of growth of steel sector in our
country and the ambitious production target of 300 MT by 2025, the
Committee felt that in addition to the already identified/proven iron ore
reserves, there was an imperative need for exploration of new jron ore
reserves, In this regard, the Committee, however noted that the data of
iron ore mapping available had become old and obsolete. The Committee
had also been given to understand that NMDC Ltd. was equipped with
State of the art/latest technologies for drilling and exploration work but
the work is pending in some of the mining areas pending forest clearances.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the process of exploring
fresh iron ore deposits should be initiated at the earliest so that latest
data was made available and exploration work did not suffer on account
of lack of availability of data. Taking note of the fact that exploratory
works were held up pending statutory clearances and that substantial
R&D works in the field of mapping and exploration of iron ore had not
been done in the past, the Committee felt that this aspect should no
longer remain neglected and immediate steps be taken for updation of
mapping data of iron ore and pending, forest clearances. The Committee
also desired that the Government should not only take advance action
to ensure availability of raw material for production of 300 million tonne
of steel by 2025 but should also explore the prospects of acquiring iron
ore assets abroad.

12. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:—

“1, In coherence with the plan of Ministry of Steel of achieving
300 MTPA steel production by 2024-25, NMDC plans to
become a major Iron Ore supplier in the Country. As a part
of our strategic planning, NMDC is embarking upon to
increase its Lron Ore production capacity to 50 Million Tonnes
by 2018-19 and 67 Million Tonnes by 2021-22 from existing
and new mines to meet the requirement of steel production.

7


IL.

TL

The Iron Ore Production of 67 Million Tonnes by 2021-22 can
be achieved by allocation of new Iron Ore Deposits in other
States, early Statutory clearances for Bailadila Deposit-4 and
Deposit-13 and expansion Projects with the support from the
Government.

The section 17A (2A) of MM (D&R) Amendment Act, 2015
provides for Reservation for Government/PSUs. The matter
is being pursued to reserve the area for NMDC with
concerned State Government for 196 Ha and 154.50 Ha areas
contiguous to KIOM & DIOM MLs and Ramandurg in
Karnataka, Mankadnacha and Malangtoli in Odisha, Ghatkuri
in Jharkhand, Ramgiri in Andhra Pradesh.

Abroad;

Iv.

VL

VIL

VOL.

NMDC has 78.56% equity in Legacy Iron Ore Ltd. Legacy
Tron Ore is a Perth-based Australian exploration company,
focused on the development of iron ore, gold and base metal
deposits. Currently Legacy has 19 tenements—Iron ore
(01 tenement), Goid (17 tenements) and Base Metals (01
tenement).

Mt. Bevan Magnetite project is a joint venture between Legacy
Tron (60%) and Hawthorn resources (40%). Total JORC
magnetife resource is 1.17 billion tonnes @30.6% Fe out of
which, 322Mt is in indicated category and 847Mt is in inferred
category. The resource size can be further extended by drilling
in eastern banded iron ore formation.

SPV, the initiative of Ministry of Steel to boost steel production
in India, NMDC is leading the formation of steel SPV in the
State of Karnataka and Jharkhand.

To provide iron ore to the steel plants, NMDC is in continuous
engagement with Mysore Minerals Limited (MML) to sign
a Memorandum of Understanding and form a Joint Venture
company to develop the iron ore resources in the State of
Karnataka.

For allocation of iron ore resources and ore linkage to Steel
SPV, NMDC had submitted the draft Joint Venture agreement
to form a Joint venture company between NMDC and JSMDC
in July 2015.”


13. The Committee while acknowledging the need for expanding
the iron ore availability across the country had desired that the work
regarding exploration of fresh iron ore resources should be initiated
expeditiously. The Committee had, therefore, stressed on the need for
immediate action on updation of iron ore mapping data which has
become old and obsolete. The Committee are unhappy to note that the
reply of the Ministry is silent on this aspect. Keeping in view the
compelling circumstances to achieve ambitious production target of
300 MT by 2025 in the country and pending exploration work due to
obsolete mapping and exploration data, the Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation that immediate steps be taken for updation of
mapping data of iron ore and desire that they be apprised of the steps
taken by Ministry of Steel in this matter.

Joint Ventures for R&D
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)

14, The Committee noted that some of the steel companies in
India had also been partnering with world leaders through joint
ventures for acquiring technology and process know-how to enable
them to improve their performance and produce value added
products. For example, Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) had
signed an MoU with Arcelor Mittal for development/production
of automotive grade steel sheets. JSW steel had entered into
partnership with JFE, Japan for technological support for development
and production of value added steel products particularly
automotive grade steel and electrical steel. Further, Tata Steel
Limited had entered into partnership with Nippon Steel and
Sumitomo Metals Corporation for development and production of
automotive grade steel sheets. In addition, 2 renowned foreign companies
namely POSCO, South Korea and China Steel Corporation, Taiwan had
set up their 100% subsidiaries in India to produce value added flat steel
products. Though, the Committee appreciate these efforts and felt that
with these initiatives India’s dependence on import of value added.
products will substantially decrease, yet at the same time, the Committee
desired that concerted efforts were also required not only for technological
collaboration with such, companies but for acquiring/transfer of high-end
technologies pursued by them. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the targeted investments and stipulated dates by which the
aforementioned Joint Ventures by the Indian Steel Companies could be
set up.

9


under: —

15. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as

“The information desired by the committee is given hereunder: —

SAIL:

SAIL and Arcelor Mittal have signed an MoU on May 22,
2015 to explore the possibility of setting up an automotive
steel manufacturing facility under a Joint Venture (JV), in
India. The MoU has a validity of two years.

The proposed JV will construct a state-of-the-art cold rolling
mill and other downstream finishing facilities in India that
will offer technologically advanced steel products to India’s
rapidly growing automotive sector.

The input material for the CRM shall be supplied from SAIL’s
upcoming Hot Strip Mill located at Rourkela Steel Plant. Thus,
it would be a completely integrated indigenous supply chain
for the Indian Automotive Sector.

A task force team comprising representatives from both SAIL
and Arcelor Mittal has been working on detailed due diligence
and feasibility study, based on the outcome of which definitive
agreements for setting up a JV Company shall be entered
into.

The investment and the timeline for setting up of production
facilities shall be firmed up as a part of the due diligence
and feasibility study.

Tata Steel:

In early 2000, Tata Steel signed technological contracts with
Nippon Steel and Arcelor for the development of cold rolled
and galvanized products for automotive customers. Nippon
Steel was appointed as a Technology Consultant for the
selection of process and machinery in the cold rolling
complex, which was established in the year 2000. Nippon
Steel help was availed for the finalization of technology/
process/machinery in the green field project at Kalinganagar,

Tata Steel and Nippon Steel put up a Continuous Annealing
Line at Jamshedpur (0.54 MTPA) in 2014 for the production
of high quality Cold Rolled material for automotive


customers. This unit produces steel for internal as well as
external applications up to a strength level of 590 MPa.

e Tata Steel and Bluescope, Australia established a Continuous
Galvanizing unit and Colour Coating Line at Jamshedpur.
The unit produces high quality Galvalume and Colour Coated
Steel for construction application. TSL availed the help of
CSM, Italy in 2015 for the development of high strength APL
grades.

. All the Technology collaborations and JVs have been
completed successfully. These efforts have resulted in the
development of new grades and substantial technology
transfer has occurred on account of them.

. At present there is no ongoing Technology contract with any
overseas Technology Partner. Discussions are in progress for
JV with Nippon Steel and Sumitomo Metal for a 2.5 MTPA
modern Cold Rolling Complex at Kalinganagar. It will be
done only if the economics of doing it as JV are favorable.

JSW Steel:

° JSW entered into a JV with JFE Steel Corporation for (a)
transfer of Know-how to help JSW steel in production of
high end products for automobile steels and Electrical steels,
(b) Process improvement consultation and guidance for steel
processes, and (c) Testing and certification of advanced steels.

° Accordingly, to adopt the new technologies, JSW has invested
in two major production facilities:

a. About Rs. 4,350 crores in CRM-2 project for building
the Country's largest and widest state-of-the-art
2.3 MTPA capacity Cold Rolling Mill with continuous
annealing and continuous galvanizing lines to produce
high end automotive sicels.

b. About Rs. 505 crores in new facilities for production
of Cold Rolled Non-grain Oriented (CRNO) electrical
steel.”

16. While observing that some of the Indian Steel Companies

including PSUs had been partnering with other world companies
through Joint Ventures for acquiring technology and process know-

11


how adding value added products and improving performance etc.
The Committee had observed that concerted efforts would be required
not only for technological collaboration with such companies but also
for acquiring/transfer of high end technologies pursued by them. The
Committee had also desired to be apprised of the targeted investments
and stipulated dates of initiation of these joint ventures, In this regard,
the Ministry in their action taken reply have informed that SAIL and
Arcelor Mittal have signed an MoU on May 22, 2015 to explore the
possibility of setting up an automotive steel manufacturing facility
under a Joint Venture (JV), in India. This MoU has a validity of two
years. A task force team comprising of representatives from both SAIL
and Arcelor Mittal has been working on detailed due diligence and
feasibility study, based on the outcome of which definitive agreements
for setting up a JV Company shall be entered into. The investment and
the timeline for setting up of production facilities shall be firmed up
as a part of the due diligence and feasibility study. As regards private
sector, the Ministry have informed about the initiatives being
undertaken by Tata Steel and JSW for acquiring technology and
production of high end steel products through JVs. Though, the
Committee are satisfied with these initiatives for production of high
grade steel in the country, the Committee desire that intensive efforts
be made so that these processes are speeded up and the work on setting
up of such JVs should be initiated at the earliest.

Anti-dumping Duty on Steel
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)

17, While reiterating their earlier recommendation in 20th Report
on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Steel whereby the
Committee appreciated the measures like hiking of import duty,
imposition of provisional safeguard duty on certain items, imposition of
anti-dumping duty, invoking the Steel and Steel products (Quality Control
Order) etc. taken by the Government to protect the interest of beleaguered.
domestic steel industry, the Committee noted that India follows the lesser
duty rule in anti-dumping investigations and subsidy investigations. As
per this method, anti-dumping, duty/countervailing duty was levied on
the lesser of ‘margin of dumping/amount of subsidy’ or margin of injury.
According to the Ministry of Steel, major jurisdictions such as the United
States of America, Canada and China, however, did not adopt the lesser
duty rule. These jurisdictions were of the view that their domestic industry
had to be protected from unfair dumping/subsidy at all costs and the
most effective way to accomplish that would be if anti-dumping duty/
countervailing duty was levied to the full extent of the margin of dumping/
amount of subsidy. As a consequence, these countries did not give the

12


benefit of Jesser duty rule to erring exporters as they realize this method
was not effective because it always leaves room for the exporters to
continue dumping practices. Similarly, it gave less relaxation to exporters
from countries that offer trade distortive subsidies. The Committee were
further apprised that General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade, Agreement
on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 (Anti-Dumping Agreement) and Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures permit WTO members to levy anti-dumping
duty/countervailing duty to the full extent of the margin of dumping/
amount of subsidy. In fact, WTO commitments do not mandate that
countries should follow lesser duty rule in anti-dumping investigations.
In view of the foregoing and the fact that the lesser duty rule was
introduced in the WTO at the instance of import dependent countries,
to give them an elbow for levying duties that were lower than the dumping
margin, the Committee felt that the country which had a vibrant domestic
industry capable enough of producing a wide spectrum of products with
increase of steel production to give a boost to the ‘Make in India’ Vision
should consider imposition of anti-dumping duty/countervailing duty to
the full extent of the dumping margin/amount of subsidy and stop the
practice of giving only partial protection against dumped imports/
subsidized imports. According to the Ministry of Steel, scrapping of ‘lesser
duty’ rule in relation to anti-dumping investigations and subsidy
investigations do not require changes in the parent act and these charges
could be effected by change in Rules alone. The Committee therefore,
recommended the Ministry of Steel to take up the matter at the appropriate
level in the Government so that elaborate policy initiatives be taken and
a level playing field and adequate and effective safeguards were provided
to the domestic steel Industry.

18. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under: —

“It may be noted that industries have been constantly trying for
removal of ‘Lesser Duty Mechanism’ for notification of Anti-
Dumping Duty on Steel Products. Ministry of Steel vide DO
No. 3/2(7)/2015-TTD dated 18th March 2016 has also requested for
the same to Ministry of Commerce. To lend support to the stressed
domestic industry, Government of India has notified a number of
measures, viz. MIP, Anti-dumping duty, Safeguard duty, Quality
Control to cover a wide range steel products affected by predatory
pricing strategy of countries with excess steel making capacities.”

49, The Committee have time and again expressed concern and
solidarity over the current State of the Indian Steel Industry. The
Committee are also aware that domestically produced steel is at a

13


disadvantage as compared to imported steel due to certain costs which
are external to steel producers such as cost of power, cost of finance,
cost of logistics, Government levies, etc. The Committee had noted
that all major steel producing countries like USA, Canada and China
Protect their domestic industry from unfair dumping by levying the
anti dumping/countervailing duty to the full extent as against the policy
adopted by India which follows the lesser duty rule in anti-dumping
investigations and subsidy investigations. Keeping these aspects in
mind, the Committee had desired the Ministry of Steel to take up this
matter at the appropriate level in the Government so that elaborate
policy initiatives be taken in this regard. The Committee however, feel
extremely disappointed at the action taken reply of the Ministry wherein
it has merely mentioned a communication dated 18th March, 2016
quoting a request made to the Ministry of Commerce for removal of
‘Lesser Duty Mechanism’. It is, therefore, evident to the Committee
that after presentation of this original Report to the Parliament on
10.08.2016, the Ministry of Steel have failed to take any initiative on
the Committee’s recommendation. The Committee strongly lament this
lackadiasical approach of the Ministry and exhort the Ministry of Steel
to take up the recommendation made by the Committee at the
appropriate level in the Government so that elaborate policy initiatives
be taken to safeguard the domestic steel industry. The Committee were
also given to understand that there should be no major hurdles in
implementing the full extent duty as the WTO commitments do not
mandate the countries to follow lesser duty rule in anti-dumping
investigations. As scrapping of ‘lesser duty’ rule in relation to anti-
dumping investigations and subsidy investigations do not require
changes in the parent act and these changes can be effected by change
in Rules alone, the Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation for
providing proper safeguards to the domestic steel industry and as
informed by the Ministry of Steel that the matter was last taken up
with the Ministry of Commerce on. 18.03.2016. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the further follow up action be taken in the
matter within three months of presentation of this Report,

14


CHAPTER IT

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (Serial No. 2)

The Committee observe that lack of seriousness on R&D
in Indian Steel Sector has resulted in high capital cost for
modernization and building new steel capacities as the country
still depends on the western countries for import of major
equipment and technologies. Also, the dependence on imported
raw materials especially coking coal has discouraged the development
of indigenous technologies compatible to resource endowment,
threat to sustainability of resources especially adequacy of
iron ore resources as the country is yet to develop cost
effective beneficiation/pelletisation technologies suited to
domestically produced iron ores. The Committee note that although
an allocation of Rs. 118 crore was made during 11th plan
period for ‘Promotion of R&D in Iron and Steel Sector’ with
focus on development of innovative/path breaking technologies
for utilization of iron ore fines and non-coking coal, beneficiation
of raw materials like iron ore, coal ete. and agglomeration
and improvement in quality of steel produced through the
induction furnace, only Rs. 73.72 crore were released for R&D
projects approved with a total cost of Rs, 123.27 crore involving
plan fund of Rs. 87.28 crore. The Committee are unhappy to note
that although 6 R&D projects have reportedly been completed, yet
pilot plants for commercialization of processes/technologies are
yet to be established by the steel industry. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that there is an urgent need to speed up the
implementation of technologies/processes developed by setting up of pilot
plants/industrial trials for beneficiation and pelletization of iron ore slimes,
optimum coal blending, production of low phosphorous steel, production
of quality steel through induction furnace route so that the country can
become self reliant in utilization of raw material resources in producing
quality steel.

15


Action Taken

The reasons for non-utilization of the allocated funds are given
below:—

° Lack of quality R&D proposals being received in Ministry of
Steel mainly due lack of qualified and competent R&D
manpower and infrastructure in the iron and steel sector.

° The allocated grants in approved R&D projects could not be
released due to delay in implementation of some of the R&D
projects due to technical complexities and logistical constraints
leading to non utilization of allocated funds.

With regard to the 6 R&D projects completed which were carried
out in lab/pilot scale, the knowledge gained have been sent to the steel
companies to explore utilization of the know-how and implementation
of the developed processes for commercialization.

SAIL has introduced appropriate iron ore slime beneficiation system
through Research and Development projects. Slime beneficiation systems
have been implemented and working at Dalli and Meghahatuburu mines
and under stabilisation at Bolani and Kiriburu mines, At Barsua mines,
a slime beneficiation system is in the process of implementation, which
is being pursued with the support of plan fund of Ministry of Steel. Also
with support from Ministry of Steel, another project is being pursued
by RDCIS for setting up a state-of-art pilot Pelletisation unit. The system
has been already commissioned and feasibility of pelletisation of Goethitic/
Hematite iron ore is being tested.

The other Indian steel companies like Tata Steel, JSW and Essar
has also commissioned beneficiation and pelletisation plants for utilisation
of the low grade iron ore available in the country.

For the smaller Induction Furnace based steel units, Ministry of
Steel has funded R&D by CSIR NML Jamshedpur for development/
production of low phosphorus steel as per the BIS specifications. Industrial
trials of the process developed has been tested in Industrial Induction
Furnaces of various sizes in association with Industry Association. Results
have been encouraging. Further trials have been envisaged, which if
successful, will go a long way in resolving an issue of national importance,

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

16


Steel Development Fund
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)

The Committee are unhappy to note that Steel Development Fund
which was set up in 1997-98 for R&D initiatives with an annual
expenditure target of Rs. 150 crore to be pursued by public and private
steel companies for development of innovative/path breaking technologies,
beneficiation/upgradation of low grade iron ore, achieving, global
benchmarks in productivity, quality, etc. has failed to yield desived results
even after funding of 91 R&D projects costing Rs. 950,75 crore under the
scheme. Although, 55 of these 91 R&D projects have been completed and
24 projects are in progress, the Committee are concerned to note that
even after expending Rs, 950.75 crore on these 91 R&D activities, during
2014-15, 9.32 MT of finished steel was imported. While deprecating the
non-focused approach on R&D activities by the Government and domestic
steel Industry during the last 2 decades, the Committee feel that it is high
time now that Indian Steel Industry focus on R&D on better resource
utilization, better cost efficiency and production of world class products.
The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the sustained
efforts made by the Ministry of Steel and domestic steel companies to
produce quality steel for automotive sector, electrical equipment and ship
building etc.

Action Taken

In the recent past, the country has been producing normal grades
of automotive steels and also CRNO electrical steels for quite some time.
The steel companies are also engaged in development and production
of steel required for the strategic sector like ship building, oil and gas,
defence sector etc. Of late, several steel companies are engaged in
production of most of the auto grade steel sheets as well as CRNO steel
sheets. However, CRGO electrical steel is hardly produced in the country
as the technology is closely held by a handful of leading steel
manufacturers worldwide. One company produce around 10,000 Tonnes
of CRGO steel based on imported inputs.

Government has accordingly decided to pursue an R&D project
namely “Development of Technology for Cold Rolled Grain Oriented
(CRGO) Electrical Steel Sheets”, for indigenous development of the
technology for CRGO steel sheets. Salient features of the project are given
below:—

. This is a joint collaborative research project by NMI.
Jamshedpur (CSIR), Tata Steel, RINL and Ministry of Steel.

17



° The estimated cost of the CRGO Pilot project is
Rs. 494.63 crore out of which Rs. 117.65 crore is to be provided
from Plan Fund.

° MECON has prepared the DPR of the project which has been
approved by stakeholders in September 2016.

° A Memorandum of Agreement is expected to be signed by
the stakeholders shortly.

. Project is likely to be initiated in 2016-17 after necessary
final approval in Ministry of Steel and giving go ahead to
MECON for the Project Management Consultancy and
Supervision services,

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9}/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Comments of the Committee

{Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)

R&D by Public Sector Steel Companies
SAIL
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)

As regards the R&D by public sector steel companies, the Committee
observe that Research and Development Centre for Iron and Steel (RDCIS)
is the nodal centre for product development activities at SATL. New
product commercialization is being carried out by Chief Marketing Officer
(CMO) in support of RDCIS and Plants for promotion of the product by
intense customer interaction, arranging customer meets in different
branches and regions. While observing a considerable increase in R&D
expenditure from Rs. 106.05 crore in 2013-14 to Rs. 232.06 crore during
2015-16, the Committee are happy to note that out of 85 projects
undertaken by RDCIS during 2015-16, 48 projects with thrust on cost
reduction, value addition, quality improvement and development of new
products were completed by March, 2016. Moreover, RDCIS has filed
19 patents and 26 copyrights from April to December, 2015. The Committee
appreciate the research work undertaken by RDCIS during the last
3 years and particularly the development of Soft iron magnetic grades
developed for the first time in India for neutrino observatory and armour
plates for bullet proof applications such as bullet proof/mines proof
armoured vehicles. The Committee recommend that to achieve its
operational and business goal, SATL should continue to make concerted

18


efforts in R&D Sector including consistent upgradation of its current
steel technology thereby improving efficiency and reduction in the cost
of production.

Action Taken

RDCIS, SAIL (the Corporate unit of SAIL) has been contributing
immensely to improve the efficiency of SATL Steel Plants and Units. The
innovations introduced by RDCIS, SAIL as a result of R&D projects have
also resulted in cost reduction measures. During the year 2015-16, 45
projects have been completed by RDCIS, SAIL, 35 patents and 36
copyrights have been filed by SATL (RDCIS is nodal agency for filing).
R&D Expenditure of SAIL during 2015-2016 is Rs. 277 crore. RDCIS,
SAIL is continuously undertaking new R&D programmes to address plant
issues viz., improvement in sinter plant productivity, optimisation of coal
blend, waste heat recovery etc.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]
RINL

Recommendation (Serial No. 6)

The Committee observe that actual expenditure on R&D by RINL
during 2013-14 rose to Rs. 50.27 crore from Rs. 31.13 crore during 2012-
13. However during 2014-15, the expenditure on R&D fell down to
Rs, 33.09 crore. There has been a further decline in R&D expenditure during
2015-16 and only Rs. 16.24 crore were expended by RINL till December,
2015. The Committee also note that with the expansion of its plant to
63 MTPA and further plans of RINL to expand its production capacity
to 20 MIPA, a roadmap on R&D has reportedly been prepared by RINL
and a dedicated R&D Centre is being set up with state-of-the-art
infrastructural facilities at an estimated cost of Rs. 100 crore. The
Committee also note that the other features of the R&D strategy include
expansion of manpower to 100 engineers/scientists and 80 technical staff,
assimilation of new technologies for full exploitation, process
development, process control, automation, development of new and high-
end products, development of competence of R&D personnel, etc. While
appreciating the efforts being, made by RINL on R&D activities and also
putting into place a robust R&D strategy for achieving the planned goals,
the Committee would like to be apprised of the benefits accrued to the
company on account of R&D initiatives in a quantified manner. The
Committee further recommend that setting up of the proposed separate
R&D Centre with requisite diagnostic and research facilities, pilot plants
and simulation facilities should be carried out in a time bound manner.

19


Action Taken

The benefits accrued to the company on account of R&D initiatives
are listed below during the last five years:—

Title of the project

Benefits accrued/expected

2

| 3 [|

Improving the yield and
metallurgical performance of Vizag
Steel's four strand bloom casting
tundish through water modelling.

About 50% reduction in skull loss
achieved (Skull loss reduced from
8 ६ to 45 t, improving yield).

Improvement of MgO - ९ brick
quality to enhance the converter life,

Converter Lining Life has been
extended with modified lining to
4000+life from 2600 heats life,

Prediction of transition bloom
volume and minimization of
transition bloom production during
casting of different grades of steel
through Vizag steel’s 12M radius
four strand continuous caster,

Rejected blooms on account of mix
up have come down from 1000 nos,
per year to 305 nos. per year after
implementation. Financial benefit
of about Rs. 6 crores per annum
achieved.

Development of value added
ceramic products utilizing solid
wastes generated at Visakhapatnam
Steel Plant.

1. Developed vitrified ceramic tiles/
pavement blocks and porous tiles/
pavement blocks with different
compositions of solid wastes.
2, Commercialisation of technology
is under progress.

Optimization of design and
operating parameters like wire
speed, bath super heat, steel grades
on Calcium recovery and its
efficacy for inclusion modification.

Tripping of Auto mould level
control due to clogging used to be
around 100 times which has
reduced to only 2 times, a reduction
of 98%,

Development of _ thermo-
mechanically treated bars having
improved seismic and corrosion
resistance.

Bars used in earthquake prone
areas are treated thermo-
mechanically to achieve the
necessary strength for withstanding
the seismic disturbances. The
cooling process in the mills was
optimized to achieve a UTS/YS ratio
of 1.20 in 25mm and 32mm rebar
and 1.18 in 16mm and 20 mm rebar,

Suitability of BF slag as a
replacement for river sand in civil
construction,

Tests performed with 0-100%
replacement of river sand with BE
slag in concrete blocks have passed
the compressive strength test, Trial
implementation of the
recommendations is ongoing,

20



1 2 3

7 Development of boron steel grades | 250t of billets were cast during
at VSP. Nov’15 —Jan’16. Products were sent
to market and the feedback is
positive with additional realisation
of Rs, 1500 per ton.

| Minimization of crumbling of steel | Reduces environmental pollution,
slag. easy handling, transport and
storage of cooled slag
Suspended Particulate Matter
(SPM) before implementation was
4185 Microgram/Ncum and SPM
after implementation has come
down to 523 Microgram/Ncum,

10, | Optimization of operating | Adopting the practice has led to an
parameters for Ca-Si treatment of | increase of sequence (tundish life)
liquid steel at SMS-2 for improving | from 4.2 in 2014 to 7.4 in 2015
castability of steel. yielding a benefit of Rs. 21.14 cr
per annum,

The setting up of the proposed R&D centre is being monitored for
timely completion.

Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016

Utilization of Iron Ore Fines
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)

The Committee note that the main source of iron ore fines are the
waste dump fines from earlier workings utilizing the high grade lumps
and leaving behind the low grade fines containing high silica and alumina
impurities and cannot be used as such for iron making. Similarly, the
ultra fines/slimes from Hematite fron Ore washing plants with high level
of impurities cannot be charged to the furnace for iron making. The
Committee, however, note that such iron ore fines lying unutilized can
be used if these are beneficiated and used as sinter or pellets for iron
making. In this regard, the Committee also note that to address the
problems of difficult-to-beneficiate/pelletise low grade iron ore fines,
Ministry of Steel have sponsored several R&D projects which have resulted
in development of technology at laboratory scale besides some R&D pilot
plants under commissioning. According to the Ministry, Indian Steel
Industry, particularly, the integrated steel plants are already using iron
ore fines extensively to the tune of 60-70% in the form of sinter for
production of iron and steel. Further, some steel companies have set up
pelletisation facilities to utilise finer varieties of iron ore fines in the form

21


of pellets. Similarly, large number of units in the private sector have set
up beneficiation and pellitisation facilities to utilize low grade iron ore
fines for production of pellet/sponge iron. As regards public sector
companies are concerned, the Committee note that RDCIS, SAIL has taken
a R&D project to develop suitable process in utilization of gothetic/
hematite iron ore which is difficult to beneficiate and pelletise. Taking
note of the fact that during 1998-2004, there was an enormous surge in
export of fines and the precious resources of the country were given
away at throw away prices, the Committee are concerned to note that
no serious initiatives have been taken to develop a system or a technology
to utilize these fines to produce steel. While observing that utilization
of fines leads to conservation of minerals as well as better economics of
operation and avoiding long range transportation of fines for economic
and environmental reasons, the Committee feel that the development of
innovative and path breaking technologies for better utilization of iron
ore fines is the need of the hour, The Committee desire the Ministry of
Steel to seriously pursue the various R&D projects sponsored by them
and extend ail possible assistance/guidance to encourage the Indian Steel
Companies in their initiatives being taken in this direction.

Action Taken

Indian Steel Industry has already been utilizing iron ore fines in
the production of sinter and utilizing it to the extent 60-70% of the Blast
Furnace burden, While most of the inputs use coarse-fines, several others
units even use ultra fines including low grade fines in production of
pellets for subsequent use in iron making. For utilisation of low grade
and finer iron ore fines, several beneficiation and pelletisation plants
have already been commissioned in the recent past by the steel industry.
‘To address the problems of difficult-to-beneficiate/pelletise low grade
iron ore fines, Ministry of Steel sponsored several R&D projects which
have developed technology in laboratory scale. Some R&D pilot plants
are also under commissioning with funding from Ministry of Steel. Similar
initiatives have also been taken up by the steel companies themselves.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Poor Quality of Raw Material
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)

The Committee note that although growth of! the Indian Steel
Industry is attributed to domestic availability of low cost raw materials
like iron ore and coal, but at the same time the country is also plagued
with a major handicap regarding the poor quality of aw material available.

22


The Committee note that though India is self sufficient in its reserves
of iron ore, for growth and development of steel sector, but high alumina
content, high alumina silica ratio and high alkali loading in inputs etc.
have resulted in high slag volumes and high specific energy consumption
which in turn adversely affect the operation and productivity of blast
furnace, quality of hot metals and unnecessarily adds to the cost of
production, Even the coking and non-coking coal available in our country
are reported to be of very inferior quality which significantly influence
the productivity and efficiency of the steel making process. Due to the
presence of these impurities, techno-commercial solutions for raw material
quality is the need of the hour. The Committee feel that the technology
for improving the quality/efficiency of coking coal needs to be developed
urgently failing which there is heavy dependence on import of large
quantity of coking coal. The Committee also feel that the focus of R&D
should be on acquiring technology for steel making from low grade raw
material including ash reduction in coking coal, utilization of low grade
iron ore fines, slimes, beneficiation of iron ores and production of low
phosphorous steel etc, The Committee also stress on the urgent need for
implementation of beneficiation techniques developed so far for converting
the available raw material suitable for blast furnace operation. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the implementation of all R&D
schemes financed by Ministry of Steel at various plants/mines of steel
PSUs for ash reduction in coking coal, beneficiation of iron ores, utilization
of Jow grade iron ore fines, etc.

Action Taken

Ministry of Steel has funded a joint collaborative Comprehensive
research for Production of low ash (10% ash) coal (coking, non-coking)
from high ash Indian coals including desulphurisation of high sulphur
North East coal pursued by Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology
(CSIR-IMMT) Bhubaneswar, RDCIS, SAIL Ranchi, CSIR-NML,
Jamshedpur, CIMFR, Dhanbad, CMPDI, Ranchi and NEIST, Jorhat. Under
this research beneficiation circuits for high ash Indian coal have been
developed at laboratory and pilot scale at IMMT, Bhubaneswar. The
findings of the research have been sent to the steel companies by Ministry
of Steel for exploring commercial utilization.

The status of implementation of the R&D projects pursued at various
plants/mines of steel PSUs with financial assistance from Ministry of
Steel for ash reduction in coking coal, beneficiation of izon ores, utilization
of low grade iron ore fines, etc. are given below:—

. At Barsua mines of SAIL, a slime beneficiation system is in
the process of implementation, which is being pursued with

23


the support of plan fund of Ministry of Steel. The project has
been delayed as the statutory stage-2 environmental clearance
is awaited at the mine site have not been received so far.

° A project is being pursued by RDCIS/SAIL for setting up a
state-of-the-art pilot Pelletisation unit. The system has been
already commissioned and feasibility of pelletisation of
Goethitic/Hematite iron ore is being tested.

. RDCIS is developing an Automation System for Optimum
Coal Blending at Coal Handling Plant of Coke Oven Batteries
for implementation at Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) of SAIL to
achieve coal blend ash variation within 0.5% from the present
level of 1% thereby improving the Blast Furnace productivity.
Procurement process is in progress.

[Ministry of Steel O.M, No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]
Need for Fresh Mapping for Iron Ore Deposits

Recommendation (Serial No. 10)

Considering the prospects of growth of steel sector in our country
and the ambitious production target of 300 MT by 2025, the Committee
feel that in addition to the already identified/proven iron ore reserves,
there is an imperative need for exploration of new iron ore reserves. In
this regard, the Committee, however, note that the data of iron ore mapping
available has become old and obsolete. The Committee have also been
given to understand that NMDC Ltd. is equipped with State-of-the-art
latest technologies for drilling and exploration work but the work is
pending in some of the mining areas pending forest clearances. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the process of exploring fresh
iron ore deposits should be initiated at the earliest so that latest data is
made available and exploration work does not suffer on account of lack
of availability of data. Taking note of the fact that exploratory works are
held up pending statutory clearances and that substantial R&D works
in the field of mapping and exploration of iron ore has not been done
in the past, the Committee feel that this aspect should no longer remain
neglected and immediate steps be taken for updation of mapping data
of iron ore and pending forest clearances. The Committee also desire that
the Government should not only take advance action to ensure availability
of raw material for production of 300 million tonne of steel by 2025 but
should also explore the prospects of acquiring iron ore assets abroad.

24


IL

Action Taken

In coherence with the plan of Ministry of Steel of achieving
300 MTPA steel production by 2024-25, NMDC plans to
become a major Iron Ore supplier in the Country. As a part
of our strategic planning, NMDC is embarking upon to
increase its Iron Ore production capacity to 50 Million Tonnes
by 2018-19 and 67 Million Tonnes by 2021-22 from existing
and new mines to meet the requirement of steel production.

The Iron Ore Production of 67 Million Tonnes by 2021-22 can
be achieved by allocation of new Iron Ore Deposits in other
States , early Statutory clearances for Bailadila Deposit-4 and
Deposit-13 and expansion Projects with the support from the
Government.

The section 17A(2A) of MM(D&R) Amendment Act, 2015
provides for Reservation for Government/PSUs. The matter
is being pursued to reserve the area for NMDC with
concerned State Government for 196 Ha and 154.50 Ha areas
contiguous to KIOM & DIOM Mis and Ramandurg in
Karnataka, Mankadnacha and Malangtoli in Odisha, Ghatkuri
in Jharkhand, Ramgiri in Andhra Pradesh.

Abroad:

lV.

Vi.

vo.

NMDC has 78.56% equity in Legacy Iron Ore Ltd. Legacy
Iron Ore is a Perth-based Australian exploration company,
focused on the development of iron ore, gold and base metal
deposits. Currently Legacy has 19 tenements— Iron ore
(01 tenement), Gold (17 tenements) and Base Metals (01)
tenement.

Mt Bevan Magnetite project is a joint venture between Legacy
Tron (60%) and Hawthorn resources (40%). Total JORC
magnetite resource is 1.17 billion tonnes @30.6% Fe out of
which, 322MT is in indicated category and 847MT is in
inferred category. The resource size can be further extended
by drilling in eastern banded iron ore formation.

SPY, the initiative of Ministry of Steel to boost steel production
in India, NMDC is leading the formation of steel SPV in the
State of Karnataka and Jharkhand.

To provide iron ore to the steel plants, NMDC is in continuous
engagement with Mysore Minerals Limited (MML) to sign

25


a Memorandum of Understanding and form a Joint Venture
company to develop the iron ore resources in the State of
Karnataka.

VII. For allocation of iron ore resources and ore linkage to Steel
SPV, NMDC had submitted the draft Joint Venture agreement
to form a Joint venture company between NMDC and JSMDC
in July, 2015.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

Technical Manpower in Steel Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)

The Committee note that the Ministry of Steel had assigned the
work to IT, Kanpur for a study on requirement and availability of technical
manpower for steel industry in India for production of 300 MT by 2025.
The study has revealed that if future steel plants employ modern
technology and automation then no shortfall is envisaged for graduate
engineers in any discipline including metallurgical engineering. However,
if steel plants continue to remain at the same level as these are today,
there is likely to be some shortfall in the supply of graduate metallurgical
engineers and to some extent ceramic engineers, However, no shortage
is anticipated in the case of diploma engineers and ITI trained personnel.
Taking note of delayed modernization and expansion of existing steel
plants by SAIL, the Committee are apprehensive that if steel plants
continue to remain at the same level as they are today, there will be
shortage of graduate metallurgical engineers. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should chalk out a time bound plan for
modernization and automation of all the existing steel plants in the country
to check shortfall of graduate engineers including metallurgical engineers.

Action Taken

The Indian Steel industry is taking a two pronged strategy for
improving the technological face of the steel sector through modernisation
and expansion of the existing plants and setting up of green-field plants
with the state-of-the-art technologies to improve its performance indices
at par with international standards. The Government is also facilitating
the Iron and steel industry which has been de-licensed and deregulated.

26


Import of foreign technologies and equipment is freely permissible with
100% FDI and reduced import tariff for project imports also facilitate
procurement of state-of-the-art technologies globally.

Under Modernization and Expansion plan of SAIL, besides capacity
enhancement, new state-of-the-art technologies with higher level of
automation, energy efficient and pollution control facilities have been
undertaken. This will also enrich the product mix and customer centric
processes to support higher production volumes.

Further SAIL, being a Maharatna Company of Government of India
has been able to attract and select the graduate engineers in all the required
disciplines including metallurgy and ceramics through its regular
induction process at all India level without experiencing any shortfall.
The recruitments in SAIL across all required disciplines have been
consciously integrated to the manpower requirements arising out of our
modernization and expansion plans.

As regards operation of the modernized and expanded facilities,
manpower has already been provided and deployed in most of the
facilities apart from re-deployment of skilled/trained manpower from
existing facilities.

RINL completed its capacity expansion from 3.0 Mtpa to 6.3 Mtpa
of liquid steel in April, 2015 at a cost of Rs. 12291 crore. RINL is further
investing about Rs. 4,000 crore for modernizing and upgrading the health
of its older units viz, Blast Furnace, Converter shop, Sinter plant etc.

RINL, VSP has been adopting the state-of-the-art technologies
including automation in all capacity expansion and modernization plants.
Automation is being used extensively in managing all plant functions
including control and optimization of all process equipment, material
storage, personal resources, manufacturing operations and management
functions plant wide.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Personnel Engaged in R&D
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)

The Committee observe that for any industry to succeed, it requires
a dedicated technical manpower having depth of knowledge and expertise
required to perform the assigned job for various activities such as

27



engineering (design), project, operation, maintenance, development of
new technology through R&D etc, The technology and R&D positions
need to be manned by technical professionals who have the ability to
do self-study, understand state-of-the-art or benchmark processes, analyze
complex problems and explore new solutions. Such positions demand
personnel with high learning ability, mental agility and application
orientation. The Committee, therefore, feel that there is a need to encourage
students from IITs/IIScs to take up metallurgy for which adequate jobs
have to be created. The Committee, however, observe that engineering
graduates, in general, prefer white collared jobs with the highest available
pay package. As a result, there is dearth of quality manpower for the
manufacturing sector where salaries are low and working conditions are
strenuous. It’s a known fact that a person will give his best productivity
and output if he is assured that his financial needs will be satisfactorily
met. For this, the Committee recommend that remuneration provided to
the scientists and research scholars should be upgraded from time to
time to ensure retention of such talent. The Committee also note that
Academic institutions from which these personnel pass out also play a
major role in shaping up their vision. Though, there is no dearth of
quality institutes or well versed faculty in our country, yet the
infrastructure provided is not at par with foreign institutes which might
be another reason why very few people opt for metallurgy for their
research, The Committee, therefore, desire that existing faculty may be
trained with the help of Industry and Research Institutions. The Committee
also recommend that creation of ‘Steel Technology Centres’ at the location
of the Steel Plant sites will quickly help in the development of faculty.
Furthermore, the Committee desire that the Government/Steel companies
should persuade the institutes imparting education and training in
metallurgical field to invite faculty for lectures from foreign institutes
having expertise in this field which can contribute to the growth of mindset
and vision of our researchers.

Action Taken

The above observations and suggestion of the Committee with
regard to engagement of R&D personnel has been noted and will be
intimated to the steel companies/research organizations/Academic
Institutions for consideration/compliance. The recommendation of the
Committee for creation of ‘Steel Technology Centres’ at the location of
the Steel Plant sites, have been noted.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl, Dated 28.10.2016}
28


Joint Ventures for R&D
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)

The Committee note that some of the steel companies in India have
also been partnering with world leaders through joint ventures for
acquiring technology and process know-how to enable them to improve
their performance and produce value added products. For example, Steel
Authority of India Limited (SATL) has signed an MoU with Arcelor Mittal
for development/production of automotive grade steel sheets. JSW steel
has entered into partnership with JFE, Japan for technological support
for development and production of value added steel products particularly
automotive grade steel and electrical steel, Further, Tata Steel Limited
has entered into partnership with Nippon Steel and Sumitomo Metals
Corporation for development and production of automotive grade steel
sheets, In addition, 2 renowned foreign companies namely POSCO, South
Korea and China Steel Corporation, Taiwan have set up their 100%
subsidiaries in India to produce value added flat steel products. Though,
the Committee appreciate these efforts and feel that with these initiatives
India’s dependence on import of value added products will substantially
decrease, yet at the same time, the Committee desire that concerted efforts
are also required not only for technological collaboration with such
companies but for acquiring/transfer of high-end technologies pursued
by them. The Committee would like to be apprised of the targeted
investments and. stipulated dates by which the aforementioned Joint
Ventures by the Indian Steel Companies could be set up.

Action Taken

The information desired by the Committee is given hereunder:—
SAIL:

. SAIL and Arcelor Mittal have signed an MoU on May 22,
2015 to explore the possibility of setting up an automotive
steel manufacturing facility under a Joint Venture (JV), in
India. The MoU has a validity of two years.

° The proposed JV will construct a state-of-the-art cold rolling
mill and other downstream finishing facilities in India that
will offer technologically advanced steel products to India’s
rapidly growing automotive sector.

. The input material for the CRM shall be supplied from SAIL's
upcoming Hot Strip Mill located at Rourkela Steel Plant. Thus,

29


30

it would be a completely integrated indigenous supply chain
for the Indian Automotive Sector.

A task force team comprising representatives from both SAIL
and Arcelor Mittal has been working on detailed due diligence
and feasibility study, based on the outcome of which definitive
agreements for setting up a JV Company shall be entered
into.

The investment and the timeline for setting up of production
facilities shall be firmed up as a part of the due diligence
and feasibility study.

Tata Steel:

Tn early 2000, Tata Steel signed technological contracts with
Nippon Steel and Arcelor for the development of cold rolled
and galvanized products for automotive customers. Nippon
Steel was appointed as a Technology Consultant for the
selection of process and machinery in the cold rolling
complex, which was established in the year 2000. Nippon
Steel help was availed for the finalization of technology/
process/machinery in the green field project at Kalinganagar.

Tata Steel and Nippon Steel put up a Continuous Annealing
Line at Jamshedpur (0.54 MTPA) in 2014 for the production
of high quality Cold Rolled material for automotive
customers, This unit produces steel for internal as well as
external applications up to a strength level of 590 MPa.

Tata Steel and Bluescope, Australia established a Continuous
Galvanizing unit and Colour Coating Line at Jamshedpur.
The unit produces high quality Galvalume and Colour Coated
Steel for construction application. TSL availed the help of
CSM, Italy in 2015 for the development of high strength API
grades.

All the Technology collaborations and JVs have been
completed successfully. These efforts have resulted in the
development of new grades and substantial technology
transfer has occurred on account of them.

At present there is no ongoing Technology contract with any
overseas Technology Partner. Discussions are in progress for
JV with Nippon Steel and Sumitomo Metal for a 2.5 MTPA


modern Cold Rolling Complex at Kalinganagar. It will be
done only if the economics of doing it as JV are favorable.

JSW Steel:

® JSW entered into a JV with JFE Steel Corporation for
(a) transfer of Know-how to help JSW steel in production of
high end products for automobile steels and Electrical steels,
(b) Process improvement consultation and guidance for steel
processes, and (c) Testing and certification of advanced steels.

. Accordingly, to adopt the new technologies, JSW has invested
in two major production facilities: —

a. About Rs. 4,350 crores in CRM-2 project for building
the Country’s largest and widest state-of-the-art
2.3 MTPA capacity Cold Rolling Mill with continuous
annealing and continuous galvanizing lines to produce
high end automotive steels.

b. About Rs, 505 crores in new facilities for production
of Cold Rolled Non-grain Oriented (CRNO) electrical
steel.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report)

Steel Pricing
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)

The Committee were informed that cost of production of steel by
individual companies is not available with Ministry of Steel as the matter
is commercially sensitive and companies are reluctant to share such data.
However, from a study undertaken by World Steel Dynamics, the
Committee note that average cost of production of steel in different
countries varies from $658/tonne (highest in U.S.) to $405/tonne [lowest
in Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)]. Further, the average cost
of steel production in India is reported at $468/tonne as compared to
$546/tonne in China, The Committee were also apprised of the major
factors leading to higher cost of production such as higher capital and.

31


interest costs; relatively less operational efficiencies; dependence on other
countries for technology and capital equipment; dependence on imports
for coking coal; higher transport and logistics costs; and higher cost of
electricity, etc. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that the
process of modernization and expansion of some of the integrated steel
plants by phasing out older plants and facilities with latest energy efficient,
clean and green technologies, which directly affects the cost of production,
has not yet been completed, While stressing the need for completion of
modernization and expansion of integrated steel plants at the earliest,
the Committee also recommend that R&D interventions required to
address problems relating to manufacturing of technological and capital
equipment, beneficiation of low grade iron ore and slimes in the country,
optimum coal blending with imported coking coal should be stepped up
for improvement in operational efficiency and reduction of cost. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Government/
Steel companies to address these R&D interventions/equipment
manufacturing in the country to bring down the cost of steel production.

Action Taken

Ministry of Steel is facilitating the setting up of an Industry led
Institutional Mechanism to pursue joint collaborative research in the iron
and steel sector of national importance. These observations of the
Committee for bringing down the cost of steel production, in the country,
have been noted and will be given due importance in SRIMI to bring
down the cost of steel production.

SAIL has undertaken Modernisation and Expansion plan of
Integrated Steel Plants at Rourkela, Burnpur (ISCO), Durgapur, Bokaro
and Bhilai along with Special Steel Plant at Salem. The major facilities
at all the plants excluding Bhilai Steel Plant have been completed. After
completion of these facilities, latest energy efficient, clean and green
technologies have been operationalized which will reduce the cost of
production. For Bhilai Steel Plant, some of the facilities have been
completed and balance is likely to be completed during 2016-17.

Some of the R&D projects having been undertaken to reduce cost
of production, energy optimization and improvement in operational
parameters of steel plants over the years, are:—

न Improvement in productivity and quality of sinter through
preheating of sinter mix and oxygen enrichment in ignition
hood at SP#2, DSP

32


° Introduction of modified ladle heating system in SMS-II, BSP

° Development of an integrated process automation system for
Machine #2, Sinter Plant, BSL

न Automation of Stacker cum Reclaimer (SCR) in RMHP,
DSP

° Introduction of digital VVVF drive technology to control
cooling bed roller table motors at Merchant Mill, DSP

° Improvement in performance of SP #3 through optimisation.
of process parameters, RSP

Beneficiation of low grade iron ore and slimes

In order to ensure desired quality of iron ore feed along with
maximum utilisation of all grades of ore naturally available in an efficient
manner and at the same time maintain the various Techno-Economic
Factors and profitability at desirable levels, SAIL iron ore mines at Kiriburu
and Meghahatuburu in Jharkhand, Bolani and Barsua in Odisha and Dalli
mines in Chhattisgarh have the provisions of iron ore washing facilities
with slime beneficiation facilities. Further, SAIL has also undertaken
certain quality improvement projects as detailed below:—

° Gua Beneficiation and Pellet Plant (Lump-1.8 Mtpa, Fines-
4.2 Mtpa, Pellets—4 Mtpa)

. Dalli Rajhara Beneficiation and Pellet Plant (Pellet - 1.0 Mtpa)
° RSP Beneficiation and Pellet Plant (Pellet - 2.0 Mtpa)

SAIL has presently 35 million tonnes of iron ore fines dump at Gua
iron ore mines, which got accumulated over the years as there was no
sintering facility at ISP, Bumpur, which was the principal linkage plant
of Gua mine.

Now, SAIL has taken the initiative to beneficiate and reclaim the
fines from the fines dump to the tune of 2.50 MTPA and liquidate the
entire fine dump under the expansion program of Gua Ore Mines. In
this regard, environmental clearance has been obtained and setting up
of state-of the-art beneficiation plant of 12.5 MTPA capacity for processing
of 10 MIPA ROM from the mines and 2.50 MTPA fines from the fines
dump is under progress.

33


Steps taken by SAIL to increase supply-base of imported coking coals

Detailed characterization including pilot oven carbonization tests
were carried out with hard and soft coking coals. Coal samples from
twelve different sources were tested, These coals have been found usable
in SAIL coal blends.

Coal from new sources/existing sources with changed specifications
evaluated since September 2014 include Australian hard, Australian Soft,
Indonesian hard, Mozambique hard, New Zealand soft and Colombian
hard.

Cost reduction is one of the most important benefits targeted by
the R&D Projects taken up. This is carried out on a regular basis at the
shop level through various cost reduction measures, with specified targets
assigned to each major shop. Apart from this R&D Centre, RINL has
targeted reduction in the cost of steel production though various measures
such as utilization of optimum coal blend, PCI, etc. as one of its key
objectives.

An Action Plan has been devised to reduce the cost of steel
production due to R&D interventions. The running programs and the
programs to be taken up shortly under this plan are given under:—

e Reduction of Ladle balance and improvement of yield from
the steel ladle at VSP.

° Effect of coke dust (-Imm) on sintering process and on the
Sinter produced.

. Re-design of emergency containers for slag/steel dumping to
eliminate refractory lining.

° Optimization of Aluminum consumption in steel refining
process in Steel Melting Shop (SMS)-2.

. Fe Alloy reduction.
. Mill scale briquetting.

. Replacement of conventional coagulant (Alum) in chemical
treatment of MBC. plant of Coke Ovens using different
commercially available coagulants.

34


. Improving life of hammers in flux crusher of sinter plant.

. Feasibility study on Utilization of fly ash pellets as ladle
and tundish covering compound.

* GCP sludge briquetting.
e Metallurgical waste briquetting, ctc.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Recommendation (Serial No. 16)

According to Ministry of Steel, domestically produced steel is at
a disadvantage as compared to imported steel due to certain costs which
are external to steel producers such as cost of power, cost of finance, cost
of logistics, Government levies etc. The Committee have been given to
understand that at the present rate of per KWH power in the country,
domestic steel producers are at a disadvantage of Rs. 800-Rs. 900 per
tonne as compared to steel producers in China, Japan and Korea. The
Committee have also been apprised of certain levies and duties in the
form of District Mineral Fund (DME), National Mineral Expansion Trust
(NMET), duty on import of raw material such as coking coal (@2.5%)
levy on clean energy cess etc. which are imposed on steel producers in
India. The Ministry of Steel has desired that duty on clean energy cess
and on coking coal be removed as 90% of coking coal is procured through
imported sources due to lack of domestic availability and it being cleaner
source having lower ash content and essential input material for
production of steel. While concurring with the suggestions of Ministry
of Steel, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should take up the
matter at the highest level with the authorities and the States concerned
and impress upon them for waiving off the import duty and clean energy
cess on coking coal as it being the major and cleaner raw material for
production of steel.

Action Taken

The issue of high incidence of increased cost of power, finance,
logistics, Government levies, duty on Import of Coking coal etc. has been
taken up with NITI Aayog in the Ministry of Steel “Approach Paper.”
The same has also been raised in a high level meeting of MoS with the
PMO and other concerned ministries.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]
35


Consumption of Steel

Recommendation (Serial No. 18)

The Committee note that focus of R&D has been mainly on increase
in production of steel by phasing out of obsolete technology and
introduction of new State of the art technology. No attention has been
paid to the fact that per capita steel consumption in the country is as
low as 60 kg against the world average of around 225 kg. There is no
doubt about the fact that India is a young emerging economy which has
a huge potential for consumption of steel in areas beyond infrastructure
and automobile industry. The need of the hour is to focus on exploring
new avenues for utilization of steel which in turn would have a
proportionate effect not only on increase in production but consumption
too. The Committee are of the firm view that R&D should not be restricted
to technologies/innovation to increase production, rather R&D is required
to focus and identify the areas where consumption can be increased. ‘The
Committee feel that a lot of work needs to be done in this area as no
attention has been paid till now. The Comumittee, therefore, recommend
that besides real estate and home/industrial appliances, innovative
techniques like usage of steel in hitherto unutilized sectors like
construction of bridges by replacing concrete/cement with steel, road
railings in hilly areas, etc. should also be encouraged. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry of Steel/
Steel Companies to identify the areas where consumption of steel can
be increased.

Action Taken

Institute for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG), an Institute
promoted by the Ministry of Steel has taken up a good number of
activities/initiatives to enhance steel consumption and to create the
awareness for increasing the steel usage. INSDAG has organized steel
campaign in rural areas by training the masons on the benefits of steel
usage and. promote best practices. Till date, 52 number of Masons Training
Programme covering 2611 nos. of masons were conducted by INSDAG
in association with SAIL, Tata Steel, RINL and JSW. INSDAG is developing,
designs of model Rural Houses, Culverts, Anganwari Panchayat Hall,
Community Toilet, etc. with steel. INSDAG has brought out brief
publications on the designs of such structures in rural areas and translated
in vernacular languages in Hindi, Telegu and Bengali. INSDAG has been
transforming rural youths as Entrepreneur to start steel based fabrication
shop through 3-weeks’ training, preparing DPR for them to enable receive
subsidized loans under PMEGP to set up steel fabrication facilities in
their areas, INSDAG has developed prototype community grain storage

36


bin and also will be working for Green House for safe farming of seeds,
flowers, fruits, develop rural household items like Trunks, Diwans,
Furniture, Trolleys.

INSDAG has organized Annual all India Student Competition for
Students of Engineering Colleges, one for Civil and Structural students
and another for Architecture students on different themes of making
steel based structures. INSDAG also conducts all India Competition for
Professionals every year for any iconic steel structures designed and
constructed during last one year.

Regarding the consumption of steel, as per World Steel Association
(WSA), per capita consumption of steel in the world during calendar
year 2015 is reported to be down by 3% compared to 2014 whereas in
India, the per capita consumption is 60.6 Kg, up by 4.5% compared to
2014. So far as SAIL, is concerned, it has formed a senior level committee
which has been interacting with key functionaries of various Ministries,
Project Executing Authorities, consultants, designers, experts etc. for
promoting increased usage of steel. The key areas where consumption
of steel can be increased have been identified as:—

(a) Road Transport and Highway - The Committee met the
Secretary MoRTH, DG (Roads) and Spl. Secretary MoRTH,
Chief Engineer of Indian Academy of Highway Engineers,
key functionaries of NHAI, Indian Road Congress Consultants
and concerned Chief Engineer of MoRTH. It was ascertained
that the target of this year construction was 15,000 Kins. of
National Highway. Further in the next 15-20 years 15-20,000
Kms. of expressway are also planned. Apart from this some
huge bridge projects like Ganga bridge at Patna (6 Kms. long)
are coming up which would be requiring over 1 lakh tons
of steel. There are 1500 road bridges which are being
rehabilitated and 208 [0085 will be reconstructed which will
be requiring huge amount of steel.

(6) Rural Development - The Committee has met the concerned
key officials in the ministry to push for maximum steel usage
in rural houses as well as panchayat schools etc. Presentations
have been made to the key official of 26 States on maximum
usage of steel for rural housing. A prototype has also been
presented to be adopted under PMAY.

(c) Urban Development—The Committee has met the Minister of

Urban Development and Housing as well as Chairman NBCC,
DG (CPWD) and other officials to maximize steel usage under

37


@)

12)

(0

(8)

(h)

“PMs Housing for All-2022” Scheme where mass housing
would be required. Studies by INSDAG for high rise buildings
have been done which show steel intensive buildings have
been more cost effective compared to conventional RCC
Buildings. Presentations are being planned to highlight these
aspects.

Ports and Shipyards - With the rolling out of the Sagarmala
Project released by PM in April 2016, 173 projects have been
identified for port modernization/connectivity/
industrialization with the investment of 4 lakh crores. Besides
this, ship building and ship repair also would be going up
in the next 5 years with an estimated demand of 1.5 lakh tons
of steel.

Railways — The requirement of rails in the next year is approx.
one million tonnes. Further Wheel and Axle as well as wagon
building is likely to go up substantially.

Automobile - This segment consumes 11% of total steel
consumption in the country and is likely to go up to 20%
under Automobile Mission Plan 2016-2025 of the Government.
There will be huge requirement for High Strength Steel for
the manufacture of Passenger Cars.

Border fencing-The Committee met Secy. NHAI, Border
Management and other key officials of BSF. This is primarily
carried in Eastern frontier States like Assam, Tripura, Mizoram
and West Bengal in wake of recent terror attack in Dhaka.
Expeditious action is being taken by Border Fencing Deptt.
of NHAT in consultation with BSF and State Government to
fence immediately 550 kms. in South Bengal on. priority.

Storage of Foodgrain—The Committee met the Chairman of
FCI as well as some leading silo manufacturers to push for
steel grain silos for storage of foodgrains to prevent losses.
FCI has plans to build storage capacity of 100 lakh tonnes
of steel silos by 2020. FCI has awarded contracts for 2.5 lakh
tonnes already at 6 locations and another 13.5 lakh tonnes at
26 locations is under process. There is consumption possibility
of storage of other grains in the future.

Steel Demand has been proportionate with the GDP growth of the
country. Housing and real estate, construction and infrastructure and
manufacturing segment are the prime drivers of steel demand in India.

38


RINL over the years has taken a number of initiatives to develop
products for different applications by capturing the needs and expectations
of the customers. Apart from customer feedbacks, RINL is working with
Institute for Steel Development and growth (INSDAG) in steel intensive
projects, participates in various workshops and seminars and conducts
ABC (Architecture, Builders, Construction Engineers) meets in different
cities to identify areas where steel consumption can be increased. Further
advertisements in various print and electronic media are being intensified
to ensure enhanced awareness about its products.

{Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

39



CHAPTER HI

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES"

Recommendation (Serial No. 1)

The Committee note that during the year 2014-15, the country
produced 88.25 MT of crude steel and was ranked the 4th largest steel
producer in the world after China, Japan and the United States of America.
Although, the Indian Steel Industry is amongst the fastest growing world
wide with a growth rate of 8%, the per capita steel consumption in the
country has remained abysmaily low at 60 kg against the world average
of around 225 kg. The Committee are, therefore, of the firm view that
there is ample scope for sustained growth and development of steel sector
in the country. In the opinion of the Committee, to sustain and improve
the competiveness of the Indian Steel Industry, adoption of modern and
state-of-the-art technologies both in the existing and new plants is of
utmost importance by pursuing appropriate R&D Programmes. While
examining the R&D in Iron and Steel Sector in detail, the Committee
have made their observations and recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

Action Taken

Tron and steel industry is de-licensed and deregulated, and import
of foreign technologies and equipment is freely permissible with 100%
FDI. The Indian Steel industry is taking a two pronged strategy for
improving the technological face of the steel sector through modernisation
and expansion of the existing plants and setting up of green-field plants
with the state-of-the-art technologies to improve its performance indices
at par with international standards. Steel companies in India are also
partnering with world leaders through joint ventures for acquiring high-
end technologies, viz. SAIL with Arcelor Mittal, Tata Steel with Nippon
Steel and Sumitomo Metal Corporation, JSW Steel with JFE etc.

The Indian steel industry is also taking various measures through
Research and Development for optimisation of the existing processes for

40


reduction in resource consumption. SAIL, Tata, JSW & Essar did significant
R&D work in process improvements and raw material beneficiation and
agglomeration. Ministry of Steel is also facilitating R&D in the sector by
providing financial assistance from Steel Development Fund and also
Plan Fund.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016}

Recommendation (Serial No. 13)

As regards the strategy employed by steel industry to retain the
technical manpower, the Committee were informed that Competitive
compensation package at entry level, established brand equity combined
with other benefits and facilities for work-life balance, makes the Steel
Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) a choice for employment by the candidate
from premier institutes. The Committee further observe that the Steel
PSU employ a Performance Management System which is unique and
comprehensive. Growth opportunities for every young entrant are
immense and one can aspire for career growth upto the Board level
positions. However, in view of the increased capacity of private sector
steel plants, during the last decade, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the details of officers of public sector steel companies who
have left them to join private sector steel companies. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the strategy of the public sector steel
companies to retain their officers in future expansion programme of steel
sector.

Action Taken

‘To attract and retain the technical manpower in SAIL, various
strategies have been employed including competitive compensation
package at entry level, work-life balance, medical facilities, schools for
their ward, welfare amenities, developed townships and infrastructure
like club, sports, swimming pool, etc. apart from established brand-value
of SAIL.

At present, in SAIL, attrition rate is around 0.5 % to 0.6 % of total
manpower, which is minimal in comparison to private sectors companies
in the industry. Though most of the time while submitting resignation,
employees may not indicate the actual reason of leaving the job, the
negligible percentage of attrition and the past experience shows that SAIL
employees leaving for private steel companies is not a major concern.

x

al


Retention of executives has never been a constraint in RINL-VSP
as the rate of attrition amongst executives is less than 1% per annum,
since last 5 years. Data on details of employment of executives post
separation/resignation is not maintained as it is not obligatory for such
executives to furnish the same.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No, 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

42


CHAPTER 1V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTER

Need for Higher Investments in R&D
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)

The Committee note that steel PSUs like NMDC Ltd., MECON
Ltd., MOIL Ltd. and KIOCL Ltd. also carry out independent R&D works
in the field of ore beneficiation, mineral processing and safety and
productivity in mines etc. The Steel Companies like SAIL, TATA Steel,
JSW Steel and ESSAR Steel have accomplished some significant R&D
works in the area of raw material beneficiation, agglomeration and product
development. However, the actual investment on R&D by the Steel
Companies in India has remained very low in the range of 0.05-0.5% of
the sales turnover compared to R&D investments in Steel Companies
abroad. For instance, in the countries like China, Japan and South Korea
etc, annual RécD investments are very high and varies in the range of
1-2% of their sales turnover whereas during the year 2014-15, the SAIL’s
share of expenditure was only 0.56% of the turnover of the company.
Similarly, the expenditure on R&D by RINL, NMDC Ltd,, MOIL Ltd. and
MECON Ltd. during 2014-15 was 0.28 %, 0.15%, 0.73% and 0.53%
respectively of their total turnover. The Committee note that as per
Department of Public Enterprises guidelines, Maharatna and Navratna
category of CPSEs are required to invest 1% of their PAT and Miniratna
Companies have to invest 0.5% of their PAT in R&D. Besides that, the
Working Group on Steel Industry for the 12th Five Year Plan has also
recommended a minimum 1% investment in R&D by the steel companies
of their sales turnover. While the main focus of R&D by Indian Steel
Companies have remained on improving internal processes like saving
costs and improving plant efficiency, want of adequate R&D investments
for development of high end technologies and products remains a major
concern for the Committee. The Committee feel that enhanced R&D
investments and adoption of new technologies are imperative for
competitiveness of Indian Steel Industry. The Committee, therefore,

43


recommend that taking into account the requirement of laying focus on
indigenous development of technology, continuous and augmented efforts
should be made for R&D initiatives by all concerned including the Ministry
of Steel, Public and Private Sector Companies, Institutes of Technological
Research and Advancements, etc. The Committee also recommend that
the Indian Steel Companies, both public and private enterprises should.
make an attempt to benchmark their R&D spending with internationally
prevalent best practices in the Sector. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken by all Steel PSUs and private sector companies
in this regard.

Action Taken

In addition to the present R&D schemes pursued by Ministry to
Steel, to augment the R&D initiatives of the Indian Steel Sector, Ministry
of Steel is facilitating the setting up of an Industry led Institutional
Mechanism to pursue joint collaborative research in the Iron and steel
sector and spearhead R&D of national importance.

With regard to benchmarking R&D investments by the Indian steel
companies to the global best practices, it is submitted that setting up of
SRTMI which is an industry led mechanism for joint collaborative research,
and will run from the contributions of the steel companies, will facilitate
increasing the R&D investment. Besides, the PSU steel companies
individually are also giving more thrust on R&D and have set up strategies
to enhance the R&D investment. The steel companies in the private sector
also are engaging in enhancing their R&D capabilities which are expected
to enhance the R&D investment.

There has been a significant increase in R&D expenditure of SAIL
from Rs. 110.43 crore in 2013-14 to Rs, 264.20 crore in 2014-15, further
to Rs. 277 crore in 2015-2016. In terms of turnover net of excise, R&D
expenditure has increased from 0.24% (2013-14) to 0.58% (2014-15), further
to 0.72% in 2015-16, which is the highest among all steel plants in the
country.

SAIL has undertaken R&D Master Plan programme with an aim
to increase the R&D Expenditure to 1% of turnover. Under R&D Master
Plan, new innovation projects have been undertaken in SAIL Steel Plants
and Units.

RINL strives for indigenous development of technology through
R&D spending to match with the international practices in the Iron and

44


Steel Sector. Major Ré&D initiatives to achieve an R&D expenditure of
1% of Sales ‘Turnover at RINL - VSP are given under:—

1. A collaborative R&D programme on “Development of the
technology and produce CRGO steel and other value added
steels” with CSIR - National Metallurgical Laboratory,
Jamshedpur, Tata Steel, Jamshedpur and Ministry of Steel at
an estimated cost of Rs. 495 crore over a period of five years.
RINLs contribution for this project is Rs. 129.4 crore.

2. Setting up additional facilities for existing R&D Centre at an
expenditure of Rs. 3.4 crore towards infrastructure and with
additional research equipment of Rs. 15 crore.

3... Setting, up a separate R&D Centre over a period of six years
with a proposed expenditure of about Rs. 150 crore (Rs. 25
crore per year).

4. Participation in “Steel Research and Technology Mission of
India” (SRTMI) involving an expenditure of approx. Rs. 8
crore per year.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl, Dated 28.10.2016]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report)

Anti-dumping Duty on Steel
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)

While reiterating their earlier recommendation in 20th Report on
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Steel whereby the Committee
appreciated the measures like hiking of import duty, imposition of
provisional safeguard duty on certain items, imposition of anti-dumping
duty, invoking the Steel and Steel products (Quality Control Order) etc.
taken by the Government to protect the interest of beleaguered domestic
steel industry, the Committee note that India follows the lesser duty rule
in anti-dumping investigations and subsidy investigations. As per this
method, anti-dumping duty/countervailing duty is levied on the lesser
of ‘margin of damping/amount of subsidy’ or margin of injury. According
to the Ministry of Steel, major jurisdictions such as the United States of
America, Canada and China, however, do not adopt the lesser duty rule.

45



These jurisdictions are of the view that their domestic industry has to
be protected from unfair dumping/subsidy at all costs and the most
effective way to accomplish that would be if anti-dumping duty/
countervailing duty is levied to the full extent of the margin of dumping/
amount of subsidy. As a consequence, these countries do not give the
benefit of lesser duty rule to erring exporters as they realize this method
is not effective because it always leaves room for the exporters to continue
dumping practices. Similarly, it gives less relaxation to exporters from
countries that offer trade distortive subsidies. The Committee were further
apprised that General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade, Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade 1994 (Anti-Dumping Agreement) and Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures permit WTO members to levy anti-dumping
duty/countervailing duty to the full extent of the margin of dumping/
amount of subsidy. In fact, WTO commitments do not mandate that
countries should follow lesser duty rule in anti-dumping investigations.
In view of the foregoing and the fact that the lesser duty rule was
introduced in the WTO at the instance of import dependent countries,
to give them an elbow for levying duties that are lower than the dumping
margin, the Committee feel that the country which has a vibrant domestic
industry capable enough of producing a wide spectrum of products with
increase of steel production to give a boost to the ‘Make in India’ Vision
should consider imposition of anti-dumping duty/countervailing duty to
the full extent of the dumping margin/amount of subsidy and stop the
practice of giving only partial protection against dumped imports/
subsidized imports. According to the Ministry of Steel, scrapping of ‘lesser
duty’ rule in relation to anti-dumping investigations and subsidy
investigations do not require changes in the parent act and these charges
can be effected by change in Rules alone. The Committee therefore,
recommend the Ministry of Steel to take up the matter at the appropriate
level in the Government so that elaborate policy initiatives be taken and
a level playing field and adequate and effective safeguards are provided.
to the domestic steel Industry.

Action Taken

It may be noted that industries have been constantly trying for
removal of ‘Lesser Duty Mechanism’ for notification of Anti-Dumping
Duty on Steel Products. Ministry of Steel vide DO No. 3/2(7)/2015-TTD
dated 18th March 2016 has also requested for the same to Ministry of
Commerce. To lend support to the stressed domestic industry, Government

46


of India has notified a number of measures, viz. MIP Anti-dumping duty,
Safeguard duty, Quality Control to cover a wide range steel products
affected by predatory pricing strategy of countries with excess steel making
capacities.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report)

47



CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

Steel Research and Technology Mission of India (SRTMI)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)

The Committee note that to spearhead R&D activities of national
importance through joint collaborative research programmes in steel sector,
an Industry led initiative called SRTMI has been setup in close cooperation.
amongst the steel companies, Ministry of Steel, academia and relevant
R&D institutions in the country. The mission will facilitate joint
collaborative R&D proposals of national importance inter alia to ensure
raw material security, development of relevant technologies suitable for
domestic raw materials to ensure reduction in energy consumption and
Green House Gas (GHG) emissions to address climate change issues. The
Comittee have been given to understand that after introduction of
SRIMI, a major bottleneck will be overcome as earlier all the Institutes,
PSUs, Private Sector companies were busy doing their own R&D without
consulting, coordinating and sharing any information amongst themselves.
According to Ministry of Steel, this will be a single umbrella under which
all diverse R&D works will be clubbed under one roof. As regards funding
of the project, the Committee note that initial corpus for setting up of
SRTMI is Rs. 200 crore of which 50% is to be provided by the Ministry
of Steel and the balance by the participating Steel Companies. According
to Ministry of Steel, major steel companies like SAIL, RINL, NMDC, Tata
Steel, JSW, JSPL and MECON have committed to contribute @ Rs. 25 per
tonne of crude steel produced in the year 2013-14 as their contribution
in the initial corpus for SRTMI amounting of Rs. 212.49 crore. While
appreciating the efforts of Ministry of Steel in setting up of SRTMI to
facilitate joint collaborative R&D works, the Committee also note that
CEOs of major India Steel Companies have signed a Memorandum of
Agreement with Ministry of Steel on 6th April, 2015 for participation and
financial contribution in the initiative. The Committee hope that the
benefits from R&D projects undertaken would be shared by all and not
remain confined to members of SRTMI only. Taking note of the fact that
there are a large number of smaller and secondary units in the steel
sector which are not part of the SRTMI, the Committee apprehend that

48


these units will not be benefited from the research carried by SRTMI.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Steel to evolve
appropriate mechanism in SRTMI to address the issues faced by the
Smaller and Secondary Steel Sector. The Committee also desire that
adequate attention should also be paid to the on-going R&D projects as
well as implementation of the projects already completed to ensure that
their findings can be put into commercial use by various steel PSUs and
private players.

Action Taken

The recommendation of the Committee for evolving appropriate
mechanism to address the issues faced by secondary steel sector has been
noted. As desired by the Committee, adequate attention will also be
given for the on-going R&D projects as well as implementation of the
projects already completed, to ensure that their findings can be put to
use by the steel industry for commercial purpose.

[Ministry of Steel O.M. No. 11014 (9)/2016-Parl. Dated 28.10.2016]

New Detar; RAKESH SINGH,
2 March, 2017 Chairperson,
11 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Sieel.

49


ANNEXURE I

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON

COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 2 MARCH, 2017 IN HON’BLE

CHAIRPERSON’S CHAMBER, ROOM NO. ‘210’, B-BLOCK,
PHA EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI

50

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

ep eB NDA F YN

The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1200 hrs,

PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh— Chairperson
Memoers
Lok Sabha
Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
Shri Shailesh Kumar
Shri Ajay Nishad
Smt. Riti Pathak
Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
Shri Ranjib Biswal
Shri B.K. Hariprasad

Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev


SECRETARIAT

1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary

2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director

3. Shei Arvind Sharma = — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Deputy Secretary

2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.

3, The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—

(i) Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the 21st Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on “Research and
Development in Iron and Steel Sector” relating to the Ministry
of Steel; and

(ii) ee eee 8 ee et

4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise
the Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned.

“Do not pertain to this Report.

51


ANNEXURE II

(Vide Para IV of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

Tl.

tl.

V.

52

RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL

Total No. of Recommendations made: 18
Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:

(Vide recommendation at Si. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15,
16, and 18)

Total : 13
Percentage : 72.22%

Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's replies:

(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 13)

Total : 02
Percentage : 11.11%

Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee:

(Vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 7 and 17)

Total : 02
Percentage : 11.11%

Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:

(Vide recommendation at Sl. No. 4)

Total : 01
Percentage : 5.56%


—_—————

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available onsale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above.”

eS O0—0—