STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained in
the Fifty-second Report of Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on the subject “Marketing and Transportation of Steel by
Public Sector Steel Companies”]
SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Pausha, 1936 (Saka)
6


SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-second Report of Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Marketing and Transportation of Steel by
Public Sector Steel Companies”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Pausha, 1936 (Saka)

CC&S No. 86
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2015 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi—110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) ........................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 13
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 23
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 24
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 32
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 19.12.2014 .............. 33
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Second
Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ..................................................... 35

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2014-15)
Shri Rakesh Singh* — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Shailesh Kumar
7. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
8. Shri Godam Nagesh
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
(iii)
* Shri Rakesh Singh appointed w.e.f .27.11.2014 vice Shri Hansraj G. Ahir appointed Minister.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
24. Shri Srinjoy Bose
25. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya*
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
3. Ms. Vandana P . Guleria — Sr. Executive Assistant
*Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Basawaraj Patil.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
Fifty-second Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Marketing and Transportation of Steel by Public
Sector Steel Companies” pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.
2. The Fifty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 18.02.2014.
Replies of the Government to all the observations/recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 14th July, 2014.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 19.12.2014.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-second Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
19 December, 2014 Chairperson,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals
with Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty Second Report (Fifteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on “Marketing and
Transportation of Steel by Public Sector Steel Companies” of the Ministry
of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
18.02.2014.
2. The Report contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect
of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on
14th July, 2014. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 11
Total – 08
(Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
-Nil-
Total – 00
(Chapter III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos. 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, and 14
Total – 06
(Chapter IV)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
-Nil-
Total–00
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken notes
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this
Report be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Ministry on some of their observations/recommendations made in the
Fifty-Second Report.
CALENDAR FOR CUSTOMER MEETS
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
5. The Ministry had informed the Committee that RINL
has a Calendar for Customer Meets at various levels like CMD,
Director (Commercial), General Manager (Mktg.) and Regional
Managers. Through these Customer Meets, the needs and expectations
are captured and efforts are made to meet their requirements.
The Committee desired that SAIL should also prepare a Calendar for
Customer Meets at different levels so as to ensure maximum customer
satisfaction.
6. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have informed
the Committee as under:—
“I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Interactions at Branch, Region, HQ and Corporate level take
place on a regular basis. However, cross functional teams for
Plants, Research and Development Centre (RDCIS) for Iron
and Steel and Marketing have been created to apprise
customers about new product, its application and cost benefit
analysis.

3
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL follows Calendar for Customer Meets.”
7. While appreciating the endeavour of RINL for maintaining a
calendar for customer meets conducted at the various levels of officials,
the Committee note that the reply of the Ministry is silent about
preparing a calendar for consumer meets by SAIL. Having a calendar
would ensure that the events are evenly spread out throughout the
year. It would also be helpful in ensuring that all the districts are
covered in a given time period and no undue weightage is given to
some particular regions. Moreover, the frequency of conducting such
programmes can also be maintained district-wise. A clear vision can
be had about how many areas have been covered and those which
have been left out. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that SAIL should
also opt for maintaining a yearly calendar clearly mentioning the dates
on which customer meets would be held during a year in the country.
The said calendar can be used as an instrument for making the customer
aware of promotional activities of SAIL throughout the year. The
Committee also recommend that SAIL and RINL should ensure the
publicity of calendar of customer meet through print and electronic
media.
STEEL DEMAND IN RURAL AREAS
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
8. The Committee noted that a Rural Dealership Scheme to meet
requirements of rural consumers at Block, Tehsil and Taluka level was
introduced by SAIL in 2011-12. At present the dealer network of SAIL
consist of 855 rural dealers out of a total 2774 dealers, covering almost
all districts of the country. Since RINL also has a strength of 231 rural
dealers in different parts of the country, the Committee felt that there
is a vast scope of increasing the strength of rural dealers by both the
PSUs as per capita steel consumption in rural India is estimated at only
9.8 kg. compared to an average of 57 kg. per person in the country. As
per SAIL Dealership Policy and Rural Dealership Policy, dealers are
required to stock TMT Bars, GP/GC Sheets and other items required by
common man and sell to small/retail customers at prices fixed by SAIL.
The Committee were however, dismayed to note that although SAIL is
delivering steel in interiors under its dealership scheme at dealers’
doorstep, there are not enough transporters vying for dealer supplies in
view of insufficient volumes and inconsistency in buying by the dealers

4
in the hinterland. At times, inadequate infrastructure slows down
supplies during monsoons. The Committee, therefore, recommended
that SAIL and RINL should not only increase the Rural Dealership in
the country but also take desired steps to make available suitable types
of transport to carry small bundles of lower sizes of Rebars and other
items like TMT bars, GI sheets, HR/CR sheets, etc. to meet the demand
of rural areas.
9. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished
as follows:—
“I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Presently, SAIL has a wide network of marketing outlets
consisting of 37 Branch Sales Offices, 27 Customer Contact
Offices and 67 Warehouses across the country. SAIL’s dealer
network was further expanded during the financial year
2013-14. Under the new “SAIL Rural Dealership Scheme”
which was launched in 2011-12, SAIL has appointed 1004
Rural Dealers (including LOI) up to 01.04.2014 with an
objective to meet the steel demand of the small rural
consumers at block, tehsil and taluka level. As on 01.04.2014,
SAIL has an extensive Dealer network of 2948 Dealers
(including 1004 Rural Dealers), spread across length and
breadth of the country.
The recommendations related to the transport needs in order
to meet rural demand will be examined.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL is taking steps for ensuring availability steel to Rural
Dealers by supplying steel as per the requirement of Rural
Dealers. RINL made FOR (Free On Road) contract for
supplying steel to the customers’ premises, as a part of
Consignment Agency Contracts also.”
10. The Committee are unhappy to observe that the Rural
Dealership Scheme introduced with a view to popularize usage of
steel in rural areas has failed to achieve the desired success in the
absence of dedicated fleet of transporters to deliver products in
interiors. The Committee had recommended that SAIL and RINL should
increase Rural Dealership in the country and also take steps to make

5
available suitable types of transport to carry those products which have
a market in the rural areas. Although, RINL is supplying steel to the
customer’s premises on FOR (Free On Road) basis, SAIL is reportedly
examining the transport needs of customers. The Committee would
like SAIL to give utmost priority to the issue of transportation of steel
and would like to be apprised of the steps initiated by SAIL in this
regard.
SALES PERFORMANCE OF SAIL AND RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
11. The Committee had observed that product-wise/category-wise
performance of sales in respect of SAIL since 2009-10 indicate that there
was decline in sale of pig iron from 1,97,000 tonnes in 2009-10 to 67,000
tonnes in 2011-12. Similarly, there was decline in sales of long products
from 49,42,000 tonnes to 43,88,000 tonnes, 66,84,000 tonnes to 6,05,000
tonnes for flat products and 1,57,000 tonnes to 1,11,000 tonnes in case
of PET products during 2009-10 and 2011-12 respectively. The product
wise performance of RINL was however, reported to have improved as
sale of Rebars increased from 1,20,2000 tonnes in 2009-10 to 13,61,000
tonnes in 2011-12. Similarly, sale of wire rod coils and structural have
also increased during 2011-12 as compared to 2009-10. The sale
performance of RINL also indicated that against a total sale of 31,14,000
tonnes of steel products during 2010-11, the company could sell only
28,02,000 tonnes during 2012-13. In view of the poor overall sales
performance of steel products by SAIL and RINL, the Committee were
of the view that CMO (SAIL) and marketing wing of RINL have failed
to increase their market share of steel products inspite of increased
production capacity of saleable steel after the completion of current phase
of their ongoing modernization and expansion plan. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommended that SAIL and RINL should take
necessary steps so that the companies compete with other major domestic
producers of steel.
12. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished
as follows:—
“I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
The reason for reduction of market share of SAIL is that the
volume of production of SAIL has been constant. On the

6
other hand, competitors have increased their capacity
because of which the total availability of steel in the
country has increased. Market share of SAIL will improve
once the new mills at SAIL plants are commissioned and
enhanced production capacity of SAIL is in place at different
plants.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
Against sales of 2.802 million tonnes of saleable steel in
2012-13, RINL sold 3.035 million tonnes of saleable steel,
representing a growth of over 8%. Sales of saleable steel are
also higher than the production of 3.016 million tonnes during
the year, i.e. the differential quantity has been sold from
inventory .”
13. Taking note of poor product/category-wise performance
of sales in-respect of SAIL, the Committee had recommended that
the Government/Steel companies should take necessary steps to
increase their market share after completion of current phase of
their ongoing modernization and expansion plan. The Ministry of
Steel in their Action Taken Reply have informed the Committee that
reduction of market share of SAIL is due to volume of production
being constant and increase in capacity of competitors resulting in
more availability of steel in the market. As regards RINL, the Committee
were informed that as against sales of 2.802 million tonnes in
2012-13, RINL sold 3.035 million tonnes of saleable steel in 2013-14,
which amounts to an increase of over 8%. The Committee, expect that
the market share of SAIL should increase after completion of
modernization and expansion plan in different plants of SAIL. Needless
to say that SAIL and RINL should take necessary steps to ensure
increase in their market share during the current financial year
2014-15 and the Committee be apprised of the action plan of the
Government/Steel PSUs in this regard.
TRANSPORTATION OF STEEL
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
14. The Committee had observed that delivery of Steel products
to customers is either directly dispatched from steel plants or through
network of stockyards located all over the country . Steel products are

7
transported from SAIL plants to its warehouses mainly by Rail. Similarly ,
RINL also uses both Rail and Road modes of transportation for movement
of iron and steel from its plant at Visakhapatnam to various stockyards
across the country. While comparing the figures for modes of
transportation, the Committee noted that dependence on rail is much
more as compared to that by Road. The Committee, felt that dependence
on a single mode of transportation should be substantially reduced
and to ease burden on Rail, other modes of transportation like road
and coastal transportation should also be explored. Regarding challenges
faced during transportation, the Committee noted that ensuring adequate
and timely availability of rakes is a major concern which needs to be
overcome by taking suitable and timely action. The Committee desired
that the matter of allowing/providing 2 point destination rakes need to
be taken up by Ministry of Steel with Ministry of Railways at the
highest level on priority basis as after modernization and expansion
programme of both SAIL and RINL, the requirement of rakes would
grow further. The Committee also desired that adequate attention should
be given by steel PSUs for ensuring the quality of the product during
loading/unloading and transportation of steel goods as degree of damages
to a finished product, are more as compared to transportation of raw
material.
15. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished
as follows:—
“I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Steel being bulk commodity, preference for despatch by steel
plants is primarily by rail. Railways also look for higher rail
share of steel despatches from steel plants. At SAIL steel
despatches by rail are at a level of about 91% currently. Road
despatches are being undertaken as per customer requirement
to cater to small order or to nearby destination or to places
where rail connectivity is a problem.
In future also, despatches of steel from SAIL plants
will continue primarily by rail. Therefore, logistics
facilities under expansion schemes for handling the
various commodities inside plants have been designed in
consultation and approvals from railways. Accordingly,
railway needs to augment its rolling stock  viz
wagons/locomotives to meet enhanced demand of

8
steel despatches by rail. It may be mentioned that rail
is an eco-friendly mode of transport, which should be
encouraged for bulk transportation requirements of steel
industry .
The issues of ensuring adequate wagon availability for
steel despatches are taken up regularly with railways
at various levels  viz by SAIL at Divisional/Zonal/Railway
board. A monthly meeting is also convened by ED (Rail
Movement), Railway Board, Kolkata with steel industry, where
wagon availability issues are also discussed and resolved.
Further, if required, such issues are also taken in Joint
Consultative Mechanism (JCM) meetings conducted by
Ministry of steel periodically with representatives of railway
and steel industry .
As regards 2-point despatches, currently it is around 30%
of total steel despatched from SAIL plants, which shall
continue, after expansion in SAIL. Railway to consider
continuing this facility to SAIL in future as well considering
small quantity of variety of products demanded by customers
located at various destinations along the length and breadth
of the country.
Cranes and handling equipment constitute the backbone
of efficient and damage free handling at all warehouses.
At present Electric Overhead Transport (EOT) cranes
are in operation at Dankuni, Kanpur, Delhi, Faridabad,
Kalamboli, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bangalore. Rubber Tyred
Gantrys (RTGs) at Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Chennai and
Dankuni are working efficiently and yielding good results.
In addition, to enhance the level of operational efficiency
post modernization, it has been proposed to install EOT cranes
at Bokaro, Guwahati and Rourkela and RTGs at various
locations like Bhilai, Kalamboli, Ghaziabad, Faridabad,
Kanpur, Bokaro, Durgapur, Guwahati, Rourkela, Bangalore,
Hyderabad and Vizag in a phased manner depending on
sustained demand. In addition, the Handling Contractors are
also deploying Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM)
Cranes at both Departmental and CA WHs as per tender
terms.

9
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL has been taking up with Railways to allocate adequate
number of rakes on continuous basis. The issue of allowing
2 point destination rakes has also been taken up with railways.
Further, RINL has been taking initiatives for improving
packaging, reducing damages during handling of products
at the time of loading and unloading.”
16. Regarding Committee’s recommendation for allowing/
providing 2 point destination rakes by Ministry of Railways and
ensuring the quality of product while loading/unloading during
transportation of steel goods, the Committee are unhappy to note
that at present only 30% of total steel dispatched from SAIL plants
is dispatched through 2 point destination dispatches undertaken
by Railways. Further, RINL is also reported to have been
continuously taking up the matter of non-availability of adequate
rakes with the Ministry of Railways. Considering the importance
of the matter, the Committee again stress that the Ministry of Steel
should take up the matter with Ministry of Railways on priority basis
to resolve all contentious issues between the steel PSUs and Railways
so that adequate number of rakes are made available at 2 point
destinations.
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
17. The Committee noted that RINL wants to source its requirement
of Dolomite and Limestone produced by its subsidiary M/s Bisra Stone
Lime Company (BSLC) based in Birmitrapur. However, due to freight
disadvantage, obtaining material from BSLC was becoming unviable since
freight from Birmitrapur to Visakhapatnam is more than Rs.  1000 per
tonne compared to the cost of material which is Rs. 650/-per tonne. The
Committee further noted that RINL is a major customer of Indian Railways
and contributes considerable revenue. The revenue contribution to Indian
Railways from RINL for 2012-13 was about Rs. 1300 crore, which is likely
to go up substantially after expansion. In view of this, it had been
suggested to the Committee that reduction of freight by at least
Rs. 250 per tonne for transportation of Dolomite and Limestone from
Birmitrapur to Visakhapatnam is required. The Committee had been
further informed by the Ministry that RINL had also pleaded that Railway
should give freight concession during peak season which is levying 15%
of surcharge for movement of goods during October to June. RINL had

10
also sought freight concession for Granulated PF Slag which is by-product
of steel production. The Committee strongly felt that the concern expressed
by RINL merited consideration and therefore, desired that these matters
be taken by the Ministry of Steel on behalf of RINL with the Ministry
of Railways on priority basis.
18. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished
as follows:—
“Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL would like to express its sincere gratitude to the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel for recommending reduction
in transportation rates for Dolomite and Limestone from M/s BSLC
from Birmitrapur to Visakhapatnam and transportation of
granulated BF slag and reduction in peak season surcharge.
Implementation of these is going to improve the performance of
RINL. Ministry of Steel have also taken up these issues with
Railways for consideration.”
19. Keeping in view the freight disadvantage in obtaining
material from M/s Bisra Stone Lime Corporation (BSLC) becoming
unviable to RINL, the Committee had desired that this issue may
be taken up by the Ministry with the Ministry of Railway on
priority basis. Though, the Ministry of Steel have reportedly taken
up the matter with Railways, the Ministry have not come out
with categorical reply indicating the progress made in this direction.
The Committee would like the Ministry to take up the cause of RINL
with the Railways forcefully and they may be apprised about the
outcome.
DELIVERY PERIOD OF STEEL GOODS
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
20. The Ministry of steel had submitted before the Committee that
there should be norms on number of days for delivery of various products
like pig iron, steel and by-products to various destinations within the
country. In case delivery was delayed beyond the stipulated number of
days, Railways have to pay compensation for inventory carrying cost of
the material. The Committee were of the strong view that delivery of
various steel products to various destinations within the country needed

11
to be transported by Railways within a time schedule, in order to protect
the interest of dealers and end-users. They, therefore would like steel
companies to include this condition while entering into an MoU/Contract
with the Railways.
21. The Ministry of Steel in their action taken replies have furnished
as follows:—
I. “Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Presently there is no scheduled running of freight trains like
passenger trains. The freight trains get delayed as these trains
get frequently stabled en route on account of movement
priority accorded to passenger trains, which run on same
track. This results in delayed arrivals and sometimes bunched
arrivals of freight trains at their destination. It is therefore,
necessary that construction of dedicated freight corridors of
railways should be completed early for reducing transit time
of freight trains and facilitating running of freight trains within
schedule.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
Ministry of Steel have advised to RINL (VSP) to explore
ways and means to enter an MoU/contract with the
Railways that in case delivery of materials is delayed
beyond the stipulated number of days by Railways, they
have to pay compensation for inventory carrying cost of
the material.”
22. The Committee had recommended that the steel
companies should include penalty clause while signing an MoU/
contract with the Railways for late delivery of various products
like pig iron, steel and by-products to various destinations within
the country. The contract should clearly indicate that if delivery has
been delayed beyond the stipulated number of days, Railways should
pay compensation for inventory carrying cost of the material.
The Ministry of Steel in their action taken reply have informed the
Committee that as there is no schedule running of freight trains like
passenger trains, the delivery of goods get delayed frequently. In view
of the reply of the Government, the Committee desire the Ministry of
Steel to take up the issue with Ministry of Railways for preparing a
fix running schedule for freight trains and the steel PSUs should also

12
include a clause in the MoU/contract whereby Railways should pay
compensation beyond a specific period in case of delay in delivery of
goods. The Committee also stress that construction of goods train
corridors be pursued by Ministry of Steel more vigorously with Ministry
of Railways.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Introductory
The Committee observe that the Indian iron and steel industry has
undergone a sea change during the last decade and the industry have
become one of the foremost sectors with substantial investments flowed
in for the interplay or free market enterprise in this vital sector. At the
consumer or demand end, the market for steel has been transformed
from a seller to a buyer market. Control and regulation have been replaced
by competition. The Committee also note that administered prices have
been replaced by supply and demand determined market prices. The
Committee expect the steel PSUs to channelize their marketing strategies
towards maximizing their market share in order to increase their
profitability.
Action Taken
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
The observation of the Committee regarding channelizing SAIL’s
marketing strategies towards maximizing its market share in order
to increase profitability has been noted. Suitable marketing strategies
are being drawn up by SAIL and shall be employed for marketing
products from the new mills as and when these are commissioned
for maximizing the market share of SAIL.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL is enhancing its production capacity to cater to the increasing
demand for steel in the country. This strategy is going to help in
improving market share. Various marketing strategies are taken on
continuous basis for improving sales, increasing market share,
improving realizations, increasing exports etc.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]

14
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Marketing network of SAIL and RINL
The Committee observe that Central Marketing Organization (CMO)
of SAIL is marketing steel produced by the 5 Integrated Steel Plants of
SAIL located at Bokaro, Bhilai, Durgapur, Burnpur and Rourkela and
3 Special Steel Plants at Salem, Bhadrawati and Durgapur in both domestic
as well as foreign markets. Headquartered in Kolkata, it transacts business
though its network of 37 Branch Sales Offices spread across the four
Regions, 25 Departmental Warehouses equipped with mechanised
handling systems, 42 Consignment Agents and 27 Customer Contract
Offices. CMO’s domestic marketing efforts is supplemented by its ever
widening network of dealers who meet the demands for the smallest
customers in the remotest corners of the country . As on 1st January, 2014
SAIL’s dealer network consists of 2774 dealers (including 855 Rural dealers)
covering almost all districts of the country. The Organization headed by
Director (Commercial) consists of the major operating divisions, viz. Flat
Products Group, Long Products Group, Retail Marketing Group,
Warehousing Group, International Trade Division and for marketing of
products of Special Steel Plants. As regards the distribution Network of
RINL, the Committee note that the network spread across the country
consist of 5 Regional offices located at Delhi (North), Mumbai (West),
Chennai (South), Kolkata (East) and Visakhapatnam (Andhra) and
23 Branch Sales Offices and Stockyards. Further, Consignment Sales Agents
have been appointed at 5 locations where RINL does not have its outlets.
These are Bhopal, Jabalpur, Varanasi, Guwahati and Agartala. In order
to improve distribution of steel and to ensure availability of steel
production in every nook and corner of the country the Committee
recommend that RINL should also create similar marketing division on
the lines of SAIL and create a dedicated cadre of workers who should
be resourcefully engaged to increase the customer contact programmes
at every level. The Committee further desire that both SAIL and RINL
should increase the number of sales offices and stockyards in the country
in line with the increased steel production after modernization and
expansion programme of existing steel plant(s) and new capacity addition.
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee observe that Central Marketing Organisation of
SAIL in addition to its main function of overall sales strategy of the
company to achieve sales target in terms of sales turnover, market share

15
and profitability, to oversee the supply also attend to various service and
support functions such as the Marketing Analyst Group looking into
market research function, Application Engineering Group for advising
customer on appropriate usages and monitoring of quality in consultation
and coordination with the Plants and IT groups. The Committee while
emphasizing that CMO should not deviate from its core function of overall
strategy of improving the sales target, would also like to be apprised of
the study, if any, on the marketing strategy of SAIL undertaken by CMO.
Action Taken
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Appointing new Consignment Agents at different locations of the
country is being examined so that the same can be utilized as the
Hub for catering to the smaller/retail customers. Moreover, in each
of the plant locations the warehousing capacities are being added
so that they may be treated as an extension of the plant facilitating
additional storage space for movement of material to different
destinations. While the capacity of the existing stockyards at
Durgapur, Bokaro and Bhilai is being expanded, at other plant
locations viz. Rourkela and Burnpur, Greenfield warehouses are
being planned.
The Market Analysis Group of SAIL/CMO from time to time takes
up different studies with respect to segment-wise analysis,
competitor’s activity, market dynamics with regard to domestic and
export activities. These reports help in focusing on the segments
to be catered to by the SAIL Marketing team as also draw
appropriate strategies based on competitors’ activities.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
Keeping in view of the increased production, RINL is enhancing
its marketing distribution network to meet the increasing sales. In
addition to Regional Offices, Branch Sales Offices and Marketing
Contact Offices, RINL has 114 Retailers and 697 Dealers for
distribution of its products to various customers in urban, semi-
urban and rural areas. In due course, new branches as per existing
pattern will be started as per requirement. Marketing Contact
Officers also will be appointed in addition to 7 appointed in 2013-
14, wherever required.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]

16
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
Customer Contact Offices of SAIL
The Committee note that per capita consumption of steel in India
is abysmally low at 57 Kg. against a global average of around 217 Kg.
The Committee feel that this gives a huge opportunity to the PSUs as
not only there is an ever increasing demand but it also presents huge
scope and potential for Indian Steel Industry to grow. The Committee
feel that the number of Customer Contact Offices of SAIL which at present
are 27 is very less. The Committee feel that country being so large and
diverse, to penetrate deep into the market and to enable easy access to
the consumers, the number of Customers Contact Offices should be
suitably increased so that awareness amongst consumers could be
generated about the products. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken/being taken by SAIL and RINL to tap the huge market
of consumers of steel which is lying untapped both in urban and rural
areas.
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Customer Contact Offices (CCOs) augment order booking activity
of the Branch Sales Offices (BSOs) of SAIL, and are attached to a
nearby BSO from where the requirements collected by the CCO are
serviced. CCOs and BSO executives regularly undertake visits to
customers to identify the existing as well as potential customers/
projects in their area including the large number of small scale
units which may be presently being serviced by SSI Corporations/
traders or competitors and analyse competitors’ activities in their
area and send the requisite feedback on market intelligence to help
increase SAIL’s share. Other steps being taken by SAIL to tap the
huge market of consumers of steel lying untapped both in the
urban and rural areas are:—
(a) Enhancement of rural dealership network.
(b) Opening of Consignment Agency Yards to increase storage
space and to improve the reach of the material.
(c) Door delivery of material to customers.

17
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL is expanding its distribution network with a view to ensuring
availability of steel in the nook and corner of the country . The
Rural Distribution Network, presently at 697 is planned to be
enhanced to 1000 in due course. Marketing Contact Officers also
will be appointed, wherever required, in addition to the 7 appointed
in 2013-14.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Quality Control Order
Another major aspect of customer satisfaction is to improve quality
of product. To ensure quality control of steel, certain items (galvanized
sheet, steel wire for pre stressed concrete etc.) have been brought under
quality control order issued by the Government. The Committee find that
some of the major new products developed to meet the customers
requirement and enhance market share are End Forged Thick Web
Asymmetric Rail for Indian Railways, Atmospheric corrosion resistance
steel plates for use in Delhi Metro Project, ASTM A 537 class 1 plates
with impact test in transverse direction for petro-chemical industry, SAIL-
TMT Fe 550 EQR/IS 1786Fe 550 D- High Strength Earth Quake Resistance
Quality Bars for construction of tall towers, BSEN 10025-2 S 275J2+N-
Moderate strength with low temperate impact toughness for railway
passenger bogie, DIN EN 10028-3:P355 NL1- Weldable, fine grain Pressure
Vessel Plates for manufacturing of light wagon, 5 mm thick 2 Pie Grade
Steel Plates for defense application, etc. A large number of innovations
are also carried out in Plants for process improvements and cost
competitiveness. The Committee would like to emphasize on various
measures to improve marketability of products through improved
packaging. The Committee feel that there is a need to bring more items
under this order to ensure high production of special quality and value
added products in the market by Steel PSUs which would easily sustain
competition from other players in the market.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Steel has notified 16 steel products having direct bearing
on human safety and critical to housing and infrastructure under the

18
Steel and Steel Products (Quality Control) Order in March, 2012. If
necessary, this Ministry will take steps to bring more products under this
order whenever required.
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Packaging of products is being given due importance to ensure
quality. The new mills coming in current phase of modernization
are equipped with state of the art packaging facilities.
With the expansion and modernization of SAIL plants, SAIL shall
be adding new products to its product-mix; special quality and
value added products shall be produced from modernized mills.
The quantum of value added products shall increase to 50% from
the current level of 40%. Special steel production during 2013-14
has been highest ever at 5.42 million ton with a growth of 6%
over 2012-13.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL appoints an external agency every year for carrying out
Customer Satisfaction Survey. Further, Ministry of Steel also
commissions an external agency for carrying out Customer
Satisfaction Survey every year as a part of the assessment of
Prime Minister’s Trophy for the best Integrated Steel Plant in the
country. Based on the recommendations in the Survey, actions are
initiated on continuous basis for improving customer satisfaction.
In the past actions were taken on improving compacting and packing
of bundles of wire rod coils. In case of export orders packaging
is done as per the stipulation of the customers.
RINL is implementing the Quality Control Order introduced by
GoI so as to serve its customers at their satisfaction in terms of
quality and value added products to sustain stiff competition in
the market.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
Customer Satisfaction
The Committee note that SAIL and RINL enter into MoU with its
major customers for their annual requirements. Supplies against the same

19
are regularly monitored and requirements of the customers are discussed
while booking orders on monthly basis. The major customers of SAIL
are NTPC, NHPC, BHEL and L&T. The Committee have been given to
understand that though there has been steady improvement in the
Customer Satisfaction Index by customers contact programme where
customers needs and expectations are captured and efforts are made to
meet their requirement by sending various functional teams to customers,
they observe that customer satisfaction in case of RINL is 80.8% as per
the latest customer satisfaction survey. The Committee, thus feel that the
steel companies structured mechanism for customer satisfaction is not
up to the desired level as even for permanent and bulk customers with
whom they entered into MoU for annual supplies. While recommending
that more customers meets should be held to improve customer satisfaction
level, the Committee also desire that quality of product be monitored
at various levels before dispatch to different parts of the country to further
improve the customers satisfaction index. Taking note of the fact that the
SAIL is supplying steel to Government Departments/PSU customers
(13.6%), private projects (15.1%), SSIC (3.2%), others (40%) and Trade
(including dealer sales) (27.9%), the Committee would like the Ministry/
SAIL to also focus on satisfaction of other consumers’ and dealers besides
Government Departments in order to increase their sale proceeds.
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
In order to improve customer satisfaction and also to ensure supply
of quality products, pre-despatch inspection by customers at the
stockyard is being encouraged. Further in order to witness the
production process, customers are encouraged to visit SAIL plants.
Plant visits are regularly organized for domestic as well as foreign
customers desiring to visit plants.
Sales to other consumers apart from Government departments and
PSUs form a large share in total sales of SAIL. During 2013-14 sales
to consumers other than Government Deptts./PSUs and Private
Projects was 39.5% of the total domestic sales. Customer Satisfaction
Index of private consumers who comprise of Tube makers, Cold
Reducers, LPG Cylinder Manufacturers, Material Handling
Equipment Manufacturers, Auto Component Manufacturers etc., is
also captured and monitored on monthly basis and corrective and
preventive steps are taken to improve the same.

20
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL markets its products to three main customer segments.
These are Industrial, Projects and Traders. In addition, RINL
also supplies its steel products to NSIC, SSICs and Rural Dealers.
MOUs are entered into with regular customers of all three
main segments.
The Customer Satisfaction Index of RINL has improved
to 83.25 as per the Survey conducted by Business and
Industrial Division, IMRB International, against 80.8 in the previous
survey.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee feel that customer satisfaction is the first and
foremost requirement for any marketing endeavour to succeed. This aspect
should be given due importance as the satisfaction of the end user would
determine success or failure of any product. For this it is very essential
to obtain periodic feedback from the customers and building brand
awareness so as to remain popular among customers and to remain afloat
in the market. The Committee desire that PSUs should participate and
hold frequent fairs, exhibitions etc. in different locations for regular
interface with the customers.
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
In the Financial Year 2014-15, it is planned that Cross Functional
Groups from Plants, RDCIS and Marketing shall visit customers
in various regions to apprise them about new products, its
application and cost benefit analysis. Similar meetings shall also
be held with designers, consultants etc.
Further, SAIL has been promoting Corporate and Product branding
through various modes of public relations, namely , by advertising
in print/electronic media, participating in various exhibitions,
outdoor advertising, sponsorships of various events, etc. while
taking into account overall commercial viability. These include the
prestigious India International Trade Fair (IITF) held every year

21
from 14-27 November at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi. SAIL
participates under the aegis of the Ministry of Steel, Government
of India. Also, recently, a set of new radio spots on SAIL products,
namely, SAIL TMT, SAIL Jyoti GP/GC sheets, and Salem Stainless
have been aired on All India Radio. Both print advertisements and
radio spots are also being released in different Indian languages
to reach out to the wider Indian customers.
Regular interaction by SAIL with the media through press meets/
visits/releases leading to publication of articles/stories in various
media plays an important role in enhancing the positive image of
the Company.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL participates in Trade Fairs and Exhibitions and puts up its
stall with a view to popularizing its products in the market.
Customer feedback is obtained from periodic customer meets at
HQ, Region and Branch level, visits of Cross Function Teams (CFTs),
consisting of members from Rolling Mills, Quality Assurance and
Technology Development Deptt., Production Planning and
Monitoring Deptt. and Marketing, visits of various customer groups
to RINL etc. Further product promotion activities are also taken
up for improving awareness of customers.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
Export of Steel
With regard to export of saleable steel, the Committee observe that
SAIL maintains a strategic presence in foreign markets and has been
exporting around 3-5% of its saleable steel production during last few
years. With higher production capacities of SAIL plants post expansion
and modernization, share of exports is likely to go up in future. The
Committee further note that RINL products are well accepted in
international market. In order to tap new market, RINL is proposing to
open its first international market office at World Trade Centre at Colombo,
Sri Lanka. The Committee would also like SAIL to explore the possibility
of opening such International marketing office in order to increase their
presence in the International market.

22
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
SAIL along with RINL are in discussion for jointly opening
international marketing offices in order to improve their presence
in the export market.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL maintains its presence in the export market by exporting iron
and steel products. During 2013-14, export turnover of RINL stood
at Rs. 747 cr against Rs. 598 cr in the previous year, representing
a growth of 25%.
International Marketing Office (IMO): RINL’s application to Registrar
General of Companies (RGoC), Sri Lanka has been accepted and
all necessary formalities have been completed for opening Office
at WTC, Colombo, Sri Lanka. The operation of Office is expected
to start in due course.
Leveraging port based location of the plant, RINL has been making
efforts for improving exports. A Team of officials from Marketing
visited Sri Lanka, Ethiopia and Dubai, Kenya etc. for exploring
new markets. During the year, Iron and Steel products were exported
to Indonesia, Taiwan, South Korea, Nepal, Thailand, Ethiopia, Kenya
and Tanzania.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]

23
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-Nil-

24
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
Modernisation and Expansion Programme of SAIL
The Ministry have informed the Committee that RINL has a
Calendar for Customer Meets at various levels like CMD, Director
(Commercial), General Manager (Mktg.) and Regional Managers.
Through these Customer Meets, the needs and expectations are
captured and efforts are made to meet their requirements. The
Committee desire that SAIL should also prepare a Calendar for
Customer Meets at different levels so as to ensure maximum customer
satisfaction.
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Interactions at Branch, Region, HQ and Corporate level take place
on a regular basis. However, as indicated at para 7, cross functional
teams have been created to apprise customers about new product, its
application and cost benefit analysis.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL follows Calendar for Customer Meets.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

25
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
Steel Demand in Rural Areas
The Committee note that a Rural Dealership Scheme to meet
requirements of rural consumers at Block, Tehsil and Taluka level was
introduced by SAIL in 2011-12. At present the dealer network of
SAIL consist of 855 rural dealers out of a total 2774 dealers, covering
almost all districts of the country. Since RINL also has a strength of
231 rural dealers in different parts of the country, the Committee feel
that there is a vast scope of increasing the strength of rural dealers
by both the PSUs as per capita steel consumption in rural India is
estimated at only 9.8 Kg. compared to an average of 57 Kg per person
in the country. As per SAIL Dealership Policy and Rural Dealership
Policy, dealers are required to stock TMT Bars, GP/GC Sheets and
other items required by common man and sell to small/retail customers
at prices fixed by SAIL. The Committee are however, dismayed to
note that although SAIL is delivering steel in interiors under its
dealership scheme at dealers’ doorstep, there are not enough transporters
vying for dealer supplies in view of insufficient volumes and inconsistency
in buying by the dealers in the hinterland. At times, inadequate
infrastructure slows down supplies during monsoons. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that SAIL and RINL should not only increase the
Rural Dealership in the country but also take desired steps to make
available suitable types of transport to carry small bundles of lower sizes
of Rebars and other items like TMT bars, GI sheets, HR/CR sheets, etc.
to meet the demand of rural areas.
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Presently , SAIL has a wide network of marketing outlets consisting
of 37 Branch Sales Offices, 27 Customer Contact Offices and 67 Warehouses
across the country. SAIL’s dealer network was further expanded during
the financial year 2013-14. Under the new “SAIL rural Dealership Scheme”
which was launched in 2011-12, SAIL has appointed 1004 Rural Dealers
(including LOI) up to 01-04-2014 with an objective to meet the steel
demand of the small rural consumers at block, tehsil and taluka level.
As on 01.04.2014, SAIL has an extensive Dealer network of 2948 Dealers
(including 1004 Rural Dealers), spread across length and breadth of the
Country.

26
The recommendations related to the transport needs in order to
meet rural demand will be examined.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL is taking steps for ensuring availability of steel to Rural Dealers
by supplying steel as per the requirement of Rural Dealers. RINL made
FOR contract for supplying steel to the customers’ premises, as a part
of Consignment Agency Contracts also.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
Sales performance of SAIL and RINL
The Committee observe that product wise/category wise
performance of sales in respect of SAIL since 2009-10 indicate that there
is decline in sale of pig iron from 1,97,000 tonnes in 2009-10 to 67,000
tonnes in 2011-12. Similarly, there is decline in sales of long products
from 4,94,2000 tonnes to 43,88,000 tonnes, 66,84000 tonnes to 6,05000
tonnes for flat products and 1,57,000 tonnes to 1,11,000 tonnes in case
of PET products during 2009-10 and 2011-12 respectively. The product
wise performance of RINL is however, reported to have improved as sale
of Rebars increased from 1,20,2000 tonnes in 2009-10 to 13,61,000
tonnes in 2011-12. Similarly, sale of wire rod coils and structural have
also increased during 2011-12 as compared to 2009-10. The sale
performance of RINL also indicate that against a total sale of
31,14,000 tonnes of steel products during 2010-11, the company could
sell only 28,02000 tonnes during 2012-13. In view of the poor overall
sales performance of steel products by SAIL and RINL, the Committee
are of the view that CMO(SAIL) and marketing wing of RINL have failed
to increase their market share of steel products inspite of increased
production capacity of saleable steel after the completion of current phase
of their ongoing modernization and expansion plan. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that SAIL and RINL should take necessary
steps so that the companies compete with other major domestic producers
of steel.

27
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
The reason for reduction of market share of SAIL is that the volume
of production of SAIL has been constant. On the other hand, competitors
have increased their capacity because of which the total availability of
steel in the country has increased. Market share of SAIL will improve
once the new mills at SAIL plants are commissioned and enhanced
production capacity of SAIL is in place at different plants.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
Against sales of 2.802 million tonnes of saleable steel in 2012-13,
RINL sold 3.035 million tonnes of saleable steel, representing a growth
of over 8%. Sales of saleable steel are also higher than the production
of 3.016 million tonnes during the year, i.e. the differential quantity has
been sold from inventory.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
Transportation of Steel
The Committee observe that delivery of Steel products to customers
is either directly dispatched from steel plants or through network of
stockyards located all over the country. Steel products are transported
from SAIL plants to its warehouses mainly by Rail. Similarly , RINL also
uses both Rail and Road modes of transportation for movement of iron
and steel from its plant at Visakhapatnam to various stockyards across
the country. While comparing the figures for modes of transportation,
the Committee note that dependence on rail is much more as compared
to that by Road. The Committee, feel that dependence on a single mode
of transportation should be substantially reduced and to ease burden on
Rail, other modes of transportation like road and coastal transportation
should also be explored. Regarding challenges faced during transportation,
the Committee note that ensuring adequate and timely availability of
rakes is a major concern which needs to be overcome by taking suitable

28
and timely action. The Committee desire that the matter of allowing/
providing 2 point destination rakes need to be taken up by Ministry of
Steel with Ministry of Railways at the highest level on priority basis as
after modernization and expansion programme of both SAIL and RINL,
the requirement of rakes would grow further. The Committee also desire
that adequate attention should be given by steel PSUs for ensuring the
quality of the product during loading/unloading and transportation of
steel goods as degree of damages to a finished product, are more as
compared to transportation of raw material.
Action Taken
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Steel being bulk commodity, preference for despatch by steel plants
is primarily by rail. Railways also look for higher rail share of steel
despatches from steel plants. At SAIL steel despatches by rail are at a
level of about 91% currently. Road despatches are being undertaken as
per customer requirement to cater to small order or to nearby destination
or to places where rail connectivity is a problem.
In future also, despatches of steel from SAIL plants will continue
primarily by rail. Therefore, logistics facilities under expansion schemes
for handling the various commodities inside plants have been designed
in consultation and approvals from railways. Accordingly, railway needs
to augment its rolling stock  viz wagons/locomotives to meet enhanced
demand of steel despatches by rail. It may be mentioned that rail is an
eco-friendly mode of transport, which should be encouraged for bulk
transportation requirements of steel industry.
The issues of ensuring adequate wagon availability for steel
despatches are taken up regularly with railways at various levels  viz by
SAIL at Divisional/Zonal/Railway board. A monthly meeting is also
convened by ED (Rail Movement), Railway Board, Kolkata with steel
industry, where wagon availability issues are also discussed and resolved.
Further, if required, such issues are also taken in Joint Consultative
Mechanism (JCM) meetings conducted by Ministry of steel periodically
with representatives of railway and steel industry.
As regards 2-point despatches, currently it is around 30 % of total
steel despatched from SAIL plants, which shall continue, after expansion
in SAIL. Railway to consider continuing this facility to SAIL in future

29
as well considering small quantity of variety of products demanded by
customers located at various destinations along the length and breadth
of the country.
Cranes and handling equipment constitute the backbone of efficient
and damage free handling at all warehouses. At present Electric Overhead
Transport (EOT) cranes are in operation at Dankuni, Kanpur, Delhi,
Faridabad, Kalamboli, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bangalore. Rubber Tyred
Gantrys (RTGs) at Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Chennai and Dankuni are
working efficiently and yielding good results. In addition, to enhance the
level of operational efficiency post modernization, it has been proposed
to install EOT cranes at Bokaro, Guwahati and Rourkela and RTGs at
various locations like Bhilai, Kalamboli, Ghaziabad, Faridabad, Kanpur,
Bokaro, Durgapur, Guwahati, Rourkela, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Vizag
in a phased manner depending on sustained demand. In addition, the
Handling Contractors are also deploying Original Equipment
Manufacturer (OEM) Cranes at both Departmental and CA WHs as per
tender terms.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL has been taking up with Railways to allocate adequate number
of rakes on continuous basis. The issue of allowing 2 point destination
rakes has also been taken up with railways. Further, RINL has been taking
initiatives for improving packaging, reducing damages during handling
of products at the time of loading and unloading.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee note that RINL wants to source its requirement of
Dolomite and Limestone produced by its subsidiary M/s Birsa Stone Lime
Company (BSLC) based in Birmitrapur. However, due to freight
disadvantage, obtaining material from BSLC is becoming unviable since
freight from Birmitrapur to Visakhapatnam is more than Rs.  1000 per
tonne compared to the cost of material which is Rs. 650/- per tonne. The
Committee further note that RINL is a major customer of Indian Railways
and contributes considerable revenue. The revenue contribution to Indian

30
Railways from RINL for 2012-13 was about Rs. 1300 crore, which is likely
to go up substantially after expansion. In view of this, it has been suggested
to the Committee that reduction of freight by at least Rs. 250 per tonne
for transportation of Dolomite and Limestone from Birmitrapur to
Visakhapatnam is required. The Committee have been further informed
by the Ministry that RINL has also pleaded that Railway should give
freight concession during peak season which is levying 15% of surcharge
for movement of goods during October to June. RINL has also sought
freight concession for Granulated PF Slag which is by-product of steel
production. The Committee strongly feel that the concern expressed by
RINL merits consideration and therefore, desire that these matters be
taken by the Ministry of Steel on behalf of RINL with the Ministry of
Railways on priority basis.
Reply of the Government
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
RINL would like to express its sincere gratitude to the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel for recommending reduction in
transportation rates for Dolomite and Limestone from M/s BSLC from
Birmitrapur to Visakhapatnam and transportation of granulated BF slag
and reduction in peak season surcharge. Implementation of these is going
to improve the performance of RINL. Ministry of Steel have also taken
up these issues with Railways for consideration.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
Delivery Period of Steel Goods
The Ministry of Steel have submitted before the Committee that
there should be norms on number of days for delivery of various products
like pig iron, steel and by-products to various destinations within the
country. In case delivery is delayed beyond the stipulated number of
days, Railways have to pay compensation for inventory carrying cost of
the material. The Committee are of the strong view that delivery of various
steel products to various destinations within the country needs to be

31
transported by Railways within a time schedule, in order to protect the
interest of dealers and end-users. They, therefore, would like steel
companies to include this condition while entering into an MoU/Contract
with the Railways.
Reply of the Government
I. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL)
Presently there is no scheduled running of freight trains like
passenger trains. The freight trains get delayed as these trains get
frequently stabled en route on account of movement priority accorded
to passenger trains, which run on same track. This results in delayed
arrivals and sometimes bunched arrivals of freight trains at their
destination. It is therefore, necessary that construction of dedicated freight
corridors of railways should be completed early for reducing transit time
of freight trains and facilitating running of freight trains within schedule.
II. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL)
Ministry of Steel have advised to RINL (VSP) to explore ways and
means to enter an MoU/Contract with the Railways that in case delivery
of materials is delayed beyond the stipulated number of days by Railways,
they have to pay compensation for inventory carrying cost of the material.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 11013(20)/2013, dated 14th July, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)

32
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
NEW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
19 December, 2014 Chairperson,
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.

33
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2014 IN
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Godam Nagesh
7. Shri Devji M. Patel
8. Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan
10. Shri Neiphiu Rio
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Sigh
14. Shri Rama Kishore Singh

34
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
16. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** *** ***
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on 52nd Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on the subject “Marketing and Transportation of Steel by
Public Sector Steel Companies” of the Ministry of Steel.
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned Ministry
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Do not pertain to this Report.

35
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 14
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 11)
Total : 08
Percentage : 57.2%
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies:
-Nil-
Total : 00
Percentage : 00%
IV . Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee:
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 and 14)
Total : 06
Percentage : 42.8%
V . Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
-Nil-
Total : 00
Percentage : 00%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”