MINISTRY OF STEEL

“Physical and Financial Performance of SAIL and MECON Ltd.”

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/

Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel

(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)]

FORTY-THIRD REPORT

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 (Saka)



FORTY-THIRD REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2017-2018)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MINISTRY OF STEEL

“Physical and Financial Performance of SAIL and MECON Ltd.”

[Action Taken by. the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report
of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.08.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.08.2018

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 (Saka)


CC&S No. 129

Price ; Rs. 66.00

i

© 2018 By Lox Sapna Srcreratuat

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition
New Delhi-110 064.

edure and Conduct of
) and printed by M/s, India Offset,



CONTENTS

PAGE
ComposiTION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) ii)
INTRODUCTION. (vy)
Cuarrer हैं 1
Crarter Il Observations/Recommendations which have been

accepted by Government. 16
Cwarter HE Observations/Recommendations which the Committee

do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of

the Government. 29
Craprer TV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of the Government have not been accepted

by the 7 मम 30
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

final replies of the Government are still awaited... 37

ANNEXURES
1 Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee

on Coal and Steel (2017-18) held on 25.07.2018... 44

il. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee
‘on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)... 46


ws PoP

>

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2017-18)

Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
Lok Sabha
Shri fdris Ali
Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
Shri Chandulal Sahu
Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
Shri Shailesh Kumar
Dr, Banshilal Mahato
Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi
Shri Godam Nagesh
Shri Ajay Nishad
Smt. Riti Pathak
Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan
Shri Ravindra Kumar Ray
Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
Shri Tathagata Satpathy
Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’
Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
Shri Rama Kishore Singh
Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
Shvi Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
Shri Ranjib Biswal
Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev

Gi)


24.
25.
26.
27.
28,
29,
30.
31,

Shri Ram Vichar Netam

Shri Sanjay Singh

Shri Samir Oraon*

Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu*

Shri Achyutananda Samanta*
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha*

Shri Prabhaker Reddy Vemireddy*

Vacant
SuCRETARIAT
1. ShriU.B.s. Negi _
Shri Ajay Kumar Garg —

Shri Arvind Sharma _

Ae Pp

Smt, Vandana Pathania Guleria

Joint Secretary
Director
Additional Director

Executive Officer

* Nomina wef ibo2a0ig कआऱभ्ेओ़े़ओ़़कागणभमसझहिेिन:र:ड: Nominated wef, 13.02.2018,
* Nominated wef 02.06. 2018

0)



INTRODUCTION

J, the Chairperson, Standing Commitice on Coal and Steel having been
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Forty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-
Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel on “Physical and Financial Performance of SAIL and MECON
Ltd.” relating to the Ministry of Steel.

2. The Thirty-Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 04.01.2018.
Replies of the Government to all the abservations/recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 19.03.2018.

3, The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 25.07.2018.

4. An analysis on the ‘Action Taken by the Government on. the
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Cominittee is given at Annexure-IL.

5, For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Chapter-I of the Report.

New DEH; RAKESH SINGH,
25 July, 2018 ____ July, 2018 _
03 Shravana, 1940 (5

Chairperson,

Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel.

0]


CHAPTER 1
REPORT

This Report of the Standing Committee deals with Action Taken by
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel on the subject, “Physical and Financial Performance of
SAIL and MECON Ltd.” relating to the Ministry of Steel which was presented
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.01.2018.

2. The Report contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. The
Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Steel in
respect of all the 14 observations/recommendations contained in the Report
on 19.03.2018. These have been categorised as follows:

@ Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:

Serial Nos.: 1, 5; 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12 Total : 08
Chapter-II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:

Serial No.; Nil Total ; 00

Chapter-ID

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:

Serial Nos.: 2, 3 and 14 Total : 03

Chapter-IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies

of the Government are still awaited:

Serial No.: 4, 9 and 13 Total : 03
Chapter-V


3... The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In case, where it js not possible for the Ministry
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for

4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their observations/recommendations made in the
Thirty-Seventh Report,

Recommendation (SL No. 1)
Physical Performance of SAIL

5. The Committee noted that over the last 2 years, the SAIL had
made considerable Progress in enhancing its physical performance, During
2016-17, SAIL achieved highest ever production of crude steel in a year
at 14.50 MT with a growth of 2% over the last year and saleable steel at
13.87 MT with a growth of 12% over the last year, During the year
2016-17, SAIL achieved highest ever saleable steel sale and production of
Saleable Steel in a year. Further, the Committee also observed that SAIL
achieved highest ever Hot Metal production at 15.73 Million Tonnes (MT),
Crude Steel production at 14.50 MT and Saleable Steel production at
13.87 MT during financial year 2016-17, The Committee further observed
that during the first half of 2017-18, against the plan production of Hot

up the good efforts for overall improvement in its physical performance 50
as to make the company more competitive with other players in the market.

i
{

i
:



6. In ifs action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:

“Several initiatives have been taken by SAIL including appointment of
BCG & Experts for suggesting measures for overall growth of SATL.
This has resulted in improved performance upto 9M’ 2017-18
9* Month of 2017-18 over the same period last year. The growth in
OM? 2017-18 over 9M’ 2016-17 in respect of Hot Metal is 1%, for
Crude Steel growth is 3% and in Saleable Steel is 0.1%."

7, While reviewing the Physical and Financial Performance of
SALL, the Committee in their original report had appreciated the all
round improvements in major techno-economic parameters in SATL
despite increase in input prices and subdued demand of steel and had
desired that SAIL should step up the good efforts for overall
improvement in its physical performance so as to make the company
more competitive compared to other players in the market. In their
Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Steel has informed the Committee
that for 9M’ 2017-18, as compared to 9M? 2016-17, there has been
improved physical performance py SAIL to the tune of 1% for Hot
Metal, 3% for crude steel growth & 0.1% for saleable steel. It has
been further mentioned that these results have been achieved due to
several initiatives taken by SAIL including appointment of BCG (Boston
Consulting Group) & Experts for suggesting measures for overall
growth of SATL. While appreciating the performance by SAIL, the
Committee would also like to be apprised of the major
recommendations/suggestions made by BCG (Boston Consulting
Group) & Experts and subsequent initiatives taken by SAIL in this
regard.

Recommendation (SI. No. 2)
Capacity Utilization by SATL Plants

8. The Committee observed that against the installed capacity of
12.8 MT of Crude Steel Production during 2014-15, the actual production
was 13.90 MT and thus achieving 107% of capacity utilization. Against the
installed capacity of 16.8 MTPA during 2015-16 and 2016-17, the total
Crude Steel production by SATL was 14.27 MT and 14.50 MT respectively
showing 85% and 86% of capacity utilization. The Committee also noted
that the installed capacity of crude steel by SAIL after modernization and


expansion programme will be increased from 12.8 MTPA to 21.4 MTPA
after operations at all plants come to stream, Although, the Committee were
happy fo note that Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgapur Steel Plant had exceeded
in production as far as their installed capacity is concerned, they are
concerned to note the poor performance of Rourkela Steel Plant(RS),
TISCO Steel Plant(ISP), Alloy Steel Plant(ASP), Salem Steel Plant (SSP)
and Visvesvaraya Iron Steel Plant(VISP) that could achieve only 79%,
56%, 38%, 60% and 33% of their installed capacity of Crude Steel during
2016-17. While appreciating the highest ever Hot Metal, Crude Steel and
Saleable Steel Production by SAIL during 2016-17, the Committee desired
that the Company should take all necessary steps to address all the bottlenecks
which hampers full capacity utilisation of these plants so that production
targets for 2017-18 which were lagging behind duxing the first half of the
year were fully achieved. The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the reasons for very poor capacity utilization by other plants of SATL and
the steps taken by the company to ensure that ail the plants operate at their
full installed capacity,

9. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:

2016-17

* Capacity utilization at Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgaput Steel Plant
was 121% and 113% respectively.

* Capacity utilization at Bokaro Stcel Plant was 72% as Hot Metal
and Crude Steel production was restricted at Bokaro Steel Plant
due to high slab stocks.

* Capacity utilization at Rourkela Steel Plant and TISCO Steel
Plant was lower at 79% and 56% as new facilities were under
stabilization.

* Capacity utilization at Alloy Stcels Piant, Salem Steel Plant and
Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant was lower as production was
curtailed as per market orders.”

10. The Committee while examining the capacity utilization by
different plants of SAIL had observed that though Bhilai Steel Plant
and Durgapur Steel Plant had excecded production as compared to

4


their installed capacity, Rourkela Steel Plant(RS), IISCO Steel
Plant(ISP), Alloy Steel Plant(ASP), Salem Steel Plant (SSP) and
Visvesvaraya [ron Steel Plant(VISP) could achieve only 79%, 56%,
38%, 60% and 33% respectively of their installed capacity of Crude
Steel during 2016-17. In view of the low capacity utilization by these
steel plants, the Committee had desired that necessary steps be taken
to bring these plants to operate at their full capacity by addressing
all issues which hamper the same. In their Action Taken Reply, the
Ministry has informed the Committee about the various reasons for
low capacity utilization by several steel plants of SAIL. According to
Ministry of Steel, capacity utilization at Bokaro Steel Plant was 72%
as Hot Metal and Crude Steel production was restricted due to high
slab stocks and at Rourkela Steel Plant and TESCO Steel Plant, lower
capacity utilization at 79% and 56% was due to new facilities being
under stabilization, Further, Capacity utilization at Alloy Steel Plant,
Galem Steel Plant and Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant was lower as
production was curtailed as per market orders, Although, the Ministry
have cited various reasons for low capacity utilization by some of the
SAIL's Plants, the Committee find that the reply of the Ministry is
silent on the steps taken to ensure that all the plants operate at their
full installed capacity. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire that appropriate steps should be taken by
Ministry of Steel/SATL to ensure full capacity utilization by these
plants. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the steps
taken by SAIL to ensure timely lifting/sale of high slab stocks at
Bokaro Steel Plant.

Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
Availability of Raw Material and Captive Mining by SALL Iron Ore

11. The Committee noted that SAIL has captive mines of iron ore,
coal, Limestone & Dolomite. During the year 2016-17, SAIL mines produced
26.44 MT of iron ore and the entire iron ore requirement of SATL plants
was met through the captive mines of SAIL. After the ongoing modernization.
and capacity enhancement of SAIL, Hot Metal production is expected to
touch a level of 23.46 MTPA. At this stage, the requirement of Tron Ore
shail be 39 MTPA and SAIL mines were geared up to meet this expected
demand fully through captive mines. The Committee further observed that

5


in order to expedite capacity expansion projects, SAIL has obtained extended
mining leases of ML-162 of Barsua-Taldih-Kalata Iron Ore Mine in Odisha,
Nandini Limestone Mine and Hirti Dolomite Mine of Bhilai Steel Plant in
Chhattisgarh. The Committee were, however, concerned to note that forest
clearance in respect of Kiribura Meghaha Tuburu iron ore mines, Gua Ore
Mines and Chiria, Jharkhand, Kalwar-Nagur Iron Ore Mines Project under
Bokaro Steel Plant were pending with the Ministry of Environment, Forest
& Climate Change. The Committee also note with concern about
non-development of Kalwar and Rowghat iron ore mines in Chhattisgarh
for which Stage-II forest clearance was granted way back in August,
2009. In line with expected Hot Metal production target of 23.46 MTPA for
which the requirement of Iron Ore is 39 MTPA, the Committee recommend
that Ministry of Steel/SAIL should vigorously pursue with Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and impress upon them to grant
forest clearance for the projects under reference without further delay. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in
this regard,

12. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:—.

1. “Delay in grant of Stage-II Forest Clearance (FC)

Grant of Stage-II Forest Clearance’s (FC) for Gua, Kiriburu-
Meghahatuburu and Chitia mines of SAIL in Saranda forest in Jharkhand
is pending at Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
(MoEFCC) from 30.07.2015, 13.07.2015 & 22.09.2014, respectively
(for about two years).

The matter of Stage-IT FC for Gua which is required is regularly
being monitored in Project Monitoring Group (PMG) of PMO. During
review meeting of PMG of PMO on 15.12.2017, MoEFCC informed
that final decision of Competent Authority on Mining Plan for
Sustainable Mining (MPSM) for Saranda Forest is still awaited,

A meeting was held with DGF&SS, MoEFCC on 05, 10.2017, wherein
it transpired that now Zone-I & Zone-IL, as proposed in MPSM has
been merged and Stage-IT FC for the Duargaiburu lease of Gua and
South-Central Block of Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu mines will be granted
shortly.



Ministry of Steel is actively pursuing the matter with MoEFCC, The

deta

ils of the efforts made by Ministry of Steel in this regard in recent

time are appended below:

Hon’ble Steel Minister discussed the matter of delay in grant of
Stage-II FC with Minister MoEFCC during the meeting held on
08.06.2016 and 21.02.2017.

To expedite pending Stage-IL FC in Saranda Forest in Jharkhand
including Chiria jeases, Ministry of Steel vide letter dtd.
29.09.2016 submitted its comments on Draft Mining Plan for
Sustainable Mining (MPSM) of MoEFCE and requested that
mineralised area of Ankua Forest Block in which Chiria mine is
located should be excluded from no mining zone.

To expedite the proposals of grant of pending Stage-II FC for
SAIL Mines in Jharkhand, Secretary, Ministry of Stee! held a
meeting with Secretary, MoEFCC on 02.12.2016.

Secretary Steet vide letter did 07.02.2017 requested Secretary
MoEFCC to expedite pending Stage-II FC and copy of the letter
was also forwarded to Principal Secretary to PMO.

The member of consultative committee, Ministry of Steel &
Mines & Member of Parliament, Sri Laxman Giluwa vide letter
dated 02.02.2017 & 21.06.2017 requested Hon’ble Minister,
MoEFCC to expedite grant of pending forest clearance for SAIL
mines in Saranda forest.

‘The matter of delay in grant of Stage-Il FC was also discussed
during Consultative Committee of Ministry of Steel meeting held
on 10.06.2017 at Dharamshala.

During review by PMG of PMO on 25.08.2017 and 15.12.2017,
MoEFCC informed that final decision of Competent Authority
on MPSM for Saranda Forest is still awaited.

A workshop on “Co-Existence of Mining Industries & Forest-
Challenges & Way Forward” was organised by SATL at Kolkata
on 23.09.17. During the workshop, issues related to grant of
Stage-IIl FC’s for Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu, Gua & Chiria were
apprised to DGF&SS, MoEF&CC, Gol.


21

2.2

Non-development of Rowghat and Kalwar-Nagur iron ore mines
of Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP)

Rowghat Iron Ore Mine

Rowghat mine in the past could not be developed, even though
Stage-Il FC was granted by MoEFCC in August, 2009, on account
of law and order issue in the area, Development activities in the area
could resume after deployment of Central Security Forces. Necessary
infrastructure for setting up of security barracks for the forces for
providing security to Rowghat Mining Project & Dalli-Rajhara-Rowghat
Rail link project is being provided by SAIL with an investment of
about Rs, 417 crore.

For development of 14 MTPA mine at Rowghat, SAIL has appointed
an MDO. In this regard, the Mining Service Agreement (MSA) for a
period of 30 years including 5 years of construction from the effective
date of contract was signed with MDO on 25.09.2017,

Kalwar-Nagur Iron Ore Mine

Stage-II FC for diversion of 17 ha of forest land out of 938.059 ha
of Kalwar-Nagur lease was granted by MoEFCC on 07.01.2008. Mine
in the past could not be developed on account of delay in grant of
environment clearance,

For development of 1 MTPA iron ore mine at Kalwar-Nagur Icase,
Chhattisgarh, the EC proposal was considered by Expert Appraisal
Committee (EAC) of MoEFCC on 25.04.2016 wherein EAC has
recommended for grant of EC for the limited forest land of 17 ha out
of 938.059 ha in Kalwar-Nagur lease. But instead of grant of EC,
MoEFCC is now insisting that unless SATL deposits NPV for entire
forest land in the mining lease or surrenders the excess forest land,
EC tor the project will not be issued.

+ In the matter of payment of Net Present Value (NPV) for entire
forest land in a lease by a Govt, Company, Secretary Steel vide
letter dated 21.03.2016 had sought clarification from MoBFCC
and the same are still awaited.

i
|


. Further, SAIL has challenged the MoEFCC guideline
dtd, 01,04.2015 in Jharkhand High Court which provides payment
of NPV for entire forest land ina mining lease. Hon'ble Jharkhand
High Court had stayed the notices of Jharkhand State Govt.
through which demand for payment of NPV for entire forest
land was vaised. Matter is still pending.

+ Further, vide letter dated 03.05.2017, CCF, Kanker, Chhattisgarh
asked SAIL to deposit NPV of Rs. 96.28 crore for the remaining
forest land in Kalwar-Nagur lease. SAIL vide letter dated
24.06.2017, informed Additional PCCF, Chhattisgarh that as of
now SAIL has not applied for diversion of remaining forest land
in Kalwar-Nagur lease, therefore, payment of NPV under
section 201) of FC Act at this juncture is not justifiable.

+ Recently on 18.12.2017, Joint Secretary, MoEFCC convened a
meeting and adyised SATL to deposit the NPV of the entire
forest land in the jease amounting to Rs. 96 crore else the
Chhattisgarh State Govt. will initiate the process for cancellation
of mining lease notwithstanding the fact that the lease bas already
been extended by the State Government on 14.03.2016 till
34.03.2025.

+ SAIL has submitted that since the matter regarding payment of
NPV for entire forest land in a mining lease is under adjudication,
therefore BC for Kalwar-Nagur lease be granted so that SATL
can start development of mine to meet the increased requirement
of ixon ore post-modernisation. Grant of EC is awaited.”

43. Noting that several mines of SAIL are under litigation,
thereby hampering the growth in performance of the Company on
the whole, the Committee had desired that these pending issues/
matters be vigorously pursued with Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change io expedite their clearance and find a viable
solution as well. But the Committee are unhappy to note that not
much progress has been made even after the recommendation made
py the Committee in this regard in their original Report. According
to Ministry of Steel, Grant of Stage-H Forest Clearance’s (FC) for
Gua, Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu and Chiria mines of SAIL in Saranda


forest in Jharkhand js Pending with the Ministry of Environment,
Forest & Climate Change (MoEFCC) from 30.07.2015, 13.07.2015 &

of Gua and South-Central Biock of Kiriburu-Meghahataburu mines
is likely to be granted shortly, Regarding the 14 MTPA Rowghat Iron
Ore Mine, Ministry of Stee] has informed the Committee that in the
past this mine could not be developed, even though Stage-IT FC was
granted by MoEFCC in August, 2009, on account of Jaw and order
issue in the area. Now, for development of this mine, SAIL has
appointed a Mine Developer-cum-Operator (MDO) and Mining Service

with MDO on 25.09.2017. The Committee further note that even

mines, the FC in respect of other mines are still Pending at various
Stages which is a matter of great concern, The Committee feel that
such huge delays in granting forest clearance is likely to hamper the
availability of raw material after expansion of the capacity of its steel

10



plants requiring 39 MTPA of iron ore, The Committee, therefore,
desire that Ministry of Steel should urgently address all the pending
issues at the highest level and they be apprised of the outcome
thereof, The Committee would also like to be apprised of the latest
status regarding the Kalwar-Nagur Iron Ore Mine after the convening
of the meeting by the Joint Secretary, MoEFCC on 18.12.2017.

Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
Captive Power Generation by SAIL

14, The Committee observed that SAIL had laid stress on reliability
of power supply in its plants and strengthening of the power distribution
system of Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) with Damodar Valley Corporation
(DVC) grid at 220 KV which has already been commissioned. With this,
थी the Integrated Stee! Plants of SAIL are now connected with utility grids
at 220 KV level, which enhances the reliability of grid power supply and
jowers the tariff of grid power as well as open access charges for having
grid connectivity at such high voltages. The Committee also took note of
the fact that captive power generation by SAIL during 2016-17 increased
to 820 MW from 785 MW during 2015-16 showing a growth of 45%.
The Committee were happy to note that captive power generation capacity
were being further augmented by capacity addition of 290 MW through
NSPCL (joint venture of NTPC & SAIL), Further, orders for supply and
installation of Power Plants of 1x250 MW at Rourkela Steel Plant and
2x20 MW at Durgapur Steel Plant were placed during the year. These
Plants are expected to commence commercial operations during the Year
2019-20. It had also been brought to the notice of the Committee that as
a part of commitment towards development of renewable energy, the SATL.
had already installed a capacity of 1070 K Wp rooftop solar plants at various
locations and 1 MWp grid interactive solar plant at RSP. Further, actions
for installation of 200 MWp capacity solar plants at various SATL Plant
locations had also been initiated. While appreciating the efforts of SAIL for
captive power generation and its augmentation programme, the Committee
desired that SAIL should also commit itself for development of renewable
energy and grid interactive solar plants at various locations of SATL plants
in a fixed timeframe to reduce its carbon footprint on the line of one being
setup at RSP, The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan
of SAIL in this regard.

14


15. In its action taken veply, the Ministry of Steet has stated as
under:

“SAIL has taken initiatives for installation of grid interactive solar
plants at its various plant locations, Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) has
already been issued for total capacity of 102 MWp grid interactive
solar plants to be installed at Salem, Durgapur, Kulti and Bhilai, Land
has also been finalized for installation of another 60 MWp capacity at
Rourkela and Bokaro and Feasibility Report is under preparation for
the same. Besides this, Installation of 2000 KWp rooftop solar plants
on the rooftop of various SAIL buildings at Bokaro is also in progress.”

16. While observing augmentation of captive power generation
capacity of SAIL, the Committee in their original Report had
appreciated the initiatives taken by SAIL for installation of grid
interactive solar plants at its various plant locations. The Ministry of
Steel has informed the Committee that Notice Inviting Tender (NIT)
in this regard has been issued for total capacity of 102 MWp grid
interactive solar plants to be installed at Salem, Durgapur, Kulti and
Bhilai. Land has also been finalized for installation ef another
60 MWp capacity at Rourkela and Bokaro. Besides this, work relating
to Installation of 2000 KWp rooftop solar plants on the rooftop of
various SAIL buildings at Bokare is also in progress, In wake of
these developments and keeping in mind SAIL’s commitment for
clean environment, the Committee would also like to be apprised of
any time frame/action plan that has been chalked out by SAIL to
reduce its carbon footprint by laying emphasis en development of
renewable energy and encouraging grid interactive solar plants on
the lines of the one already setup by the company at Rourkela,

Recommendation (SI. No. 10)
Initiatives by Government

17. The Committee noted that the Government had taken a slew of
measures to protect the steel industry from the onslaught of cheap imports
resulting in huge stump in domestic steel sector from 2014-15 onwards.
The steps taken by the Government inter alia include increase in basic
custom duty, levying of anti-dumping duty, notification of Minimum Import
Price (MIP) and imposition of provisional safeguard duty on certain items,

12



amending the Steel and Steel Products (Quality Control) Order, 2012 ete.
The Committee also noted that MIP had since been completely phased out
after 4th February, 2017 and all the items covered under MIP were now
covered under the Anti-Dumping Duty (ADD) imposed by the Government.
While appreciating the steps taken by the Government to bail out the
domestic steel Industry from cheap imports of steel products by imposing
anti-dumping duty on import of Wire Rod of Alloy or Non-Alloy Steel,
colour-coated sheets, seamless tubes, pipes and hollow profiles of iron,
alloy or non-alloy steel, HR coils, HR plates, CR products, the Committee
recommended that every effort should be made by the Government to
check onslaught of cheap imports on domestic steel sector and a mechanism
may be put in place to monitor the imports of steel and its impact on
domestic steel sector from time to time. In view of the targeted 300 mr
production of Steel by 2025, the Committee also felt that the Ministry of
Steel should pursue with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of
Commerce to give more incentives to the domestic steel industry so that
more and more capacity addition projects were commissioned under ‘Make
in India’ campaign.

18. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:

“Ministry of Steel in consultation with the industry stakeholders taken
up the issues with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce to
facilitate growth of the strategically important steel industry.

Ministry of Steel had earlier supported trade remedial measures like
Minimum import Price, Anti-Dumping Duty, Safeguard Duty to protect
the domestic industry from unfairly traded imports. Ministry of Stee!
is also pursuing Ministry of Finance for rationalization of import duty
structure of critical raw materials for stee! industry.”

19. Expressing its concern towards the adverse effects on
domestic Steel Industry due to the surge of cheap imports, the
Committee in their original Report had yecommended that a
ynechanism be put in place to monitor the imports of steel and its
impact on the domestic steel sector. The Committee are, however,
concerned to note that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the

13


matter, The Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier
recommendation and desire that the impact of cheap imports on the
domestic steel industry should be carefully monitored so that
appropriate and timely action could be taken.

20. The Committee in their original Report had also rooted for
more incentives to domestic steel industry to revive the sector and
to ensure 300 MT production target by 2025. In this regard, the
Committee note that the Ministry of Steel in consultation with the
industry stakeholders is pursuing the matter of rationalization of
import duty structure of critical raw materials for the steel industry
and the other issues with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of
Commerce to facilitate growth of the strategically important steel
industry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete
outcome of these initiatives of Ministry of Steel.

Recommendation (SI. No. 14)
Securing Jobs on Nomination Basis for MECON Ltd.

21. The Committee were happy to note that MECON Ltd. had pipeline
Projects worth about Rs, 18,000 crore (executed and in hand) till date.
Several prestigious gas pipeline projects (such as the Bawana Nangal
Pipeline,) were successfully completed by MECON for M/s Gas Authority
of India Ltd. (GAIL). GAIL had recently awarded Engineering & Project
Management Consultancy (EPMC) services to MECON Lid, for the
Pradhanmantri Urja Ganga Pipeline Project (excluding the Dobhi - Haldia
segment in Eastern Region of the Country), MECON’s scope of work
involves a pipeline length of 1813 km. (approx.) (from Phulpur to Dobhi
and Bokaro to Dhamra), entailing an Investment of about Rs. 7,867 crore
MECON’s fee for the job is about Rs, 108.2 crore (excluding GST and site
related expenses). MECON Ltd. has also been awarded EPMC services by
M/s GAIL for developing the City Gas Distribution (CGD) networks in
6 cities along the Urja Ganga (viz. Varanasi, Bhubaneswar, Cuttack, Patna,
Ranchi & Jamshedpur). On similar lines MECON Ltd. had sought
Government support for securing jobs on nomination basis from PSUs
within Ministry of Steel such as SAIL, RINL, NMDC Lid., MOIL, KIOCL,
MSTC ete. in line with those being secured from GAIL. The Committee
desired that the Ministry of Steel should consider adequate support sought

14



by MECON for securing jobs from Steel PSUs on nomination basis only
at compatible prices so that MECON Ltd. could regain its foothold in the
business and therefore urged the Ministry of Stecl to do the needful in the
matter, The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard,

22. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as
under:

“The matter is under consideration of this Ministry.”

23. While examining the physical and financial performance of
MECON Lid., the Committee in their original Report (16th Lok Sabha)
had noted that after showing good performance/profit in its initial
years, MECON Ltd. was struggling to keep itself in business since
2016-17 and its profitability had been adversely affected. At the same
time, the Committee also appreciated the fact that MECON Ltd. had
shown improvement in its business procurement parameters during
the last 3 years. Encouraged by this and noting that currently MECON
Ltd. has many prestigious projects in hand, the Committee had desired
that Ministry of Steel should render full support and assistance to
MECON Ltd. for securing jobs from Steel PSUs on nomination basis.
In their action taken reply, the Ministry has not made any firm
commitment in this regard and have simply stated that the matter is
under consideration. Not satisfied with their reply, the Committee

reiterate their earlier recommendation and recommend the Ministry
of Steel to take concrete necessary steps in the matter so that MECON
Ltd. could sccure jobs from Steel PSUs at compatible prices. The
Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the ‘consideration
process’ which is underway.

15


CHAPTER IT

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Recommendation (SI. No. 1)
Physical Performance

The Committee note that over the last 2 years, the SAIL has made
considerable progress in enhancing its physical performance. During
2016-17, SAIL achieved highest ever production of crude steel in a year
at 14.50 MT with a growth of 2% over the last year and saleable steel at
13.87 MT with a growth of 12% over the last year, During the year
2016-17, SAIL achieved highest ever saleable steel sale and production of
saleable steel in a year. Further, the Committee also observe that SAIL
achieved highest ever Hot Metal production at 15.73 Million Tonnes (MT),
Crude Steel production at 14.50 MT and Saleable Stecl production at 13.87
MT during financial year 2016-17. The Committee further observe that
during the first half of 2017-18, against the plan production of Hot Metal
at 7.99 MT, the actuals were 7.61 MT and against crude Steel production
target of 7.54 MT, the actuals were 7.13 MT. SAIL had also undertaken
expansion of its integrated steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur
and Burnpur and Special Steel Plant at Salem. There were all round
improvements in major techno-economic parameters, The Committee
appreciate that even in wake of unprecedented increase in input prices and
subdued demand for steel, the performance of SAIL on various parameters
has improved, At the same time, the Committee feel that SAIL should step
up the good efforts for overall improvement in its physical performance so
as to make the company more competitive with other players in the market,

Action Taken

Several initiatives have been taken by SATL including appointment of
BCG & Experts for suggesting measures for overall growth of SAIL. This
has resulted in improved performance upto 9M’2017-18 over the same

16


period last year. The growth in 9M’2017-18 over 9M’2016-17 in respect

of Hot Metal is 1%, for Crude Steel growth is 3% and in Saleable Steel is
0.1%.

(O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry

of Steel]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (81. No. 5)
Power

The Committee observe that SAIL has laid stress on reliability of
power supply in its plants and strengthening of the power distribution
system Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) with Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC)
grid at 220 KV which has already been commissioned. With this, all the
Integrated Steel Plants of SAIL are now connected with utility grids at
220 KV level, which enhances the reliability of grid power supply and
lowers the tariff of grid power as well as open access charges for having
grid connectivity at such high voltages. The Committee also take note of
the fact that captive power generation by SATL during 2016-17 increased
to 820 MW from 785 MW during 2015-16 showing a growth of 4.5%,
The Committee are happy to note that captive power generation capacity
is being further augmented by capacity addition of 290 MW through NSPCL
joint venture of NTPC & SAIL). Further, orders for supply and installation
of Power Plants of 1x250 MW at Rourkela Steel Plant and 2x20 MW at
Durgapur Steel Plant were placed during the year. These Plants are expected
to commence commercial operations during the Year 2019-20. It has also
been brought to the notice of the Committee that as a part of commitment
towards development of renewable cnergy, the SAIL has already installed
a capacity of 1070 KWp rooftop solar plants at various locations and 1
MWp grid interactive solar plant at RSP. Further, actions for installation of
200 MWp capacity solar plants at various SATL. Plant locations have also
been initiated. While appreciating the efforts of SAIL for captive power
generation and its augmentation programme, the Committee desire that
SAIL should also commit itself for development of renewable energy and
grid interactive solar plants at various locations of SAIL plants in a fixed

17


timeframe to reduce its carbon footprint on the line of one being setup at
RSP. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of SAIL
in this regard.

Action Taken

SAIL has taken initiatives for installation of grid interactive solar plants
at its various plant locations. Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) has already been
issued for total capacity of 102 MWp grid interactive solar plants to be
installed at Salem, Durgapur, Kulti and Bhilai. Land has also been finalized
for installation of another 60 MWp capacity at Rourkela and Bokaro and
Feasibility Report is under preparation for the same, Besides this, Installation
of 2000 KWp rooftop solar plants on the rooftop of various SAIL buildings
at Bokaro is also in progress,

{O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated {9th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 6)
Financial Performance

The Committee feel that though SAIL has slowly and steadily managed
to come on track after suffering initial setbacks during last 2 years, a lot
is yet to be accomplished. For this, various measures like better fund
management, enhancing operational efficiency, striving for higher sales
volume and high net sales realization are needed. As regards the financial
performance of 5611, during the last 3 years, the Committee observe that
the gross turnover which was Rs. 50627 crore during 2014-15 was reduced
to Rs. 43294 crore during 2015-16 and again rose to Rs. 49180 crore
during 2016-17. During the first half of Financial Year 2018, the net sale
is Rs. 24898 crore as compared to Rs. 18472 crore during HI of the
Financial Year 2017 showing improvement of 23%. According to the Ministry
of Steel, there has been a dip in the financial performance of SAIL from
2015-16 mainly because of rise in interest which rose from Rs. 1457 crore
in 2014-15 to Rs. 2528 crore during 2016-17 and depreciation which has

18


risen from Rs. 1773 crore during 2014-15 to Rs. 2680 during 2016-17.
The Committee note that despite increase in higher imported and indigenous
coal prices, high royalty on iron ore, depreciation, increase in store and
spares and repair and maintenance expenses, SAIL’s financial performance
has shown positive trend with Earning Before Income, Tax, Depreciation
and Amortization (BBIDTA) improving from Rs. -2204 crore during
2015-16 to Rs. 672 crore during 2016-17 and during the Financial Year
2018, it has shown a positive trend at Rs. 989 crore with improvement of
88% due to higher Net Sales Realization (14%) and Sales Volume (8.7%).
While appreciating the concerted efforts made by SAIL, the Committee
desire that the Company should keep the momentum going on and ensure
effective implementation of various initiatives undertaken by them to improve
its performance which would help them to regain its lost glory. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in its financial
performance as a result of various initiatives undertaken by them.

Action Taken

Measures taken by SAIL in bringing down the costs of production
and improving the profitability are as under:

* Reduction in consumption level of raw materials like Coal, Iron
Ore, Fluxes, etc. and bringing down cost of raising iron ore &
clean coal in mines.

+ Production optimization and product-mix improvement.
+ Improvement in techno-economic parameters.

+ Index based pricing mechanism for coking coal.

+ Rationalization of manpower.

+ Imposition of tariff and non-tariff barriers including Anti-dumping
and Safeguard duties, expanding scope of steel quality control
orders, etc.

+ Identification and closure of uneconomic activities.

+ Rationalizing production from relatively inefficient routes of
production.

19


Waste management.

Full utilisation of engineering shops and replacing purchased
items,

Strict control on demurrage expenses.
Reduction in number of service contracts,
Reduction in procurement cost through strict Inonitoring,

10% Reduction in the various items of administrative
expenses,

Re-negotiation of prices of long term contracts for cutting down
procurement price where deliveries are still pending.

De-proprictorisation of items of stores & spares, plant &
machinery, maintenance services, etc.

Reduction in inventory of finished/semi-finished products, stores
& spares and raw materials, etc,

Monitor and reduce handling and transit losses of imported
coal,

Reduction in logistic cost for transportation of coal being
imported

SAIL — Financial Performance (Rs. crore)

Year Turnover EBIDTA Interest Depreci- Profit Profit
( Gross ) ation Before After

Tax Tax

(PBT) (PAT)

2014-15 50627 5586 1454 1773 2359 2093
2015-16 43294 - 2204 2300 2402. -7008 -4021
2016-17 49180 672 2528 2680. -4851 -2833



SAIL — Financial Performance ( H1 FY 18 )

HI HI HI (%)
FY 16 FY 17 FY 18 Improvement
Net Sales Rs. crores 18472 20162 24898. +23%
EBIDTA Rs. crores “534 527 989. +88%
Interest Rs. crores 1048 1197 1231... +3%
Depreciation Rs. crores 980 1266 1457, + 15%
Exceptional Expenses Rs. crores - 243 329 +86 crores
PBT Rs, crores -2562 “2179 >2028. +6.9%
PAT Rs, crores -1356 -1268 +1340 *-5.7%
EBIDTA to Net revenue Ratio “2.9% 2.6% 3.9%  — +50%

*Tax benefit on Investment Allowance was available till 31.03.2017. Penalty under

Common Cause of Rs.330 crores was not considered as allowable expenses.

The financial results of the Company for nine months ending on
31.12.2017 is given below:

Year Turnover Gross Int. Depr- Excep- Profit Tax Net
(Gross) Margin eciation tional (+)/ Profit
(EBI- Abno- Loss (-) wi
DTA) rmal Before Loss(-)
Items Tax ‘After
Gains (PBT) Tax
on (Pat)
Loss

@)

9M 2016-2017 35101 562 1808 1936 -250 -3432. -1370. -2062

OM 2017-2018 41486 2560 1906 2216 5383. -1945 >5वह. -1297

[O.M. 1ए०.1101461)/2018-2॥1., Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

2t


Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
Sales & Marketing

The Committee note that with a view to reshape its marketing strategy
ensuring best value realization for SAIL products, SAIL has’ undertaken
conversion of semis to finished products. For this purpose, a Special
Initiatives Group (SIG) headed by an Executive Director (ED) was formed
in April, 2017 with a view to enhance SAIL’s product basket so as to
provide better value to the customers. The Group has identified areas like
Ready-to-Use Re-bars, Colour Coated Products and Crash Barriers, etc. for
expanding business. Entry into new markets overseas is also being made
with the help of expansion of product basket and improvement in product
quality from the modernised mills. Some of the new markets developed are
Djibouti (Billets), Taiwan (EIR Coil), Philippines (Wire Rod Coils/Billet),
Thailand (Bloom), Bangladesh (CR Coil). SAIL has also introduced several
improvements in service parameters such as Cost & Freight (CER)/Cost
Insurance & Freight (CIF) deliveries instead of only Free on Board (FoB)
supplies, better payment terms, reduction in delivery schedule, faster handling
of enquiries, Third Party Inspection, etc. In addition, a Sales Force
Effectiveness (SFE) Programme is being introduced to improve the
effectiveness of sales and marketing team with a more structured approach
towards customer interface along with a Key Account Manageinent (KAM)
process aimed at bringing more focus on the top customers. The Committee
hope that with these initiatives, SAIL would be able to achieve a better
customer satisfaction and improved market share. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the achievements made as a result of sales and
marketing initiatives undertaken by SAIL.

Action Taken

Special Initiative Group was formed to explore areas of value addition
and to make available ready to use steel. Out of various initiatives identifed
by the group, tendering process has been initiated in Eastern Region for
conversion arrangement for Crash Barriers, In Northern and Eastern Regions
also tendering process is on. Empanelment of parties for Rebar processing
has been completed in Western Region. In other areas process for tendering
is under progress,

Various initiatives taken for exports have resulted in higher exports of
finished steel during the current FY. Share of finished steel in total steel

22


exports has gone up from 27% in Apr-Dec.’16 to 54% in Apr.-Dec.17
with increase in volume of finished steel from 1.45 lakh tonnes in
Apr.-Dec.’16 to 2.46 lakh tonnes in Apr.-Dec.’17. Exports of certain
products such as Structurals and TMT bars have been booked for the first
time. Exports of Cold Rolled Coils have been started from the new mill of
Bokaro Steel Plant. A trial order of Cold Rolled Coils from CRM-II of
Bokaro Steel Plant to Europe is being serviced.

Sales Force Effectiveness Programme (SFE) is an intensive and
structured customer contact program with focus on tapping the high potential
customers, increasing the customer base, developing the database of
customers and knowledge enhancement of the field executives for improving
overall effectiveness of the sales force. Till 31st December, 2017, SFE has
been rolled out in 31 branches of CMO and the process of rolling it in
balance branches is on.

An online IT module in SAP has been developed to capture the SFE
related data including details of customer visits. Various online reports have
been developed to generate the output of data entered in SAP-CRM module
for review/analysis purposes. During Oct.-Dec.’17, 3148 customer visits
were undertaken by the field executives, as part of the SFE initiative. Such.
vigorous customer contact is aimed at adding new customers to SAIL fold
and market products of new mills, in addition to retaining existing customer
base.

Pilot run of Key Account Management (KAM) process for 17
customers spanning Chandigarh, Kolkata and Mumbai has already started.

According to Joint Plant Committee (JPC), during Apr.-Dec.’17, SATL's
market share has increased to 15% from 13.8% in corresponding period
last year,

[O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

Recommendation (S]. No. 8)
Augmenting Rural Consumption of Steel

The Committee have time and again emphasized that there is immense
possibility in rural areas where the per capita consumption of steel is

23



12 kg only. The Committee observe that a significant usage of steel will be
done in the houses constructed under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna —
Gramin (PMAY-G) wherein steel intensive structures will be used to built
the houses. These houses get ready quickly and are cheaper. In its efforts
for enhancing the steel consumption in rural areas, the Committee note that
SAIL has started a new initiative ‘SAIL Steel —- Gaon Ki Ore’ aimed at
boosting steel consumption in the country. The Gaon ki Ore campaign is
designed to familiarize end users at the grassroot level, especially of rural
areas like masons, artisans, individual house builders, gram panchayat
members and eminent local personalities, etc., with innovative usage of
SAIL steel and its applications and advantages in the fields of construction,
household equipment, agriculture, etc. Through engagement activities, the
awareness is spread amongst audience about the advantages of using the
steel in terms of increased durability, life, safety and longevity of any
construction and product. The Committee also note that SAIL’s product
basket has branded products like SAIL TMT, SAIL Jyoti GP/GC sheets,
Salem stainless utensils products in its basket which fit the rural requirements
well and has popular acceptance. A nation-wide campaign and workshops
have been organised at various locations/States which strategically aims to
develop a strong link with consumers through direct engagement. All
workshops of the campaign are designed to familiarize participants about
SAIL’s production process, product range, applications and advantages and
the interactive sessions are conducted in local language for easier connect
with audience. The Committee are happy to note that as a result of these
efforts being made by the company, its Sales have jumped up in the month
of August 2017 over Corresponding Period Last Year (CPLY) selling
91000 tonnes of steel in the month. While acknowledging this achievement
of SAIL, the Committee desire that during these direct interactions and
awareness programmes, fecdback from the participants may be taken so
that specific need based products of the rural consumers may be identified
thereby enabling SAIL to produce and market these products to the rural
consumers accordingly.

Action Taken

SAIL’s new Rural communication exercise~ ‘SAIL Steel - “गांव की ओर'
is directed towards popularizing of steel amongst the rural masses. A total

24


of 61 such programmes have been organised through out the country till
December 2017. The programme has found wide acceptance amongst the
audience as focus is mainly on the usage of steel products and its advantages
in terms of durability, convenience, longevity etc.

Every programme concludes with a question answer session where
the participants are encouraged to raise queries and provide suggestions for
increasing reach of SAIL products. The suggestions provided were generally
with respect to regular availability of smaller diameter of TMT bars, which
is being augmented with expansion of capacity of TMT bars and also
through conversion of Semis into TMT bars of lower diameter. These
programmes have enabled to promote usage of steel in far flung areas and
establish linkage with the potential customers, This communication exercise
is likely to contribute further towards a consistent increase in retail sales
which is being presently witnessed, During April-December 2017, dealer
sales have increased to 6.3 lakh tonnes, registering a growth of 8% over
corresponding period last year.

[O.M. No.11014(1V2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

Recommendation (81. No. 10)
Initiatives by Government

The Committee note that the Government has taken a slew of measures
fo protect the steel industry from the onslaught of cheap imports resulting
in huge slump in domestic steel sector from 2014-15 onwards. The steps
taken by the Government inter alia include increase in basic custom duty,
levying of anti-dumping duty, notification of Minimum Import Price (MIP)
and imposition of provisional safeguard duty on certain items, amending the
Steel and Steel Products (Quality Control) Order, 2012 etc. The Committee
also note that MIP has since been completely phased out after 4th February,
2017 and all the items covered under MIP are now covered under the Anti-
Dumping Duty (ADD) imposed by the Government. While appreciating the
steps taken by the Government to bail out the domestic steel Industry from.
cheap imports of steel products by imposing anti-dumping duty on import
of Wire Rod of Alloy or Non-Alloy Steel, colour-coated sheets, seamless
tubes, pipes and hollow profiles of iron, alloy or non-alloy steel, HR coils,
HR plates, CR products, the Committee recommend that every effort should

25


be made by the Government to check onslaught of cheap imports on
domestic steel sector and a mechanism may be put in place to monitor the
imports of steel and its impact on domestic steel sector from time to time.
In view of the targeted 300 MT production of Steel by 2025, the Committee
also feel that the Ministry of Steel should pursue with the Ministry of
Finance and the Ministry of Commerce to give more incentives to the
domestic steel industry so that more and more capacity addition projects
are commissioned under ‘Make in India’ campaign.

Action Taken

Ministry of Steel in consultation with the industry stakeholders taken
up the issues with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce to
facilitate growth of the strategically important steel industry.

Ministry of Steel had earlier supported trade remedial measures like
Minimum import Price, Anti-Dumping Duty, Safeguard Duty to protect the
domestic industry from unfairly traded imports. Ministry of Steel is also
pursuing Ministry of Finance for rationalization of import duty structure of
critical raw materials for steel industry.

[0.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 11)
Optimizing Cost

The Committee note with satisfaction that SAIL has taken pradent
decisions to bring down the cost of production and improving the profitability
like reduction in consumption level of raw materials, rationalization of
manpower, reduction in administrative expenses, closure of uneconomic
activities, rationalizing productions from relatively inefficient routes of
production, etc. As a result of these measures, the total operating expenses
per tonne has reduced from Rs. 35145 during 2014-15 to Rs. 33795 during
2016-17. In this context, the Committee are also happy to note that SAIL
is the only company amongst JSW Steel and Tata, which has reduced its
cost of production even in ineffective route despite the fact all 3 were

26


affected by increasing coal prices and the other two had increased their
cost of production. The Committee at the same time take cognizance of the
fact that being a Government PSU, SAIL has certain additional obligations
limiting cost of production as compared to other private companies, which
is higher on manpower costs around 18-19% per tonne in SAIL as compared
to say JSW steel where it is 2% only. However, the Committee trust that
SAIL would strive to compete with private sector by compensating the
higher manpower costs by reducing the cost of consumption of raw
materials like coal, iron ore, etc. besides reducing wastage and improving
other performance parameters, The Committee hopeghat SAIL will manage
to show further reduction in its cost of production with every subsequent
quarter.

Action Taken

Some of the measures being taken by SAIL to reduce cost of production
and enhance performance:

+ Maximizing production through modern and energy efficient
new units

+ Maximizing production through the energy and cost effective
Coneast route

+ Phasing out of energy intensive steel making facilities such as
‘Twin Hearth Fumaces and Ingot casting route

+ Increase usage of Coal Dust injection in Blast Furnaces thereby
reducing the BF Coke consumption.

+ Reduction in usage of other raw materials like iron ore, limestone,
dolomite, ferro alloys etc.

+ Utilization of process wastes like recycling of LD slag, recovery
of metallic from slag, recycling of BF flue dust, mill scale etc.

[O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
Financial Performance of MECON Ltd.

‘The Committee note that MECON Ltd. has been incurring higher

27


expenses than its income. During 2016-17, the total income of MECON
Ltd. was Rs, 406.98 crore against expenses of Rs. 495.12 crore. Even
during 2017-18 (HL) (upto September, 2017), MECON Ltd. had generated
an income of Rs, 190,66 crore against expenses of Rs. 228.49 crore.
According to the Ministry/MECON Ltd., the main reasons for incurring
high expenses resulting in losses to the company are fixed employee benefit
expenses by nature, overall economic slow down, projects in hand nearing
completion stage resulting in low contribution towards turnover, metal and
mining sector witnessing overcapacity situation and loan on iron ore mining.
Notwithstanding the reasons explained for the losses to the company, the
Committee feel that'the expenses on the higher side than income is not a
healthy trend for any Company. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that
MECON Ltd. should meticulously analyze the various factors which have
resulted in increasing losses and take stringent and urgent cost cutting
measures. The Committee are happy to note that various measures being
undertaken by them are reducing operating expenses, organizational
restructuring, optimum utilization of manpower, enhancing employee
productivity, improvement in project execution and monitoring methodology
to remove any bottlenecks during its operations. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the success achieved as a result of various initiatives
being taken by the Ministry/MECON Ltd. in this regard,

Action Taken

As a result of the various measures undertaken by the company to
improve its financial performance, the company is able to improve its
“Revenue from Operations’ by approx. 65% in the Ist half of FY 2017-18
over Ist half of FY 2016-17. The ‘Total Income’ of the company has also
increased by approx. 50% in the Ist half of FY 2017-18 over 1st half of
FY 2016-17.

The company is successful in reducing its “Total Expenses by Total
Income Ratio’ by approx. 42% in the Ist half of FY 2017-18 over ist half
of FY 2016-17.

Moreover, the company is able to reduce its ‘Loss Before Tax? by
approx. 52% in the Ist half of FY 2017-18 as compared to the Ist half of
FY 2016-17.

[O.M. No.i1014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

28


CHAPTER Til

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT

-Nil-


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
Capacity Utilization

The Committee observe that against the installed capacity of 12.8 MT
of Crude Steel Production during 2014-15, the actual production was
13.90 MT and thus achieving 107% of capacity utilization, Against the
installed capacity of 16.8 MTPA during 2015-16 and 2016-17, the total
Crude Steel production by SAIL was 14.27 MT and 14.50 MT respectively
showing 85% and 86% of capacity utilization, The Committee also note
that the installed capacity of crude steel by SAIL after modernization and
expansion programme will be increased from 12,8 MTPA to 21.4 MTPA
after operations at all plants come to stream. Although, the Committee are
happy to note that Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgapur Steel Plant had exceeded
in production as far as their installed capacity is concerned, they are
concerned to note the poor performance of Rourkela Steel Plant (RS),
IISCO Steel Plant (ISP), Alloy Steel Plant (ASP), Salem Stecl Plant (SSP)
and Visvesvaraya Iron Steel Plant (VISP) that could achieve only 79%,
56%, 38%, 60% and 33% of their installed capacity of Crude Steel during
2016-17. While appreciating the highest ever Hot Metal, Crude Steel and
Saleable Steel Production by SAIL during 2016-17, the Committee desire
that the Company should take all necessary steps to address all the bottlenecks
which hampers full capacity utilisation of these plants so that production
targets for 2017-18 which are lagging behind during the first half of the
year are fully achieved. The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the reasons for very poor capacity utilization by other plants of SAIL and
the steps taken by the company to ensure that all the plants operate at their
full installed capacity,

30



Action Taken
2016-17

+ Capacity utilization at Bhilai Steel Plant and Durgapur Steel Plant
was 121% and 113% respectively.

+ Capacity utilization at Bokaro Steel Plant was 72% as Hot Metal
and Crude Steel production was restricted at Bokaro Steel Plant
due to high slab stocks.

+ Capacity utilization at Rourkela Steel Plant and TISCO Steel
Plant was lower at 79% and 56% as new facilities were under
stabilization.

+ Capacity utilization at Alloy Steels Plant, Salem Steel Plant and
Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant was lower as production was
curtailed as per market orders.

(O.M. No. 11014 (1)/2018-Parl. dated 19th March, 2018, Ministry
of Steel]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SL. No. 3)

Raw Material
Tron Ore

The Committee note that SAIL has captive mines of iron ore, coal,
Limestone & Dolomite. During the year 2016-17, SAIL mines produced
26.44 MT of iron ore and the entire iron ore requirement of SAIL plants
was 176 through the captive mines of SAIL. After the ongoing modernization
and capacity enhancement of SAIL, Hot Metal production is expected to
touch a level of 23.46 MTPA. At this stage, the requirement of Iron Ore
shall be 39 MTPA and SAIL mines are geared up to meet this expected
demand fully through captive mines. The Committee further observe that
in order to expedite capacity expansion projects, SAIL has obtained extended
mining leases of ML-162 of Barsua-Taldih-Kalata Iron Ore Mine in Odisha,
Nandini Limestone Mine and Hirri Dolomite Mine of Bhilai Steel Plant in
Chhattisgarh, The Committee are, however, concerned to note that forest

31


clearance in respect of Kiriburu Meghaha Tuburu iron ore mines, Gua Ore
Mines and Chiria, Jharkhand, Kalwar-Nagur Iron Ore Mines Project under
Bokaro Steel Plant are pending with the Ministry of Environment, Forest
& Climate Change. The Committee also note with concern about
non-development of Kalwar and Rowghat iron ore mines in Chhattisgarh
for which Stage-II forest clearance was granted way back in August,
2009. In line with expected Hot Metal production target of 23.46 MTPA for
which the requirement of Iron Ore is 39 MTP4, the Committee recommend
that Ministry of Steel/SAIL should vigorously pursue with Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and impress upon them to grant
forest clearance for the projects under reference without further delay. The
Committee would like to be apptised of the steps taken by the Ministry in
this regard,

Action Taken
3. Delay in grant of Stage-II forest clearance (FC)

Grant of Stage-II Forest Clearance’s (FC) for Gua, Kiriburu-
Meghahatuburu and Chiria inines of SAIL in Saranda forest in Jharkhand
is pending at Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEFCC)
from 30.07.2015, 13.07.2015 & 22.09.2014, respectively (for about two
years).

The matter of Stage-IT FC for Gua which is required is regularly
being monitored in Project Monitoring Group (PMG) of PMO. During
review meeting of PMG of PMO on 15.12.2017, MoEFCC informed that
final decision of Competent Authority on Mining Plan for Sustainable Mining
(MPSM) for Saranda Forest is still awaited,

A meeting was held with DGF&SS, MoEFCC on 05.10.2017, wherein
it transpired that now Zone-I & Zone-il, as proposed in MPSM has been
merged and Stage-II FC for the Duargaiburu lease of Gua and South-
Central Block of Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu mines will be granted shortly.

Ministry of Steel is actively pursuing the matter with MoEFCC, The
details of the efforts made by Ministry of Steel in this regard in recent time
are appended below:

+ Hon’ble Steel Minister discussed the matter of delay in grant of
Stage-II FC with Minister MoEFCC during the meeting held on
08.06.2016 and 21.02.2017,

32


+ To expedite pending Stage-II FC in Saranda Forest in Jharkhand
including Chiria leases, Ministry of Steel vide letter
did. 29.09.2016 submitted its comments on Draft Mining Plan
for Sustainable Mining (MPSM) of MoEFCC and requested that
imineralised area of Ankua Forest Block in which Chiria mine is
located should be excluded from no mining zone.

+ To expedite the proposals of grant of pending Stage-II FC for
SAIL Mines in Jharkhand, Secretary, Ministry of Steel held a
meeting with Secretary, MoEFCC on 02.12.2016.

+ Secretary Steel vide letter did. 07.02.2017 requested Secretary
MOoEFECC to expedite pending Stage-I1 FC and copy of the letter
was also forwarded to Principal Secretary to PMO.

« The member of consultative committee, Ministry of Steel &
Mines, & Member of Parliament, Sri Laxman Giluwa vide letter
dated 02.02.2017 & 21.06.2017 requested Hon’ble Minister,
MoEFCC to expedite grant of pending forest clearance for SATL
mines in Saranda forest.

+ The matter of delay in grant of Stage-IT FC was also discussed
during Consultative Committee of Ministry of Steel meeting held
‘on 10.06.2017 at Dharamshala.

+ During review by PMG of PMO on 25.08.2017 and 15.12.2017,
MoEEFCC informed that final decision of Competent Authority
on MPSM for Saranda Forest is still awaited.

+ A workshop on “Co-Existence of Mining Industries & Forest-
Challenges & Way Forward” was organised by SAIL at Kolkata
on 23.09.17. During the workshop, issues related to grant of
Stage-II FC’s for Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu, Gua & Chirla were
apprised to DGF&SS, MoEF&CC, Gol.

4, Non development of Rowghat and Kalwar-Nagur iron ore mines
of Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP)

2.1 Rowghat tron Ore Mine

Rowghat mine in the past could not be developed, even though
Stage-II FC was granted by MoEFCC in August, 2009, on account

33


2.2

of law and order issue in the area. Development activities in the area
could resume after deployment of Central Security Forces. Necessary
infrastructure for setting up of security barracks for the forces for
Providing security to Rowghat Mining Project & Dalli-Rajhara-Rowghat
Rail link project is being provided by SAIL with an investment of
about Rs. 417 crore.

For development of 14 MTPA mine at Rowghat, SAIL has appointed
an MDO. In this regard, the Mining Service Agreement (MSA) for a

period of 30 years including 5 years of construction from the effective
date of contract was signed with MDO on 25.09.2017.

Kaiwar-Nagur Iron Ore Mine

Stage-Il FC for diversion of 17 ha of forest land out of 938.059 ha
of Kalwar-Nagur lease was granted by MoEFCC on 07.01.2008. Mine
in the past could not be developed on account of delay in grant of
environment clearance.

For development of 1 MTPA iron ore mine at Kalwar-Nagur lease,

Chhattisgarh, the EC proposal was considered by Expert Appraisal Committee
(EAC) of MoEFCC on 25.04.2016 wherein EAC has recommended for
grant of EC for the limited forest land of 17 ha out of 938.059 ha in
Kalwar-Nagur lease. But instead of grant of EC, MoEFCC is now insisting
that unless SAIL deposits NPV for entire forest land in the mining lease or
surrenders the excess forest land, EC for the project will not be issued.

34

+ In the matter of payment of Net Present Value (NPV) for entire
forest land in a lease by a Govt. Company, Secretary Steel vide
letter dated 21.03.2016 had sought clarification from MoEFCC
and the same are still awaited.

* Further, SAIL has challenged the MoEFCC guideline dtd.
01.04.2015 in Jharkhand High Court which provides payment
of NPV for entire forest land ina mining lease. Hon’ble Jharkhand
High Court had stayed the notices of Jharkhand State Govt.
through which demand for payment of NPV for entire forest
land was raised. Matter is still pending.

+ Farther, vide letter dated 03.05.2017, CCE, Kanker, Chhattisgarh
asked SAIL to deposit NPV of Rs. 96.28 crore for the remaining


forest land in Kalwar-Nagur Icase. SAIL vide letter dated
24.06.2017, informed Additional PCCE, Chhattisgarh that as of
now SAIL has not applied for diversion of remaining forest land
in Kalwar-Nagur lease, therefore, payment of NPV under
section 201) of FC Act at this juncture is not justifiable.

+ Recently on 18.12.2017, Joint Secretary, MoEFCC convened a
meeting and advised SAIL to deposit the NPV of the entire
forest land in the lease amounting to Rs. 96 crore else the
Chhattisgarh State Govt. will initiate the process for cancellation
of mining lease notwithstanding the fact that the lease has already
been extended by the State Government on 14.03.2016 till
31.03.2025.

- SAIL has submitted that since the matter regarding payment of
NPV for entire forest land in a mining lease is under adjudication,
therefore EC for Kalwar-Nagur lease be granted so that SAIL
can start development of mine to meet the increased requirement
of iron ore post-modernisation. Grant of EC is awaited.

[O.M. No. 11014(1)/2018-Parl. dated 19th March, 2018,
Ministry of Steel]

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (SI. No. 14)
Securing Jobs on Nomination basis

The Committee are happy to note that MECON Ltd. has pipeline
projects worth about Rs. 18,000 crore (executed and in hand) till date.
Several prestigious gas pipeline projects (such as the Bawana-Nangal
Pipeline,) were successfully completed by MECON for M/s Gas Authority
of India Lid. (GAIL). GAIL has recently awarded Engineering & Project
Management Consultancy (EPMC) services to MECON Ltd. for the
Pradhanmantri Uxja Ganga Pipeline Project (excluding the Debhi - Haldia
segment in Eastern Region of the Country). MECON’s scope of work
involves a pipeline length of 1813 km. (approx.) (from Phulpur to Dobhi

35


and Bokaro to Dhamra), entailing an Investment of about Rs. 7,867 crore
MECON’s fee for the job is about Rs. 108.2 crore (excluding GST and site
related expenses). MECON Ltd. has also been awarded EPMC services by
M/s. GAIL for developing the City Gas Distribution (CGD) networks in
6 cities along the Urja Ganga (viz, Varanasi, Bhubaneswar, Cuttack, Patna,
Ranchi & Jamshedpur). On similar lines MECON Ltd. has sought
Government support for securing jobs on nomination basis from PSUs
within Ministry of Steel such as SAIL, RINL, NMDC Lid., MOIL, KIOCL,
MSTC ete. in line with those being secured from GAIL. The Committce
desire that the Ministry of Steel should consider adequate support sought
by MECON for securing jobs from Steel PSUs on nomination basis only
at compatible prices so that MECON Ltd. could regain its foothold in the
business and therefore, urge the Ministry of Steel to do the needful in the
matter. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.

Action Taken
The matter is under consideration of this Ministry.

[O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl, Dated 19th March, 2018,
Ministry of Steel]

Comments of the Committee

(Please see para 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)


CHAPTER - ¥

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
Coal

According to Ministry of Steel, due to limited indigenous availability
of low ash coking coal in the country, SAIL imports 80-85% of low ash
coking coal from Australia, USA and New Zealand etc, and blends it with
coking coal produced from captive mines of SAIL and from Bharat Coking
Coal Ltd. (BCCL)/Coal India Ltd. (CIL) sources. With expected
23.46 MTPA production of Hot Metal, the requirement of coking coal by
SATL will be 2! MT against 0.54 MT colcing coal provided from indigenous
sources during 2016-17 and 4 MT of coking coal is likely to be made
available from captive and BCCL/CIL sources, the Committee feel that
coking coal is one of the important raw material for cost optimization in
production of Steel and in the absence of adequate quantities of coking
coal, it is inyperative that improved methodology be developed for blending
of indigenous and imported coal. Further, the supply chain of imported and
indigenous coal be strengthened and made efficient. The Committee also
desire that SAIL should enter into long term agreement/joint ventures with
छा, for acquisition of coking coal blocks abroad to ensure availability of
adequate quantity of coking coal as per their requirement so that production
of SAIL is not affected for want of supply of adequate quantity of coal.
In this context, the Committee would also like to be apprised of the
timeframe by which 3.5 MT washery at Tasra and another to wash coal
produced from Parbatapur coal block will be sct up by SATL.

Action Taken

Research & Development Centre for Iron & Steel, Stee] Authority of
India Limited (SAIL) is pursuing a R&D project viz. “Development of
Automation System for Optimum Coal Blending at Coal Handling Plant of
Coke Oven Batteries at Bokaro Steel Plant”. The aim of the project is to

37


develop indigenously a blending model to control the ash variations for
improving the Blast Furnace productivity and hence saving cost. The project
was initiated during 2015-16 and is likely to be completed in 2018-19,

Steel Authority of India Limited

SAIL has been optimizing the coking coal blend considering the
availability, quality & cost of coking coal from different indigenous and
imported sources. Recently, M/s BCG has developed a coking coal blend
optimizer tool for SAIL. The coal blend optimizer tool is being fine tuned
in consultation with BCG so as to derive maximum benefits from the tool.

Out of total coking coal requirement of SAIL plants, indigenous coking
coal availability is assessed by SAIL in consultation with CIL subsidiaries.
The balance requirement of coking coal is met through imports. As per
prevailing practice, coking coal supply from CIL subsidiaries to SAIL. is
through annual MoUs, wherein inter alia price of coal is mutually agreed.

The Government of India vide its letter dated 11th December, 2007
approved the formation of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for securing
metallurgical coal and thermal coal assets overseas. The PSUs viz, SAIL,
CiL, RINL, NMDC and NTPC were its promoters with equity participation
of 2:2:1:1:1. However, CIL vide its letter dated £8th March, 2016 informed
ICVL that CIL Board in its 319th Board meeting held on 12th August, 2015
had decided to opt out ICVL and intimated the same to Ministry of Coal.

Reply concerning Tasra and Parbatpur Coal Washery
1, Setting up of Tasra coal washery

For development of 4 MTPA coking coal mines at Tasra coal block
including setting up of 3.5 MIPA throughput capacity coal washery,
etc. a Coal Mining Services Agreement (CMSA) was signed between
M/s. SAIL and M/s. Lanco Infra Tech Ltd. (LITL) on 23.09.2013
with validity for a period of 28 years including 2 years of Construction
Period, Commercial production date as per this CMSA was envisaged
as 23.09.2015 and washery to be established and washed coal was to
be supplied from 3rd year onwards i.e. from 23.09.2018.

In the interim, the “Right to Fair Compensation & Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Resettlement & Rehabilitation Act, 2013” [LARR
Act] was enacted by the Parliament and notified in January 2014,

38


This development has impacted the timelines for land acquisition which
leads to amendment in some of the clauses of the CMSA governing
the Commencement of Commerciat Production Date and Period of
Contract.

The revised Commercial Production Date and Period of Contract
would be incorporated in the CMSA after approval of SAIL Board.

2. Setting up of Parbatpur coal washery

At Parbatpur Coal block there is a non-operating coal washery
(2.5 MTPA) which was established by the prior allottee and was
commissioned in 2011. Washery operations stopped after de-allocation
of the block. Although it is situated within the block area, the washery
was not included in asset transferred list when coal block was allocated
to SAIL. As per conditions of Environmental Clearance (EC) transferred
to SAIL, without operation of Coal washery mining operation can not
be started. Any decision regarding take over and operation of washery
is dependent on issue of grant of Mining Lease. Mining lease issue is
undecided because of overlap of ONGC Petroleum Mining Lease
(CBM) & Parbatpur Coal block.

[O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl. Dated 19th March, 2018,
Ministry of Steel]

Recommendation (SL. Na. 9)
Enhancing Steel Consumption

The Committee note that although the per capita steel consumption
has increased from 60 kg. to 65 kg. during the last 2 years, yet it is quite
far from the world average of 215 kg. per capita. There is a lot of scope
for consumption in villages. A significant usage of steel as already stated
is in the houses constructed under PMAY-G, The other significant areas for
consumption of steel are infrastructure, capital goods, automobile, Railways,
etc., foundation of ports and harbours, bridges, crash barriers. Besides,
there is adequate scope for consumption in drinking water pipes as the
usage of steel would reduce wastage due to water loss, non-carcinogenic
and unbreakable. As regards the steps taken by SAIL in finding newer
applications for the steel and ensuring that steel products are not gradually
replaced by aluminium or other composite materials, the Committce observe
that recent efforts of SATL in this direction have led to usage of steel for

39


agricultural implements (tractor disc, tilling equipment ete.), silos for grain
storage, high strength plates for AIM chest, soft iron plates for neutrino
detector for India Based Neutrino observatory, scismic resistant TMT rebars
(Fe5008) for construction sector, High Strength F orming Quality steels for
Auto segment and steels for Indian Navy and defence which include DMR
249A/B for INS Vikrant and SAILARM for testing of ammunition, etc.
According to Ministry of Steel, there is an increasing trend of use of
Aluminium and other composites material in auto, white goods & architectural
applications. World-wide initiatives from steel sector focuses on coated,
corrosion resistant and high strength steels as a counter measure. The
Committee further observe that in line with contemporary approach, SAIL
has recently commissioned a new state- of-the-art Cold Rolling Mill Complex
at BSL, Bokaro. High strength steels and coated products (both galvanized
& galvannealed) will constitute major part of the product-mix from this
complex which will cater to Auto and White goods segments, SAIL has
also entered into a joint venture with Arcelor Mittal for the production of
high strength steel (both coated and un-coated) for Auto segment. In view
of the fact that steel is totally recyclable and cost effective and competitive
material as compared to other alternative material like aluminium, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to identify new steel products
of mass consumption to achieve higher target of steel usage per capita in
the country, The Committee also note that the production target of 300 MT
of Steel by 2025 can not be achieved unless the consumption level of steel
is augmented significantly to the level of 170 kg. to 180 kg. as argued by
the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Steel in coordination and collaboration with Ministries of Defence, Railways,
Road Transport and Highways, Housing and Urban Affairs, Shipping, Drinking
Waiter and Sanitation etc. should vigorously identify the areas where stecl
can be consumed, which in-turn can be produced and marketed by SAIL
as per their specific needs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Ministry/SAIL and progress made therein.

Action Taken

Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) along with Institute for Steel
Development And Growth (INSDAG) and Hindustan Steelworks
Construction Limited (HSCL) have been interacting with practicing
consultants to develop cost comparison on Life Cycle Cost Analysis (LCCA)

40


basis and comparative benefits of steci structures vis-a-vis concrete
structures. Efforts are on to develop standardized design of steel intensive
building & bridges which will be used to promote adoption of steel intensive
structures. In order to promote fow cost houses in rural areas, presentations
along with prototype designs have been made to key officials of Rural
Development Ministries of various States. One presentation was also made
to working level officials at CPWD Headquarters on steel usage and product
solutions from new mills of SAIL.

Apart from the steps taken by individual CPSEs under its aegis, the
Ministry of Steel is also taking up with steel consuming Ministries for
taking measures to increase stec! consumption,

A meeting was held jointly by Secretary, Ministry of Steel and Secretary,
Ministry of Shipping regarding use of steel intensive structures in future
development of Ports and Inland Waterways on 24.11.2017 which was
attended by representatives of major steel producers in public and private
sectors and Consulting Engineers.

Indian Stainless Steel Development Association, in association with
Ministry of Steel, organized a seminar on “Use of Stainless Steel for Water
Service Pipeline, Treatment and Storge’. A book on ‘Stainless Steel for
Water Service Pipeline, Treatment and Storage 20177, containing technical
information and case studies, was released during the Seminar which was
forwarded to Municipal Commissioners of some cities.

Institute for Stee! Development And Growth (INSDAG), 8 non-profit
making member-based organization under the aegis of Ministry of Steel,
has developed a low cost, strong and durable design and construction
methodology for houses for the rural poor. Model Houses have been
constructed at some locations. One such model house has been constructed
within the campus of National Institute of Rural Development & Panchayati
Raj in Hyderabad to give it a wide publicity for adoption by States.

[O.M. No, 11014(1)/2018-Parl, Dated 19th March, 2018,
Ministry of Steel]

Recommendation (Si. No. 13)
Turnaround Plans

The Committee also note that MECON Ltd. has shown a very good
performance in business procurement during the last three years. From an

4


order booking of Rs. 593.40 crore in 2014-15, MECON Ltd. booked
orders worth Rs. 683.40 crore in 2015-16 and Rs. 1418.65 crore during
2016-17, which is an all time high improvement and achievement of the
company. The Committee also note that a Strategic Growth Plan of MECON
Ltd. for next five years ie. upto FY 2021-22 is reported to be under
finalization, The growth agenda targets three to four fold enhancement in
revenues by 2021-22, with sustained profitability. The strategic plan envisages
leveraging the core strength in metals sector and to harness business
opportunities in diversified sectors such as energy (oil & gas and power
generation, transmission & distribution) and infrastructure (stress on steel
intensive structures) to provide hedge against the cyclic risks in the metals
business. The plan document also formulates business strategy for MECON
Ltd. to align with Government policies, priorities and initiatives, including
National Steel Policy-2017. The Committee would like that the proposed
growth plan may be finalized as early as possible. The Committee trust that
MECON Ltd. would make all earnest efforts and strive on this growth plan
besides arresting the downturn in its financial performance and retain its
market position as a premier consultancy company.

Action Taken

The Strategic Growth Plan of MECON Ltd. for next five years ie.
upto FY 2021-22, is under advanced stage of finalization. MECON is
making all earnest efforts and strive on this Growth Plan, besides, arresting
the downturn in its financial performance and retain its market position as
a premier consultancy company.

Major efforts being undertaken by the company are as follows:

(i) With periodic reviews, progress of major projects is being
monitored very closely by the top management. Pro-active
initiatives are taken for quick resolution of key issues with the
client. Further, critical impediments/issves, affecting the progress
of the projects, are being escalated to the appropriate levels and
in some cases even to Ministry level.

Gi) Task force teams of senior officials, headed by Executive
Directors, have been formed, which are continuously pursuing
for early resolution/settlement of extra claims related issues,

42


both for EPC & consultancy assignments with major clients like
SAIL, NMDC, RINL ete.

(ii) Concerted marketing efforts ave being put to procure more &
more jobs in all sectors of relevance to the Company, coupled
with focus on, putting the best efforts to get significant turnover
contribution from new jobs in FY 2017-18.

[O.M. No.11014(1)/2018-Parl, Dated 19th March, 2018,
Ministry of Steel]

New Debut; RAKESH SINGH,
25 July, 2018 Chairperson,
03 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel.



ANNEXURE I

MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL (2017-18) HELD ON 25 JULY, 2018 IN HON’BLE
CHAIRPERSON’S CHAMBER, ROOM NO. ‘210’, B-BLOCK, PHA

Senay # ७ N

se

12,
13.
i4,

EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI

The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT

Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
Lok Sabhe

Shri Chandulal Sahu

Smt. Jyoti Dhurve

Dr. Banshilal Mahato

Shri Godam Nagesh

Shri Ajay Nishad

Smt. Riti Pathak

Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan

Shri Ravindra Kumar Ray

. Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’
11,

Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
Rajya Sabha
Shri Samir Oraon
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha
Shri Prabhaker Reddy Vemireddy

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi जप Joint Secretary
2... Shri Ajay Kumar Garg गो Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director


2.

At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting

of the Committee.

3.

The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following

Draft Reports on:

@
तो)

(iii)

(to)
(v)
4,

tet ik कक

Action Taken by the Government on the Observations!
recommendations contained in their Thirty-Seventh Report on
“Physical and Financial Performance of SATL and MECON Ltd.”
pertaining to the Ministry of Steel;

soe soir sk
कक soko ak
soe ek sok

The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/

modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise
the Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

¥*# Do not pertain 10 this Report.


ANNEXURE IT

(Vide Para IV of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE

IL.

TIE.

lV.

46

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL

Total No. of Recommendations made:

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:

(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos.: 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11
and 12)

Percentage of total

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:

(vide Recommendation at Si. No.: Nil)
Percentage of total

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:

(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos.: 2, 3 and 14)
Percentage of total

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:

(vide Recommendation at SI. Nos.: 4, 9 and 13)

Percentage of total

14

57%

00

03

21.50%

05
21.50%


“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.

The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above."