26 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2016-2017) 
SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
on  "Demands For Grants (2016-17)" 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH   REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938(Saka) 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2016-2017) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  
on "Demands For Grants (2016-17)" 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  14.12.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   14.12.2016 
 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2016/Agrahayana 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (ii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (iv) 
 
  
CHAPTER I Report   ………………………………………………………………………………………. 1 
 
   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
 
12 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
 
 
34 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited………………………………..  
 
38 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Description of  Request for Support from the Committee on 
Various Issues………………..……………………………………………. 
 
 
39 
II. Statement regarding  List of Major Jobs Secured by Mecon 
during 2015-16…………………………………………………………………… 
       
       45 
 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing C ommittee on Coal and 
Steel (2016-17) held on 29.11.2016………………………………………… 
 
 
       
       48 
 
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha)…………………………………………….………................................ 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL (2016-17) 
             
   Shri Rakesh Singh- Chairperson  
 
Name of the Member 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2.      Shri A Arunmozhithevan 
3.      Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.      Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
5.      Shri Nagesh Godam 
6.      Shri Shailesh Kumar 
7.      Dr. Banshilal Mahato 
8.      Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
9.     Shri Ajay Nishad 
10.      Shrimati Riti Pathak  
11.      Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan 
12.      Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
13.      Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
14.      Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
15.      Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16.      Shri Janardan Singh "Sigriwal" 
17.      Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18.      Shri Rama Kishore Singh   
19.      Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
20.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
21.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
 Sabha 
22.      Shri  
23.       
24.       
25.      Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
26.       
27.       
28.       
29.      
30.      
31.      
 
 
 (ii) 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri U.B.S. Negi               -   Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri Ajay Kumar Garg      -    Director  
3.    Shri Arvind Sharma        -   Additional Director  
4.    Smt. Vandana P. Guleria    -  Executive Officer   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the R eport on their behalf, present 
this Twenty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants (2016-17)" pertaining to the Ministry of 
Steel.  
 
2.  The Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 03.05.2016. 
Replies of the Government to all the observations/recommen dations 
contained in the Report were received on 16.09.2016.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted 
this Report at their sitting held on 29.11.2016.   
 
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendation contained in the Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-IV.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Chapter-I  of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            RAKESH SINGH 
      29 November, 2016                                                             Chairperson 
      8 Agrahayana, 1938(Saka)       Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
(iv) 

7 
 
  REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel on Deman ds for Grants (2016-17) relating to the Ministry of Steel 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.05.2016. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replie s have been received from the Ministry of  
Steel in respect of all the 16 observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report on 16.09.2016. These have been categorised as follows:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
   
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 
            Total :  13 
            Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
Serial No. 7, 8 and 9 
             Total : 03 
            Chapter-III 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respec t of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Serial  No. Nil         
      Total : 00 
 Chapter-IV 
            
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  
Serial No. Nil 
              Total : 00 
            Chapter-V 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given  to 
implementation of the  Observations/Recommendations accepted by 

8 
 
the Government.  In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to  
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, 
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action 
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government 
on some of their observations/recommendations made in the Twentieth 
Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
IMPORTANT POLICY INITIATIVES  
 
5. The Committee note d that several measures ha d been taken by the 
Government to control the surge in imports to protect the domestic steel 
industry. These measures include hiking of import duty, imposition of 
provisional safeguard duty on certai n items, imposition of antidumping duty, 
invoking the Steel and Steel products (Quality Contr ol Order) etc. The 
Committee had also been apprised that the Government had  constituted a 
Review Committee with members from Ministries of Finance, Revenue, 
Commerce and Steel to keep a constant vigil and monitor the movement of 
trade and prices of steel. According t o the Ministry of Steel, there wa s a 
proposal for corporate debt restructuring whereby the loans given to steel 
companies could be converted into longer  term loans with low rate s of 
interest. The Committee had  also been given to understand that as per the 
demand of Steel Ministry certain other measures like review of 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with Ja pan & Korea 
was required as th is agreement has resulted in huge jump in imports from 
these countries. The Ministry of Steel ha d also apprised the Committee that 
there had been ongoing demand from the steel industry for inclusion of iron 
ore in freight class (145) as is for coal, limest one, dolomite and manganese 
ore as against the freight class (165) for steel as on date. If  this demand of 
steel industry wa s accepted by Railways,  the benefit that would accrue wa s 

9 
 
13.8 % less freight charge in transportation of iron ore by Railways. The 
Committee note d that the matter ha d been taken up with Ministry of 
Railways at Railway Board level on 24th August, 2015, 16th January, 2016 
and 24th February, 2016. While appreciating the measures taken by the 
Government to bail out the beleaguered steel i ndustry reeling under an 
unprecedented crisis, the Committee recommend ed that the matter 
regarding review of CEPA with Japan and Korea should be taken at the 
highest level to check rising imports from these countries. The Committee 
also recommended that the Ministry of Railways should be impressed upon to 
include iron ore in same freight class as coal and if felt necessary the matter 
may be taken up with the Ministry at the highest level to advocate their case 
for the same. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the present 
status on the proposal for corporate debt restructuring whereby the loans 
given to steel companies can move towards longer term loans with low rates 
of interest.  
 
6. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as under:-  
 
"Ministry of Steel has taken up with the Railways for rationalisation of 
iron ore freight charges by reclassification of freight class for steel and 
iron ore and reduction of period of busy season surcharge. 
 
Ministry of Steel has taken up the m atter regarding review of CEPA 
with Japan and Korea at various levels including at the level of the 
then Minister of Steel with Ministry of Commerce and Industry with a 
view to check rising imports from these countries.  Apart from this 
following Policy initiative have been taken so far- 
 
i. The Government has notified safeguard duty of 20% in March 2016 
on hot-rolled flat products of non-alloy and other alloy steel, in coils 
of width of 600 mm or more. 
ii. In February 2016, the Government has notified Minimum Imp ort 
Price (MIP) on 173 steel products in order to provide a level playing 
field to domestic producers against the injury caused as evident 
from the decline in margins of the producers. 
iii. The Government has increased the peak rate of basic customs duty 
on steel to 15%.  The effective rate has also been increased by 5%, 
once by 2.5% in June 15 and again by another 2.5% in August 15, 
current rates being in the range of 10% - 12.5%. 

10 
 
iv. Anti-dumping duty on certain grades of stainless steel has been 
imposed in June as well as in December 2015.  
v. Government has also amended the Steel & Steel Products (Quality 
Control) Order, 2012, in December 2015 to ensure that only quality 
steel is produced/ imported in India.   
vi. For ensuring raw material availability, the Government h ad issued 
MMDR Amendment Act, 2015 & rules there under which provides for 
allocation of iron ore to „specified end use‟. As per the provisions of 
the Act, State governments have also to initiate and expedite the 
process of auction to maintain the sufficien t availability of iron ore 
at cheaper prices for the steel sector. 
vii. For reducing the stress in the steel sector, RBI has extended 5:25 
scheme in July 2015, whereby longer amortization period for loans 
to projects in infrastructure and core industries sector s, say 25 
years, based on the economic life or concession period of the 
project, with periodic re-financing, say every 5 years, is allowed. 
 
In respect of corporate debt, it is stated that RBI have issued detailed 
guidelines on restructuring for facilitati ng timely and transparent 
mechanism for restructuring of debts of viable entities affected by 
internal or external factors. The restructuring framework is aimed at 
preserving the value for viable entities that are affected by certain 
internal and external factors and minimize the losses to the creditors 
and other stakeholders through an orderly and coordinated 
restructuring programme. These guidelines are neutral to sectors and 
forums through which restructuring has been approved.  
 
RBI has placed no restri ction on the duration of repayment period or 
moratorium periods of loans. Banks are free to decide the repayment 
schedule of their loan accounts, with or without a moratorium, as per 
their Board approved policies, commercial viability and the broad 
guidelines of RBI.  Companies can avail Corporate Debt Restructuring 
(CDR). In addition, RBI has issued guidelines for Strategic Debt 
Restructuring and Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed 
Assets(s4A), which can be availed by Steel Industry. Banks are f ree to 
align the repayment schedule as per the economic life of the project 
once during its life time, without treating the account as restructured."  
 
7. While taking note of the various measures being taken by the 
Government to control surge in imports to protect the domestic steel 
industry, t he Committee in their original Report , had recommended 
that the matter regarding review of Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with Japan and Korea be taken at the 
highest level to che ck rising import s from these countries.  In 
addition, to curb the cost of production, the Committee had 
recommended for inclusion of iron ore in the same freight class as 
coal to reduce the production cost besides implementation of the 

11 
 
proposal for corporate debt restruct uring.  In this regard, the 
Committee note with satisfaction that the matter of review of CEPA 
with Japan and Korea up has been taken with Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry.  Also, for reduction of transportation cost, the Ministry 
has stated that the matt er has been taken up with the Railways for 
rationalization of iron ore freight charges by reclassification of freight 
class for steel and iron ore .  In respect of corporate  debt 
restructuring, the Committee note that RBI has issued detailed  
guidelines on restructuring of debts of viable entities affected by 
internal or external factors for mini mizing the losses to the creditors 
and other stakeholders in addition to the guidelines for Strategic Debt 
Restructuring and Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of st ressed 
assets which can be availed by the steel industry.  The Committee 
would, therefore, like to be apprised of t he positive impact of such 
measures undertaken by the Ministry in protecting the domestic steel 
industry from distress.   
 
Recommendation  No.4 
 
REDUCTION IN PRODUCTION OF STEEL 
 
8. The Committee further desired that all out efforts be made in bringing 
down the cost of production. Such steps may include development of coastal 
shipping and riverine shipping and tailor made packages with Railways etc. to 
cut down the transportation costs, giving boost to National Skill Development 
Campaign for improving labour productivity, etc. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the specific measures taken in this regard. 
 
9. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as under:-  
 
"Ministry of Steel has taken up with the Railways for rationalisation of 
iron ore freight charges by reclassification of freight class for steel and 
iron ore and reduction of period of busy season surcharge. 
 
Consultations are on with the Ministry of Shipping for transportation of 
raw material from the east -coast to the steel plants in west -coast and 
the finished steel products from the steel plants to the markets all 
across the country using modal mix transportat ion of rail -coastal 
transportation. 

12 
 
 
Ramp-up of production from SAIL's new units under modernization and 
expansion plan is not just increasing production and leading to better 
quality, but has also  resulted  in reducing cost of production. Higher 
production from the new efficient units and rationalizing production 
from cost intensive routes have manifested in the form of a reduction 
in total expenditure per ton of saleable steel  by over 10% 
(approximately Rs. 4000 per ton) in Q4 2015 -16 compared to Q1 of 
2015-16 and the same trend continues. 
 
SAIL has initiated various skill development initiatives for the 
employees working in the projects in the Modernization and Expansion 
area and also in the existing areas for manning critical equipments.   
This includes imparting training to improve the skills of the employees 
in the high tech engineering areas such as hydraulic, pneumatic, PLC, 
automation, drivers, etc. employees are also given training on the 
Project package at the centralized Training Institute at MTI,  Ranchi on 
regular basis.  
 
SAIL has also undertaken initiatives to support the Industrial Training 
Institutes (ITI) at various locations including Bolani, Barsua, 
Manoharpur, and Gua by Raw Materials Division and also by Bokaro 
Steel Plant. This should em power the local youth for competing in the 
present market scenario.  
 
In its efforts to contribute nationally to the Skill Development 
initiative, SAIL has signed a MoU with National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC) to support skill development initiat ives in the 
vicinity of steel plant locations. SAIL is supporting National Skill 
Development Corp. campaigning for improving skill & productivity level 
of young employable manpower (youth manpower) by setting up Skill 
Development Centers in the vicinity of  SAIL plant locations and 
providing its existing infrastructure to NSDC. To start with, SAIL has 
identified four locations viz. Bhilai, Bokaro, Durgapur and Rourkela for 
these Skill Development Centers (SDCs). Under this MoU SAIL will 
support NSDC for skil ling and certification to off - roll manpower, on - 
roll manpower and local youth for future employability and income 
generation.  These Skill Development Centers would be run by NSDC 
through its affiliated training providers (TP) on self -sustenance basis. 
This shall result in higher skill level and higher productivity of the 
target group and labour in general. 
 
Measures taken by RINL for reduction in costs and to improve 
profitability include the following: 
 
 Usage of different Coals in the Coal Blend is opti mized continuously to 
achieve overall reduction in the cost. Three new coal brands, from 
Mozambique, Canada and Indonesia were introduced in the Coal Blend, 
enhancing the supplier base.   Procurement of Coal from Indonesia has 
given the benefit of lower freight also.  

13 
 
 In order to reduce the outgo on account of ocean freight, cape size 
vessels with a carrying capacity of about 1.5 lakh tonne are being 
nominated for coal shipments.  During the year 2015 -16, around 62% 
of coal was imported through Cape Size vessels.  
 120 MW BF gas based Power Plant, was commissioned in 2015 -16 
enabling reduction in power generation cost as also quantum of power 
import.  With this, the power generation capacity based on utilization 
of waste energy has increased.   
 Product Mix an d Distribution has been changed from time to time, in 
line with the market demand and to maximize the realizations.  Branch 
Sales Office has been opened in Vijayawada for capitalizing on the 
demand for Capital Region Development planned by Govt. of AP. 
 The percentage of Value Added Steel under Expansion units ramped up 
from a level of 30% in 2014-15 to 64% in 2015-16.   
 Thrust on cost reduction measures to restrict expenditure has been 
further intensified in all areas which have larger potential of cost 
reduction.  
 
As a part of skill India initiatives RINL signed a MoU with National Skill 
Development Corporation.  RINL established a Skill Development 
Centre for organizing Skill Trainings through Iron and Steel Sector Skill 
Council.  Training programmes orga nized for employees / trainees are 
steel sector specific and designed to enhance the skill and knowledge 
of work force to achieve higher productivity and production." 
 
 
10. During the examination of Demands for Grants (201 6-17), the 
Committee had inter-alia stressed on the need f or bringing down the 
cost of production of steel by implementation of various  steps which 
may include development of coastal shipping and riverine shipping 
and tailor made packages with Railways etc. to cut down the 
transportation c osts besides giving boost to National Skill 
Development Campaign for improving the labour productivity . From 
the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry, the Committ ee note with 
satisfaction that for  reducing transportation costs, the Ministry of 
Steel has init iated consultations with the Ministry of Shipping for 
transportation of raw material from east -west to the Steel plants in 
the west coast and using modal mix transportation comprising rail -
coastal transportation.  Besides this, the ramp up of production fr om 
SAIL's new units have also led to cost reduction of steel production.  
As regards improving  the labour productivity under N ational Skill 
Development Programme, the Committee are happy to note that both 

14 
 
SAIL and RINL have signed MoUs with National Skill Development 
Corporation (NSDC) to support skill development initiatives.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the imp act of such initiatives 
in achieving a lower cost of steel production, in a quantified manner.  
 
Recommendation No.12 
MECON Ltd.  
 
The Committee note d that MECON Ltd.'s mission wa s to provide 
technical consultancy -design and engineering, design and supply of plant, 
equipment and systems, implementation of new industrial ventures from 
concept to commissioning. The Committee observe d that during 2013 -14, 
MECON's income was Rs. 486.92 crore and PAT was Rs. 49.48 crore. For the 
year 2014-15, the income of the company increased to Rs. 539.15 crore but 
the Committee we re surprised to note that PAT for the year decreased and 
was Rs. 20.27 crore. The Committee were concerned to note that during the 
year 2015 -16, against the target for PAT of Rs. 8.28 crore, the company 
incurred a loss of Rs. 144.13 crore upto December, 2015. The Committee in 
their 9th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grant s(2015-16) had 
desired that MECON should take steps to bag more orders in the field of 
design, engineering, and consultancy and contracting projects in view of 
passing of Mines and Mineral (Development & Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2015. In their action taken reply, MECON had also assured the Committee on 
taking steps in that direction. Taking note of the fact that the com pany was 
incurring losses, the Committee fe lt that MECON ha d not taken the desired 
advantage of bagging orders for more projects. The Comm ittee would like to 
be apprised of the new projects, if any, bagged by MECON during 2015 -16 
and would recommend that continuous and concerted efforts be made by 
MECON in this direction.  
 
12. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as under:-  
 
"Subsequent to passing of the Mines and Mineral (Development & 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, MECON put in concerted efforts in 
garnering projects in Mines area and has been successful in securing 
order from Ministry of Mines for  assisting the State Governments in 
activities pertaining to Auction of Mine Blocks including providing 

15 
 
Transaction Advisory Services. At present MECON is participating and 
assisting the State Governments of Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh in vari ous activities for Auction of Mine 
Blocks and is also providing Transaction Advisory Services in the 
States of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand for the same. 
 
During the Study Tour of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel to 
Bokaro on 18.01.2016,  the capabilities of MECON were presented 
along with a request for support from the Committee on various 
issues. As suggested by the Chairman of Committee, the request for 
support was given in writing ( Annexure I). A list of major jobs 
secured by MECON during 2015-16 is enclosed at Annexure II." 
 
13. The Committee in their original Report, after taking into 
consideration the incurring losses by MECON  Ltd., had recommended 
that the company need to make continuous and concerted efforts 
towards bagging new pro jects, particularly in view of passing of the 
MMDR Amendment Act, 2015.  In this regard, the Committee note 
from the Action Taken Reply of the Government that after passing of 
the MMDR Am endment Act, 2015, MECON Ltd., due to its  concerted 
efforts, has been successful in bagging orders from Ministry of Mines 
for assisting the State Govern ments in activities pertaining to 
Auction of M ine Blocks provid ing Transaction Advisory Service s.  
Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the presentation 
made by  MECON Ltd. before the Com mittee on 18.01.2016 during 
their study visit to Bokaro wherein the Company have sought support  
of the Committee in bagging a number of orders under various 
entities like Government of Jharkhand, SAIL project s, etc. as Project 
Management Consultant on behalf of ICAR, projects under Ministry of 
Defence etc.  In this regard, the Committee , while observing that   
bagging a project now  is mainly dep endent on C ompetitive Bidding 
Process, urge the Ministry of Steel to extend its all possible support 
to MECON in its bid to secure orders/jobs for the projects earmarked 
by them.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation No.15 
 
JOINT VENTURE BY MSTC LTD. FOR AUTOSHREDDING PLANT 
 
14. The Committee also recalled that during 12th Plan, MSTC Ltd. had 
planned to set up on auto shredding plant at Dhaej in Gujarat in Joint 
Venture with ESSAR Steel Plant. The Committee had been informed that 
Essar Steel had backed out from this project. According  to the Ministry, 
sourcing of raw material for the project had been an area of major concern 
and MSTC was now pursuing this issue with the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways, Ministry of Heavy Industries, SIAM etc. for enactment of a 
Law incentivizing compulsory scrapping of End of Life Vehicles which were 
the raw material for the project. The Committee had been further informed 
that the Kerala Government had approached MSTC Ltd. for setting up the 
First Auto Shredding Plant in Kerala. The Committee wo uld like to be 
apprised of the progress made in the matter. The Committee also desired 
MSTC Ltd. to expedite the setting up of the auto shredding plant as there 
was no other ongoing project in hand for MSTC Ltd. currently except e -
commerce activities.  
 
15. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated as under:-  
 
"MSTC had sought Expression of Interest (EOI) for setting up of a Joint 
Venture for Auto Shredding Plant and Mahindra Intertrade had 
responded. Mahindra Intertrade is a part of Mahi ndra Partners, the 
$900 million Private Equity division of the Mahindra Group whose 
mission is to accelerate value creation through a diversified portfolio of 
emergent businesses. The MoU for the Joint Venture was signed in 
April, 2016 by both the parties. The Joint Venture Agreement has been 
signed also."   
 
 
16. The Committee in their original report have desired to know the 
status of setting up of Auto Shredding Plant in Kerala by MSTC Ltd.   
However, from the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry, the Committee 
note that the Ministry  is silent about the status of setting up of Auto 
Shredding Plant in Kerala.  The Committee  have been informed that 
MSTC Ltd. has sought Expression of Interest (EOI) for setting up of a 
Joint Venture for Auto Shredding Plant and Mahindra Inter trade had 

17 
 
responded and the  Joint Venture was signed in April, 2016 by both 
the parties.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
of the project and whether any timeline has been decided for its 
completion. The Committee wou ld also like to be apprised of the 
status of enactment of the desired  law incentivizing compulsory 
scrapping of End of Life Vehicles which in the opinion of the 
Committee would provide a big boost to the Auto Shredding projects 
in the country. 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
PLAN EXPENDITURE - R&D IN STEEL SECTOR  
 
The Committee note that based on the recommendation of the 
Working Group on Steel Industry for 11th Plan (2007 -12), a new scheme on 
R&D was included in the 11th Five Year Plan with an outlay of Rs. 118.00 
crore. The objective of the scheme was to promote and accelerate R&D 
activities in development of innovative/path breaking technologies utilizing 
Indian iron ore fines and non -coking coal, improvement of quality of steel 
produced beneficiation and agglomeration (e.g. pelletization) of raw 
materials. In 12th Five Year Plan, a provision of Rs. 200.00 crore has been 
made for the R&D Scheme. The Committee note that despite t here being 
only a single planned scheme under the purview of Ministry of Steel, its 
actual utilization has been quite low. Also, there has been a trend to 
drastically reduce the funds allocated at RE stage especially during the first 3 
years of the 12th Pl an Period i.e. in 2012 -13, 2013-14 and 2014 -15. The 
Committee find that during the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 Rs. 46 crore were 
allocated at BE stage. These were reduced to Rs. 26.49 crore and Rs. 8.00 
crore during the years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 respectively at RE stage. The 
actuals during 2012-13 and 2013-14 were Rs. 24.90 crore and Rs. 8.00 crore 
respectively. Similarly RS. 20 crore allocated for BE (2014 -15) were reduced 
to Rs.7 crore at RE stage. As regards cumulative expenditure during the first 
4 years of the Plan i.e. from 2012-13 to 2015-16, out of total provision of Rs. 
200 crore for the scheme, Rs. 127 crore have been allocated at BE stage 
which were later reduced to Rs. 56.49 crore at RE stage and only Rs. 43.48 
crore have been actually utilized. The  Committee also note that upto the 
financial year 2015 -16, the plan provision of the Ministry of Steel was kept 
under three components of the R&D Schemes viz. (i) Scheme for Promotion 
of Research and Development in Iron and Steel Sector – ongoing R&D 
Projects; (ii) Development of Technology for Cold Rolled Grain Oriented 
(CRGO) Steel Sheets and other value added innovative steel products; and 
(iii) Development of innovative Iron/Steel making process/Technology. The 
Committee have been informed that on the a dvice of Ministry of Finance, 
from Financial Year 2016 -17, the scheme has been rationalized and with 
their approval it has been decided to keep entire provision under one sub -
head i.e. Scheme for Promotion of Research and Development in Iron and 
Steel Sector. According to the Ministry of Steel, this rationalization of R&D 
Scheme would be helpful in ensuring flexibility in spending of funds unlike 
the earlier system whereby allocation for funds to 3 different sub heads had 
caused under-utilization of funds. The Committee have also been apprised 
that earlier there was stagnation in R&D activities for the steel sector as 
there were only 2 fully equipped laboratories with Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR). Now, the Ministry have opened centres  of 

19 
 
excellence in IIT Kharagpur, IIT Mumbai and there is a talk to open the same 
in Banaras Hindu University (BHU) as well. The Committee feel that R&D is a 
very important component for any sector to succeed and produce quality 
goods and given the current situation of the Indian Steel Industry, due 
emphasis should be given on this aspect. As already admitted by Secretary, 
Ministry of Steel that Steel PSUs are focusing on increasing investment in 
R&D from 0.3% to 1% of their total turnover, the Committee des ire that the 
Ministry should also look into the causes of low utilization in this scheme 
during the previous years and take stringent measures so that the funds 
allocated for the scheme are fully utilized.   
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
 Ministry of Steel is pursuing a joint collaborative research proposal for 
Development of Technology for Cold Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) steel 
sheets.  NML Jamshedpur, Rastriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL), Tata Steel 
Limited Jamshedpur and Ministry of Steel are the stakeholders in this 
initiative and will share the cost of the project.  According to the estimated 
cost of the project, the share of the Ministry of Steel was envisaged Rs.150 
Crore.  Therefore, this money has been earmarked for the CRGO project from 
Plan Fund out of the allocated fund of Rs.200 crore in the 12th Five Year Plan. 
 
 Cold Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets used in the 
manufacture of electrical transformers, metallurgically are one of the most 
critical & costliest steel products.  It requires high technical competence and 
discipline in all steps of steel making, rolling, processing etc.  The technology 
for production of CRGO Steel Sheet is closely held by only a handful of 
manufacturers and not readily available.  The current demand of CRGO steel 
in the count ry is around 2.5 lakh tonnes per year which is projected to 
increase to around 4 lakh tonnes by the year 2020.  Most of the demand is 
met from imports with only a marginal quantity is manufactured in India by 
M/s Thyssen Krupp Electrical Steel (india) Ltd.  Nasik, which is also based on 
imported semi-finished Cold Rolled coils. 
 
 Various initiatives since the 1980‟s and thereafter, by the Indian steel 
industry for producing CRGO steel in the country, through own efforts or by 
import of knowhow/technology from abroad, did not materialize. 
 
 The aforesaid allocated budget for the CRGO project could not be 
utilized as this is a first of a kind project and lot of complexities were 
involved.  Considerable time was spent on firming up of the Tender 
Document containing the Technical Specifications of the Pilot Plant, scope of 
work for preparation of the DPR and scope of work for consultancy services 
for Project Management & Construction Supervision (PMC), and placement of 
order for the DPR of the CRGO Project to MECO N.  Subsequently, the DPR of 
the Project was submitted by MECON, which has been examined by the 
stakeholders and based on their suggestions, supplementary DPR has been 
prepared by MECON in May, 2016, which has been approved by the 
stakeholders. 
 

20 
 
 Considerable time has also been spent in working out of the scope, 
methodology, financial arrangements, ownership, location, intellectual 
property, post project arrangements for utilization & maintenance etc. of the 
project/pilot plant between the stakeholders.  In this regard, a Memorandum 
of Agreement between the stakeholders of the project, called the Mother 
Contract, is being firmed up between the stakeholders.  Project will 
commence on acceptance of the DPR and signing of the mother contract by 
the stakeholders of the project.  To expedite the matter, a meeting of the 
stakeholders has been convened to discuss the supplementary DPR, 
concurrence of the stakeholders of the mother contract and any other 
relevant issue before starting of the project. 
 
 Steel Sector n eeds now more & more R&D to compete & make 
available „steel for enhanced domestic use & exports‟. The new projects are 
being launched for the same. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
UTILIZATION OF OUTLAYS DURING 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
 
The Committee note that for the 12th Five Year Plan (2012 -17), the 
Planning Commission had approved a total IEBR of Rs. 90974.64 crore for all 
PSUs. Out of this approved outlays, only 51% of the outlay i.e. Rs . 46879.30 
crore had been expended upto December, 2015. The Committee note that 
except for MECON, expenditure by most of the PSUs is much below the 
approved outlays. Against the plan approved outlays for the 12th Plan Period 
for PSUs like SAIL, RINL, NMDC and FSNL which were Rs.45000 crore, 
Rs.13373 crore, Rs.27872 crore and Rs.60 crore, the actuals were Rs. 30969 
crore, Rs.5488.59 crore, Rs.9997.85 crore and Rs.40.50 crore respectively. 
The expenditure by SAIL, RINL, NMDC and FSNL amounts to 68.8%, 41%, 
35.8% and 67.5% respectively of the approved outlays. The Committee are 
further concerned to note that MOIL has spent only Rs. 324.98 crore against 
the approved outlay of Rs. 1459.47 crore which amounts to 22.26% of its 
IEBR. Similarly, KIOCL has spent a mer e 1.10% of its IEBR i.e. Rs. 33.96 
crore spent against the approved outlay of Rs. 3080 crore. The reasons for 
low utilization of plan outlays given by the Ministry are poor performance of 
contracting agencies (SAIL), lack of raw material security(RINL), de lay in 
land allotment, pending forest clearances, slow progress of work by Railways 
(NMDC), delay in grant of leases, shortage of power in Andhra Pradesh 
(MOIL), pending of mining lease and non renewal of lease period (KIOCL), 
project for shredding plant d id not take off (MSTC), etc. The Committee are 
concerned to note the underutilization of approved outlays by Steel PSUs and 
emphasize the need for taking corrective measures by identifying the 
constraints affecting the implementation of projects and scheme s by the 
Steel PSUs. The Committee expect that this being the penultimate year of 
the 12th Plan, the approved annual outlays of Rs. 12323.55 crore for steel 
PSUs should be fully utilized. The Committee, therefore, desire that advance 

21 
 
action plan should be prepared by each PSU for the year 2016-17 keeping its 
objectives, vision and targets for the year in mind to ensure full utilization of 
approved outlays for 2016-17.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Against the target of Rs. 4000 crore, major allocation is kept towards 
the on-going Expansion and Modernisation Project of Bhilai Steel Plant, other 
major on-going capital projects across SAIL and contractual milestone related 
payments for completed schemes. Rs. 1881 crore has already been spent 
during the period April-Aug‟16. SAIL shall be taking all efforts to achieve the 
full utilization of revised target of Rs 4000 Cr. 
 
During the 12 th Plan period (2012 -17), RINL has fulfilled its Capex 
targets for the period from 2012-2016.  Major thrust during the 12th five year 
plan was given on completion of capacity expansion of Vizag Steel Plant from 
3.0 Mtpa to 6.3 Mtpa of liquid steel at a cost of around Rs. 12,291 crore. The 
project has been completed in April, 2015. RINL has targeted for a Capex of 
Rs.1350 Cr during the financial year 2016-17.   
 
NMDC‟s Board had approved Capital Budget BE 2016-17 in its meeting 
dated 12.02.106 for Rs.3664 cr.  However, the Ministry of Steel revised the 
target to Rs.3964 cr.  An expenditure of Rs.1093 cr. has been incurred by 
NMDC Ltd. till 31.08.2016 which is 83% of the internal set target of Rs.1320 
cr. (upto 31.082016).. 
 
 With this the total expenditure against the approved outlay of 
Rs.27872 cr. Is Rs.12033.06 cr. till August, 2016. (i.e 43.2% of the approved 
outlay). 
 
During the 12 th Five Year Pl an (2012 -17), MOIL Limited had Capex 
outlay of Rs. 1459.47 Crore, wherein projects had been envisaged taking into 
consideration availability of new Mining Leases (ML) & Prospecting Licenses 
(PL). The Capital Expenditure planned during the 12 th Plan period could not 
be taken up due to delay in grant of ML & PL which were beyond the control 
of the Company. The leases have recently been granted to MOIL Limited. The 
Company is taking all efforts to achieve the Capex targets in FY 2016-17. 
 
Out of the allocation  of Rs. 5 crore for setting up of Auto Shredding 
Plant, no amount could be spent during F.Y 2015 -16 by MSTC Ltd.  It was 
decided, with the approval of Board, that MSTC would go for joint venture in 
PPP model with a private steel company. Accordingly, Essar  Steel Ltd was 
shortlisted for joint venture partner, but the partnership could not materialize 
due to Essar Steel‟s own issues.  Hence, the amount could not be utilized 
during 2015 -16. Now, MSTC and Mahindra Intertrade Ltd. have agreed in 
principle to set  up a Auto Shredding Plant at Dahej. MOU for the Joint 
Venture has already been signed between MSTC and Mahindra Inter trade in 
April, 2016. After signing of the JV Agreement, JV company will be formed 
subject to approval of all concerned authorities. MSTC  has fixed target of 
spending Rs 10 crore allocated for this project for F.Y 2016-17. 

22 
 
 
Ferro Scrap Nigam Limted( FSNL) will be able to achieve the full 
utilization of planned and approved outlays of Rs.12.00 crore for the year 
2016-17. 
 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited has achieved full utilization 
in respect of Non Plan Provision., No plan provision was made during 12 th 
Five year plan.  
 
The approved expenditure from I&EBR for 2016-17 for MECON Limited 
is Rs. 5.00 crore under its XII five year plan  for expansion, modification & 
augmentation of office space, Guest House, Township etc. at various 
locations. MECON has action plan to procure immovable property for Guest 
House during FY 2016-17. Thus, it would be fully utilising I&EBR provision.  
 
During the 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -17), KIOCL has allocated plan 
outlay for Rs.3080 crores for various Greenfield & Brownfield projects such as 
development of new iron ore deposit, forward & backward integrations at the 
existing Pellet Plant & Pig Iron Plant a t Mangalore, diversification into 
integrated steel plant etc. However, all the projects as envisaged was linked 
to allocation of captive iron ore mine. Since, there was an inordinate delay in 
allocation of mine in favour of KIOCL and with the enactment of MMDR 
Amendment Act, 2015, KIOCL during the midterm review revised the outlay 
to Rs.780 crores. As against the same, the actual expenditure upto 31 st 
March 2016 was Rs.31.26 crores.  
 
An Action Plan for Plan Outlay 2016 -17 for Rs. 500 crore has been 
prepared which includes Development of Devadari Mines, Karnataka, 
Development of Chikkanayakanahalli and Other Mines, Setting up of forward 
and backward integration with BFU, Mangalore, Karnataka, Development of 
Ananthapuramu Mine & setting up of Pelletization an d Beneficiation Plant at 
Ananthapuramu and Setting up of 1.5 MTPA Pellet Plant on BOO basis at 
Bokaro Steel Plant of  SAIL.  
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
IMPORTANT POLICY INITIATIVES  
 
The Committee note that several measures have been taken by the 
Government to control the surge in imports to protect the domestic steel 
industry. These measures include hiking of import duty, imposition of 
provisional safeguard duty on certain items, i mposition of antidumping duty, 
invoking the Steel and Steel products (Quality Control Order) etc. The 
Committee have also been apprised that the Government has constituted a 
Review Committee with members from Ministries of Finance, Revenue, 
Commerce and Steel to keep a constant vigil and monitor the movement of 

23 
 
trade and prices of steel. According to the Ministry of Steel, there is a 
proposal for corporate debt restructuring whereby the loans given to steel 
companies can be converted into longer term loans with low rates of interest. 
The Committee have also been given to understand that as per the demand 
of Steel Ministry certain other measures like review of Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with Japan & Korea is required as 
this agreement has resulted in huge jump in imports from these countries. 
The Ministry of Steel have also apprised the Committee that there has been 
ongoing demand from the steel industry for inclusion of iron ore in freight 
class (145) as is for coal, limestone, dolomi te and manganese ore as against 
the freight class (165) for steel as on date. If this demand of steel industry is 
accepted by Railways, the benefit that would accrue is 13.8 % less freight 
charge in transportation of iron ore by Railways. The Committee not e that 
the matter has been taken up with Ministry of Railways at Railway Board 
level on 24th August, 2015, 16th January, 2016 and 24th February, 2016. 
While appreciating the measures taken by the Government to bail out the 
beleaguered steel industry reelin g under an unprecedented crisis, the 
Committee recommend that the matter regarding review of CEPA with Japan 
and Korea should be taken at the highest level to check rising imports from 
these countries. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of 
Railways should be impressed upon to include iron ore in same freight class 
as coal and if felt necessary the matter may be taken up with the Ministry at 
the highest level to advocate their case for the same. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the  present status on the proposal for corporate 
debt restructuring whereby the loans given to steel companies can move 
towards longer term loans with low rates of interest.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Ministry of Steel has taken up with the Railways for rationalisation of 
iron ore freight charges by reclassification of freight class for steel and iron 
ore and reduction of period of busy season surcharge. 
 
Ministry of Steel has taken up the matter regarding review of CEPA 
with Japan and Korea at various levels including a t the level of the then 
Minister of Steel with Ministry of Commerce and Industry with a view to 
check rising imports from these countries.  Apart from this following Policy 
initiative have been taken so far- 
 
viii. The Government has notified safeguard duty of 2 0% in March 2016 on 
hot-rolled flat products of non -alloy and other alloy steel, in coils of width 
of 600 mm or more. 
ix. In February 2016, the Government has notified Minimum Import Price 
(MIP) on 173 steel products in order to provide a level playing field t o 
domestic producers against the injury caused as evident from the decline 
in margins of the producers. 
x. The Government has increased the peak rate of basic customs duty on 
steel to 15%.  The effective rate has also been increased by 5%, once by 

24 
 
2.5% in Jun e 15 and again by another 2.5% in August 15, current rates 
being in the range of 10% - 12.5%. 
xi. Anti-dumping duty on certain grades of stainless steel has been imposed 
in June as well as in December 2015.  
xii. Government has also amended the Steel & Steel Produc ts (Quality 
Control) Order, 2012, in December 2015 to ensure that only quality steel 
is produced/ imported in India.   
xiii. For ensuring raw material availability, the Government had issued MMDR 
Amendment Act, 2015 & rules there under which provides for allocat ion of 
iron ore to „specified end use‟. As per the provisions of the Act, State 
governments have also to initiate and expedite the process of auction to 
maintain the sufficient availability of iron ore at cheaper prices for the 
steel sector. 
xiv. For reducing the stress in the steel sector, RBI has extended 5:25 scheme 
in July 2015, whereby longer amortization period for loans to projects in 
infrastructure and core industries sectors, say 25 years, based on the 
economic life or concession period of the project, with periodic re -
financing, say every 5 years, is allowed. 
 
In respect of corporate debt, it is stated that RBI have issued detailed 
guidelines on restructuring for facilitating timely and transparent mechanism 
for restructuring of debts of viable entities  affected by internal or external 
factors. The restructuring framework is aimed at preserving the value for 
viable entities that are affected by certain internal and external factors and 
minimize the losses to the creditors and other stakeholders through a n 
orderly and coordinated restructuring programme. These guidelines are 
neutral to sectors and forums through which restructuring has been 
approved.  
 
RBI has placed no restriction on the duration of repayment period or 
moratorium periods of loans. Banks a re free to decide the repayment 
schedule of their loan accounts, with or without a moratorium, as per their 
Board approved policies, commercial viability and the broad guidelines of 
RBI.  Companies can avail Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR). In addition,  
RBI has issued guidelines for Strategic Debt Restructuring and Scheme for 
Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets(s4A), which can be availed by 
Steel Industry. Banks are free to align the repayment schedule as per the 
economic life of the project once during its life time, without treating the 
account as restructured.  
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 

25 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
The Committee further desire that all out efforts be made in bringing 
down the cost of production. Such steps may include development of coastal 
shipping and riverine shipping and tailor made packages with Railways etc. to 
cut down the transportation costs, giving boost to National Skill Development 
Campaign for improving labour productivity, etc. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the specific measures taken in this regard. 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Ministry of Steel has taken up with the Railways for rationalisation o f 
iron ore freight charges by reclassification of freight class for steel and iron 
ore and reduction of period of busy season surcharge. 
 
Consultations are on with the Ministry of Shipping for transportation of 
raw material from the east -coast to the steel  plants in west -coast and the 
finished steel products from the steel plants to the markets all across the 
country using modal mix transportation of rail-coastal transportation. 
 
Ramp-up of production from SAIL's new units under modernization and 
expansion plan is not just increasing production and leading to better quality, 
but has also resulted  in reducing cost of production. Higher production from 
the new efficient units and rationalizing production from cost intensive routes 
have manifested in the form of a reduction in  total expenditure per ton of 
saleable steel by over 10% (approximately Rs. 4000 per ton) in Q4 2015 -16 
compared to Q1 of 2015-16 and the same trend continues. 
 
SAIL has initiated various skill development initiatives for the 
employees working in the projects in the Modernization and Expansion area 
and also in the existing areas for manning critical equipments.   This includes 
imparting training to improve the skills of the employees in the high tech 
engineering areas such as hydraulic, pne umatic, PLC, automation, drivers, 
etc. employees are also given training on the Project package at the 
centralized Training Institute at MTI, Ranchi on regular basis.  
 
SAIL has also undertaken initiatives to support the Industrial Training 
Institutes (ITI ) at various locations including Bolani, Barsua, Manoharpur, 
and Gua by Raw Materials Division and also by Bokaro Steel Plant. This 
should empower the local youth for competing in the present market 
scenario.  
 
In its efforts to contribute nationally to th e Skill Development 
initiative, SAIL has signed a MoU with National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) to support skill development initiatives in the vicinity of steel plant 
locations. SAIL is supporting National Skill Development Corp. campaigning 
for improving skill & productivity level of young employable manpower (youth 
manpower) by setting up Skill Development Centers in the vicinity of SAIL 
plant locations and providing its existing infrastructure to NSDC. To start 
with, SAIL has identified four lo cations viz. Bhilai, Bokaro, Durgapur and 

26 
 
Rourkela for these Skill Development Centers (SDCs). Under this MoU SAIL 
will support NSDC for skilling and certification to off - roll manpower, on- roll 
manpower and local youth for future employability and income  generation.  
These Skill Development Centers would be run by NSDC through its affiliated 
training providers (TP) on self -sustenance basis. This shall result in higher 
skill level and higher productivity of the target group and labour in general. 
 
Measures taken by RINL for reduction in costs and to improve 
profitability include the following: 
 
 Usage of different Coals in the Coal Blend is optimized continuously to 
achieve overall reduction in the cost. Three new coal brands, from 
Mozambique, Canada and Indonesia were introduced in the Coal Blend, 
enhancing the supplier base.   Procurement of Coal from Indonesia has 
given the benefit of lower freight also.  
 In order to reduce the outgo on account of ocean freight, cape size 
vessels with a carrying capacity o f about 1.5 lakh tonne are being 
nominated for coal shipments.  During the year 2015 -16, around 62% 
of coal was imported through Cape Size vessels.  
 120 MW BF gas based Power Plant, was commissioned in 2015 -16 
enabling reduction in power generation cost as  also quantum of power 
import.  With this, the power generation capacity based on utilization 
of waste energy has increased.   
 Product Mix and Distribution has been changed from time to time, in 
line with the market demand and to maximize the realizations.  Branch 
Sales Office has been opened in Vijayawada for capitalizing on the 
demand for Capital Region Development planned by Govt. of AP. 
 The percentage of Value Added Steel under Expansion units ramped up 
from a level of 30% in 2014-15 to 64% in 2015-16.   
 Thrust on cost reduction measures to restrict expenditure has been 
further intensified in all areas which have larger potential of cost 
reduction.  
 
As a part of skill India initiatives RINL signed a MoU with National Skill 
Development Corporation.  RINL  established a Skill Development Centre for 
organizing Skill Trainings through Iron and Steel Sector Skill Council.  
Training programmes organized for employees / trainees are steel sector 
specific and designed to enhance the skill and knowledge of work fo rce to 
achieve higher productivity and production. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

27 
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
SAIL  
 
The Committee are co ncerned about the losses incurred by SAIL due 
to a major crisis in the steel industry due to cheap imports from the countries 
having excess capacity. The Committee note that though the profit of SAIL 
had been dwindling during last 2-3 years, but this is the first time when SAIL 
is incurring losses. Profit After Tax(PAT) of SAIL was Rs. 2616 crore in 2013 -
14 which got reduced to Rs. 2093 crore in 2014 -15. In 2015 -16 (upto 
Dec‟2015), the company incurred losses of Rs.2906.00 crore. The Committee 
find that tot al income has increased from Rs. 52513.00 crore in 2013 -14 to 
Rs. 53470.00 crore in 2014 -15. But in 2015 -16, the income generated upto 
December, 2015 is Rs. 32985 crore only. In this regard, the Committee 
express their satisfaction at the assurance given by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Steel during the oral evidence that the Ministry and SAIL are focusing on cost 
reduction measures and SAIL had already reduced its production cost by Rs. 
1500 per tonne. While appreciating these concerted efforts of Ministry of  
Steel and SAIL, the Committee also note that the Government has taken 
certain measures to protect the interest of domestic steel manufactures. The 
Ministry of Steel had also informed the Committee that they are in the 
process of identifying a consultant w ho will help SAIL craft its turnaround 
strategy. The Committee desire that till a turnaround strategy is crafted out, 
SAIL should take immediate short term measures to curb losses to the 
minimum by opting for cost saving measures. The Committee hope to see  a 
positive impact of such measures on the domestic steel market in the near 
future. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps initiated by 
SAIL in this regard. 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Measures taken by SAIL in bringing down the costs of production and 
improving the profitability are as under:- 
 
a) Reduction in consumption level of raw materials like Coal, Iron 
Ore, Fluxes, etc & bringing down cost of raising iron ore & clean 
coal in mines. 
b) Production optimization and product-mix improvement. 
c) Improvement in techno-economic parameters. 
d) Index based pricing mechanism for coking coal. 
e) Rationalization of manpower. 
f)  Identification and closure of uneconomic activities. 
g) Rationalizing production from relatively inefficient routes of 
production. 
h) Waste management. 
i)  Full utilisation of engineering shops and replacing purchased 
items. 
j)  Strict control on demurrage expenses. 
k) Reduction in number of service contracts. 
l)  Reduction in procurement cost through strict monitoring. 

28 
 
m) 10% reduction in the various items of administrative expenses. 
n) Re-negotiation of prices of long term contracts for cutting down 
procurement price where deliveries are still pending. 
o) De-proprietorisation of items of stores & spares, plant & 
machinery, maintenance services, etc. 
p) Reduction in inventory of fini shed/semi-finished products, stores 
& spares and raw materials, etc. 
q) Monitor and reduce handling and transit losses of imported coal. 
r) Reduction in logistic cost for transportation of coal being imported  
 
 The Company has been working on reduction of cost on a regular 
basis. Government of India has decided to engage a Consultant for providing 
a road map for turnaround of SAIL.  
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
The Committee note that for t he year 2015-16, a production target of 
14.38 million tonne of saleable steel was set for SAIL which was later 
reduced to 12.78 million tonne at RE stage. Out of the given target, 8.79 
million tonne steel was produced upto December, 2016. For the year 2016 -
17, the target of production of saleable steel has been increased to 14.60 
million tonne. Similarly, for RINL the Committee note that for the year 2015 -
16, the target for saleable steel which was 4 million tonne, was reduced to 
3.6 million tonne at RE sta ge. The Committee note that about 2.5 million 
tonne saleable steel production was achieved by RINL upto December, 2015. 
An increased target of production of 4.5 million tonne of saleable steel has 
been set for the year 2016 -17 by RINL. The Committee note t hat although 
steel industry is going through a major crisis and there is a glut in the 
market due to import of cheap steel, they desire that given the prevailing 
market conditions, SAIL and RINL should focus to improve production and 
efficiency at various levels and lay emphasis on improving profit by 
developing and marketing new products. 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Measures taken by SAIL in bringing down the costs of production and 
improving the profitability are as under:- 
 
a) Reduction in consumption level of raw mater ials like Coal, Iron 
Ore, Fluxes, etc & bringing down cost of raising iron ore & clean 
coal in mines . 
b) Production optimization and product-mix improvement. 
c) Improvement in techno-economic parameters. 
d) Index based pricing mechanism for coking coal. 
e) Rationalization of manpower. 
f) Identification and closure of uneconomic activities. 
g) Rationalizing production from relatively inefficient routes of 
production. 

29 
 
h) Waste management. 
i) Full utilisation of engineering shops and replacing purchased 
items. 
j) Strict control on demurrage expenses. 
k) Reduction in number of service contracts. 
l) Reduction in procurement cost through strict monitoring. 
m) 10% reduction in the various items of administrative expenses. 
n) Re-negotiation of prices of long term contracts for cutting down 
procurement price where deliveries are still pending. 
o) De-proprietorisation of items of stores & spares, plant & 
machinery, maintenance services, etc. 
p) Reduction in inventory of finished/semi-finished products, stores 
& spares and raw materials, etc. 
q) Monitor and reduce handling and transit losses of imported coal. 
r) Reduction in logistic cost for transportation of coal being 
imported  
 
The Company has been working on reduction of cost on a regular 
basis. The Ministry of Steel, Government of India is also in the process of 
engaging a consultant for providing a road map for turnaround of SAIL.  
 
SAIL tied up with mjunction in September, 2015 for online bidding for 
ocean freight for movement of imported coal. As a result, during 2015 -16 a 
saving of Rs. 518 Crore was achieved ag ainst the targeted level of ocean 
freight for 2015-16, through competitive bidding.  
 
Production Plan 
 
Production plan of 2016 -17 envisages growth of 4% in Hot Metal (i.e 
16.3 MT), 7% in Crude Steel (i.e 15.3 MT) and 20% in Saleable Steel (i.e 
14.9 MT) over actual production of 2015-16.  
 
Integrated operation of new facilities has already been started at DSP, 
RSP, BSL and ISP. New facilities at BSP are likely to start in the FY 2016 -17. 
Emphasis is on timely commissioning, quick stabilization and ramping up  to 
capacity of the new facilities and reduction in slab stock at BSL and RSP. 
 
Developing new Products 
 
Every year SAIL endeavors to develop new products as per market 
requirement. In 2015-16 twenty four (24) new products were developed for 
use in constru ction, wind mill components, power sector and general 
engineering. SAIL is adding a number of new products in the current phase 
of modernization. Market development activity for marketing some of these 
products such as Parallel Flange Beams and other Unive rsal sections was 
started by the Central Marketing Organisation of SAIL in 2014 -15 and 
continued in 2015 -16 by way of organizing workshops with the help of IIT 
professors for the target customers.  
 

30 
 
Rastriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) has been passing thro ugh the 
transitional phase of Expansion and Modernization.  While the Expansion to 
6.3 Mtpa has been completed, Modernization and Augmentation of capacity 
to 7.3 Mtpa is in progress which is scheduled to be completed in 2017-18.  In 
the meantime, all attem pts are being made to stabilize and ramp up 
production from new units.   
 
The completion and stabilization of ongoing expansion and 
modernization projects are expected to improve key techno -economic 
parameters thus increasing the cost competitiveness of the company further. 
 
RINL is investing around Rs.4000 Cr for modernizing & upgrading the 
health of its existing units which are in operation for more than 2 decades, 
which will enhance the capacity by 1 MTPA to 7.3 MTPA in the next phase of 
expansion.   The  revamped units are expected to meet the latest 
environmental norms, adopt the latest technology, conserve energy, increase 
the production and productivity.   
 
Additional measures taken by RINL for reduction in costs and to 
improve profitability include the following  : 
 
 Usage of different Coals in the Coal Blend is optimized 
continuously to achieve overall reduction in the cost. Three new 
coal brands, from Mozambique, Canada and Indonesia were 
introduced in the Coal Blend, enhancing the supplier base.   
Procurement of Coal from Indonesia has given the benefit of 
lower freight also.  
 In order to reduce the outgo on account of ocean freight, cape 
size vessels with a carrying capacity of about 1.5 lakh tonne are 
being nominated for coal shipments.  During the year 2015-16, 
around 62% of coal was imported through Cape Size vessels.  
 120 MW BF gas based Power Plant, was commissioned in 2015-16 
enabling reduction in power generation cost as also quantum of 
power import.  With this, the power generation capacity ba sed on 
utilization of waste energy has increased.   
 Product Mix and Distribution has been changed from time to time, 
in line with the market demand and to maximize the realizations.  
Branch Sales Office has been opened in Vijayawada for 
capitalizing on the  demand for Capital Region Development 
planned by Govt. of AP. 
 The percentage of Value Added Steel under Expansion units 
ramped up from a level of 30% in 2014-15 to 64% in 2015-16.   
 Thrust on cost reduction measures to restrict expenditure has 
been further intensified in all areas which have larger potential of 
cost reduction.  
 
The company has been pursuing several strategic initiatives.  The 
Forged Wheel Plant being set up with assured offtake from Railways is under 
cost plus model.  The JV for manufactu re of Transmission Line Towers and 

31 
 
Tower parts is another such diversification initiative in partnership with the 
end user.   
 
While the above diversification projects offer new value addition 
opportunities, the value addition within the plant is also set to increase with 
capabilities for high end value added steel production through secondary 
metallurgy facilities installed under expansion.   The percentage of Value 
Added Steel under Expansion units ramped up from a level of 30% in 2014 -
15 to 64% in 2015 -16.  Further, the Company has developed several new 
products during last three years (2013 -16), to cater to specific customer 
requirements.   
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
HSCL  
 
The Committee note that HSCL, whose mandate is to mobilize 
indigenous capability for putting up integrated steel plants in the country has 
diversified and is participating in the 'Bharat Nirman Programme' of the 
Government in the North East State of Tripura un der Prime Minister Gramin 
Sadak Yojana(PMGSY). The Committee have also stressed in their 9th Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on the need to provide sufficient opportunities to HSCL by 
awarding them work contracts by Steel PSUs to overcome its liabilities and 
utilize its potential to the maximum. The Committee note that HSCL had 
achieved an order booking of Rs. 2649 crore in 2013 -14 and Rs. 1844 crore 
in 2014 -15. During the year 2015 -16 orders amounting to Rs. 1654 
crore(unaudited) were booked by HSCL upto December,  2015. The 
Committee are, however, unhappy to note that for 2016-17, HSCL has kept a 
lower order booking target of Rs. 1200 crore only. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the reasons for decreasing the target for the year 2016 -17. 
The Committee als o note that HSCL had incurred a loss of Rs. 18.67 crore 
during 2013 -14. Though during 2014 -15 this loss was curbed to Rs. 8.10 
crore, yet for 2015-16 HSCL has again incurred a loss of Rs. 12.51 crore upto 
December, 2015. In view of the continuous losses be ing incurred by HSCL, 
the Committee would like the Ministry/HSCL to take intensive measures to 
reduce its expenses and concentrate on acquiring more business prospects to 
keep itself relevant in the business.  
 
ACTION TAKEN  
 
 In view of the possibility of  merger with NBCC, the marketing target 
for     2015 -16 has been kept at Rs.1200 Cr. Besides this, the business 
model of the company will also be guided by the policy decision of the 
Holding Company after the proposed takeover. HSCL has been putting all 
efforts to improve its operational results on continual basis. During 2015 -16, 
the Company earned Gross Operational Margin of Rs.98.15 Cr. and the Net 
Loss reduced from Rs.8.10 Cr. in 2014-15 to Rs.5.06 Cr. (unaudited). 

32 
 
 
 The main contributing factor to Net Loss is Rs.107.27 Cr. towards 
Interest on Govt. Loan and the Differential Interest paid to the Banks for the 
Term Loan secured for funding VRS. Increase of business volume in steel 
sector will help in improvement of operational results further. The Company  
is running with minimum administrative and salary expenses with the pay 
structures CDA 1996 & IDA 1992 still in place. 
 
 HSCL‟s business in Steel Plant has been in the range of 18-20% for the 
last several years. HSCL secures jobs in Steel Plant through op en tender and 
reverse auction as per the terms in the NIT. For increasing business volume 
in Steel plants, HSCL has recently entered into perennial jobs like Loco 
Operation & Shunting jobs at SAIL/Bokaro, Durgapur & Burnpur. Besides 
this, HSCL has taken up  3 major Civil & Structural Packages at NMDC Steel 
Plant at Nagarnar for Rs.147 Cr. HSCL has secured orders worth Rs.1819 Cr. 
during 2015-16 compared to Rs.1844 Cr. secured during 2014-15. 
 
 HSCL has signed MOU with 4 expert agencies in Solar Energy 
generation sector for cooperation in taking up implementation of Rooftop and 
Solar Power generation Plants. The Company has already taken up 
Transaction Advisory Service for Khodri (4.398MW) and for Dhakrani 
(1.466MW), Solar Power Plants, under UJVN Ltd., Govt. of Uttarakhand. 
HSCL has written to the PSUs under Ministry of Steel to entrust 
implementation of Rooftop power generation units on these buildings. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
The Committee have been time and again emphasizing on the matter 
of finalizing the restructuring proposal for HSCL at the earliest. In this 
regard, the Committee have been informed that a note for the Cabinet on the 
financial restructuring of HSCL and its tak eover by National Buildings 
Construction Corporation Limited (NBCC) is being prepared for placing before 
the Union Cabinet. The Committee would like to be apprised of a final 
decision taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
The Union Cabine t has considered and approved the Note for the 
Cabinet of Ministry of Steel on financial restructuring of HSCL and its 
takeover by NBCC in its meeting of the cabinet held on 25.05.2016.  Follow -
up actions to implement the decision have been initiated. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
Recommendation No.12 
 
MECON Ltd.  
 
The Committee note that MECON Ltd.'s mission is to provide technical 
consultancy-design and engineering, design and supply of plant, equipmen t 
and systems, implementation of new industrial ventures from concept to 
commissioning. The Committee observe that during 2013 -14, MECON's 
income was Rs. 486.92 crore and PAT was Rs. 49.48 crore. For the year 
2014-15, the income of the company increased to  Rs. 539.15 crore but the 
Committee are surprised to note that PAT for the year decreased and was Rs. 
20.27 crore. The Committee are concerned to note that during the year 
2015-16, against the target for PAT of Rs. 8.28 crore, the company incurred 
a loss of Rs. 144.13 crore upto December, 2015. The Committee in their 9th 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants(2015 -16) had desired that 
MECON should take steps to bag more orders in the field of design, 
engineering, and consultancy and contracting proje cts in view of passing of 
Mines and Mineral (Development & Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015. In 
their action taken reply, MECON had also assured the Committee on taking 
steps in that direction. Taking note of the fact that the company is incurring 
losses, the Committee feel that MECON has not taken the desired advantage 
of bagging orders for more projects. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the new projects, if any, bagged by MECON during 2015 -16 and 
would recommend that continuous and concerted efforts be made by MECON 
in this direction.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Subsequent to passing of the Mines and Mineral (Development & 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, MECON put in concerted efforts in 
garnering projects in Mines area and has been successful in securing or der 
from Ministry of Mines for  assisting the State Governments in activities 
pertaining to Auction of Mine Blocks including providing Transaction Advisory 
Services. At present MECON is participating and assisting the State 
Governments of Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh 
in various activities for Auction of Mine Blocks and is also providing 
Transaction Advisory Services in the States of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh 
and Jharkhand for the same. 
 
 During the Study Tour of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel to 
Bokaro on 18.01.2016, the capabilities of MECON were presented along with 
a request for support from the Committee on various issues. As suggested by 
the Chairman of Committee, the request for support was given in writing 
(Annexure I). A list of major jobs secured by MECON during 2015 -16 is 
enclosed at Annexure II. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 

34 
 
Recommendation  No.13 
 
The Committee also note that an outlay of Rs. 5 crore is regularly 
being made by MECON for the same component of Expansion, Modification & 
Augmentation of Office Space at Ranchi / Guest House etc. at various 
locations during 2013 -14, 2014 -15 and 2 015-16. The Committee observe 
that the actual utilization in these years has always exceeded the allocation 
i.e. Rs. 6.10 crore in 2013 -14, Rs. 6.12 crore in 2014 -15 and Rs. 7.19 crore 
in 2015-16(upto December, 2015). As such, against an allocation of Rs. 15 
crore, a sum of Rs. 19.41 crore has been spent on Expansion, Modification & 
Augmentation of Office Space at Ranchi/Guest House etc. at various locations 
during the last 3 years. The Committee would like to know the reasons for 
such a substantial sum bei ng allocated for the same purpose year after year 
and the details of the works undertaken under this Head.  
  
ACTION TAKEN 
 
The Govt. has approved a plan outlay of Rs. 5.00 crores per year 
under its 12 th five year plan to be expended by MECON from its I&EB R 
towards expansion, modification & augmentation of office space at Ranchi / 
Guest House etc. at various locations. The company has got an office 
Building Complex at HO, Ranchi which was constructed in mid 60s and the 
same has become very old and requires continuous maintenance and up 
gradation. Further, the Guest House facilities at HO, Ranchi is also very old 
and requires up gradation and uplift.  There are a few new project sites like 
Jagdalpur (for NMDC) which need a permanent Guest House. For these 
purposes company has taken up many small projects of short duration and 
small in values as given below: 
Rs.in crores 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
(Prov.) 
     
1. Augmentation / Renovation of Office 
Facilities 
3.35 4.00 3.33 
2. Acquisition / Renovation / Purchase of 
Flats, Land, etc for Guest House at 
different locations 
- - 4.17 
3. Augmentation of power distribution 
system 
1.56 0.61 1.17 
4. Others 1.19 1.51 1.36 
 TOTAL 6.10 6.12 10.03 
 
The company has purchased Flats / Land, etc in the fi nancial year 
2015-16 for setting up Guest House facilities. For this purpose the 
expenditure for the financial year 2015 -16 is high as compared to its 
previous years.  Further, the company is in the process of acquiring flats in 
the FY 2016-17 for which initial installment has been paid in the FY 2015-16. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 

35 
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
MSTC Ltd.  
 
The Committee observe that MSTC Ltd. has taken a decision to 
concentrate on e-commerce business instead of trading as the latter is more 
profitable but very risky. The Committee also note that as against a Profit 
After Tax (PAT) of Rs. 90.99 crore in 2014 -15 for MSTC the PAT for 2015 -16 
upto December, 2015 is only Rs. 24.19 crore. The Committee feel that given 
the fact that the rate of service charge on e -commerce is very low compared 
to trading business, the Company needs to strive hard to attain profitability. 
The Committee have been informed that MSTC has also diversified its e -
Commerce activities in various domains like Coal Block Auctions, Red Sander 
wood auctions, Sandal Wood Auctions and Human Hair, various minerals etc. 
In addition MSTC is further looking forward to expand its e -Commerce 
presence into various other arenas like e - Retail business (B2B) along with 
India Post. Also a plan to float a portal for e -shopping mall is underway. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest status of these two new 
ventures of MSTC i.e. e-retail with India Post and floating of e-shopping mall. 
Regarding trimming of its trading portfolio as it is very risky, the Committee 
would like to be apprised whether MSTC has fixed any target for generating 
business/income from trading.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
For the financial year 2015 -16 the total volume of busi ness of MSTC 
was approximately 2% higher than the last year‟s volume. The Profit Before 
Tax (PBT) was Rs.89.60 crore and Profit after Tax (PAT) was Rs.58.59 crore.  
MSTC could achieve this profit level due to adoption of innovative service mix 
as per need of the customers. MSTC has envisaged the selling of Gorgon 
Nut/Makhana as service provider and Cooperative Federation (COMFED) 
Aggregator and India Post shall deliver material to the consumer or to the 
actual users. MSTC has discussed the modalities with India Post and COMFED 
and a proposal and draft MoU has been submitted to COMFED. The response 
from COMFED is awaited. The development of e -mall portal „MSTC Metal 
Mandi‟ is in process. At present registration of sellers and buyers are in the 
offing. The inc ome target of MSTC for thermal coal and other traditional 
items in Trading business for FY 2016 -17 has been fixed for Rs.21.42 crore. 
MSTC is focusing on enhancement of e -commerce business to increase 
profitability. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation No.15 
 
The Committee also recall that during 12th Plan, MSTC Ltd. had 
planned to set up on auto shredding plant at Dhaej in Gujarat in Joint 
Venture with ESSAR Steel Plant. The Committee have been inf ormed that 
Essar Steel has backed out from this project. According to the Ministry, 
sourcing of raw material for the project had been an area of major concern 

36 
 
and MSTC is now pursuing this issue with the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, Ministry of  Heavy Industries, SIAM etc. for enactment of a Law 
incentivizing compulsory scrapping of End of Life Vehicles which are the raw 
material for the project. The Committee have been further informed that the 
Kerala Government has approached MSTC Ltd. for sett ing up the First Auto 
Shredding Plant in Kerala. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in the matter. The Committee also desire MSTC Ltd. to 
expedite the setting up of the auto shredding plant as there is no other 
ongoing project in hand for MSTC Ltd. currently except e -commerce 
activities.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
MSTC had sought Expression of Interest (EOI) for setting up of a Joint 
Venture for Auto Shredding Plant and Mahindra Intertrade had responded.  
Mahindra Intertrade is a part of Mahin dra Partners, the $900 million Private 
Equity division of the Mahindra Group whose mission is to accelerate value 
creation through a diversified portfolio of emergent businesses. The MoU for 
the Joint Venture was signed in April, 2016 by both the parties. The Joint 
Venture Agreement has been signed also.   
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No.16 
KIOCL  
 
The Committee note  that the mining activity at KIOCL Ltd. was 
stopped as per the Hon‟ble Supreme Court verdict w.e.f. 01.01.2006. At 
present KIOCL is mainly operating the pellet plant at Mangalore by sourcing 
iron ore from the market. The Profit After Tax (PAT) of KIOCL in 2013-14 was 
Rs. 39.94 crore and it was Rs. 31.26 crore in 2014 -15. During 2015 -16, 
KIOCL had suffered a loss of Rs. 139.48 crore upto December, 2015. The 
Committee further note that KIOCL produced 1.710 million tonne of pellets in 
2013-14 and 0.785 million tonne pellets in 2014-15. Pellet Production target 
for BE(2015-16) was 1.800 million tonne which was reduced to 0.700 million 
tonne at RE stage and actual achievement upto December, 2015 was only 
0.100 million tonne. The Committee, therefore, note that th e target was 
reduced by more than half at RE stage. Yet again, Pellet Production target for 
BE(2016-17) is set at 1.300 million tonne. The Committee feel that KIOCL 
should focus on projecting realistic targets keeping in view the achievement 
of the previou s years and viability and marketability of produced material. 
The Committee also note that in a recent development KIOCL Ltd. has sent a 
shipment of iron ore pellets to Iran under the Government's Make in India' 
concept. The Committee have been informed that KIOCL Ltd. is bringing high 
grade iron ore (with 'Fe' content of 67%) from Brazil and converting it into 
pellets at KIOCL's pellet Plant at New Mangalore. For undertaking the above 

37 
 
order, KIOCL signed a back to back contract for import of high grade iron ore 
concentrate of 67% Fe from Brazil and export of pellets after conversion to 
M/s Mobarakeh Steel Company (MSCO) under Government of Iran. It has 
been further informed that customers in Turkey and Vietnam also have 
shown interest in procuring High Grad e Pellets from KIOCL. The Committee 
desire that KIOCL should actively pursue the interest shown by the overseas 
customers and explore similar opportunities elsewhere in the world to obtain 
business which in turn would help KIOCL to curb the mounting losses . The 
Committee also note that an outlay of Rs. 500.00 crore has been provided for 
KIOCL Ltd., for (i) development of Devadari Iron ore deposit in the state of 
Karnataka & forwarding integration project at Blast Furnace unit etc; (ii) 
Equity participation with NMDC & RINL for setting up slurry pipeline & Pellet 
Plant project Development of iron ore deposit joint with APMDC, a State 
owned PSU under Government of Andhra Pradesh; and (iii) Setting up of 1.5 
MTPA Pellet plant at Bokaro Steel Plant, SAIL on Built, Own & Operate (BOO) 
basis. The Committee recommend that Ministry of Steel should monitor the 
investment plan of KIOCL during 2016-17 and ensure that outlays of Rs. 500 
crore are fully utilized as targeted as these new mining and pellet plants will 
definitely help the company in improving its financial performance.  
 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Ministry has been monitoring the progress of development of projects 
and utilization of funds allotted for each project at various levels periodically. 
 
KIOCL has been encounte ring severe challenges from raw material 
sourcing as well as selling of pellets under Long Term Contracts ever since 
closure of captive mines. Added to this, global slowdown and prolonged 
recession in steel industries has further affected the performance. As it is 
evident from year to year performance that in 2013 -14, KIOCL was able to 
meet the annual production & dispatch targets. For FY 2014 -15, domestic 
steel industries due to subdued activity in steel using sectors, diminished 
demand for steel & high pellet production capacities coupled with most of the 
integrated steel plants equipping themselves with captive pellet plants, have 
shrunk the total market space available for merchant pellet manufacturers. 
As a result the pellet production & dispatch were d ropped to 0.785 million 
tonne & 0.679 million tonne.  
 
For FY 2015 -16, KIOCL was anticipating improvement in market 
condition and accordingly kept a target of 1.800 million tonne, but based on 
negative trend in entire in steel using sectors , KIOCL was cons trained to 
bring down the target to 0.700 million tonne as RE stage. As against the 
same the actual production was 0.100 million tonne, thereby achievement is 
6% of target only. Further, due to sharp fall in prices, KIOCL has reported 
loss of Rs.77.66 crores during the year. 
 
For FY 2016-17, KIOCL has set the target of 1.300 million tonne with 
allocation of 0.750 million tonne through tolling arrangement and 0.550 
million tonne through normal pellet production. It is pertinent to mention 

38 
 
that under tolling arrangement i.e. utilization of pellet plant infrastructure for 
various domestic & international manufacturers raw materials and finished 
goods are the responsibilities of the users, & KIOCL responsibility limited to 
convert the iron ore at a predetermined  rates. Taking advantage, during 
slack the existing pellet plant capacity can be better utilized as well as 
revenue can be earned for the organization.   
 
In the international market, iron ore and pellet prices are continuously 
under pressure due to iron o re oversupply, declining demand for steel in 
Chinese market. Further, premium for pellets over iron ore fines i.e. 
difference between the price of pellets and iron ore fines has also narrowed 
down. In order to overcome this issue and to meet target for FY 2016-17, 
KIOCL is planning to produce and sell high grade pellets & tolling 
arrangements with overseas and domestic Parties. 
 
In this direction, KIOCL has already processed for importing around 
70,000 MT of high grade iron ore concentrate, produce pellets and export the 
same to Iran. In this regard KIOCL customers have evinced interest to 
procure DR grade pellets for supplying to Iran. Customers in Iran are  
planning to procure total quantity of about 4,00,000 tonne based on above 
trial order. 
 
Further SKSCO, Iran is having discussions with KIOCL for taking the 
matter forward. KIOCL also is in discussions with other global players (China, 
Turkey, Switzerland etc) to undertake tolling arrangements. 
 
Present status of projects as envisaged under CAPEX plan 201 6-17 is 
as under : 
 
i) Development of Devadari Mines, Karnataka - Fund allocated Rs. 10.00 
Crores. 
 
a) KIOCL submitted the reservation proposal to Govt. of Karnataka 
on 25.07.2015 for reserving the mining area for iron and 
manganese ore in Devadari Range, Bellary Dist.  
b) Govt. of Karnataka on 22.03.2016 recommended the proposal 
to Ministry of Mines, GoI for reservation of an area of 470.40 
ha in Devadari Range, Sandur Taluk, Bellary District for iron 
ore and manganese in favour of KIOCL Ltd.  
c) On 30.03.2016, Ministr y of Mines, GoI sought certain 
clarifications on this reservation proposal from Govt. of 
Karnataka and same is being worked out by GoK. 
 
ii) Setting up of forward and backward integration with BFU, Mangalore, 
Karnataka:   Fund Allocated: Rs. 51.00 Crores. 
 
a) Company is working out resumption of production of pig iron on 
Blast Furnace Unit during this financial year.  

39 
 
b) As forward integration projects KIOCL is planning to set up TMT 
bar unit. The proposed outlay will be utilized for preparation of 
TEFR and initial expenditure for setting up of TMT bar unit. 
 
iii) Setting up of 8 MTPA filter plant, 6 MTPA Pellet Plant at Vizag and 13 
MTPA Slurry Pipe line from Nagarnar to Vizag along with NMDC & RINL 
through JV:  
 
Fund Allocated: Rs. 50.00 Cr. KIOCL‟s Board has accorded approval for 
acquiring 16 % stake in the proposed JV. Joint Venture Agreement 
submitted by NMDC is under scrutiny for formation of JV Company to 
take the project forward.  
 
iv) Development of Ananthapuramu Mine & setting up of Pelletization and 
Beneficiation Plant at Ananthapuramu: Fund Allocated: Rs. 10.00 Cr. 
  
a) Govt. of AP has granted PL to APMDC on 30.11.2015 over an 
extent of 1327 ha in Nemkal Village, Anantapuram district, 
Andhra Pradesh. 
b) APMDC has submitted proposal to PCCF, Govt of Andhra Pradesh 
for seeking permission to carry out exploratory drilling.  
c) PCCF, Govt of Andhra Pradesh requested APMDC to conduct DGPS 
survey of the proposed Road  and Bore hole points & resubmit the 
proposal. 
d) DGPS Survey is being carried out for resubmission of proposal for 
forest clearance to undertake exploratory drilling.  
 
v) Setting up of 1.5 MTPA Pellet Plant on BOO basis at Bokaro Steel Plant 
of M/s SAIL:  Fund allocated : Rs. 300.00 Cr.  
 
a) M/s SAIL had floated a Limited tender enquiry on 23.12.2014 for 
“Setting up of 1.5 MTPA capacity pellet plant at bokaro steel plant 
on build-own-operate (BOO) basis”.   
b) KIOCL submitted their Bid on 02.05.2015. 
c) KIOCL is under price negotiation with SAIL.  
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
DECLINING PROFIT OF RINL  
 
The Committee note that over the years, income of RINL has seen a 
sharp decline. From Rs.13842.72 crore in 2013 -14 , income of the company 
reduced to Rs. 10770.23 crore in 2014 -15 and during 2015 -16, Rs.7172.13 
crore income could be generated upto December, 2015. Similarly, Profit After 
Tax (PAT) of RINL which was Rs. 353.94 crore in 2013 -14 plummeted to Rs. 
52.81 crore in 2014 -15. During 2015 -16, the loss of RINL stood at Rs. 
1014.67 crore. Regarding the reasons for shortfall in Profit After Tax (PAT) 
with respect to previous years, RINL has informed the Committee that 
reduction in Net Sales Realization due to sluggish market conditions owing to 
lack of demand and cheaper imports from China; imposition of DMF (District 
Mineral Fund) @30% on Royalty w.e.f. 12.01.2016 as per MMDR Act, has 
partly offset the benefit of reduction in Iron Ore Pric es; increase in finance 
costs due to availment of higher supplier‟s credit and short -term & long term 
loans to meet the working capital; reduction in interest income due to the 
redemption of preference share capital and outflows towards on -going 
expansion plan; increase in deprecation due to capitalization of new 
expansion units; and increase in power tariff by State Power Distribution 
Companies are major reasons for shortfall. While acknowledging these 
factors, the Committee feel that the same are also being faced by other steel 
plants including private sector steel plants. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that declining performance of entire steel industry be taken 
seriously and the utmost efforts be made by the Ministry by incentivizing this 
sector through various interventions.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Indian steel industry is going through a downturn and almost all steel 
producers, from big integrated steel plants to small secondary producers, are 
suffering from deterioration in their margins as a result of de creasing prices. 
Due to huge overcapacity in major steel making countries such as China, 
Japan and Korea, producers have made distress sale (prices below the cost 
of production) in emerging markets such as India. This has led to a 
significant increase in the quantum of imports and a considerable decrease in 
the prices. The consequence of this has been that the steelmakers who have 
invested more than INR 5000 billion in the last 10 -12 years and expected to 
reap benefits now have been left with depleted incom e statements, eroded 
EBITDA margins and ever growing debt burden. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 

41 
 
Recommendation No.8 
 
NMDC Ltd.  
 
The Committee are happy to note that 7.0 MTPA Bailadila Iron Ore 
Deposit 11-B Project of NMDC Ltd. at Chhattisgarh has been commissioned in 
August, 2015. Besides this, the work on two other projects viz. 7.0 MTPA 
Kumaraswamy Project and 1.2 MTPA Pellet Plant at Donimalai, is reported to 
be under stabilization. As regards the physical performance of NMDC Ltd. the 
Committee note that NMDC has been exceeding its mining capacity target 
during the last 3 years and its achievement was 103%, 115% and 105% 
during 2012 -13, 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 respectively. The Committee are, 
however, concer ned to note though iron ore production by NMDC Ltd.was 
300.25 lakh tonne and 304.41 lakh tonne during 2013 -14 & 2014 -15 
respectively, the production upto December 2015 was only 197.91 lakh 
tonnes of iron ore as against a reduced target of 275 lakh tonnes.  Moreover, 
the target for iron ore production for NMDC Ltd. has been further reduced to 
257 lakh tonne for BE 2016 -17. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the reasons for keeping low target for iron ore production during the year 
2016-17 despite the fact that mining capacity utilization has exceeded 100 % 
for last three years and two new mines of 7.0 MTPA each at Bailadila, 
Chhattisgarh and Kumaraswamy, Karnataka have been commissioned/ under 
stabilization. The Committee would also like to know the p rospective plan of 
NMDC Ltd. to produce 75 MTPA of iron ore by 2018 -19 and 100 MTPA by 
2021-22.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
 In May 2015, NMDC formulated a long term strategic management 
plan (SMP), Vision 2025, as per which its Iron Ore Mining capacity was 
envisaged  to be  increased to 75 million tonnes per annum (MTPA) by  
2018-19 and 100 MTPA by FY 2021 -22.  This was in line with the roadmap 
charted out by the Ministry of Steel, Government of India to augment India‟s 
steel production to 300 MTPA in the next decade. 
 
 Since the formulation of SMP, the business environment for 
commodities/iron ore witnessed severe downturn, necessitating a re -look at 
the ambitious growth agenda.  The prices of steel products and iron ore have 
come down substantially since then.  The s ubdued market conditions are 
likely to continue in the foreseeable future for both the steel and the iron ore 
industry globally, with supplies exceeding demand. 
 
Taking into account the market scenario, the SMP was reviewed by 
NMDC and the broad guidelines of the same have been re-worked as (subject 
to the approval of the Board): 
 
o Increase Iron Mining scale to 50 MTPA by FY 19 and 67 MTPA by 
FY22and further to 100 MTPA in the long term.  
o Strengthen exploration and forward -integrate to value added business 
(Pellet). 

42 
 
 
 Strategically diversify into other steelmaking raw materials 
(Coking Coal, Mn Ore), energy (Thermal Coal) and fertilizer raw 
materials (Rock Phosphate, Potash) based on growth/business 
potential and relevance to NMDC. 
 Diversify into strategic and critical raw materials like Tungsten to 
ensure long term supply security for the nation. 
 
It would be pertinent to mention that the above expansion plan of 
NMDC takes into account the high prospects of the growth of the Indian Steel 
Industry in the coming  years with several factors  indicating the same, such 
as, thrust of the government on infrastructure development, growing 
urbanization, extensive plans of rail network expansion, improving power 
generation etc.  Low per capita  steel consumption in the co untry at 59 kg/t 
vis-à-vis the world average of  217 kg/t also indicate the huge growth 
potential the Indian Steel industry has. 
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
The Committee note that t otal income of NMDC Ltd. increased from 
Rs. 14153.00 crore in 2013 -14 to Rs. 14622.00 crore in 2014 -15. During 
2015-16, an income of Rs. 6262 crore was generated upto December, 2015. 
As regards the Profit After Tax (PAT), it increased from Rs. 6420.00 cror e in 
2013-14 to Rs. 6422.00 crore in 2014 -15. During 2015-16, PAT of Rs. 2475 
crore had been generated upto December 2015. Despite all this, for 2016-17, 
a target for PAT has been kept very low at Rs. 645 crore only. The 
Committee fail to understand the lo gic of reducing the profit target so 
drastically for 2016-17 by NMDC Ltd. The Committee would, therefore, like to 
be apprised of the reasons for such drastic reduction in PAT targets and steps 
taken by the company to improve its financial performance.  
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
While preparation of the BE 2016 -17 in the month of December, 2015 
the import of steel was impacting the domestic steel industries as Minimum 
Import Price (MIP) was not introduced and the impact of safeguard duty levy 
was not evident. In view o f the above the projection of Production volume in 
2016-17 was reduced and considered at 275 LT at the excellent level, thus 
reducing PAT to Rs. 645 cr. The reduction in profit is also on account of the 
fact that domestically and internationally, price of iron ore will continue to 
remain low, which will also have significant impact on NMDC‟s bottom line.  
 
[O.M. No.11014 (4)/2016-Parl. dated 16th September, 2016 of Ministry of Steel] 

43 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

44 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES   OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            RAKESH SINGH 
29 November, 2016                                                              Chairperson 
8 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
  

45 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
DESCRIPTION OF  REQUEST FOR SUPPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE ON 
VARIOUS ISSUES.  
 
 
Ref  : Meeting of the Standing Committee on Coal & Steel with MECON 
at  
         Bokaro on  18.01.2016 
 
Sub : Request for support on the following issues  
 
A. Retaining MECON as Principal Consultant to Government of 
Jharkhand (GoJ) for Infrastructure and Development Projects of 
GoJ towards building Jharkhand State.  
 
The present Government under the able leadership of Hon‟ble Chief 
Minister, Shri Raghubar Das, is committed for good and transparent 
governance. To support such an endeavour and aspiration of the present 
Government, it is our earnest submissions that MECON may be considered 
and recognized as Principal Consultant. Such an approach will help us in 
providing to the Government, technical consultancy in a wholesome 
manner, integrating all facets of development, like industry, infrastructure, 
mining, tourism, health etc. With a large pool of competent technical 
workforce and our main engineering strength available at Ranchi, we are in 
a position to provide such a service  to the Government of Jharkhand. It 
may be worth mentioning that we are a major contributor to the State and 
the Central Exchequer from the State of Jharkhand. 
 
The Mining Department of State of Jharkhand needs further strengthening 
to take care of present  auction process and further activities.  MECON can 
provide all possible assistance in carrying out these activities. 
 
B. Support requested for the following  : 
1. Early release of orders to MECON for the following SAIL 
Projects: 
 3.3 Mt Beneficiation Plant and 2.0 Mt Pellet Plant at RSP, SAIL 
 1.0 Mt Pellet Plant and Beneficiation Plant at BSP, SAIL 
 Rebuilding of Coke Oven Battery #8 at BSL, SAIL 
 
2. MECON to continue as PMC for the PMC project for IIAB, Ranchi 
(on behalf of ICAR) – job was awarded based on competitive bidding 
and now it is proposed to hand it over to CPWD. MECON should be 
allowed to remain PMC whereas CPWD can be entrusted with 
construction responsibility. 
 
C. Support requested from Ministry of Defence for : 

46 
 
1. Retaining MECON Principal Consultant to GoI f or Defence Productions 
and Special Projects under Make in India campaign.  During the recent 
visit of Hon‟ble Defence Minister, Shri Manohar Parikar to Jharkhand, 
he announced establishment of following defence setups: 
 Ordnance Factory 
 Army (Sainik) School 
 Military Station 
 Defence University 
 
2. Award of order to MECON for the “Supply of Wide Plate Mill” project of 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI), Hyderabad. 
MECON had put lot of efforts in carrying out the basic and detailed 
engineering, when Midhani Mana gement was considering MECON for 
the co-development of the Wide Plate Mill which led to the signing of 
draft contract and submission of firm price by MECON. Subsequently 
Midhani went for open tender – where MECON has also participated 
and awaits price opening. 
 
To support Ministry of Steel, Government of India ‟s ambitious plan to 
achieve 300 MTPA crude steel output by 2025 -26, MECON took special 
initiatives for planning & execution  in the following manner:  
1. SPV for Steel  
 MECON developed the concept in  association with SBICAPS for 
development of 23 MTPA Steel production capacity thru‟ SPV route. 
 SPV proposed for four states, e.g. Jharkhand (NMDC), Chhattisgarh 
(SAIL), Odisha (RINL) & Karnataka (NMDC).  
 MECON is participating in all the meetings with MoS  / State Govts. / 
Stake Holders for steering the project.  
MECON is providing site selection services for all of the above. 
2. Steel Freight Corridor (SFC)  
 MECON has developed the concept of SFC to provide adequate logistics 
infrastructure support connect ing the raw material sources with the 
steel plants and their delivery system. 
 MECON along with RITES are taking up Pre -Feasibility studies of some 
major routes on behalf of NMDC.  
3. Special Mining Zones (SMZ)  
 MECON has developed the concept of SMZ that i ncludes development 
of infrastructure facilities in and around the core mining zones of the 
country. 

47 
 
 The concept of SMZ were presented to Secretary, MoS on 21 st Dec. 
2015. 
 It was decided in that meeting MoS shall takeup this matter with MoM 
& MoEF for further development.  
Defence, Strategic & Special Projects  
Highlights  
 MECON being a PSU ensures highest level of Confidentiality required 
for such Projects of National Importance.  
 All Procedures and Directives of GOI followed diligently. 
 MECON in associati on with MoD have been executing  variety of 
projects successfully since decades.  
 Rich experience in executing projects eg. CODs, RODs, FODs. 
 MECON is having a Defence Projects Division for handling  defence 
projects.  
 Highly cost effective services. 
 Complete Engineering services from Concept to Commissioning under 
one roof. 
List of Projects executed  
 SEABIRD (Ph-I), DRDO, HAPP, IMRAT, DMRL, MIDHANI, AGNI, AKASH 
& KONKUR MISSILE LAUNCHING, BARC, SHAR, BEL…  
MECON desires to be retained as Principal Consulta nt by GoI for defence 
production under Make in India campaign. 
MECON’S Association for Building Jharkhand State  
Ongoing Projects  
 World‟s Highest Flag Mast of India at Pahari Mandir – PMC 
 New Jharkhand High court building complex at Ranchi - PMC 
 Five Major Roads  of Ranchi - Decongestion & Beautification -DPR + 
Bid Mngt. + PMC.  
 Inner Ring Road at Ranchi -DPR + Bid Mngt.+ PMC.  
 Bridges under Mukhyamantri Gram Setu Yojana - DPR  

48 
 
 Transaction advisor to GoJ for NTPC-GoJ JV for PTPS, Patratu  
 Technical due diligence study of 2x270MW Units at Latehar, for GoJ  
Projects awaiting work order from Govt. of Jharkhand  
 PMC - DDUGJY & IPDS work for Jharkhand state. 
 Vivekananda Statue at Bada Talab for Dept. of Tourism: Consultant for 
DPR + Bid Mngt. + TPIA 
 Projects of Tourism, Sports, Arts & Culture: Principal Consultant for 
DPR + Bid Mngt. + TPIA + PMC 
 SONE GANGA Project: DPR + Bid Mngt. + PMC for 14 districts for rural 
area ensuring Swatch Bharat Mission and water for all  
 
Projects Identified for Providing Support  
 Solar Power Projects: Principal Consultant for DPR + Bid Mngt. + TPIA. 
 Decongestion & Beautification of Roads in all major towns of 
Jharkhand: Consultancy for DPR + Bid Mngt. + PMC.  
 Consultant for All prefabricated and Conventional design of buildings 
under Building Construction Department - DPR + Bid Mngt. + TPIA. 
 RAPDRP for 30 Towns: Bid Mngt. + PMC on Deposit Work basis. 
 BOP of NTPC & Govt. of Jharkhand JV Power Plant, Patratu: On Deposit 
Work basis. 
MECON desires to be retained as Principal Consultant b y GoJ for building 
Jharkhand State  
Likely Orders to be Received  
1. SAIL Projects - MECON emerged as L1 Bidder and awaiting order  
 Pending Order Value: Rs. 1045 Crores 
 Projects:  
• 3.3 MTPA Iron Ore Beneficiation Plant & 2.0 MTPA Pellet Plant of RSP. 
• 1.0 MTPA Pellet Plant along with Beneficiation Plant of BSP. 
•  0.6 MTPA Slime Beneficiation plant for SAIL-RMD. 
•  Rebuilding of COB #8, BSL. 
  Request for 

49 
 
•  PMC for Hot Strip Mill , RSP   
•  PMC for Critical Packages of BSP 
2. Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd., Hyderabad 
 Project: Supply of  Wide Plate Hot Rolling Mill. 
 Status:  
• MIDHANI floated Global tender in 2012, but could not place order as 
offers received were far in excess of MIDHANI‟s budget. 
• MECON had proposed to build the mill with in -house resources on co -
development basis within MIDHANI‟s budget. 
• MECON had techno -commercial discussion and draft contract was 
signed between MECON & MIDHANI in 2014. 
• Even after signing of the draft contract, MIDHANI decided to go for 
limited tender for this project in August 2015. 
• MECON su bmitted offer in December 2015 and tender is presently 
under evaluation by MIDHANI 
MECON Needing Governmental Support  
1. IIAB, Ranchi  
 Project - Project Management Consultant for IIAB, Ranchi (On behalf 
of ICAR)  
 MECON emerged successful Bidder through co mpetitive bidding 
process.  
 IIAB issued LOI on 23.12.2013 contract signed with MECON on 
18.03.2014. 
 Subsequently MECON has carried out substantial work on the project.  
 ICAR has now decided to entrust the job to CPWD.  
2. 10 MT Rock Phosphate Mines in Syria  
 Preparation of Techno-Economic Study Report  
 Job awarded to MECON by Ministry of Chemical & Fertilisers, GoI. 
 Contract signed in 2009. 
 Status - Final Report submitted by MECON.  

50 
 
 Fee of MECON - US$ 1.5 Million 
 Outstanding Payment - 52.5% of MECON‟s fee 
 Support needed-Realisation of outstanding payment thru‟ intervention 
of MEA & MoCF.  

51 
 
Annexure-II 
 
STATEMENT REGARDING  LIST OF MAJOR JOBS SECURED BY MECON 
DURING 2015-16  
 
 Confidential     
Sub:List of major jobs secured during 01/04/2015 to 31/03/2016 
Sl. 
No. 
CLIENT PROJECT SCOPE OF 
SERVICES 
Date of  
order 
A. INDIAN BUSINESS (CONSULTANCY)   
1 Bharat Electronics 
Ltd., Ghaziabad 
Underground and Overground 
Specialised Integrated EMP 
Protected Hardened Structures at 
Arjangarh, Salua, Memaura, Vadsar 
and Bangalore 
PMC 
Services 
05.10.15 
2 Ministry of Urban 
Development, Govt. of 
Jharkhand, Ranchi 
Development of Five Urban Roads 
and Inner Ring Road of Ranchi City 
DPR & PMC 14.08.15 
3 GAIL (India) Ltd., 
Noida 
PMC Services including Services 
for Pipeline Route Survey Job of 
Phulpur-Haldia Pipeline Project 
PMC 
Services 
18.08.15 
4 Jharkhand Bijli Vitran 
Nigam Ltd., Ranchi 
Project Management Consultancy 
for implementation of Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) in Jharkhand 
PMC 
Services 
01.03.16 
5 SAIL/IISCO Steel 
Plant, Burnpur 
Expansion Project for 2.5 MT 
Stream - Additional Fees 
PMC 
Services 
25.03.16 
6 RINL Powergrid TLT 
Pvt. Ltd., 
Visakhapatnam 
Setting-up a Transmission Line 
Tower Manufacturing Plant at 
Visakhapatnam 
DEC & PMC 
Services 
18.01.16 
7 Bhagyanagar Gas Ltd. Development of CGD Network in 
Hyderabad for a period of Three 
Year 
EPMC 30.07.15 
8 Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation Ltd., 
Neyveli 
1 x 250 MW Bithnok Thermal Power 
Project & 1 x 250 MW Barsingsar 
Thermal Power Station Extension 
Consultancy 18.08.15 
9 Building Construction 
Department, Special 
Works Division, Govt. 
of Jharkhand 
Construction of New Jharkhand 
High Court Building Complex at 
Dhurwa, Ranchi 
PMC 
Services 
12.11.15 
10 Odisha Power 
Transmission 
Corporation Ltd., 
Bhubaneswar 
45 nos. o f 33/11 KV Substations, 
Pkg-1 (36 nos. of Substations) & 
Pkg-5 (9 nos. of Substations) within 
DISCOM-CESU & SOUTHCO 
under Phase -II (R), ODSSP & 
(Amendment-1 for Additional 
Manpower) 
PMC 
Services 
08.06.15 
&  
11.09.15 

52 
 
11 Govt. of Jharkhand, 
Ministry of Powe r, 
(JUVNL), Ranchi 
Transaction Advisory Services for 
proposed Participation of NTPC Ltd. 
in Joint Venture Formation for 
Patratu Thermal Power Station 
Transaction 
Advisory 
Services  
01.04.15 
12 SAIL/IISCO Steel 
Plant, Burnpur 
Zero Liquid Discharge Plant fo r 
Expansion / Modernisation of New 
2.5 Mtpa Project & existing Coke 
Oven of Old Plant 
Consultancy 10.10.15 
13 Tata Metaliks, 
Kharagpur 
Design, Engineering & Consultancy 
Services for Mini Blast Furnace # 1  
DEC 15.07.15 
14 RINL/Visakhapatnam 
Steel Plant, 
Visakhapatnam  
Revamping & Upgradation of 
Walking Beam Furnaces # 1 & 2 of 
Light & Medium Merchant Mill 
DEC 24.04.15 
15 Ministry of Mines, 
Govt. of India 
Transaction Advisory Services for 
various Mines 
Transaction 
Advisory 
Services  
31.03.16 
16 Srikalahasti Pipes Ltd., 
Chennai 
Upgradation of Mini Blast Furnace DEC 14.05.15 
17 JSW Steel Ltd., Salem Installation of a 3 -Strand New 
Bloom Caster (CCM # 3) by 
extending SMS # 1 Building 
DEC 07.09.15 
18 Ministry of Mines, 
Govt. of India 
DGPS Survey for various Mines DGPS 
Survey 
31.03.16 
19 SAIL/Rourkela Steel 
Plant, Rourkela 
Revamping of Blast Furnace # 4 of 
RSP 
Consultancy 14.03.16 
20 Odisha Mining Corpn. 
Ltd., Bhubaneswar 
Modified Mine Plans for Kalarangi 
Chromite Mines, Kaliapani Chromite 
Mines, Saruabil Su krangi Chromite 
Mines, Base of Mahagiri Chromite 
Mines and Scheme of Mining for 
Karlapat Bauxite, Sasubahomali 
Bauxite and Sukinda Chromite 
Block 1, 2 & 3 
Modified 
Mine Plan & 
Scheme of 
Mining 
02.01.16 
21 Jharkhand Govt. Rural 
Development Special 
Division 
Construction of Concrete Road 
Bridges alongwith approach Road 
over Rivers / Nallahs on Rural Road 
in Jharkhand 
DPR 08.07.15 
22 Hindustan Petroleum 
Corpn. Ltd. 
Engineering Consultancy Work at 
Panagarh LPG Bottling Plant 
Consultancy 15.09.15 
23 Hindustan Petroleum 
Corpn. Ltd. 
Reassessing Wind and Seismic 
Resistance of Product Storage 
Tank for various locations 
Consultancy 04.09.15 
24 JSW Steel Ltd., Salem EOF#1 Capacity Enhancement 
from 45t to 65t  
DEC 23.09.15 
B. INDIAN BUSINESS (SUPPLY)   
1 Corporation Bank, 
Mangalore 
Construction of Buildings as 
"Deposit Works" on "Total Turnkey 
Basis" 
Execution on 
LSTK Basis 
18.02.16 

53 
 
2 SAIL/Bokaro Steel 
Plant, Bokaro 
Power Supply System for Sinter 
Plant-II (Package No. 4) 
EPC 11.04.15 
3 ISRO Propulsion 
Complex (IPR C), 
Mahendragiri, Tamil 
Nadu 
Establishment of Structural & 
Mechanical Systems of Integrated 
Engine Test Facility 
EPC 11.03.16 
4 SAIL/Bokaro Steel 
Plant, Bokaro 
Installation of Quenching System 
for Rebuilding of Coke Oven Battery 
# 8 
EPC 04.09.15 
5 SAIL/Durgapur Steel 
Plant, Durgapur 
Extended Category -II Repair of 
Blast Furnace-II 
Capital 
Repair 
13.04.15 
6 Srikalahasti Pipes Ltd., 
Chennai 
Supply of Stave Coolers Supply 14.05.15 
C. OVERSEAS BUSINESS   
1 Premium Steel and 
Mines Ltd., Nigeria 
Steel Plant F acilities of Delta Steel 
Co. Ltd., Warri, Nigeria 
Due 
Diligence, 
Asset 
Valuation & 
Bankable 
TEV Report 
19.10.15 
  Total Business Procured (Rs. Lakhs) 68340.26 
 
 

ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 29 N OVEMBER, 2016 IN HON'BLE CHAIRPERSON'S 
CHAMBER, ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Rakesh Singh - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
3. Shri Nagesh Godam 
4. Shri Shailesh Kumar 
5. Dr. Banshilal Mahato 
6. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
7. Shrimati Riti Pathak  
8. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan 
9. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
11. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
12. Shri Janardan Singh "Sigriwal" 
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
15.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
 Sabha 
16. Shri  
17. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
18.  
19.  
SECRETARIAT 
1.   Shri U.B.S. Negi  - Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Ajay Kumar Garg - Director 
3. Shri Arvind Sharma - Additional Director 
4.       Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft 
Reports:- 
(i) **   **   **   ** 
(ii) **   **   **   ** 
(iii) Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  observations / 
recommendations contained in the Ninth20th Report  (16th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on "Demands for Grants (2016 -17)" relating to the Ministry of 
Steel. 
4. The C ommittee adopted the Reports with some changes/modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
5. **   **   **   ** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________________________________________________________________
______. 
** Do not pertain to this Report.  

55 
 
 ANNEXURE- IV 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT  
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made                    16   
            
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
          (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10,  
12, 13, 14, 15 and 16)               13 
                                                                                                
       
Percentage of total                      81.25% 
            
       
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies  
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 7, 8 and 9)      
     03 
  
Percentage of total                   18.75% 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee     
 (vide recommendation  Sl. No. Nil)                  00 
        
Percentage of total                                          0% 
               
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited (vide recommendation  Sl. No. Nil)                        00 
           
 Percentage of total                                 0%  
 
 