1 
 
     
23 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2015-2016) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
 
"SAFETY, HEALTH AND EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR 
INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN COAL/LIGNITE MINING AREAS" 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel    
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)] 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2016/ Sravana, 1938(Saka) 
 
 
 

2 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2015-2016) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
"SAFETY, HEALTH AND EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR 
INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN COAL/LIGNITE MINING AREAS" 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report(16th Lok Sabha) of the  
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   10.08.2016 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on   10.08.2016 
   
                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
August, 2016/ Sravana 1938(Saka) 
  


3 
 
 CONTENTS 
  
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................... (ii) 
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (iv) 
CHAPTER I Report   
………………………………………………………………………………………. 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
 
17 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies………………. 
 
39 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
40 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………..  
 
41 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel (2015-16) held on  09.08.2016 ……………………………………... 
 
          
      48       
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha)………………………………………….………..............................    
       
       
      
      49   
               
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2015-16) 
             
           Shri Rakesh Singh  - Chairperson  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A Arunmozhithevan 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
5. Shri Godam Nagesh 
6. Shri Fagga Singh Kulaste $ 
7. Shri Shailesh Kumar 
8. Dr. Banshilal Mahato 
9. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak  
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan 
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Shri Janardan Singh "Sigriwal" 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Shri Rama Kishore Singh   
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
20.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
 Sabha 
22. Shri M.J. Akbar@ 
23. Shri  
24.  
25.  
26.  
27.  
28. Shri Jugul Kishore# 
29. Shri Avinash Pande# 
30. Shri Sanjay Raut# 
31.  
32. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya* 
33. Shri Beni Prasad Verma* 
_______________________________________________________________ 
$ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 05.07.2016 on his induction in the 
Council of Ministers. 
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 17.06.2016 after his resignation from 
Membership of Rajya Sabha  
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 04.07.2016 after his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha 
 *Nominated w.e.f. 25.07.2016.  
(ii) 
                                             
 
 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi             -           Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg    -           Director   
3. Shri Arvind Sharma        -           Additional Director 
4. Ms. Miranda  Ingudam   -           Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  
 
 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendat ions contained in the Fourteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Safety, Health 
and Education Facilities for Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/Lignite Mining Area s"  
relating to the Ministry of Coal.  
  
2.  The Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2015. Replies of the 
Government to all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 11.07.2016.  
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on  09.08.2016.   
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendation contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter -I  
of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                 RAKESH SINGH 
09 August, 2016                                                                      Chairperson      
18 Sravana, 1938(Saka)                    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
(iv)  
     

7 
 
   REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel deals with 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel on "Safety, Health and Education Facilities for 
Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas"  relating to the Ministry of 
Coal which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2015.  
2.  The Report contained 1 7 Observations/Recommendations. Action 
Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Coal in respect of all 
the 1 7 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on       
11.07. 2016. These have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,9, 12, 15 and 16   Total – 12 
 (Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
Sl. No. 13         Total – 01        
         (Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
NIL           Total – NIL 
           (Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of  the 
Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 10, 11, 14 and 17      Total–04  
         (Chapter V) 

8 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should 
be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action Taken notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Final Action 
Taken Replies to the Recommendation s contained in Chapter -V of this 
Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Ministry on some 
of their observations/recommendations made in the Fourteenth Report.  
NEED FOR REVIEW OF STATUTES GOVERNING SAFETY IN COAL 
MINES 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
5. The Committee observed that some of the statutes governing safety in Coal 
Mines viz. Mines Act, 1952; Electricity Act, 2003; Explosive Act, 1884; Employee 
Compensation Act, 2009; Factories Act, 1948; Indian Boiler Act, 1923 etc. were 
framed decades back in a totally different work atmosphere and therefore calls for 
an urgent holistic revi ew based on the challenges being faced in carrying out the 
present day mining operations. In this context the Committee were happy to note 
that the Ministry of L abour and Employment (MOL&E) had  proposed to amend the 
provisions of Mines Act, 1952 and bring out new Coal Mines Regulations -2015 with 
a view to address modern day challenges. The Ministr y had  informed the 
Committee that the Mines Act (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and draft Coal Mines 
Regulations, 2015 had been prepared after due deliberations with all stake holders 
and ha d been notified in the Gazette of India. The Committee appreciate d the 
initiatives taken so far by the Government in reviewing the old statutes governing 
mines safety to cater to the prese nt day needs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that comprehensive review of all the relevant statutes may be under 

9 
 
taken by the Ministry so that obsolete and redundant provisions m ight be weeded 
out and appropriate amendments, whenever necessary might be brought out in the 
statutes/Rules/Regulations. The Committee further recommend ed that the entire 
exercise might be carried out in a time bound manner and the Committee m ight be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
6. In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Coal has stated as under :  
 
"DGMS under aegis of the Ministry of Labour  & Employment (MOLE) is the 
regulatory body responsible for enforcement of various statutes applicable to 
the mining industry. They constantly review the said statutes in so far as 
their applicability is concerned to cater to the needs of the technological and 
other developments in the mining industry as well as safety and health 
aspects of the employees. The Mines Act -1952, the Coal Mines Regulation -
1957, the Mines Rul es-1955 and the Mine Vocational Training Rules - 1966 
are under process of amendment."  
7. With reference to the  recommendation of the Committee  for a 
comprehensive review of all relevant governing statues on safety in  
Coal Mines, the Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that the 
regulatory body, namely, the Directorate General of Mines Safety 
(DGMS) under the aegis of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
constantly re view the applicability of various statutes . The 
Committee note that the stated review takes into consider ation the 
needs of the technological and other  developments in the mining 
industry as well as safety and health aspects of the employees.  
According to the Ministry of Coal,  Mines Act, 1952; the Coal Mines 
Regulations, 1957; the Mines Rules, 1955; and the Mines Vocational 
Training Rules, 1966 are under process of amendment.  However,  
the Ministry's reply is silent on the aspect of the time frame within 
which this review is to  be completed.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the entire 

10 
 
exercise may be carried out in a time bound manner and the y be 
apprised of the final outcome in the matter.  
SAFETY MONITORING MECHANISM IN CIL 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
8. The Committee noted that an elaborate safety monitoring mechanism existed 
at different levels in CIL viz. Mine Level; Area Level; Head Quarter Level; CIL Head 
Quarter Level; and Mini sterial/National Level which had  resulted in continued and 
sustained improvement in CIL's safety performance. It was evident from the fact 
that the trend of five yearly average fatalities of 196 in the years 1975 -1979 in CIL 
had come down to 62 in the year 2010-2014 as also the five yearly average serious 
injuries in CIL from 1278 in the years 1975 -1979 to 228 in the ye ars 2010-2014. 
The Committee had been apprised of various actions being taken for  improvement 
in safety in mines viz. continuous review of safety status of mines through the 
multi-disciplinary Internal Safety Organization (ISO); issue of directives/guidelines 
on corrective measures for prevention of recurrence after detailed analysis of fatal 
accidents; preparation and implementation of risk assessment based Safety 
Management Plan (SMP) for every mine; mine safety audit by external independent 
agencies; technology up-gradation for improving safety in mining operation; better 
strata management; prevention of spontaneous heating; fire and explosion in 
mines; mine safety inspections; saf ety R&D initiatives at CIL, Head Quarter level; 
prevention of accidents in Open Cast Mines; emergency response systems; safety 
awareness programme; etc. Statedly, new initiatives for adoption of a system 
approach for overall improvement of safety standards  viz. adoption of globally 
established technique of WRAC (Workplace Risk Assessment and Control) compliant 
with Coal Mines Rules (CMR) 2011; uniform system of documentation of all mining 
operation activities; adoption of Risk Assessment based Safety Manage ment in all 
mines of CIL; etc. were being put in place. The Committee, however, note d with 
concern that during the last five years, the trend of fatalities in CIL showed only a 
marginal reduction from 62 in 2009 to 58 in 2013, while for serious injuries, f rom 
290 in 2009, it increased to 308 in 2010 and came down to 178 in 2013. In this 

11 
 
regard, the Committee had emphasized that every single life was precious and all 
out efforts must be made to bring the fatality rate to zero on utmost priority basis. 
The Co mmittee appreciated that laudable initiative s at par with global standards 
were being put in place in CIL Mines to further boost the safety parameters and 
standards in these mines. The Committee, however, at the same time desire that 
the reasons for each instance of fatality as well as serious injury that had occurred 
must be properly analyzed and appropriate remedial mechanism be accordingly 
devised to avoid recurrence of such circumstances to bring down the fatality rate as 
well as the trend of serious i njuries. The Committee hope d that the preventive 
measures being put into place as well as the new initiatives would translate into a 
zero tolerance level for fatalities as well as serious accidents in these mines. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of  the tangible results gained from these 
initiatives and measures being put in place in CIL Mines. 
 
9.  In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Coal has stated as under:  
 
"The law enforcing agency / regulatory authority under the Mines Act - 1952 
i.e. th e Directorate General of Mine safety (DGMS) under the aegis of 
Ministry of Labour  & Employment (MOLE) conducts statutory inquiry / 
investigation to analyze the causes and circumstances leading to all fatal 
accidents and suggests remedial measures to avoid recurrence of such 
accidents. 
Apart from inquiry conducted by DGMS, all fatal and serious accidents are 
also being inquired / investigated by the Mine Manager or any Asst. Manager 
authorized by the Mine Manager and the Safety Officer of the respective mine 
as per provisions made under the Coal Mines Regulations- 1957. 
Apart from the above investigations / inquiries made under various 
provisions of statutes, the Internal Safety Organization (ISO) of each 
subsidiary company also conducts inquiry in case of an y fatal accident to 
analyze the root causes and recommend corrective and preventive measures 
to be taken to prevent recurrence of such accidents. 
Tangible results of safety initiatives in mines of CIL: There is 
substantial reduction in both fatal and serio us accidents in the mines of CIL 
in last four years since adoptation of risk assessment tool of Workplace Risk 
Assessment and Control  (WRAC)for preparation safety Management 
Plans(SMPs)and implementation of control measures in mines, which is 
evident from the table given below: 

12 
 
Sl. 
No. Accident Statistical 
Parameters 
4 yearly average  
(from 2008 to 2011) 
prior to 
implementation of 
WRAC based SMPs 
4 yearly average  
(from 2012 to 2015) 
since implementation 
of WRAC based SMPs 
% Reduction  
1 Nos. of fatal 
accidents 60 48 20% 
2 Nos. of fatalities 70 50 29% 
3 Nos. of serious 
accidents 294 182 38% 
4 Nos. of serious 
injuries 304 187 38%" 
 
10. The Committee are happy to observe that there is a substantial 
reduction in both fatal and serious accidents in the mines of CIL 
during the last four years since adoption of risk assessment tool of 
Workplace Risk Assessment and Control (WRAC)for preparation of 
safety Management Plans(SMPs)and implementation of control 
measures in mines.  This is evident from the fact that since 
implementation of WRAC based SMPs, the accident statistical 
parameters of fatal accidents, fatalities, seri ous accidents and 
serious inj uries have shown  a significant reduction of 20%, 29%, 
38% and 38% respectively  during 2012 to 2015 as compared to the 
period from 2008 to 2011 i.e. prior to implementation of WRAC 
based SMPs .  While appreciating the apparent tangible reduction 
that have ta ken place in accident statistical parameters, the 
Committee reiterate their expectation that the preventive measures 
put in place as well as the other new initiatives would translate into  
a zero  tolerance level for fatalities as well as serious accidents in 
these Mines.  
 
 

13 
 
SAFETY INSPECTION OF MINES 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
11. The Committee f ound that the Mines Rules, 1955 stipulate d for a monthly 
inspection of Mines with a view to assess various aspect s like dangers in relation to 
mining operations such as condition of Roof & Sides, adequacy of supports, safety 
aspects in haulage and travelling roadways, ventilation, sealed off area,  escape 
route, machinery etc., compliance to various statutory provisions, status of 
functioning of different safety system installed/commissioned in the Mines; 
compliance to safety checklists prescribed; etc. Un doubtedly, a robust inspection 
was the sine qua non for effective implementation of safety monitoring mechanism. 
The Committee, therefore, desired that this important aspect should be given 
utmost priority and the findings and recommendations made by inspection teams 
be meticulously followed and implemented in letter and spirit. 
12.   In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Coal has stated as under:  
 
"As per the Mines Rules 1955, Workmen Inspectors and Safety Committee 
members inspect their respective mines. Observations/ Recommendations 
based on  the inspections made by the Safety Committee during their 
inspections are discussed in the monthly meeting.  
 
The compliance of recommendations / suggestions of the Safety Committee 
are scrutinized by DGMS officials during their visit to mines. The compli ance 
report is also being checked by the Internal Safety Organization (ISO) and 
senior Area level executives. 
 
Besides the above, the officers from Directorate -General of Mines Safety 
(DGMS) regularly inspect mines to oversee the compliance of statutes related 
to mine safety. DGMS has well established structure for conducting 
inspection of mines. There are total eight zones, each under the charge of a 
Deputy Director-General of Mines Safety. There are three to four Regional 
offices under each zonal office. Each Region is under the charge of a Director 
of Mines Safety. There are in all 29 such Regional offices. There are four to 
five Dy. Director of Mine Safety (DDMS) under one Director of Mines Safety. 
Each Zone, besides having inspecting officers of mining disciplines has 
officers in electrical & mechanical engineering and occupational health 
disciplines. During inspection, DGMS officers review all safety parameters of 
the mines. 
 

14 
 
SCCL:  Inspections are done regularly  and findings/ violations / 
recommendations are acted upon and corrective action is taken. It also get 
uploaded to Web and is monitored by ISO. 
 
NLC: In order to ensure thorough inspection, following agencies /  bodies 
undertake inspection on time bound basis as follows: 
(i)       Daily 
 Safety Related issues are being deliberated at Mine Level Production 
Review Meeting. 
 Inspection of the Mine workings by Manager/ Mines and other statutorily  
qualified personnel. 
 Area wise Inspection / Supervision is being carried out by the concerned 
experienced Under Managers , Mechanical Engineers and  Electrical 
Engineers. 
 Hand over and take over of charge exists in all Mining operations in 
every shift and being followed by statutorily qualified Mining Personnel 
to ensure safety of Men, Machineries and Materials. 
(ii) Weekly 
 Weekly Review Meeting is being conducted by the Mine Manager to 
discuss the issues related to Mine working plans / operations, Safety 
Related Activities etc. 
 Safety Status / Safety Performance of the Mine is monitored / reviewed 
under the statutory frame work. 
 Regular Inspection by the Statutory Personnel and Officials at Corporate 
Level to monitor standards maintained as per statute. 
(iii) Monthly 
 Safety Status / Safety Performance are monitored by the Sectional / 
Departmental Safety Committee constituted under the Pit Safety 
Committee Mine wise. 
 Pit Safety Committee Meetings are conducted regularly once in a Month. 
Mine wise Mock drills at vulnerable locations to assess the preparedness 
on emergency response. 
 Central Safety Committee Meeting in every unit in cyclic order. 
 A Safety Audit Team comprising of Engineers of various disciplines 
inspect the Safety features such as „Fail Safe System‟ incorporated in 
the Specialized Mining Equipments / Conveyor etc., to ensure 
Safe/Reliable operation and to achieve total loss control over Men / 
Materials / Machineries. 
(iv) Quarterly 
 Inter Unit Safety Assessment are being carried out to assess the Safety 
Standards maintained as per statute. 
 „Safety Performance Appraisal‟ for NLC Units is being submitted to NLC 
Board for every Quarter and the Board - Observations / Suggestions are 
being implemented. 
 Safety Status / Safety Performance of every Mines is monitored / 
reviewed under the statutory frame work. 
(v) Periodical / Annually 
 Safety Action Plan is being prepared and reviewed every year. 

15 
 
 Training Calendar is prepared every year and training on Safety Related 
Topics is being imparted to all the Employees. 
 Well laid „Pre Monsoon Action Plan‟ in detail is prepared and revised and 
reviewed for every year to take care of any emergency situation. 
 Cyclone Alert Squad swing into action whenever heavy rainfall  / heavy 
wind velocities warnings received in advance through a well established 
Weather Warning System, net worked with Regional Meteorological 
offices. 
 Periodical Env ironmental studies by the CARD (Internal) and NIMH 
(External) on Occupational Health Hazards (Dust / vibration / noise) 
 Slope Stability / Stabilization / rehabilitation of slope are being carried 
out by engaging accredited Mining Experts (Scientific and Re search 
Institutions NIRM / KGF / CMRI / TANU and their recommendations are 
being implemented. 
 Risk Assessment and Safety Audit once in 2 years by accredited 
External Agencies. 
 DGMS officials make inspection of the Mine periodically and point out 
deficiencies for necessary corrective measures and the remedial 
measures are being undertaken and the status report is being submitted 
to the Inspectorate. 
 Periodical study is being conducted to identify and to detect emerging 
Occupational Health Hazards l ike silicosis and Pneumoconiosis, but no 
such cases were identified so far, at NLC during Periodical Medical 
Examinations being conducted as per statute. 
The recommendations given by the above inspection team are 
meticulously implemented in letter and spirit." 
13. The Committee are happy to note that a n elaborate inspection 
mechanism has been put in place in Neyveli Lignite Corporation 
(NLC) ensuring tho rough inspection on  daily, weekly, monthly, 
quarterly and annual basi s.  The Committee observe that 
recommendations given by the inspection team are meticulously 
implemented in letter and spirit.  The Committee, however, find that 
in respect of SCCL, the reply given by the Ministry merely  stated that 
inspections  are done  regularly and the findings, violation s and 
recommendations are acted upon and corrective action taken.  The 
Committee feel that the periodicity of inspections  have to be laid 
down specifically in governing statutes/guidelines so that the 
intended purpose of carrying out periodic inspections is achieved.  
The Committee also observe that inspections are carried out at 

16 
 
various levels in the hierarchy and also by various authorities viz. 
Safety Committee; Directorate General of Mine Safety; Internal 
Safety Organisation; etc. The Committee desire that ther e should be 
a robust functional cooperation and coordination amongst all these 
inspection authorities so that the findings, observations and 
recommendations are coherently analysed and implemented upon 
effectively.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter.  
ZERO HARM POTENTIAL  
Recommendation Serial No. 12 
 
14. The C ommittee note that a Roadmap had  been prepared to achieve 'Zero 
Harm Potential (ZHP) in CIL mine Areas. In the year 2010, a training programme 
was arranged by CIL on Safety in Mines, Testing and Research Statio n (SIMTARS) 
at Australia which was recognized as the best in the world to deve lop trainers with 
an objective to improve safety stand ards in Mines. The Committee had  been 
apprised that the initiative wa s a continuous process with 1488 and 1341 
executives already trained in the first and second phase of the training programme 
respectively. To achieve 'Zero H arm Potential' in mines, CIL had  taken up a 
numbers of additional measures  viz implementation of SMPs and  Take-5, an 
informal risk assessment tool before starting of any operation;  up-gradation of 
knowledge to cope with technology c hange; Risk Management System for Project 
Planning Stage,  Restructuring/Re-organization of relatively small Mines to bigger 
Mines for adoption of Mass Production Technology, acquisition of land for OCPs in 
one go so that operations in Mines c ould be done a s per approved plan and all 
mining areas be permanently fenced; deployment of higher capacity equipment in 
OCPs for faster excavation; effective training and feedback system and weeding out 
of incompetent and physically unfit workman from operational activ ities, etc. The 
Committee appreciated the ongoing initiatives towards 'Zero Harm Potential' and 
hoped that this target would be achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee 

17 
 
at the same time recommend ed that such training programmes must also be 
organized for non-executives also who were engaged in actual mining operations. 
The Committee also desire d SCCL and NLC to  work out such training programmes 
for their executives as well as non -executives. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress in the matter. 
15.     In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Coal has stated as under:  
 
"Safety is always the highest priority. Safety is embedded in the mission 
statement and is one of the most important factors in the overall business 
strategy. CIL has framed a well -defined safety policy to ensure safety in our 
mines and establishments. CIL has well established multi-disciplinary internal 
safety organization in all subsidiaries for implementation of Safety Policy. All 
operations, systems and processes are meticulously planned and designed 
with due regard to safety, conservation and sustainab le development. CIL 
always encourages employees‟ participations at all levels so as to promote 
proactive safety culture and to improve safety awareness at grass root level.  
 
With consistent efforts, continuous improvement in safety standards is 
achieved which is reflected in reduction of fatalities and serious injuries. To 
achieve further improvement, initiatives are being taken in various spheres 
which include the following:- 
A. Mining Operation: Adoption of the state-of-the art technology in suitable 
geo-mining locales. 
1. Adoption of Mass Production Technology in more number of UG 
mines. 
2. Deployment of more number of surface miners to eliminate blasting 
operation in O.C.Ps. 
3. Deployment of relatively higher capacity HEMM in more number of 
O.C.Ps . 
4. Mechanisation of UG drilling.  
5. Phasing out manual loading in UG mines. 
 
 B.  Strata Management: Thrust on prevention of roof & side fall 
accidents. 
1. Dedicated Strata Control Cell in each company. 
2. Roof bolting as an integral part of support system in UG mines. 
3. Switching over to use of resin capsules from cement capsules in 
phased manner. 
4. Monitoring of strata by strata monitoring devices.  
 
 C.    Prevention of Spontaneous heating: 
1. Expedite construction of sectionalisation stoppings. 
2. Pressure Quantity(PQ) Survey for checking efficacy of ventilation 
standards at regular intervals. 

18 
 
3. Use of more number of Gas Chromatographs for mine air sampling. 
4. Use of Local Methane Detector (LMD) for early and accurate 
detection of methane. 
5.  Environmental Tele-Monitoring System (ETMS) in degree III & fiery 
UG mines. 
D.  Training : 
1. Skill up-gradation training to frontline officials and workmen. 
2. Behavioral based training for all employees. 
3. One Week Training to all front line supervisors . 
4. Training of Dumper Operators on Simulators. 
E. Others: 
1. Slope monitoring devices in O.C.Ps for prediction of bench/dump 
failure. 
2.  Digitization of mine plan. 
3. Introduction of LED type light weight cap lamps in u/g mines. 
4. Man Riding System (MRS) for u/g mines having long and arduous 
travel. 
 
In an endeavor to achieve "Zero Harm Potential", the safety system 
of CIL is analyzed in depth vis -a-vis other coal producing countries. It 
was revealed that safety standard of Australia has been by far the best 
amongst leading coal producing countries.  Australia has achieved 
almost zero fatality in their mines consistently during last decade. 
They are doing risk assessment in all mine operations based on which 
they are preparing Safety Management Plan(SMP) for all mines and 
the same are being implemented in true spirit. 
 
To achieve " Zero Harm Potential" , CIL having explored all 
possibilities has finally adopted the safety management system of 
Australia which is now recognized as the best in the world. 
 
In the above backdrop, a group consisting of twenty executives have 
been trained in Australia in Risk Management system. These trained 
executives are being deployed for imparting training to other 
executives responsible for implementing the safety management 
system in mines of CIL. They are further giving t raining to the grass 
root level workers for preparation of Risk assessment based Safety 
Management Plan(SMP). 
 
SMPs for all mines of CIL have been prepared and are being reviewed 
on regular basis.SMP is a continuous process which need regular 
review and updation with the dynamics of mines. 
However due to differences in technological and socio -economic 
conditions prevailing in India, the progress in implementation the 
same is slow. 
 

19 
 
Upon in-depth study, comparison of our mining system with the same 
of the ot her advanced coal producing countries, the following 
contrasting differences are observed: 
 
System Coal mines of Advanced 
Countries Coal mines of CIL 
Mechanization 
All Underground as well as OC 
workings are highly 
mechanized. Very few 
manpower is deployed in mining 
activities. In underground 
mines, requirement of workmen 
to enter the area under green 
roof is minimum. Hence 
exposure to risk of workmen is 
minimum. Mostly UG mineface 
machinery are remotely 
operated. 
UG mines are highly labour 
intensive and low productivity. In 
OCPs relatively low capacity 
HEMMs are deployed due to 
limited working area. 
Working space Land is not a constraint. 
Due to delay in land acquisition, 
many mines especially OCPs are 
working in constricted space. Risk 
increases many fold  due to poor 
mine shape. Non -availability of 
land for dumping has resulted in 
many unstable dumps. 
Vicinity of 
mines 
Mining Areas are far away from 
dwellings/habitation.  
Mining Area are generally having 
dwelling/habitation and other 
surface constraints. People do not 
vacate land even after receiving 
compensation. Many habitants 
make a living on coal picking from 
dumps and theft of coal from 
mines, which increases the risk of 
accidents. 
Legacy 
Problem There is no legacy problem 
CIL was formed after takin g over 
mines from erstwhile private 
owners. These mines are even 
more than hundred years old. 
Most of these mines are having 
multi seam working contained 
water and fire in upper sections 
which are abandoned long back 
leading to transference of danger 
to present sections. 
Workforce 
Workforce appointed solely on 
basis of job requirement and 
competency. Hence all 
employees are highly educated, 
skilled and competent.  Labour 
laws are flexible,  "hire and fire 
rule" is practiced for 
incompetent workmen. 
Mostly land oustees are appointed 
who are generally semi 
educated/uneducated. 

20 
 
To achieve " Zero Harm Potential"  in mines of CIL following 
additional measures are envisaged to be implemented.  
  
1. Implementation of SMP in true spirit and continual review and 
updation the same. 
2. Implementation of Take -5 as an informal risk assessment tool before 
starting of any operations. 
3. Up-gradation of knowledge to cope with the technological changing 
scenario. 
4. Risk Management system shall be ingrained right at the project 
planning stage, itself. 
5. Restructuring/Re-organization of relatively small mines into bigger 
mines shall be done for adoption of Mass Production Technology. 
6.  Land for O.C.Ps shall be acquired in one go and all the mining areas 
shall be fenced by permanent fencing so that operations of mine can 
be done as per approved plan. 
7.  High capacity equipment shall be deployed in O.C.Ps  for faster 
excavation.After mining , land shall be restored back to its original 
shape.  
8. Effective Training and feedback system shall be introduced and 
incompetent and physically unfit workmen shall be debarred from 
operational activities. 
 
NLC: NLC is working out strategy to impart trainin g to achieve Zero Harm 
Potential (ZHP) covering its executives an d non executives in time bound 
manner. NLC has taken up a numbers of additional measures viz 
implementation of Safety Management Plan , and informal risk assessment 
tool before starting of any operation; up-gradation of knowledge to cope with 
technology change; Risk Management System for Project Planning Stage, 
effective training and feedback system and weeding out of incompetent and 
physically unfit workman from operational activities.  It is proposed to impart 
training to SME & CME operators through simulators for which procurement 
action is being initiated. 
 
SCCL : Training programmes are organized on actual mining operations to 
both Executives and Non-executives." 
16. The Committee find that  consistent and continuous efforts 
towards achievement of Zero Harm Potential' (ZHP) are being made 
by CIL.  However, the Committee are concerned to note that  though 
trainings are being imparted to gras s root level workers for 
preparation of Risk Assessment Based Safety Management 
Plan(SMP), the progress of implementation wa s slow due to 
differences in technological and socio -economic conditions 

21 
 
prevailing in the country .  The Committee, however, find that  the 
reply was silent on the aspect of a time frame for achievement of 
'ZHP'.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the ongoing 
initiatives towards achieving the ZHP be further augmented and 
accelerated so that the targets set a re achieved in a time bound 
manner.  To this end, the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
set a time frame for accomplishing the goals of ZHP.   
 
PRIVATE SCHOOLS FINANCED BY CIL AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES 
Recommendation Serial No. 17 
 
17. While observing that there was no employer- employee relationship between 
the teachers employed by the management of privately managed schools and 
CIL/Subsidiaries companies which ha d been confirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court Order dated 21st August, 2007, the Committee appreciate d the e nhanced 
rate of grants -in-aid of Rs. 5000/ - per undergraduate teacher to Rs. 7000/ - per 
graduate teacher with B. Ed. qualification per month being granted by the CIL. The 
Committee, however, desire d that management of CIL should ensure that these 
privately managed collieries schools are imparting quality education to the children 
of miners and workmen of the collieries. The Committee also desire d that the 
management of these privately managed schools which were getting grants-in-aids 
from CIL and its subsid iaries were implementing the wage structure for different 
categories of teachers as approved by the respective State Government/State 
Education Board. 
 
18.     In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Coal has stated as under:  
 
"To improve the quality of education in the  operational  area  of  Subsidiary 
Companies, National  skill Development corporation  will be engaged for 
conducting a survey  of the existing  privately managed school, which are 
getting grant-in -aids. 
The subsidiary companies have be en advised to ensure that payment of 
grant-in-aid to privately managed school is released in time." 
 

22 
 
19. The Committee are happy to note that to improve the quality of 
education in the  operational  area  of  Subsidiary Companies,  CIL 
will engage the National Skill Development Corporation for 
conducting a survey of the existing privately managed school which 
are getting grants -in-aids.  However, on the aspect of the 
Committee's  recommendation that the management of privately 
managed schools getting grants -in-aid from CIL and its subsidiaries 
should implement the wage structure for different categories of 
teachers as approved by the respective State Government/State 
Education Board, the Ministry has merely stated that the subsidiary  
companies have been advised to ensure the payment of grant -in-aid 
to privately managed school be released in time.  The Committee 
observe that the Ministry has not replied  on the important aspect  of 
implementation of wage structure.  The Committee, theref ore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the wage structure for 
different categories of teachers as approved by the respective State 
Governments/State Education Board be implemented by the 
management of privately managed schools which are getting grants-
in-aid from CIL and its subsidiaries.  The Committee desire that they 
be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 

23 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Committee recommended that the Government should go for a sustainable mining 
policy with a commitment to Safety, health and education facilities for these 
miners.  
Action Taken  
 
For sustainable mining policy with a commitment to Safety, health and education 
facilities, following steps are being taken by CIL.  
 
1. Safety Policy : CIL has framed “Safety Policy” for safe operation of all 
mining activities for sustainable development.  
 
2. Internal Safety Organization (ISO) : CIL has established a  multi -
disciplinary Internal Safety Organization (ISO) in all subsidiaries to assist the 
line management at various levels in matters related to Safety and 
sustainable mining operations. 
 
3. Risk Asses sment & Safety Management Plan : Risk assessment based 
Safety Management Plans have been prepared for all mines of CIL. It is an 
on-going process for continuous improvement of safety standard in mines for 
sustainable development. 
4. For improving safety in mining operation:Adoption of the following state-
of-the art technology in suitable geo -mining locales with view conservation 
and safety. 
 Adoption of Mass Production Technology in more number of UG mines. 
 Deployment of more number of surface miners to eliminat e blasting 
operation in OCPs. 
 Deployment of relatively higher capacity HEMM in more number of 
OCPs. 
 Mechanisation of UG drilling.  
 Phasing out manual loading in UG mines. 
 
5. Occupational Health Surveillance System : CIL has well -established 
Occupational Health Surveillance System for checkup of Occupational 
diseases and conducting Initial Medical Examination (IME) & Periodical 

24 
 
Medical Examination (PME) of its employees including contractor‟s workers as 
per provisions of the Mines Rules -1955. 
 
6. Educational facilities: The Educational facilities are being provided for the 
surrounding population also through CSR activities, besides taking care of the 
children of the mine employees.  
 
7. Resettlement and Rehabilitation Poli cy (R&R) Policy of CIL: CIL has 
formulated a Policy for the resettlement and rehabilitation of people affected 
by coal mining projects (PAPs). 
 
8. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Policy : CIL has framed well -
defined CSR policy for sustainable development with an objective to enhance 
welfare measures of the society based on short term and long term social 
and environmental consequences of mining activities.As part of its Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) efforts, Coal India Limited and its subsidiary 
companies regularly undertake various community development activities in 
and around the coalfield areas for the benefit of the local people. 
 
Works under Community Development Programme  include:-  
 Installation/Repairing of Hand Pumps. 
 Digging/renovation of Wells/Ponds/Dam etc. 
 Water Supply through pipelines. 
 Construction/Renovation and repair of Community 
Centre/building. 
 Construction/repair of Roads/Culverts. 
 Construction/repair of school building. 
 Organizing Medical Camps. 
 Organizing Sports and cultural activities. 
 Miscellaneous works. 
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
NEED FOR REVIEW OF GOVERNING STATUTES ON SAFETY IN COAL MINES 
Recommendation No.  2 
The Committee observe that some of the statutes governing safety in Coal Mines 
viz. Mines Act, 1952; Electricity Act, 2003; Explosive Act, 1884; Employee 
Compensation Act, 2009; Factories Act, 1948; Indian Boiler Act, 1923 etc. were 
framed decades back in a totally different work atmosphere and therefore calls for 
an urgent holistic review based on the challenges being faced in carrying out the 
present day mining operations. In this context the Committee are happy to note 
that the Ministry of Labour and Emp loyment (MOL&E) have proposed to amend the 
provisions of Mines Act, 1952 and bring out new Coal Mines Regulations -2015 with 
a view to address modern day challenges. The Ministry have informed the 
Committee that the Mines Act (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and draf t Coal Mines 

25 
 
Regulations, 2015 have been prepared after due deliberations with all stake holders 
and have been notified in the Gazette of India. The Committee appreciate the 
initiatives taken so far by the Government in reviewing the old statutes governing  
mines safety to cater to the present day needs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that comprehensive review of all the relevant statutes may be under 
taken by the Ministry so that obsolete and redundant provisions may be weeded out 
and appropriate amend ments, whenever necessary may be brought out in the 
statutes/Rules/Regulations. The Committee further recommend that the entire 
exercise may be carried out in a time bound manner and the Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
Action Taken 
DGMS under aegis of the Ministry of Labour & Employment (MOLE) is the regulatory 
body responsible for enforcement of various statutes applicable to the mining 
industry. They constantly review the said statutes in so far as their applicability is 
concerned to cater to the needs of the technological and other developments in the 
mining industry as well as safety and health aspects of the employees. The Mines 
Act -1952, the Coal Mines Regulation -1957, the Mines Rules -1955 and the Mine 
Vocational Training Rules- 1966 are under process of amendment.  
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
SAFETY MONITORING MECHANISM IN CIL   
Recommendation Serial No.  3 
The Committee note that an elaborate safety monitoring mechanism exists at 
different levels in CIL viz. Mine Level; Area Level; Head Quarter Level; CIL Head 
Quarter Level; and Ministerial/National Level which has resulted in continued and 
sustained improvement in CIL's safety performance. It is evident from the fact that 
the trend of five yearly average fatalities of 196 in the years 1975 -1979 in CIL has 
come down to 62 in the year 2010 -2014 as also the five yearly average serious 
injuries in CIL from  1278 in the years 1975 -1979 to 228 in the years 2010 -2014. 
The Committee have been apprised of various actions being taken for  improvement 
in safety in mines viz. continuous review of safety status of mines through the 
multi-disciplinary Internal Safety Organization (ISO); issue of directives/guidelines 
on corrective measures for prevention of recurrence after detailed analysis of fatal 
accidents; preparation and implementation of risk assessment based Safety 
Management Plan (SMP) for every mine; mine safety audit by external independent 
agencies; technology up-gradation for improving safety in mining operation; better 
strata management; prevention of spontaneous heating; fire and explosion in 
mines; mine safety inspections; safety R&D initiatives at CIL, Head Quarter level; 
prevention of accidents in Open Cast Mines; emergency response systems; safety 

26 
 
awareness programme; etc. Statedly, new initiatives for adoption of a system 
approach for overall improvement of safety standards viz. adoption of globally 
established technique of WRAC (Workplace Risk Assessment and Control) compliant 
with Coal Mines Rules (CMR) 2011; uniform system of documentation of all mining 
operation activities; adoption of Risk Assessment based Safety Management in all 
mines of CIL; et c. are being put in place. The Committee, however, note with 
concern that during the last five years, the trend of fatalities in CIL showed only a 
marginal reduction from 62 in 2009 to 58 in 2013, while for serious injuries, from 
290 in 2009, it increased to 308 in 2010 and came down to 178 in 2013. In this 
regard, the Committee need not emphasize that every single life is precious and all 
out efforts must be made to bring the fatality rate to zero on utmost priority basis. 
The Committee appreciate that laudable initiatives at par with global standards are 
being put in place in CIL Mines to further boost the safety parameters and 
standards in these mines. The Committee, however, at the same time desire that 
the reasons for each instance of fatality as well a s serious injury that had occurred 
must be properly analyzed and appropriate remedial mechanism be accordingly 
devised to avoid recurrence of such circumstances to bring down the fatality rate as 
well as the trend of serious injuries. The Committee hope th at the preventive 
measures being put into place as well as the new initiatives would translate into a 
zero tolerance level for fatalities as well as serious accidents in these mines. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the tangible results gained fr om these 
initiatives and measures being put in place in CIL Mines. 
 
Action Taken 
The law enforcing agency / regulatory authority under the Mines Act - 1952 i.e. the 
Directorate General of Mine safety (DGMS) under the aegis of Ministry of Labour& 
Employment (MOLE) conducts statutory inquiry / investigation to analyze the 
causes and circumstances leading to all fatal accidents and suggests remedial 
measures to avoid recurrence of such accidents. 
Apart from inquiry conducted by DGMS, all fatal and serious accid ents are also 
being inquired / investigated by the Mine Manager or any Asst. Manager authorized 
by the Mine Manager and the Safety Officer of the respective mine as per provisions 
made under the Coal Mines Regulations- 1957. 
Apart from the above investigat ions / inquiries made under various provisions of 
statutes, the Internal Safety Organization (ISO) of each subsidiary company also 
conducts inquiry in case of any fatal accident to analyze the root causes and 
recommend corrective and preventive measures to  be taken to prevent recurrence 
of such accidents. 
Tangible results of safety initiatives in mines of CIL: There is substantial 
reduction in both fatal and serious accidents in the mines of CIL in last four years 
since adoptation of risk assessment tool of  Workplace Risk Assessment and Control 
(WRAC)for preparation safety Management Plans(SMPs)and implementation of 
control measures in mines, which is evident from the table given below: 

27 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Accident 
Statistical 
Parameters 
4 yearly average  
(from 2008 to  
2011) 
prior to 
implementation of 
WRAC based SMPs 
4 yearly average  
(from 2012 to 
2015) 
since 
implementation 
of WRAC based 
SMPs 
% Reduction  
1 Nos. of fatal 
accidents 60 48 20% 
2 Nos. of fatalities 70 50 29% 
3 Nos. of serious 
accidents 294 182 38% 
4 Nos. of serious 
injuries 304 187 38% 
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
SAFETY MONITORING MECHANISM IN NEYVELI LIGNITE CORPORATION 
(NLC) MINES    
Recommendation  No.  4 
The Committee note that in NLC Mines during the last ten years, the number of 
fatal accidents has come down from 6 in the year 2006 -2007; to just one in the 
year 2013-14 and the serious injuries accidents reported from 10 in the year 2009-
10 to 4 in the year 2013-14. The Committee also note that most of these accidents 
had occurred more on account of individual's fault rather than due to any system 
failure or unsafe conditions of mines or machinery. The Committee, the refore, feel 
that there is a heightened need for sensitization and awareness programmes for 
mine workers for adherence to safety standards and such programme are needed 
to be accorded top priority. At the same time, the Committee express their 
satisfaction that NLC have taken a number of steps to avoid accidents in Lignite 
Mines which include provision for personal protective equipments specific to job 
requirement; systematic in-depth accident analysis; accident counseling system to 
avoid recurrence and for  behavioural transformation; area wise responsibility for 
enforcement of safety in all mine operational/maintenance activities; exhibition of 
code of safety practices at appropriate locations; inter unit safety assessments of 
every quarter; risk assessment  and safety audit for mines by accredited external 
agencies once in two years; inculcation of safety awareness for all categories of 
employees including contract employees before deployment; and continuous 
monitoring of behavioral sense/attitude/commitment  of employees towards safety. 

28 
 
The Committee expect that the NLC will further augment their safety initiatives so 
that the fatality figure comes down to zero. To this end, the Committee recommend 
that the NLC's ongoing initiatives for adherence to safety st andards and also 
inculcation of safety awareness to all workers including contract workers be carried 
on with full vigour so that the overall target of zero tolerance for fatal accidents or 
serious accidents be achieved. The Committee may be apprised of th e action taken 
in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
In order to sensitize and create awareness the following actions are taken in NLC: 
i) Public Address System – Safety messages are given in every shift to improve 
safety. 
 
ii) Hoardings 
iii) Poster 
iv) Slogans etc., 
v) Vocational Training – Safety performance is reviewed in pit safety meetings 
conducted every month in all the divisions/zones.  Based on the 
recommendations, specific job training, Refresher/Need based training are 
imparted.  Safety is my responsibility is made as part of training. 
vi) Team Talk. 
 
Apart from the above, various safety committee are formed at different level to 
monitor and propagate safety awareness, like; 
 
a) Zonal wise safety committee  
 
b) Pit Safety Committee at Mine Level 
c) Bipartite Committee at Mine Level 
d) Inspection by Workmen Safety Inspectors 
e) Inter Unit Safety Committee assessment arranged by Corporate Level. 
f) Tripartite meet at (Management, DGMS, Union) level. 
g) Safety performance appraisal at Board Level. 
 
In order to achieve Zero Tolerance for fatal accid ent, awareness is propagated 
across the  hierarchy of safety for inculcation of safe work practices by all 
concerned. „Safety is my Responsibility‟ awareness card launched during 11th Safety 
Conference by DGMS was issued to improve the safety performance a mongst the 
workman. 
 
To motivate workmen for ensuing safety measures at all levels awards are given 
during Safety Week Celebration, National Safety Day etc. for the best practicemen. 
 
Apart from the above, Risk Assessment and Safety Audit at Mine Level is done by 
engaging accredited External Agency to review the safety management and Safety 
Management plan reviewed accordingly. 
 

29 
 
Swachh Bharath is also implemented in Mines to improve housekeeping, cleanliness 
and hygiene. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
SAFETY MONITORING MECHANISM IN SINGERENI COALFIELDS COMPANY 
LIMITED (SCCL) 
Recommendation  No.    5 
The Committee note that the highest number of fatalities in SCCL in the last five 
years stands at 12 during each of the years 2010, 2012 and 2013 with the highest 
number of serious accidents of 369 during the year 2013. The Committee have 
been apprised tha t the highest fatality rate per 3 lakh man shifts occurred in the 
year 2013 which stands at 0.24 while the highest serious injuries per 3 lakh man 
shifts stands at 7.43 during the same year. The Committee also note that a number 
of measures have been taken  to improve the safety status in SCCL mines which 
inter-alia include gradual phasing out of hand sections to be replaced by Side 
Discharge Loaders (SDL) and Load Haul Dump (LHD); Strata Monitoring Cell; 
utilization of services of scientific institutions vi z. Central Institute of Mining and 
Fuel Research (CIMFR), National Institute of Road Mechanism (NIRM) etc for 
designing panels and strata Management System; critical analysis of accidents for 
subsequent action plan for prevention; mandatory safety clearanc e certificate and 
DGMS permission before depillaring panels; effective functioning of pit safety 
committees; mandatory inspection before issue of safety clearance certificate; 
monsoon audit inspection; propagation of awareness amongst workers for safety; 
organization of monthly and quarterly Risk Management Committee meetings; 
night shift inspections at least once in a fortnight by mine managers to improve 
safety and discipline in the mine; compliance of recommendations of the 11th 
conference on safety (emp loyer's responsibilities in contractor works); formulation 
of area level team for review and monitoring of safety management plans of mines; 
etc. The Committee express their happiness at such an elaborate safety mechanism 
being put into place by SCCL and h ope that vigorous and strict adherence to all 
such safety measures would ensure significant reduction in the overall fatality rate 
as well as the number of serious accidents in the near future. The Committee, 
however, at the same time like to recommend that periodic inspections at the Mines 
level be made more stringent with provisions for mandatory follow up at the highest 
level and the instances of any kind of negligence or slackness either by Workers or 
Managers are needed to be reviewed seriously. The Co mmittee would like to be 
apprised of action taken in the matter.  
 
Action Taken 
 SCCL: Periodical inspections including back shift inspections are made stringent 
and being monitored and followed at ISO, Corporate and the inspections are 
recorded in web application and circulated. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 

30 
 
NEED FOR FUNCTIONAL CONNECT AMONGST THE VARIOUS SAFETY 
MONITORING MECHANISM EXISTING AT ALL VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL 
LEVELS. 
Recommendation No.      6 
The Committee note that apart from the statutory monitoring by Director General of 
Mines Safet y (DGMS), the status of safety is also monitored by various Safety 
Committees existing at different levels  viz. Mine Level; Area Level; Subsidiary 
Level; Company Level and Ministry Level. The Committee have been apprised that 
there exist a functional conne ct amongst these different safety monitoring 
mechanisms by means of interactions/discussions of their findings as well as 
recommendations made; evaluation of activities of various mine level safety bodies 
during co-ordination meetings; taking up of unresolved issues at the lower levels to 
higher levels for compliance; free horizontal and vertical communication between 
various safety monitoring bodies; etc. The Committee also note that safety 
monitoring reports of these bodies are circulated as minutes for c ompliance and 
action taken report/compliance reports are also prepared and submitted. Moreover, 
depending on the nature of issues, the timelines are also stipulated for speedy and 
effective implementation of the various safety recommendations. The Committe e, 
however, desire that the Ministry should ensure that the existence of numerous 
safety monitoring mechanism at various levels should not result in duplicity of 
efforts or becoming a hurdle in sorting out the problems or in the matter of fixing 
responsibility and accountability. The Committee also recommend for strengthening 
of the existing  co-ordination mechanism for ensuring a vibrant functional connect 
amongst all these monitoring bodies. 
 
Action Taken 
 
CIL–Various Safety Monitoring Bodies / Agencies ar e operating independently and 
effectively in their respective domains. However, observations and 
recommendations made by different committees‟/ monitoring bodies are complied 
at mine level and action taken report (ATR) is discussed and reviewed. Un -resolved 
issues at the lower levels of monitoring bodies are brought to the knowledge of 
higher / competent authority for compliance. Apart from this, Internal Safety 
Organization (ISO) of each subsidiary reviews the status of compliance of such 
recommendations on regular basis. 
 
Further, appropriate  actions shall be taken for strengthening of existing  co-
ordination and ensuring effective functional relationship amongst all these 
Monitoring agencies. 
NLC -Apart from statutory monitoring by DGMS, various other committees 
undertake safety monitoring at Mine Level, Corporate level and Ministry of Coal 
level. 
 
At Mine Level, safety meeting reports and Form -U reports of Workmen Inspectors 
and action taken reports are circulated and reviewed during monthly safety 

31 
 
meeting.  The time for complying with the reports is 15 days; for works requiring 
more time, deadlines are fixed and reviewed every month until the pending points 
are rectified.  This monitoring does not result in duplicity or overlap; rather it acts 
as an interaction mechanism for strengthening and co -ordination of the system of 
monitoring as a vibrant functional connect.     
 
 
Committee members like Workmen Inspector, Safety Committee Member, ISO 
Member  have well defined inspection schedules.All of them work together to the 
achieve the goal of Zero Harm.  The Mine Manager, Sr.Asst. Managers and Safety 
Officer coordinate all the activities related to the safety for ensuring a vibrant 
functional connect amongst all these monitoring bodies.  
 
SCCL:  The Safety monitoring mechanism works at various levels to monitor the 
safety activities, minutes are circulated  and all ISO remain present in all such 
meetings. 
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
SAFETY MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Recommendation  No. 7 
The Committee note that one of the main functions of safety committee is to 
prepare, review and implement Safety Management Plans (SMP) which are 
prepared at the unit level, reviewed by the Internal Safety Organization (ISO) at 
corporate level and subsequently approved by Director General of Mines Safety. 
The Committee further note that the review of SMP is done monthly by the Safety 
Committee at Mine Level; Quarterly by the Area Level;  Half-yearly by the 
Subsidiary Level and Annually by the Company level. The Committee find that 
during the process of formulation for approval of the SMP, workers at the ground 
level are involved in identification of safety needs of the Mine and recommendation 
of the Safety Operating Procedure to minimize  risks, while officials of ISO and 
DGMS are involved in its scrutiny and approval. While observing that effective 
formulation and implementation of SMP at each Mines is crucial for safety, the 
Committee recommend that SMP of each Mine be meticulously formulated and then 
implemented with total involvement of all stakeholders across the hierarchy so that 
the target of zero tolerance fatalities is achieved. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
CIL: All Risk assessment based Safety Management Plans (SMP)s have already 
been prepared for all mines of CIL by adopting the technique of "Workplace Risk 
Assessment and Control (WRAC)". The said documents are reviewed periodically at 
different levels for updating. Effo rts are made to make the said document more 
comprehensive and mine specific, by involving all the stake holders which includes 

32 
 
grass roots level employees of the mine. The suggested control measures will be 
relevant to the context which can be practically implemented. 
 
NLC : Safety Management Plan (SMP) is reviewed every month in Safety Meeting.  
The SMP is prepared by Zones/Divisions by incorporating the views of floor level 
workmen.  In this regard all Zone/Division formed independent committees from 
grass root level workmen to skilled person, Supervisor and Executive for making 
preparation of SMP.  All the Zonal/ Division Heads submit individual plans which is 
complied by Safety Department. This is reviewed every month and are available in 
each department executive and Supervisor for implementation. Thus  involvement 
of all stakeholders across the hierarchy is ensured. 
 
SCCL: SMP is reviewed periodically modified if necessary and implemented. DGMS 
is also informed. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
SAFETY INSPECTION OF MINES 
Recommendation  No.   8 
The Committee find that the Mines Rules, 1955 stipulate for a monthly inspection of 
Mines with a view to assess various aspect like dangers in relation to mining 
operations such as condition of Roof & Sides, adequacy of supports, safety aspects 
in haulage and travelling roadways, ventilation, sealed off area, escape route, 
machinery etc., compliance to various statutory provisions, status of functioning of 
different safety sy stem installed/commissioned in the Mines; compliance to safety 
checklists prescribed; etc. Undoubtedly, a robust inspection is the sine qua non for 
effective implementation of safety monitoring mechanism, the Committee, desire 
that this important aspect sh ould be given utmost priority and the findings and 
recommendations made by inspection teams be meticulously followed and 
implemented in letter and spirit. 
 
Action Taken 
 
As per the Mines Rules 1955, Workmen Inspectors and Safety Committee members 
inspect their respective mines. Observations/ Recommendations based on the 
inspections made by the Safety Committee during their inspections are discussed in 
the monthly meeting.  
 
The compliance of recommendations / suggestions of the Safety Committee are 
scrutinized by DGMS officials during their visit to mines. The compliance report is 
also being checked by the Internal Safety Organization (ISO) and senior Area level 
executives. 
 
Besides the above, the officers from Directorate -General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
regularly inspect mines to oversee the compliance of statutes related to mine 
safety. DGMS has well established structure for conducting inspection of mines. 

33 
 
There are total eight zones, each under the charge of a Deputy Director -General of 
Mines Safety. There are three to four Regional offices under each zonal office. Each 
Region is under the charge of a Director of Mines Safety. There are in all 29 such 
Regional offices. The re are four to five Dy. Director of Mine Safety (DDMS) under 
one Director of Mines Safety. Each Zone, besides having inspecting officers of 
mining disciplines has officers in electrical & mechanical engineering and 
occupational health disciplines. During i nspection, DGMS officers review all safety 
parameters of the mines. 
 
SCCL:  Inspections are done regularlyand findings/ violations / recommendations 
are acted upon and corrective action is taken. It also get uploaded to Web and is 
monitored by ISO. 
 
NLC: In order to ensure thorough inspection, following agencies /  bodies 
undertake inspection on time bound basis as follows: 
(vi)       Daily 
 Safety Related issues are being deliberated at Mine Level Production Review 
Meeting. 
 Inspection of the Mine workings by Ma nager/ Mines and other statutorily  
qualified personnel. 
 Area wise Inspection / Supervision is being carried out by the concerned 
experienced Under Managers , Mechanical Engineers and  Electrical Engineers. 
 
 
 
 Hand over and take over of charge exists in all Mining operations in every shift 
and being followed by statutorily qualified Mining Personnel to ensure safety of 
Men, Machineries and Materials. 
(vii) Weekly 
 Weekly Review Meeting is being conducted by the Mine Manager to discuss the 
issues related to Mine working plans / operations, Safety Related Activities etc. 
 Safety Status / Safety Performance of the Mine is monitored / reviewed under 
the statutory frame work. 
 Regular Inspection by the Statutory Personnel and Officials at Corporate Level 
to monitor standards maintained as per statute. 
(viii) Monthly 
 Safety Status / Safety Performance are monitored by the Sectional / 
Departmental Safety Committee constituted under the Pit Safety Committee 
Mine wise. 
 Pit Safety Committee Meetings are conducted regularly once in a  Month. Mine 
wise Mock drills at vulnerable locations to assess the preparedness on 
emergency response. 
 Central Safety Committee Meeting in every unit in cyclic order. 
 A Safety Audit Team comprising of Engineers of various disciplines inspect the 
Safety fe atures such as „Fail Safe System‟ incorporated in the Specialized 
Mining Equipments / Conveyor etc., to ensure Safe/Reliable operation and to 
achieve total loss control over Men / Materials / Machineries. 
(ix) Quarterly 

34 
 
 Inter Unit Safety Assessment are being ca rried out to assess the Safety 
Standards maintained as per statute. 
 „Safety Performance Appraisal‟ for NLC Units is being submitted to NLC Board 
for every Quarter and the Board - Observations / Suggestions are being 
implemented. 
 Safety Status / Safety Perf ormance of every Mines is monitored / reviewed 
under the statutory frame work. 
(x) Periodical / Annually 
 Safety Action Plan is being prepared and reviewed every year. 
 Training Calendar is prepared every year and training on Safety Related Topics 
is being imparted to all the Employees. 
 Well laid „Pre Monsoon Action Plan‟ in detail is prepared and revised and 
reviewed for every year to take care of any emergency situation. 
 Cyclone Alert Squad swing into action whenever heavy rainfall  / heavy wind 
velocities warnings received in advance through a well established Weather 
Warning System, net worked with Regional Meteorological offices. 
 Periodical Environmental studies by the CARD (Internal) and NIMH (External) 
on Occupational Health Hazards (Dust / vibration / noise) 
 Slope Stability / Stabilization / rehabilitation of slope are being carried out by 
engaging accredited Mining Experts (Scientific and Research Institutions NIRM 
/ KGF / CMRI / TANU and their recommendations are being implemented. 
 Risk Assessment an d Safety Audit once in 2 years by accredited External 
Agencies. 
 DGMS officials make inspection of the Mine periodically and point out 
deficiencies for necessary corrective measures and the remedial measures are 
being undertaken and the status report is being submitted to the Inspectorate. 
 Periodical study is being conducted to identify and to detect emerging 
Occupational Health Hazards like silicosis and Pneumoconiosis, but no such 
cases were identified so far, at NLC during Periodical Medical Examinations 
being conducted as per statute. 
The recommendations given by the above inspection team are meticulously 
implemented in letter and spirit. 
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RISK ASSESEMENT AND SAFETY AUDIT 
Recommendation  No.  9 
The Committee are happy to note that CIL have initiated Risk Management by 
adoption of the Globally Established Technique of Work Place Risk Assessment and 
Control (WRAC). With this mechanism in place tangible benefits accrued there 
from inter-alia include sensitization of workers to identification of hazards and 
associated risk; need to adopt control measures for elimination and reduction of 

35 
 
risks; enhancing ability of workers to perform their tasks safely and consequent 
reduction in the numbers of both fa tal and serious accidents in last three years in 
CIL. As regards NLC, the Committee find that NLC carries out Risk Assessment and 
Safety Audit of Mines by deploying Accredited External Agencies once in two years, 
the major recommendations of which include preparation of SMP; Emergency 
preparedness; Plan/Pre monsoon Action Plan for every Mine; Certification for 
stipulated quality Norms; etc. and scrupulous action is taken on the 
recommendations made by such agency. The Committee, while appreciating the 
importance and significance of a comprehensive, dedicated and objective Risk 
assessment and safety audit, conducted periodically by an External Accredited 
Agency, desire that the system put in place at NLC be replicated in all other coal 
companies/PSUs so that absolute safety of workers/miners/inhabitants is ensured 
throughout. The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
CIL has adopted the internationally recognized technique of WRAC (Workplace Risk 
Assessment and Contro l) for risk mapping and prioritizing action based on Risk 
score and ranking. For the above purpose, 20 executives of CIL have already been 
trained and accredited by M/s SIMTARS, Australia. They are imparting training to 
mine level executives in all mines o f CIL. These trained executives in turn impart 
training to the executives in their functional areas.  
Further, steps are being taken to impart the said training to the non -executive 
members of the Safety Board, Safety Committee and grass root level employees for 
their sensitization regarding hazard awareness and associated risks. In this process, 
all the employees will get trained in a phased manner.  
In this regard, 20 more executives are being sent to M/s SIMTARS for training in 
Risk Management.  
CIL has adopted the aforesaid system of Safety Management which contributes 
toSafety Audit in all its mines with continuous mapping of hazards and associated 
risks in different mining operations and under varying geo -mining conditions 
prevailing at different mines . Tangible benefits have been derived which are given 
below: 
Sl. 
No. 
Accident 
Statistical 
Parameters 
4 yearly average 
(from 2008 to 
2011) 
prior to 
implementation of 
WRAC based SMPs 
4 yearly average 
(from 2012 to 
2015)since 
implementation 
of WRAC based 
SMPs 
% Reduction 
1 Nos. of fatal 
accidents 60 48 20% 
2 Nos. of fatalities 70 50 29% 
3 Nos. of serious 
accidents 294 182 38% 

36 
 
4 Nos. of serious 
injuries 304 187 38% 
 
Besides, Safety Audit of all mines of CIL is being regularly conducted by inter Area 
teams formed by Internal Safety Organization (ISO) of different Subsidiaries of CIL.  
NLC- NLC is carrying our Risk Assessment and Safety Audit for its Mines at Neyveli 
with periodicity of once in two years.  The same is an ongoing process at Neyveli 
Lignite Mines. 
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
ZERO HARM POTENTIAL 
Recommendation  No.   12 
The Committee note that a Roadmap has been prepared to achieve 'Zero Harm 
Potential (ZHP) in CIL mine Areas. In the year 2010, a training programme was 
arranged by CIL on Safety in Mines, Testing and Research Station (SIMTARS) at 
Australia which is recognized as the best in the world to develo p trainers with an 
objective to improve safety standards in Mines. The Committee have been apprised 
that the initiative is a continuous process with 1488 and 1341 executives already 
trained in the first and second phase of the training programme respective ly. To 
achieve 'Zero Harm Potential' in mines, CIL has taken up a numbers of additional 
measures viz implementation of SMPs and Take-5, an informal risk assessment tool 
before starting of any operation;  up-gradation of knowledge to cope with 
technology cha nge; Risk Management System for Project Planning 
Stage, Restructuring/Re-organization of relatively small Mines to bigger Mines for 
adoption of Mass Production Technology, acquisition of land for OCPs in one go so 
that operations in Mines can be done as pe r approved plan and all mining areas be 
permanently fenced; deployment of higher capacity equipment in OCPs for faster 
excavation ; effective training and feedback system and weeding out of 
incompetent and physically unfit workman from operational activiti es, etc. The 
Committee appreciate the ongoing initiatives towards 'Zero Harm Potential' and 
hope that this target would be achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee at 
the same time recommend that such training programmes must also be organized 
for non-executives also who are engaged in actual mining operations. The 
Committee also desire SCCL and NLC to also work out such training programmes 
for their executives as well as non -executives. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Safety is always the highest priority. Safety is embedded in the mission statement 
and is one of the most important factors in the overall business strategy. CIL has 
framed a well -defined safety policy to ensure safety in our mines an d 
establishments. CIL has well established multi -disciplinary internal safety 

37 
 
organization in all subsidiaries for implementation of Safety Policy. All operations, 
systems and processes are meticulously planned and designed with due regard to 
safety, conservation and sustainable development. CIL always encourages 
employees‟ participations at all levels so as to promote proactive safety culture and 
to improve safety awareness at grass root level.  
 
With consistent efforts, continuous improvement in safety standards is achieved 
which is reflected in reduction of fatalities and serious injuries. To achieve further 
improvement, initiatives are being taken in v arious spheres which include the 
following:- 
A. Mining Operation:  
Adoption of the state -of-the art technology in suitable geo -mining 
locales. 
Adoption of Mass Production Technology in more number of UG mines. 
Deployment of more number of surface miners to el iminate blasting 
operation in O.C.Ps. 
Deployment of relatively higher capacity HEMM in more number of O.C.Ps 
. 
Mechanisation of UG drilling.  
Phasing out manual loading in UG mines. 
 
 B.  Strata Management: Thrust on prevention of roof & side fall accidents. 
Dedicated Strata Control Cell in each company. 
Roof bolting as an integral part of support system in UG mines. 
Switching over to use of resin capsules from cement capsules in phased 
manner. 
Monitoring of strata by strata monitoring devices.  
 
 C.    Prevention of Spontaneous heating: 
Expedite construction of sectionalisation stoppings. 
Pressure Quantity(PQ) Survey for checking efficacy of ventilation 
standards at regular intervals. 
Use of more number of Gas Chromatographs for mine air sampling. 
Use of Local Methane Detector (LMD) for early and accurate detection of 
methane. 
 Environmental Tele-Monitoring System (ETMS) in degree III & fiery UG 
mines. 
 
    D.  Training : 
Skill up-gradation training to frontline officials and workmen. 
Behavioral based training for all employees. 
One Week Training to all front line supervisors . 
Training of Dumper Operators on Simulators. 
 
    E.     Others: 
Slope monitoring devices in O.C.Ps for prediction of bench/dump failure. 
 Digitization of mine plan. 
Introduction of LED type light weight cap lamps in u/g mines. 

38 
 
Man Riding System (MRS) for u/g mines having long and arduous travel. 
 
In an endeavor to achieve " Zero Harm Potential",  the safety system of CIL is 
analyzed in depth vis -a-vis other coal produci ngcountries. It was revealed that 
safety standard of Australia has been by far the best amongst leading coal 
producing countries.Australia has achieved almost zero fatality in their mines 
consistently during last decade. They are doing risk assessment in a ll mine 
operations based on which they are preparing Safety Management Plan(SMP) for all 
mines and the same are being implemented in true spirit. 
 
To achieve "Zero Harm Potential" , CIL having explored all possibilities has finally 
adopted the safety management system of Australia which is now recognized as the 
best in the world. 
 
 In the above backdrop, a group consisting of twenty executives have been trained 
in Australia in Risk Management system. These trained executives are being 
deployed for imparting training to other executives responsible for implementing 
the safety management system in mines of CIL. They are further giving training to 
the grass root level workers for preparation of Risk assessment based Safety 
Management Plan(SMP). 
 
 SMPs for all mi nes of CIL have been prepared and are being reviewed on regular 
basis.SMP is a continuous process which need regular review and updation with the 
dynamics of mines. 
However due to differences in technological and socio -economic conditions 
prevailing in India, the progress in implementation the same is slow. 
 
Upon in-depth study, comparison of our mining system with the same of the other 
advanced coal producing countries, the following contrasting differences are 
observed: 
 
 
 
System Coal mines of Advanced 
Countries Coal mines of CIL 
Mechanization 
All Underground as well as 
OC workings are highly 
mechanized. Very few 
manpower is deployed in 
mining activities. In 
underground mines, 
requirement of workmen to 
enter the area under green 
roof is minimum. Hence 
exposure to risk of 
workmen is minimum. 
Mostly UG mineface 
machinery are remotely 
UG mines are highly labour 
intensive andlow productivity. 
In OCPs relatively low capacity 
HEMMs are deployed due to 
limited working area. 

39 
 
operated. 
Working space Land is not a constraint. 
Due to delay in land 
acquisition, many mines 
especially OCPs are working in 
constricted space. Risk 
increases many fold due to 
poor mine shape. Non -
availability of land for dumping 
has resulted in many unstable 
dumps. 
Vicinity of 
mines 
Mining Areas are far away 
from dwellings/habitation.  
Mining Area are generally 
having dwelling/habitation and 
other surface constraints. 
People do not vacate land even 
after receiving compensation. 
Many habitants make a living 
on coal picking from dumps 
and theft of coal from mines, 
which increases the risk of 
accidents. 
Legacy Problem There is no legacy problem 
CIL was formed after taking 
over mines from erstwhile 
private owners. These mines 
are even more than hundred 
years old. Most of these mines 
are having multi seam working 
contained water and fire in 
upper sections which are 
abandoned long back leading 
to transference of danger to 
present sections. 
Workforce 
Workforce appointed solely 
on basis of job requirement 
and competency. Hence all 
employees are highly 
educated, skilled and 
competent.Labour laws are 
flexible,"hire and fire rule" 
is practiced for 
incompetent workmen. 
Mostly land oustees are 
appointed who are generally 
semi educated/uneducated. 
 
To achieve "Zero Harm Potential"  in mines of CIL following additional measures 
are envisaged to be implemented.  
  
Implementation of SMP in true spirit and continual review and updation the 
same. 
Implementation of Take-5 as an informal risk assessment tool before starting 
of any operations. 

40 
 
Up-gradation of knowledge to cope with the technological changing scenario. 
Risk Management system shall be ingrained right at the project planning 
stage, itself. 
Restructuring/Re-organization of relatively small mines into bigger mines 
shall be done for adoption of Mass Production Technology. 
 Land for O.C.Ps shall be acquired in one go and all the mining areas shall be 
fenced by permanent fencing so that operations of mine can be done as per 
approved plan. 
 High capacity equipment shall be deployed in O.C.Ps  for fa ster 
excavation.After mining, land shall be restored back to its original shape.  
Effective Training and feedback system shall be introduced and incompetent 
and physically unfit workmen shall be debarred from operational activities. 
 
 
 
NLC: NLC is working out strategy to impart training to achieve Zero Harm Potential 
(ZHP) covering its executives and non executives in time bound  manner. NLC has 
taken up a numbers of additional measures viz implementation of Safety 
Management Plan, and informal risk assessment  tool before starting of any 
operation; up -gradation of knowledge to cope with technology change; Risk 
Management System for Project Planning Stage, effective training and feedback 
system and weeding out of incompetent and physically unfit workman from  
operational activities.  It is proposed to impart training to SME & CME operators 
through simulators for which procurement action is being initiated. 
 
SCCL : Training programmes are organized on actual mining operations to both 
Executives and Non-executives. 
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICAL COLLEGE IN TALCHER, ODISHA 
 
Recommendation No 15 
 
The Committee note that Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. have given in principle approval 
for setting up of Medical College at Talcher, Odisha in association with the 
Government of Odisha. The Committee, however, note that no steps have yet been 
initiated towards establishment of the Medical College. The claim that upgradation 
of the existing 115 bedded MCLs Central Hospitals (NSCH) to a 500 bedded hospital 
is noted. While appreciating this laudable initiative taken by the MCL, the 
Committee express serious concern that in spite of long standing assurance for the 
establishment of the Medical College by MCL, it has not been materialized so far. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry of Coal, Coal India Ltd. and MCL in 

41 
 
particular are to revert to the Committee about t he concrete steps taken in setting 
up of the medical college at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken 
 Coal India Limited 
 
1. In the 117th Meting of Board of Directors of MCL held on 4th March‟2010 has 
given in principal approval for setting up of a Medical College at Talcher. 
2. MCL in its 160th Meeting of Board of Directors held on 06/08/2014 accorded 
approval to engage M/s NBCC (National Building Construction Company) to 
set up the Medical College namely “Mahanadi Institute of Medical Science 
Research (MIMSR)”with intake capacity of 100 per year including conversion 
of 115 bedded existing Nehru Satabdi Central Hospital (NSCH) to 500 
hundred bedded multi -specialty hospital at Talcher, Angul at a cost of Rs. 
492.62 Crores.  
3. An MOU between MCL and M/s NBCC was signed on NBCC 14/08/2015 to set 
up the Medical College project from „concept to commissioning‟.  
4. On 03/09/2015, the Foundation Stone was laid by the Hon‟ble Chief Minister 
of Odisha in presence of the Hon‟ble Minister of State (IC) for Coal, Power & 
N&RE, Govt. of India, the Hon‟ble Minister of State (IC) for Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, Govt. of India, the Hon‟ble MP (Dhenkanal) and the Hon‟ble MLA 
(Talcher) along with other Dignitaries.  
  The tentative time period for completion of the project has been scheduled to 
be 30 months at an estimated cost of Rs. 492.62 Crores. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN COAL/LIGNITE 
MINING AREAS 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
The Committee note that as part of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), the 
subsidiary companies of CIL have been providing financial assistance by way of 
grant-in-aid and infrastructure facilities to certain schools and other recognized 
educational institutions including some privately managed schools. In all there are 
681 schools in and around coalfields areas of CIL and its subsidiaries with a total 
number of 74135 students. The Committee are happy to note that in the year 
2013-14, CIL had sanctioned a n amount of Rs. 1,58,38,520 to 11792 students as 
Merit/General Scholarships and Rs. 1,36,71,428/ - to 604 students who were 
admitted in Government Medical and Engineering Colleges; an amount of Rs. 
51,000/- as special cash award to meritorious children of e mployees of CIL, as well 
on other awards. Besides, CIL provided infrastructural and periodical financial 

42 
 
support to 330 project schools and also sanctioned an amount of Rs. 9647.97 lakh 
as grant to schools including privately managed schools. The Committee  further 
note that NLC also runs 10 schools through a Common School Committee in Neyveli 
Township with a total of 6501 students as of June, 2015. Besides, NLC issues free 
school uniforms to 480 students, cash awards to meritorious students; sponsors 
Hindi teaching in which 400 students have so far been benefited; gives 
infrastructural and periodical financial support; and had established an Industrial 
Training Institution in Barsingsar village in Rajasthan. As a result of such initiatives, 
there has been remarkable improvement in literacy level and the overall proficiency 
of the workers/inhabitants of coal bearing areas which was reportedly reflected by 
their performance in various examinations of reputed institutes and also 
employment in different Government and private sector companies. The Committee 
note with appreciation that efforts are also being made to incorporate vocational 
education and skill development by CIL. Considering that education is key to 
upliftment and a better future, the Committee recommend that educational facilities 
extended to Coal and Lignite Mines workers and inhabitants of Coal/Lignite Mining 
areas are needed to be further augmented with special emphasis on imparting 
vocational education and skill development training so that the target of full literacy 
and enhancing capacity building for better prospects of employment could be 
achieved. The Committee further recommend that basic facilities be extended to 
poor students by way of provisions of mid -day meals; school uniforms; Text Boo ks 
and requisite stationery items by the sponsoring Coal Companies. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Coal India Limited  
 
As recommended by the  committee , all subsidiaries have  been  advised to  
extend and  spread educational facilities to the  employees  as well as inhabitants  
of  surrounding  areas of   collieries  situated in the  remote area  of the  country. 
The  emphasis    would be given for  establishment of  training  centre for  
imparting vocatio nal education  and  skill development so that  literacy rate  
reaches  100% and the  opportunity  of employment   is widened. 
 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited 
 
(i) Imparting Vocational Education:  
NLC Schools are offering the following Vocational Educa tion Courses at Higher 
Secondary School level. 
a. General Mechanic 
b. Electronic Equipment 

43 
 
c. Type Writing 
d. Draftsman civil 
e. Auditing and Accounting 
 
In addition to the above, to enable the students to have Practical Knowledge NLC is 
permitting these s tudents to make frequent study visits to the following NLC‟s 
factories and other establishments which are related to the field of study: 
1. Central Electric Repair Shop 
2. Central Workshop 
 
(ii) Skill Development Training: 
1. NLC is conducting Computer coa ching classes in batches free of cost for the 
benefit of students, every year.  
2. To improve the Teaching & Presentation Skills, training is being imparted to 
the teachers of NLC Schools & Private Schools. 
3. Motivational and Skills Development Training P rogrammes are being 
conducted free of cost periodically to the students. The training includes 
Presentation skills, Reading skills, Facing the Exam skills, Communication skills, 
Team building skills…..and so on. 
NLC Limited is running 10 schools through a Common School Committee in Neyveli 
Township. These schools are being run with the AID of Tamil Nadu Government. 
(i) Mid-Day Meals:  
State Government is providing Mid -day meals to the school students from 1st 
standard to 10th standard students only. The Sta te Government is not providing 
mid-day meals for the 11th and 12th standard students. And hence, NLC is 
initiating action to provide 
mid-day meals to the 11th standard and 12th standard students (Total No. of  
students 1898, Boys-507, Girls-1391). 
The State Government is providing only the mid-day meals. The students are forced 
to take the meals in their respective class rooms during the rainy season. This is 
spoiling the learning environment.  
And, hence NLC is constructing dining hall to enable the studen ts to have their 
lunch in a better atmosphere.  
 
(ii) School Uniforms: 
State Government is providing School uniforms to the students from 1st standard 
to 10th standard only. 11th and 12th standard students are not provided school 
uniforms by the State Government. 
Hence, NLC has already initiated action to provide 2 sets of uniforms each to 1898 
students of 11th standard and 12th standard (Boys-507, Girls-1391). The total cost 
works out to Rs.21.16 lakhs. These uniforms will be distributed to the students 
within a period of one month. 

44 
 
NLC is sponsoring Rs.7.65 lakhs for the Neyveli District Scouts & Guides Camp 
expenditure for this year. Scouts & Guides are being provided with 2 sets of 
Uniforms and Shoes. The cost works out to Rs.3.41 lakhs. 
 
(iii) Text Books And Requisite Stationery Items: 
The State Government is providing Text Books free of cost to all the Tamil medium 
students and to a limited extent to the English Medium students.  
Hence, NLC provided Text Books free of cost to all the remaining English M edium 
students from 6th standard to 12th standard. The cost worksout to Rs.8,51,380/-. 
Every year NLC sponsors Rs.1.5 lakhs for the purchase of Books for School Libraries 
and Teaching Kits. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
 

45 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATINOS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
SAFETY MECHANISM IN CAPTIVE MINES/ PRIVATE MINES  
Recommendation No. 13 
  
The Committee find that there have been negligible  cases of fatalities and serious 
injuries in the mines operated by Captive Mines holders and Private Players as 
compared to the Public Sector Coal Companies during the years 2012, 2013 and 
2014 respectively. The Committee note with appreciation that in the  private sector 
coal mining companies namely Integrated Coal Mining Ltd. (ICML), Jindal Power 
Ltd. (JPL) and Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd. (MIEL) there was not a single fatal 
accident reported in all these three years. This raises serious question mark over  
the safety policy being followed by public sector coal mining companies vis -a-vis 
captive mines holders and private players and the Committee feel that there is a 
need for serious introspection on the part of Public Sector Coal Companies and 
recommend the  Government to seriously undertake a comparative study of the 
safety standards and good practices being followed by Captive Mines Holders and 
Private Players and issue requisite guidelines/orders for replicating them in the 
Public Sector Coal Companies als o. The Committee may be apprised the action 
taken in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) supervise and monitor all the safety 
aspects and status in all mines and organizes Annual Safety Week energy year for 
all  mines.  During  this event all the mines including private mines are being 
inspected by the officials of Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) and Private Mines 
together. During this interaction knowledge sharing about good safety practices are 
being learnt and implemented therefore. 
Meetings of the Standing Committee on Safety in Coal Mines are held regularly 
under the chairmanship of Minister of Coal comprising the representatives of 
National level Trade Unions, CEOs of all Coal and Lignite companies, DGMS, 
Ministry of Labour  & Employment and officials of Ministry of Coal to reviews and 
recommend measures for improving the safety aspects in all coal mines.  The Coal 
Companies have established the mechanism for safety arrangements in all opencast 
and underground mines.  
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 

46 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
  

47 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
SUBSIDENCE PROBLEM   
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee note that  un-scientific, unsystematic and illegal mining are the 
primary causes of fires resulting into subsidence. Steps are being taken by 
Government/Coal PSUs to ensure implementation of the Master Plan for Jharia and 
Raniganj Coalfields dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation and diversion of 
surface infrastructure. The Committee find that the Master Plan which was 
approved on 11.8.2009 with an estimated investment of Rs. 7112.11 crore for 
Jharia Coalfields and Rs. 2661.73 crore for Raniganj Coalfields, is being 
implemented by the Jharia Rehabilitation and Development Authority for Jharia 
Coalfields and Asansol Durgapur Development Authority for Raniganj Coalfields with 
fire survey being done by the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), ISRO, 
Hyderabad since August, 2013 and overall monitoring by High Power Central 
Committee (HPCC) headed by Secretary (Coal). The Comm ittee are happy to note 
that the initial surface fire in Jharia Coalfields that stood at 8.9 Sq. Km have since 
been reduced to 2.18 Sq. Km as in July, 2015. The Committee however, desire that 
the implementation of the Master Plan be further accelerated and  enhanced so that 
the subsidence problem is rooted out completely. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in the matter. 
 
Action taken 
 
Under Master Plan, total 28 Fire schemes have been proposed in Phase -I to be 
formulated /& impleme nted for dealing with 67 fires sites spread in 41 
collieries.  11 fire schemes have been approved by Board and implemented, out of 
which 4 schemes have been completed. Now,  for expediting the fire dealing 
process, excavation methods has been resorted to b y deploying Hired HEMM at 
various mines of BCCL successfully, resulting in reduction of fire area.  
 
The coal mine fire survey/ study was instituted by BCCL through National Remote 
Sensing Centre (NRSC), ISRO, Deptt. of Space, Hyderabad in Aug., 2013 for 
delineation of surface coal fires in Jharia Coalfield. NRSC has submitted their report 
in April' 2014, in which they have concluded that the present fire area in the 
coalfield is only 2.18 sq.km. which includes both over burden dump fire and active 
fire. NR SC has deduced these findings from the State of Art, Satellite based 
technology. 
 

48 
 
Action is being taken by BCCL for dealing with fire as stipulated in the Approved 
Master Plan. NRSC has been requested to repeat the satellite TIR survey. NRSC has 
confirmed for  survey in June 2016.Once the finding of NRSC are submitted after 
the survey is completed .BCCL would improvise the fire action plan for speedier 
liquidation of fire area. In meeting on 18.12.2015 Secretary agreed in principle that 
a Fire Resource Cent er be established at The Indian School of Mines Dhanbad  ( 
ISM,)  for monitoring networking and research on fire mitigation measures at 
Jharia.  ISM, Dhanbad has been contacted to give their advice/comment. ISM 
required some document regarding previous fire studies which has been submitted 
by BCCL. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
COMPENSATION PACKAGE POLICY FATAL ACCIDENTS AND SERIOUS CASES 
FOR REGULAR AS WELL AS CONTRACT WORKERS 
 
Recommendation No.  11 
 
The Committee note that the payment of compensation is governed by the 
Employees' Compensation (Amendment) Act, 2009. The Committee find that in CIL, 
a Special Relief Package of Rs. 5 Lakh is given to a departmental employee in 
addition to the amount payab le under the Employees' Compensation Act and the 
company also release immediate payment for funeral expenses and transport etc. 
to the family of the deceased. Besides this, monetary benefits under Life Cover 
Scheme(LCS)of Rs. 1,12,800 w.e.f. 01.02.2012,  ex-gratia amount of Rs. 84,600 in 
case of death or permanent total disablement; gratuity on the basis of length to 
service; encashment of Earned Leave and Payment of Pensions as per CMPS, 1998 
are also provided to the deceased family. Further, there is provi sion for offer of 
employment to eligible kin of deceased departmental employee and provision for 
monetary compensation per month paid to family if there is no eligible person for 
employment. The Committee also observe that in case of serious bodily injury,  due 
compensation under the Employees' Compensation (Amendment) Act, 2009 is paid 
to serious bodily injured person impaired with permanent disability after due 
assessment of the percentage of permanent disability by an approved Medical 
Board. An additional  ex-gratia amount of Rs. 84,600/ - (w.e.f. 01.02.2012) is also 
given in case of permanent total disablement resulting on account of accident out of 
and in course of employment for departmental employee. Besides salaries/wages 
during period of absence and ex tensive medical treatment facilities are also 
provided either in Company's Hospital or any other referred Hospital during the 
injury period and beyond. As regards contract workers are concerned, the 
Committee find that compensation in case of fatal acciden ts and serious bodily 
injury while on duty is paid by the Contractor as per the provisions made under the 
Workmen Compensation Act, 2009. CIL as the Principal Employer ensure that 
payment of compensation to the next kin of the deceased contract worker is p aid 
by the respective contractor. The Committee further find that in SCCL, similar 

49 
 
compensation package and benefits exists with ex -gratia of Rs. 84,300/ - and 
special ex-gratia of Rs. 5,00,000/ - paid to regular employees while in case of 
contract employee,  the offloading agencies are liable to pay with their payment 
ensured by the principal employer. The Committee are however, happy to note that 
in NLC, in the case of death of a contract workman due to accident, a family relief 
of Rs.5,100/- per month is gi ven vis-a-vis Rs. 8,500/- per month paid to a regular 
employee. The Committee feel that matter of death cases should be treated 
compassionately whether it is a contract or a regular employee. Taking into 
consideration the rising cost of livelihood, the Com mittee recommend that the 
quantum of various compensation amounts being provided to the deceased to 
family/injured person are needed to be reviewed periodically. The Committee 
further recommend that the Government may explore the feasibility of extending a  
comprehensive Life and Health insurance cover to all workers including contract 
workers so that their lives and health are duly secured. Similarly, the Committee 
desire that the current compensation package for contract workers may also be 
periodically re viewed and the Coal Companies as well as the Principal Employer 
may consider to contribute in the compensation package. The  
 
 
Committee would also like to emphasize that all due compensation package are 
always released within the prescribed period whether  it is for a departmental 
employee or a contractual worker. As regards redressal of grievances related to 
compensation/relief, the Committee desire that all such issues are taken up at the 
highest level and a robust and responsive mechanism be put in place  for redressal 
of such grievances. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
CIL- Suggestions of the Committee on the other issues are noted. The proposal is 
being worked upon for appropriate consideration.  
 
NLC 
 As far as NLC concerned a family relief of 5,100/- per month is given to a 
contract workmen in case of fatal accident and vis -a-vis 8,500/- per month is 
given to regular workmen. 
 Comprehensive life and health insurance coverage is made to both contractua l 
and regular worker and the same is reviewed periodically. 
 For expediting the process of payment compensation / relief redressal of 
grievances is rested with highest authority in the hierarchy across the line and 
hence compensations are released in time. 
 
SCCL: Payments to contract employees of the off  loading agencies are ensured by 
SCCL.  
 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 


50 
 
HEALTH FACILITIES FOR INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN COAL/LIGNITE 
MINING AREAS 
Recommendation No.14 
 
The Committee note with concern that workers and inhabitants in the coal mining 
areas faces a number of major occupational health hazard caused due to sustained 
exposure to dust, vibration, noise, light, electricity, heat, pressure, machinery etc. 
Notably, other occupational hazards include chronic backache, chronic bronchitis, 
dermatitis and in OCMs deafness, vibrational syndrome, cataract due to poor light, 
etc. The Committee note that CIL and its subsidiaries have made available 
extensive medical facili ties to the employees and their families through various 
medical establishments beginning from the dispensary level and going up to the 
central and apex hospitals in different parts of the coalfields. Such infrastructure 
includes 79 hospitals with 5709 bed s, 418 dispensaries, 212 empanelled corporate 
hospitals and medical colleges, 589 ambulances, 1445 doctors including specialists 
and 3278 paramedical staff to provide medical services to CIL employees. Besides, 
11 Ayurvedic dispensaries also run by CIL subsidiaries provide indigenous system of 
treatment to workers. The Committee have been given to understand that besides 
preventive health care for detection of occupational health diseases, workers are 
also provided with protective gears such as helmet, cap lamps, masks, boots etc. 
The Committee are happy to note that due to the initiatives taken up by the 
Ministry and Coal PSUs, the number of cases of pneumoconiosis has reportedly 
come down drastically in CIL areas in the recent years and continuous biologic al 
and environmental monitoring has resulted in better health conditions of coal mine 
workers. The Committee further note with satisfaction that modernization and 
expansion of medical facilities have been accorded priority in CIL areas with many 
modern gad gets and medical equipments provided and made available for 
workers/inhabitants in these areas. Similarly, NLC also provides healthcare facilities 
through its General Hospital with 355 beds to all inhabitants of the Neyveli township 
and its surrounding villages including comprehensive medical treatment to contract 
workers and their family members. Notably, the Occupational Health Services 
(OHS) under the Preventive Health Care Programme in NLC is integrated with the 
overall hospital care delivery system of the company. Major components of 
Preventive Health Care include Periodic Medical Examination (PME) of miners 
conducted once in 3 years for those in the age brackets of 45 years and above and 
once in 5 years in the case of those who are below 45 years of ag e; Metalliferous 
Mining Medical Examination Programme; First Aid Training Programme; Community 
Health Screening; etc. The Committee observe that health issues of workers as well 
as inhabitants should be given paramount importance. Taking into consideration the 
various occupational health hazards being faced in Coal Mines by Miners, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should holistically review the working conditions 
in Mines with special aspects to hazardous conditions and come forth with a time 

51 
 
bound ro bust mechanism for ensuring up to date technology up -gradation and 
mechanization in the mining operations to reduce these hazards to the minimum 
possible level. The Committee further desire that workers must mandatorily be 
made to wear protective gears in Mines so that exposure to occupational hazards is 
minimized. The Committee also desire that a mechanism be put into place to 
ensure that workers mandatorily take periodic preventive health checkups with 
regular follow up which may include Periodical Medica l Examination of all miners 
once in 3 years instead of 5 years in the case of miners who are below the age of 
45 years. Also provision be made for facilitating immediate change of workplace 
where necessary for those workers who are affected with some parti cular kind of 
working conditions. The Committee also recommend that requisite health care 
provisions by way of giving advances, treatment as well as easy and hassle free 
settlement of cost of such treatments; etc. may also be incorporated. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Coal India Limited (CIL) 
 
The Mine Rules, 1955 in the rule 29B (b) mandates Periodical Medical Examination 
(PME) of every person employed in the mine at interval of not more than five years. 
However, the PME of persons employed in the mines of CIL who are about 45 years 
is done at interval of three years as a measure of close preventive health checkup 
of ageing employees. 
As the Committee desires to put in place a mechanism to ensure that PME of all 
workmen is done once in 3 years instead of 5 years, necessary amendment in the 
provisions of rule 29B of the Mine Rules 1955 should be incorporated so that it is 
uniformly implemented in all mines and accordingly requisite infrastructure in 
respect of doctors, paramedical staff and equipment is set up in addition to the 
existing ones. 
Technology up-gradation and mechanization programme: 
CIL has adopted the following technology up -gradation and mechanization 
programme in its mining operations: 
• Adoption of the state-of-the art technology in suitable geo-mining locales. 
• Phasing out manual loading in UG mines. 
• Adoption of Mass Production Technology in more number of UG mines. 
• Mechanization of UG drilling and roof bolting operation. 
• Deployment of  more number of surface miners to eliminate blasting 
operation in O.C.Ps. 
• Deployment of relatively higher capacity HEMM in more number of O.C.Ps . 
 

52 
 
CIL has undertaken a study on "Technology Development and Modernization of its 
mines" for formulation of Roadmap for further mechanization. 
 
Personnel Protective Equipment: 
 
CIL provides the following Personnel Protective Equipment (PPE) to all employees 
as per their job requirements. 
1. Mining Shoes 
2. Gumboot 
3. Helmet 
4. Hand Gloves 
5. Ear muff 
6. Safety Goggles  
7. Dust masks 
8. Safety Hooks / Belts 
9. Full  Body Harness / Reflective Harness 
10. Fluorescent  Jacket  / Vest  / Strap 
Change of work place (substitiution) is the part of treatment for persons detected 
with CWP (Coal Workers‟ Pneumoconiosis). Wo rk person affected with critical 
disease are also rehabilitated in a suitable work environment for speedy recovery of 
the disease.    
CIL has already empanelled 243 hospitals all over India. In most of the cases, 
employees and their dependent family member s referred for treatment are 
provided cashless facility. Otherwise CIL and its subsidiary companies are giving 
medical advance on estimate as submitted by treating hospital. 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC) 
At present the occupational health centr e at NLC is catering to the needs of its 
employees as per the guidelines given by Director General of Mines Safety. As per 
previous guidelines, Periodical Medical Examination of miners above the age of 45 is 
taken up once in 3 years and in the case of mine rs below the age of 45 years it is 
taken up once in 5 years. Observations and recommendations of the parliamentary 
committee 2015 to take up PME once in 3 years covering all age groups will be 
taken up with the NLC top management for implementation of the Committee‟s 
suggestion. 
[O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
PRIVATE SCHOOLS FINANCED BY CIL AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
 While observing that there is no employer - employee relationship between the 
teachers employed by the management of privately managed schools and 
CIL/Subsidiaries companies which has been confirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme 

53 
 
Court Order dated 21st August, 2007, the Committee appreciate the enhanced rate 
of grants -in-aid of Rs. 5000/ - per undergraduate teacher to Rs. 7000/ - per 
graduate teacher with B. Ed. qualification per month being granted by the CIL. The 
Committee, however, desire that management of CIL sho uld ensure that these 
privately managed collieries schools are imparting quality education to the children 
of miners and workmen of the collieries. The Committee also desire that the 
management of these privately managed schools which are getting grants -in-aids 
from CIL and its subsidiaries are implementing the wage structure for different 
categories of teachers as approved by the respective State Government/State 
Education Board. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Coal India Limited 
 
To improve the quality of education in th e  operational  area  of  Subsidiary 
Companies , National  skill Development corporation  will be engaged for 
conducting a survey  of the existing  privately managed school, which are getting 
grant-in -aids. 
The subsidiary companies have been advised to en sure that payment of grant -in-
aid to privately managed school is released in time. 
 
 [O.M. No. 54012/05/2013-CRC-II(Pt) dated 11/07/2016 of Ministry of Coal] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                             RAKESH SINGH 
09 August, 2016                                                                             Chairperson  
18 Sravana, 1938(Saka)                    Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 

54 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 9th August, 2016 IN ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Rakesh Singh - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
5. Shri Shailesh Kumar 
6. Shri Devji M. Patel 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
9. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
10. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
12. Shri Janardan Singh"Sigriwal" 
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
16. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
 Sabha 
 
17.      Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri U.B.S. Negi  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  -  Director 
3.  Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Additional Director 
4.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam  -  Deputy Secretary  
 

55 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for co nsideration the following Draft 
Reports:- 
(i)     **    **   **    ** 
(ii)     **    **   **    ** 
 
(iii)   Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fourteenth Report on "Safety for Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/Lignite 
Mining Areas” of the Ministry of Coal.  
4. The Committee also considered the letter of dissent dated  09.08.2016 given 
by Shri Tathagata Satpathy, M.P. in respect o f certain recommendations conta ined 
in its draft Report relating to "Research  & Development in Iron and Steel Sector" of 
the Ministry of Steel. 
5. The Committee adopted the Reports with minor changes/modifications in 
Draft Report on "Research and Development in Iron and Steel Sector". The 
Committee decided that a copy of the aforesaid letter of dissent given by Shri 
Tathagata Satpathy be appended to the Report in terms of Rule 331I.(3) of Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Committee then authorized 
the Chairperson to finalise the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the 
concerned Ministries and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
__________________________________________________________________. 
**Do not pertain to this Report.  
 
   
  

56 
 
ANNEXURE-II  
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made                   17   
           
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government          
 (vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,12,15 and 16)          12 
 Percentage of total                                                                         70.58% 
                                                          
          
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government's replies 
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 13)                                                    01 
Percentage of total                             5.88 % 
    
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. NIL)                                            00 
 Percentage of total                              0% 
               
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
 are still awaited 
 (vide recommendation at Sl. No. 10,11,14 and 17)                                  04 
 Percentage of total                      23.54 % 
      
 
 