FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COAL
SAFETY , HEALTH AND EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR
INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN COAL/LIGNITE MINING AREAS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 12.08.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 ( Saka)


CC&S No. 97
Price : R  118.00
© 2015 BY L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introductory .............................................. 1
CHAPTER II Safety of Workers in Coal and Lignite Mines ..... 4
CHAPTER III Health Facilities for Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/
Lignite Mining Areas ................................... 43
CHAPTER IV Education Facilities for Inhabitants/Workers in
Coal/Lignite Mining Areas ............................. 58
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ....... 67
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 30.12.2014 ............. 80
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 14.07.2015 ............. 83
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 11.08.2015 ............. 86
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2014-15)
Shri Rakesh Singh* — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Shailesh Kumar
7. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
8. Shri Godam Nagesh
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
(iii)
*Shri Rakesh Singh appointed w.e.f. 27.11.2014 vice Shri Hansraj G. Ahir appointed Minister.

(iv)
24. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque @
25. Shri B.K Hariprasad
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
#
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
@Shri Md. Nadimul Haque nominated  w.e.f. 08.01.2015 vice Shri Srinjoy Bose.
#Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated  w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Basawaraj Patil.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their
behalf, present this Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject “Safety, Health and Education Facilities for Inhabitants/Workers
in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas ” relating to the Ministry of Coal.
2. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2014-15) had selected
the subject for detailed examination and report to the Parliament.
The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of
Coal and Coal/Lignite PSUs on 30.12.2014 and took oral evidence on
14.07.2015. Based on the oral and written testimony submitted to the
Committee, a report on the subject was prepared.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Coal and Coal/Lignite PSUs for placing before them and
in furnishing material/information from time to time as desired by the
Committee.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 11.08.2015.
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for
the valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
11 August, 2015 Chairperson,
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The issue of Safety, Health and Education facilities for inhabitants/
workers in Coal/Lignite Mining areas assumes significance due to the
large number of workers/inhabitants in mining areas. Statedly nearly
3,70,000 workers are deployed in coal mines. And presently, coal meets
52% of primary commercial energy requirement in India against 29%
the world over. Needless to say that maintenance of safety standards
in Coal/Lignite Mines are crucial not only for the safety of work force
but it also affects the economies of the company. It is, therefore,
imperative that continuous and sustained efforts are made to ensure
optimum safety standards and zero tolerance for fatal accidents in
these Mines. It is equally important to have a robust and effective
safety monitoring mechanism for prevention of accidents and
preparedness to handle any eventualities. Besides, periodic and
systematic safety audits by Accredited External Agencies with mandatory
follow up on findings thereof are essential. Safety and Health of workers
deployed in Coal/Lignite Mines therefore need to be accorded utmost
priority. Thus, in this context, a holistic review of the present system
of safety monitoring mechanism through a revisit of the fundamental
provisions made in various statutes pertaining to the issue is paramount.
Besides adopting and instilling more scientific and good practices of
mines safety as well as globally established techniques such as Workplace
Risk Assessment and Control (WRAC) would undoubtedly help in achieving
the target set for zero tolerance for fatal accidents in Mines. Also,
issues pertaining to health and education facilities for inhabitants/
workers in coal/lignite mining areas are equally important.
1.2 The extant statutory framework governing safety in coal mines
include the Mines Act-1952 and Rules, Regulations & Bye-laws; Electricity
Act-2003 and Rules, Regulations & Bye-laws; Explosive Act-1884 &
Explosive Rules–2008; Employee Compensation Act–2009, Factories Act–
1948 (Chapter-3 & 4) and Indian Boiler Act–1923 & Rules. The Monitoring
Authority for safety in mines include External Agency under Ministry of
Labour and Environment (MoL&E) viz: Chief Inspector of Mines (DGMS);
Regional Inspector of Mines (DDG); Inspector of Mines (DMS & DDMS);
External Agency under MoC; Minutes of Standing Committee on Safety
in Coal Mines; Internal Agency: Coal India Limited Safety Board;
Subsidiary Company Tri-partite Safety Committee; Area Tri-partite Safety
Committee; Safety Committee; and Workman Inspector (Mining/
Mechanical/Electrical).

2
1.3 The Committee during their sittings held on 30.12.2014 and
14.7.2015 examined the above issues in detail. While the representatives
of the Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs briefed the Committee on the
subject on 30.12.2014, the oral evidence on the subject was taken by
the Committee on 14.7.2015. The Ministry of Coal briefed the Committee
on the extant provisions on ‘Safety, Health and Education Facilities for
Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas’ highlighting the major
policy initiatives taken up by the Ministry. Subsequently, in separate
visual presentations, the representatives of the Coal PSUs viz., Coal
India Ltd.(CIL), Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) and Neyveli
Lignite Corporation (NLC) highlighted the status of safety, health and
education facilities for inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining areas
under their jurisdiction. The Committee were apprised about the major
statutes governing mine safety; monitoring mechanism of safety status;
trend of accident statistics; safety provisions and initiatives taken to
improve safety in Mines, effectiveness of Work Place Risk Assessment
and Control (WRAC); formulation of Safety Management Plan (SMP) and
review thereof; trend of accident statistics; Implementation of the
Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields being monitored by High
Powered Central Committee (HPCC) headed by Secretary (Coal). The
representatives also briefed the Committee on the existing health and
educational facilities for inhabitants/workers in Coal/Lignite Mining
areas under their corresponding jurisdictions.
1.4 The Committee had also raised queries and sought clarifications
from the representatives on various issues viz. identification of major
hazards in mining operations and associated risks; average life span of
workers deployed in coal mines; feasibility of provision of having own
hospitals instead of referrals to other hospitals; provision of protective
equipments and improvement of working conditions in Coal mines at
par with international standards; training facilities for workers;
effectiveness of the extant safety policy and monitoring of its
implementation by the Internal Safety Organisation; efficacy of the
ISOs in terms of adequacy of staff and techniques/technology; follow
up on reports made by ISOs; roadmap towards achievement of zero
tolerance of fatality rate of accidents in Coal mines, current status of
phasing out of manual loading as per the recommendations of the
10th National Safety conference; time-frame for mechanized roof
support for coverage of all existing underground mines; zero tolerance
to fatal accidents in Coal Mines; Evaluation of Hospitals under CIL;
Need for Super-Specialty Hospitals; Trained personnel for handling aspect
of safety in proportion to total work force of nearly 3,70,000 workers
statedly deputed in Coal Mines; Control of Air and Water Pollution
vis-à-vis Health issues; Need for surprise visits to check upon safety
and health of workers; etc.

3
1.5 The detailed examination of the above issues by the Committee
on the basis of written and oral information/testimony furnished by
the representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs are highlighted
in the succeeding chapters.

4
CHAPTER II
SAFETY OF WORKERS IN COAL AND LIGNITE MINES
According to the Ministry of Coal, safety in coal mines has always
been given the highest priority in CIL. It is considered as a part of core
production process. The Directorate General Mine Safety (DGMS) is
vested with the responsibility to ensure the compliance of provisions
under the Mines Act, 1952 and Rules & Regulations made thereunder
for improvement in safety of mining operation. In addition, there
exists a Standing Committee on Safety in Coal Mines under the
Chairmanship of Minister of Coal with the members of Coal Companies,
DGMS, Ministry of Labour and Employment and Trade Unions. Coal
companies have formulated a well defined Safety Policy and established
a multidisciplinary Internal Safety Organization (ISO) to monitor the
implementation of safety policy of CIL. Apart from complying the
statutory provisions, CIL has taken several measures for prevention of
mine accident. The various safety mechanisms and initiatives are
detailed as under:—
Safety Monitoring Mechanism at different levels in CIL:
2.2 The Ministry in their Background Note on the subject highlighted
their extant safety monitoring mechanism as follows:—
At Mine level Workman inspectors: as per Mines Rule, 1955
Pit Safety Committee: constituted as per
Mines Rule, 1955.
At Area level Bipartite/Tripartite Committee Meeting
Safety Officers ’ Coordination Meeting.
Level At Subsidiary HQ Bipartite/Tripartite Committee Meeting
Area Safety Officers ’ Coordination Meeting
Inspections by ISO Officials.
At CIL HQ Level CIL Safety Board
CMD’s meet
Director (Tech.)’s Coordination Meeting
National Dust Prevention Committee Meeting
Inspections.
At Ministerial/National Standing Committee on Safety in Coal Mines.
Level National Conference on Safety in mines.
Various Parliamentary Standing Committees
(such as Standing Committee on Coal,
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) under
CSR Audit Report).

5
2.3 As regards continuous and sustained improvement in CIL’s safety
performance, the Committee were apprised as under:—
“THE 5-YEARLY AVERAGE FATALITIES SINCE THE INCEPTION OF CIL IN
THE YEAR 1975 SHOWS A CONSISTENT REDUCING TREND OVER A
PERIOD OF TIME AS IS EVIDENT FROM THE GRAPH GIVEN BELOW:
Note: Accident Statistics are maintained calendar year-wise in conformity with
DGMS and figures for the year 2013 are subject to reconciliation with DGMS.
The 5-yearly average fatalities for the period 2010-13 have reduced
by 66% in comparison to average fatalities for the time period
1975-79.”
2.4 According to Ministry of Coal the 5-yearly average of serious
injuries in CIL since its inception in the year 1975 upto the year 2013
have also shown a consistent reducing trend over period of time as is
evident from the graph below:—
Note: Accident Statistics are maintained calendar year-wise in conformity with DGMS
and figures for the year 2013 are subject to reconciliation with DGMS.
THE 5-YEARLY AVERAGE SERIOUS INJURIES HAVE REDUCED MORE
SHARPLY THAN FATALITIES IN THE SAME TIME-FRAME. AS FIGURES OF
SERIOUS INJURIES ARE THE PRECURSOR OF FATAL ACCIDENTS AND MINE
DISASTER, IT IS A REALISTIC INDICATOR OF IMPROVEMENT IN SAFETY
STANDARDS OF OUR MINES.


6
2.5 Analysis of Trend of Accident Statistics of CIL for the last 5
years is as under:—
(a) Fatalities in CIL for the last 5 years
Note: Accident Statistics are maintained calendar year-wise in conformity with DGMS
and figures for the year 2013 are subject to reconciliation with DGMS.
(b) Serious injuries in CIL for the last 5 years
Note: Accident Statistics are maintained calendar year-wise in conformity with DGMS
and figures for the year 2013 are subject to reconciliation with DGMS.


7
2.6 Asked about the Company-wise Accident Statistics for the year
2014 upto August compared to same period during the year 2013, the
Committee were apprised as under:—
Company Fatalities Serious Injuries
2013 2014 2013 2014
ECL 6 6 48 46
BCCL 5 5 14 13
CCL 7 3 6 2
NCL 4 3 10 7
WCL 5 8 34 27
SECL 7 9 24 20
MCL 1 0 7 8
NEC 0 0 0 0
CIL 35 34 143 123
2.7 Company-wise status of Organization and Infrastructure:—
As on 01.09.2014
Company PME* Doctors Para X-Ray Spirometer Audio Patho-
Center for PME medical M/C meter logy
staffs Lab.
for PME
ECL 14 14 14 17 12 14 18
BCCL 9 9 21 9 9 9 9
CCL 13 13 45 13 13 13 12
NCL 12 12 37 6 11 11 12
WCL 10 24 1 11 0 0 10 10
SECL 14 14 86 18 12 14 14
MCL 2 10 9 6225
NEC 1 2 2 1 111
CIL 75 98 225 80 60 74 81
*Periodic Medical Examination.

8
2.8 When enquired about the steps taken for improvement in Safety
in Mines; the Ministry of Coal apprised the Committee in a written
reply as under:—
“Apart from complying the statutory provisions as laid down in the
Mines Act, 1952 and the Coal Mine Regulations, Mine Rule and bye-
laws framed thereunder, CIL has taken several measures to avoid
re-occurrence of such accidents and protection of the employees/
workers. These are as under:—
• Continuous review of safety status of mines is being done
through the multi-disciplinary Internal Safety Organization
(ISO).
• After analysis of fatal accidents, several directives / guidelines
on corrective measures to be taken for prevention of
recurrence of similar type of accident in future are being
issued from the Safety and Rescue Division of CIL.
• Stress on preparation and implementation of Risk Assessment
based Safety Management Plan (SMP) for every mine.
•A  protocol for conducting safety audit by external
independent agencies has been prepared to bring uniformity
and efficiency in mine safety audit.
For improving safety in mining operation: The following steps
have been taken/are being taken to improve safety standard in mines.
1. Stress on introduction of Mass Production Technology in UG
mines.
2. More number of surface miner are being introduced to
eliminate blasting operation in opencast mines to make mining
operation more eco-friendly.
3. Introduction of High Wall mining wherever possible.
4. Deployment of high capacity HEMMs to reduce traffic density.
5. Mechanization of drilling (for bolting) is being adopted in all
UG mines.
6. Phasing out of manual loading as per the recommendations
of 10th National Safety Conference.
7. Man Riding Systems (MRSs) are being installed in all
underground mines having long haul/arduous travel.
8. Operator Independent Truck Dispatch System (OITDS) is being
used in large OCPs. ”

9
2.9 According to Ministry of Coal, some other steps specific to
certain areas of operation are as under:—
“(i) Steps taken for better Strata Management:
Roof & Side fall is still one of the major causes of fatal
accident and fatality in underground mines. Steps taken for
better strata control monitoring are as follows:—
•D etailed site-specific geological and geo-technical
characterization is done using standard strata
classification system such as Rock Mass Rating (RMR).
• Design of strata support and reinforcement systems based
on RMR.
• Strata control cells have been established in all
subsidiaries.
• Use of more number of mechanised roof drilling machines.
• Switching over to use of resin capsules from cement
capsules in phased manner.
• Initiatives have been taken to develop device with
appropriate audio-visual alarm to monitor the behaviour
of overlying roof strata.
• Several roof-monitoring devices have been developed at
Area/Mine level workshops.
• Subsidence monitoring and control.
(ii) Steps being taken to prevent spontaneous heating, fire
and explosion in mine:
• Expedite construction of sectionalization stoppings.
• Fresh Pressure Quantity (FPQ) Survey for checking efficacy
of ventilation.
•P rocurement and installation of more number of Gas
Chromatographs.
• Use of Local Methane Detector (LMD) for early and
accurate detection of methane.
(iii) Mine Safety Inspections: The following inspections are being
made in each mine to ensure that all mining operations are
carried out in the mine as per the provisions of the relevant
statute and safety norms:
•R ound the clock supervision of all mining operations by
adequate number of competent and statutory supervisors
and officers.

10
• Daily mine inspections are done by mine officials of each
mine.
•P eriodic mine inspections by senior area level official.
• Surprise back shift mine inspections by mine and area
level officials.
•T wice every week Inspection by Workmen Inspectors
appointed in each mine.
•M onthly mine inspection and meeting of Safety Committee
Members of each mine.
•R egular mine inspections by officials of Internal Safety
Organization.
•P eriodic mine inspections by High Powered Task Force,
Area and Subsidiary level Tri-partite Safety Committee
members, etc.
(iv) Safety R&D initiatives at CIL (HQ) level:
• Construction of quick setting stopping by using expansion
foam agent to isolate fire.
• Development of notch cutting machine to facilitate
construction of stopping in UG.
• Eliminating the possibility of ignition of gas and incidences
of explosion in UG mines due to electric fault by
application of innovative technology of fault diversion.
• Studies on determination of free Silica (Alfa-content) in
respirable air borne dust in coal mines and preparation
of data bank of free Silica and other minerals present in
dust as well as in coal.
(v) Special safety drive for accident prevention in OCPs:
• Formulation of Mine-specific Traffic Rule.
• Code of Practices for HEMM operators, Maintenance staffs,
and others.
•P reparation and implementation of Risk Assessment based
Safety Management Plan (SMP).
•T raining of Contractor ’s Workers involved in contractual
jobs.
• Introduction of Safe Operating Procedures (SOPs) for safe
mining operations.
•P rocurement of advanced surveying/slope monitoring
devices.

11
(vi) Emergency Response Systems:
• Emergency Action Plans of each mine is being reviewed
from time to time.
• Mock Rehearsals for examining the preparedness/efficacy
of Mine-wise Emergency Action Plan.
• Demarcating Escape Routes: An exercise for demarcating
Escape Routes in UG mines, on plans as well as below
ground by fluorescent paint, display of the same at the
entrance of the mine has been done.
•A  Check list for dealing with emergency has been
prepared and uploaded in website.
(vii) Safety Awareness Programme:
• Special Safety Drives is conducted periodically to assess
the level of compliance of safety norms in each mine.
• Annual safety fortnight is also conducted once in every
year for the same purpose.
• Constant safety awareness programmes are conducted in
every mine for increasing safety awareness amongst grass
root level workmen for ensuring compliance of safety
norms. This is done with the help of:—
— Safety talks & oath at the beginning of the shift,
—P osters & Pictorial hoardings,
— Circulation of code of safe practices for every operation
and activity to all concerned,
— Display of animation films and VT module films in VT
during special and refresher trainings,
— Monthly PSC meetings in all the mines. ”
2.10 The Committee were informed about the new initiatives taken
for adoption of system approach for overall improvement of safety
standards, which are as under:—
• “For initiating Risk Management by adoption of the globally
established technique of WRAC (Work place Risk Assessment
and Control) which proactively complies with provisions of
upcoming CMR, 2011.
• By adoption of Risk Assessment based Safety Management in
all mines of CIL following potential benefits have emerged:
a. Uniform system of documentation of all mining operation
activities in step-wise method and identification of hazards

12
and risks thereof (in the step itself) along with controls
(safety precautions) in each step makes it the first of its
kind document for all mines of Coal India Limited.
b. As WRAC involves the very persons who perform the
activity, it fosters team spirit and participativeness of
entire work force in Risk Management.
c. This method facilitates Risk management and thus
improves the standard of safety in all operations/
technology/processes.
d. It also enhancing awareness and informal training to
participating work groups.
e. It shall enhance safety in our work practices to the global
standards and will further boost the image of the
company.
• In the existing system of safety management, the safety had
practically been an issue of statutory certificate holders,
WIs, PSC members, Managers, Agents and Owner. The Risk
management by WRAC covers entire work force over a time
and many of the valuable suggestions from the work persons
are incorporated, documented and practised. The safety gets
ingrained with activity of all the departments involved with
mining operations.
•P reparation of SMP demonstrating use of WRAC as Risk
Management tool for various operations, its subsequent review
and monitoring makes it an auditable comprehensive
document.”
2.11 As regards accident Details for NLC Mines during the last ten
years, the Committee were informed as under:—
Year Category of accident Total Total Lignite
R/M S F accident mandays Production
in NLC worked (Lakh
Mines Tonnes)
12 3 4 5 67
2003-04 4 7 2 13 3479040 205.57
2004-05 10 3 2 15 3687801 215.67
2005-06 4 7 1 12 3901223 204.35

13
2006-07 6 6 6 18 4096214 210.14
2007-08 5319 4323901 215.86
2008-09 4239 4269395 213.07
2009-10 4 10 3 17 4395667 223.38
2010-11 1236 4244396 231.44
2011-12 - 6 1 7 4533078 245.90
2012-13 1449 4208682 262.23
2013-14 - 4 1 5 4236892 266.09
2014-15 - - 1 1 1849201 99.60
(upto Aug.)
R/M - Reportable Minor S - Serious F - Fatal
Note: In NLC Mines, accidents have taken place mainly due to individual ’s fault.
No accidents have occurred either due to system failure or unsafe condition of the
Mines or machinery.
Steps taken to avoid accidents in Lignite Mines
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC) has been engaged in mining
of Lignite and generation of power using lignite in its pit-head power
stations for more than five decades.
In NLC, highly sophisticated mining machineries are deployed for its
continuous lignite mining and allied activities. Asked about the Steps
taken to avoid accidents in Lignite Mines, the Committee were informed
of the following systems which are being currently used to ensure
safety in mining equipment:—
a. Fail safe system.
b. Emergency switch with pull cord system.
c. Limit switches.
d. Interlock and de-interlock devices.
e. Overload relay system for automated coordination/operation/
tripping of the system in case of wrong handling/faulty-
operation etc.
f. ‘Eldro’ breaking system etc.
12 3 4 5 67

14
In addition to above safety provisions, in order to maintain safety
of workers working in mines the following steps/safety measures are
also taken:
(i) All the required Personal Protective Equipments are issued
specific to the job requirement to the employees/contract
workers before taking up the work.
(ii) Systematic in-depth Accident Analysis is being done for
accident prevention/to avert recurrence of accidents.
(iii) NLC adopts Accident counselling system to ensure that serious/
Reportable/Near miss accident victims are given appropriate
counselling as a recurrence avoidance and behavioural
transformation.
(iv) Area-wise responsibility with priority to safety is being
enforced at all Mine Operational/Maintenance activities for
ensuring specific site supervision.
(v) Code of practices for different operations like Specialized
Mining Equipment Operations, Ancillary Equipment Operations.
Traffic Rules, General Precautions are formulated and
exhibited at appropriate locations, for the benefit of the
employees.
(vi) Inter-Unit Safety Assessments are being carried out for every
quarter to assess safety standards maintained as per statute.
(vii) Risk Assessment and Safety Audit for Mines are being carried
out by Accredited External Agencies once in two years.
(viii) Commitment on inculcating safety awareness by way of
imparting adequate/need based training with new training
modules to employees and compulsory training for all
categories of employees, including the contract employees
before their deployment in shop floor and in their assigned
working areas.
(ix) On the job training is being imparted to inculcate safety
awareness especially among the contract workers to adopt
safe work practices.
(x) Continuous monitoring of behavioural sense/attitude/
commitment of Employees towards Safety.

15
SAFETY STATISTICS IN SCCL:
2.12 The Ministry of Coal in a note forwarded to the Committee
have furnished the following statistics regarding safety in coal mines:
“(a) Safety Statistics during the year 2014 upto 31st August in
SCCL are as under:
Fatal Fatalities Serious Serious Fatality Rate Serious Injury Rate
Accidents Accidents Injuries Per MT Per 3 lakh Per MT Per 3 lakh
manshifts manshifts
56 190 191 0.18 0.19 5.68 6.02
Note: Figures are subject to reconciliation with DGMS.
(b) Fatal Accidents, fatalities, Serious Accidents and Serious
Injuries during 2010 to 2014 (upto 31st August, 2014) in SCCL:
Year Fatal Fatalities Serious Serious
Accidents Accidents Injuries
2010 10 12 302 312
2011 8 8 319 320
2012 11 12 339 341
2013 11 12 364 369
2014 (Upto Aug.) 5 6 190 191
(c) The rate of fatality and serious injury during 2010 to 2014
(upto Aug.) in SCCL:
Year Fatal Fatality Serious Serious
rate rate injuries Injuries
per MT . per 3 lakh per MT . per 3 lakh
manshifts manshifts
2010 0.24 0.21 6.21 5.57
2011 0.16 0.16 6.37 6.28
2012 0.22 0.22 6.30 6.22
2013 0.24 0.24 7.38 7.43
2014 (Upto Aug.) 0.18 0.19 5.68 6.02

16
2.13 Asked about the Measures Taken to improve the Safety Status
in SCCL Mines, the Committee were informed of the following safety
measures are being taken up by SCCL management:
“(i) In SCCL, with the aim of reducing accidents due to roof and
side falls, gradual phasing out of Hand Section is taken up so
that density of workmen in dangerous areas is minimized. In
place of Hand Section, SDL and LHD are introduced.
(ii) To monitor strata control activity, each region is provided
with a strata monitoring cell.
(iii) The services of scientific institutions like, CIMFR, NIRM etc.,
are being utilized for designing of panels and effective strata
management system.
(iv) Based on the Severity Index during the year 2013 the accident
prone mines were identified for the year 2014, and the
concerned Mine Managers and Agents were advised to critically
analyze all the accidents to identify the most common causes
and prepare Action Plan to reduce accidents.
(v) All managers were advised not to start Depillaring Panels
before obtaining Safety Clearance Certificate and also DGMS
Permissions conditions are to be followed without any
deviations. If any operations are to be conducted by deviating
from Permission conditions, modification shall be obtained
from the Inspectorate before such operation.
(vi) All Regional General Managers (Safety) were requested to
advise the concerned to discuss the remedial measures against
unsafe conditions and practices in the mines as pointed out
by Work Man Inspector (WMI) in the Pit Safety Committee
meetings and to see that the Pit Safety Committees function,
in true spirit to enhance the safety.
(vii) All area CGM/GMs were requested to arrange inspection of
Surveyed-off equipment like SDL/LHD etc. which are required
to be deployed for operations by the Area Level Committee
consisting SO to GM, ASO, Area (E&M) Engineer and OEM
Service Engineer according to the guidelines given in DGMS
(Tech.) Circular No. 1 of 2009 and issue Safety Clearance
Certificate before their deployment in underground mines.
(viii) Monsoon Audit inspections were done in all the mines by
Committees constituted for the purpose.
(ix) The findings and recommendations of enquiries in connection
with every fatal accident due to fall of roof, hit by SDL
bucket, shot firing accident were communicated to all area

17
CGM/GMs, Regional GM(S)s , ASOs, Agents, and Managers for
propagation and awareness amongst workmen and for
preventive action.
(x) All Mine Managers were advised to organize Monthly and
Quarterly Risk Management Committee meetings for the year
2014-15.
(xi) Mine Managers were advised to make night shift inspections
at least once in every fortnight as required by the statute to
improve the safety and discipline in the mine.
(xii) All Area CGM/GMs were requested to advise the Mine Managers
to follow the precautionary measures and directives issued
from the Directorate on ‘danger of inundation ’ from surface
water and underground sources.
(xiii) ISO recommendations on Roof Fall incidents were circulated
to all Mine Managers.
(xiv) All Project Officers/Agents were advised to comply clause
1.8.1 of Recommendations of 11th Conference on Safety
(Employer’s Responsibilities in Contractor Works).
(xv) All Area CGM/GMs were advised to formulate Area Level
teams consisting Area Safety Officer, Area Engineer and Area
Survey Officer , for review and monitoring of Safety
Management Plans of the mines.
(xvi) All Area E&M Engineers were advised to make thorough
inspections to ensure proper maintenance of all the safety
devices incorporated in the existing ‘Man Riding Rail Car
Systems’ and to monitor and supervise to ensure safety of
the equipment and men travelling in it.
(xvii) As opined by Dy. DGMS, all Agents were advised that all the
applications which are being made for getting Permissions/
exemptions and modifications from DGMS under CMR, 1957
shall be scrutinized by the Area Safety Officer and approved
by GM(S) of the Region concerned before submitting to DGMS
authorities.”
Monitoring Mechanism
2.14 On being asked as to whether the provisions of safety contained
in these statutes which were apparently framed way back in the 1950s
were still relevant to accommodate the modern day challenges, the
Ministry of Coal informed the Committee in a written reply as under:—
“The provisions made under the Mines Act, 1952, the Mines Rules—
1955, the Coal Mine Regulations—1957 and the Bye-laws and Standing
Order framed thereunder are still relevant to ensure safety of

18
mines and safety and health of work persons. The existing safety
statutes for coal mining were framed when underground manual
mining or semi-mechanized mining was widely adopted. Since then,
several advancements in various fields of mining have evolved viz.,
(i) Fully mechanized mines with continuous miners for both
underground and open cast mines.
(ii) The majority of coal production has shifted from underground
mines to opencast mines.
(iii) Use of Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HEMM) in coal mines
with high productivity and less manpower.
(iv) Blasting has evolved from the old system of gun powder and
safety fuse to the present day SME and electronic detonators.
(v) Impact of large scale opencast mining on the environment
and the related safety issues for workers/inhabitants.
(vi) Engagement of contractual worker in coal winning and
overburden removal etc.
(vii) Implementations of safety and welfare in contract workers
system.
(viii) The safety and health of inhabitants of coal mining areas. ”
2.15 The Ministry of Coal further stated that even though these
safety statutes are being amended or supplemented from time to time
through updated DGMS technical circulars and recommendation of Safety
conferences, still there is a need to have a holistic review of the
existing safety statutes to accommodate the modern day challenges of
the coal mining industry. With a view to address modern day challenges,
MoLE has proposed to amend the provisions of Mines Act, 1952 and now
Coal Mine Regulations-2015.
2.16 On being asked as to whether any holistic review had been
done on the fundamental provisions made in these governing statutes
pertaining to safety aspects, the Ministry of Coal stated that though,
several amendments have been made in the statutes from time to time
to meet the modern day challenges, no holistic review have been done
on the fundamental provisions made in the statutes in the past. The
need for a holistic review of the fundamental provisions of the governing
safety statutes were felt and a draft “The Mines Act (Amendment)
Bill -2011” and proposed new “Coal Mines Regulations—2015 ” has been
prepared by Ministry of Labour and Employment after deliberations
with all the stakeholders and has been published in the Gazette of
India.

19
2.17 On a pointed query as to what was the hierarchy of all these
monitoring mechanisms, the Ministy of Coal have informed the Committee
as under:—
“Apart from Statutory Monitoring by DGMS, the status of safety is
being monitored at different levels by various safety Committees.
The hierarchy of these safety monitoring mechanisms is as under:
At Mine level:
(i) Workman Inspector (Mining/Mechanical/Electrical) (Appointed
as per Rule-29Q of the Mines Rules-1955).
(ii) Safety Committee in each mine (as per Rule-29T of the Mines
Rules-1955).
At Area level:
(iii) Area Tripartite Safety Committee (Management, DGMS and
Trade unions).
At Subsidiary level:
(iv) Subsidiary company level Tripartite Safety Committee
(Management, DGMS and Trade Unions).
At Company level:
(v) CIL Safety Board (Management, DGMS and Trade Unions).
At Ministry level:
(vi) National Conference on Safety in mines conducted by Ministry
of Labour and Employment.
(vii) Standing Committee on Safety in Coal Mines (MoC,
Management, DGMS and Trade Unions).
(viii) Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. ”
2.18 On being asked to state whether there exists a functional
connect amongst these various Bodies at any horizontal or vertical
level, the Ministry of Coal stated that there exists a functional connect
amongst various bodies at horizontal/vertical level, the details of which
are as under:—
“(i) The mine level safety bodies like Zonal Safety Committees
and Pit Safety Committees interact with each other.
(ii) The findings of workmen Inspectors during inspection are
discussed in the Safety Committee meetings.

20
(iii) The recommendations made during periodic safety audit and
inspections by the corporate level ISO team are discussed
during safety committee meetings.
(iv) The activities of the various mine level safety bodies are
evaluated during the coordination meetings.
(v) The activities of the various mine level safety bodies are
evaluated during the bipartite/tripartite meetings at corporate
level and the recommendations made in the meetings are
communicated to mine level safety bodies for further
implementation.
These Safety Monitoring Bodies are working independently in their
respective domains. However , un-resolved issues at the lower levels
are taken up in the higher level for compliance. There exists free
horizontal and vertical communication between the various safety
monitoring bodies. ”
2.19 On being asked as to how the reports given by safety monitoring
Bodies were implemented, the Ministry of Coal stated that the safety
monitoring reports of these bodies are circulated as the minutes of
meetings to all concerned for compliance. Thereupon, action taken
report/compliance reports are required to be submitted.
2.20 On further being asked as to whether there are timelines
stipulated for speedy and effective implementation and adequate follow
up on the observations/recommendations made by these Bodies, the
Ministry of Coal stated that depending on nature of issues, timelines
are stipulated for speedy and effective implementation. In case of
rectifications which are likely to take time, permission was sought to
rectify within a reasonable time. The action taken reports/compliance
reports are submitted to DGMS and ISO at corporate level by the
concerned mine authority within stipulated time. Status of the
implementation of the violations/rectifications pointed out by various
Safety monitoring bodies is reviewed in the next meeting for acceptance
of the compliance. Violations/recommendations pointed out by various
safety governing bodies are followed up on a regular basis through
safety organizational structure of the Company.
2.21 On a pointed query as to how the concerns of the workers,
both regular and contract on aspect of their safety addressed by these
safety monitoring Boards, it was stated that the concerns of the workers,
both regular and contract, on aspect of their safety are addressed/
brought to the notice of the mine management by the worker directly
or first line supervisor , Workmen Inspectors, members of the pit safety
committee or through worker representatives (Trade Union) in various
safety monitoring bodies, for their timely redressal.

21
2.22 On being asked as to whether there was need to review the
present system of safety monitoring mechanism, it was stated that the
present system of safety monitoring mechanism is functioning
satisfactorily. But in view of technical changes and modern day
challenges, a holistic review will be advisable.
Safety Management Plan
2.23 The Committee were apprised that one of the main functions
of safety Committee was to prepare, review and implement Safety
Management Plan. In this context, the Ministry was asked to state how
often are these safety Management Plan prepared by each subsidiaries
of CIL, SCCL and NLC and to state its periodicity and the level in the
hierarchy where such safety Management plan are approved. In reply
thereon, it was stated that the safety management plan were prepared
at Unit level, reviewed by the Internal Safety Organisation (ISO) at
corporate level and subsequently approved by DGMS. This was reviewed
periodically at company level to incorporate the additional requirements/
changed conditions. The periodicity of review of the Safety management
plans is as under:—
Sl.No. Periodicity Level
1. Monthly Safety Committee at Mine Level
2. Quarterly Area level
3. Half-yearly Subsidiary level
4. Annually Company level
As per regulation No. 105 (7) of the proposed Coal Mine Regulations-
2015, Safety Management Plan (SMP) has to be submitted to the Regional
Inspector of Mines for approval.
2.24 On being asked as to how it was ensured that the Safety
Management Plan incorporate the practical safety need requirement at
the ground level especially for workers deputed in underground coal
mines, the Ministry of Coal stated that Risk Assessment based SMP is
prepared for each mine by a team comprising of employees of different
disciplines at ground level. Hazards and associated risks related to each
mining operation are identified and their “Safe Operating Procedures ”
are recommended by the team, based on practical safety need at the
ground level especially for workers deputed in the UG coal mines for
elimination and reduction of mining risks and the same is updated
considering the new risks given in any activity at quarterly intervals.

22
The safety management plan prepared at Unit level is scrutinized by
the Internal Safety Organisation (ISO) at corporate level and subsequently
approved by DGMS, further it is reviewed periodically at company level
to incorporate the additional requirements/changed conditions. As such
during the process of formulation for approval of the safety management
plan workers at ground level are involved in identification of safety
needs of the mine and recommendation of the safe operating procedure
to minimize risks, while officials of ISO and DGMS are involved in its
scrutiny and approval.
Safety Inspection of Mines
2.25 The Committee were further apprised that one of the function
of the Safety Committee was to undertake monthly inspection of mines.
On being asked as to whether in actual practice, such stipulation for
a monthly inspection take place regularly, the Ministry of Coal replied
in positive and stated that yes, the Safety Committee is functioning
effectively and inspect mine at least once in a month as stipulated in
the Mines Rules- 1955. On being asked as to what were the main safety
aspects covered in such inspection, the Ministry of Coal stated that
during such inspection, the following aspects were covered:—
(i) “Dangers in relation to mining operations viz. condition of
Roof & Sides, adequacy of supports, safety aspects in haulage
and travelling roadways, ventilation, sealed off area, old
working, escape route, machinery, etc. Safety checklists are
prepared for each and every location of Mines and for
Specialized Mining Equipments (SMEs), Conventional Mining
Equipments (CMEs), conveyors etc.
(ii) Compliance of various statutory provisions.
(iii) Status of functioning of different safety system installed/
commissioned in the mine.
(iv) Suggest corrective measures for improving safety standards. ”
2.26 On further being asked as to whether follow up of such
inspection reports were taken up, the Ministry of Coal stated that
actions taken against deficiencies pointed out as well as corrective
measures suggested by the Safety Committee were reviewed during the
next meeting.
2.27 On further being asked as to what level in the hierarchy are
these inspection reports and implementation thereof considered, it was
stated that the inspection reports of the pit safety committee is

23
implemented by the concerned departments and the same were reviewed
by the Manager/Mine at Unit level and the inspection reports of the
central safety committee under Internal Safety Organisation (ISO) was
reviewed and implemented by the Unit/Area level.
2.28 On a pointed query as to whether the extant mechanism of
inspection need further review and improvement, it was stated that
the existing mechanism of inspection of the safety Committee is
functioning satisfactorily as per provisions made under the Mines Rules,
1955.
Work Place Risk Assessment and Control (WRAC)
2.29 CIL have reportedly initiated Risk Management by adoption of
the Globally Established Technique of Work Place Risk Assessment and
Control (WRAC). On being asked as to what tangible benefits have been
accrued after adoption of the WRAC in actual practice, the Ministry of
Coal informed the Committee of the following tangible benefits that
have been accrued:—
(i) “Workers are able to identify the hazards and associated
risks in mining operation.
(ii) They can understand requirement of adopting control
measures to eliminate or reduce risk.
(iii) Able to perform their tasks safely.
(iv) Resulting in less numbers of accidents and incidents.
(v) Develop safety awareness among all employees. ”
2.30 On being asked as to whether occurrence of accidents have
actually come down due to this initiative and to furnish quantifiable
data to assess the effectiveness of this technique, the Ministry of Coal
replied in the affirmative and stated that both the numbers of fatal
and serious accidents have reduced in last 3(three) years since adoption
of risk management as is evident from the table below:—
2012 2013 2014
Company Fatal Serious Fatal Serious Fatal Serious
Accident Accident Accident Accident Accident Accident
CIL 57 212 55 196 44 183
SCCL 10 349 8 261

24
Risk Assessment and Safety Audit by NLC Ltd.
2.31 The Committee were informed that NLC Ltd. have reportedly
carried out Risk Assessment and Safety Audit of Mines by Accredited
External Agencies once in two years. In this context, the Committee
desired to know what were the major recommendations made by this
external audit agency and action taken thereon by Accredited External
Agencies. In this regard, the Ministry of Coal have informed the
Committee in a written reply as under:—
“Major recommendations of the external audit agency include the
following:—
(a) In respect of above study, a working document viz., ‘Safety
Management Plan ’ has been brought out and distributed to
the operation/Maintenance areas of NLC Mines and
recommendations are implemented.
(b) A well laid Emergency Preparedness Plan/Pre Monsoon Action
Plan is being prepared for every Mine every year to take care
of any emergency situation.
(c) NLC has obtained certification for all the Mines as under and
the stipulated norms in the certifications are being
maintained.
• Quality Management System ISO 9001: 2000.
• Environment Management System ISO 14001: 2004.
• Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Series - OSHAS
18001: 1999.
(d) Creation of awareness about COPs and SOPs among all at
bottom level to avoid accidents.
(e) High and medium level risks were identified in various
locations for close monitoring.
Action Taken
(a) Area wise responsibility with priority to Safety is being
enforced at all Mine Operational/Maintenance Activities for
ensuring specific site supervision.
(b) All important operation/maintenance activities of the
‘Specialized Mining Equipments ’ have been formulated/
modeled/Codified for Safe Work Practices and approved by
DGMS .The same is being followed in all spheres of activities.

25
(c) Daily/Regular/Periodical Maintenance check lists for the
“Specialized Mining Equipments ” had been prepared and
enforced for strict compliance.
(d) Inter Unit Safety Assessments are being carried out for every
quarter to assess safety standards maintained as per statute.
(e) Systematic in-depth Accident Analysis is being done and
counselling of near miss/Serious Accident Victims is being
done for accident prevention/to avert recurrence of accidents.
(f) Commitment on inculcating Safety Awareness by way of
imparting adequate/need based training with new training
modules to all employees and Compulsory Training for all
categories of employees, including the contract employees
before their deployment in Shop Floor and in their assigned
working areas. In addition to the above work related specific
job training/refresher training are also being imparted to all
categories of employees.
(g) Close monitoring is done on the safety aspects for high and
medium level risk identified by the External Agency in various
locations.
(h) Safety Status/Safety Performance of every activity is being
monitored/reviewed under the statutory framework.
(i) Continuous monitoring of behavioural sense/attitude/
commitment of employees towards Safety is being done. ”
2.32 On further being asked to state as to whether provisions for
systematic mandatory follow up for implementation of recommendations
contained in such report exist in the extant rules/regulations governing
the safety policy of NLC Ltd., the Ministry stated that the provisions for
systematic mandatory follow up for implementation of recommendations
contained in such report exist in the extant rules/regulations governing
the safety policy of NLC Ltd.
Subsidence Problem
2.33 Un-scientific, un-systematic and illegal mining are the primary
causes of fires resulting into subsidence. Coal, which are left as safety
pillars and ribs during the course of extraction (mining) in old workings
and abandoned mines, catches fires due to spontaneous combustion
and gets further aggravated due to illegal mining, resulting into
subsidence. In this context, the Committee desired to know as to what
steps have been taken by the Government to ensure implementation of
Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields dealing with fire,

26
subsidence and rehabilitation and diversion of surface infrastructure by
2019. The Ministry of Coal thereupon replied that un-scientific and
un-systematic mining adopted by the erstwhile private mine owners in
the past before nationalization in Jharia and Raniganj coalfields have
resulted in large scale fire and subsidence in the above coalfield areas.
Steps are being taken by Government/PSU to ensure implementation of
the Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields dealing with fire,
subsidence and rehabilitation and diversion of surface infrastructure.
2.34 The Ministry of Coal during their oral evidence on the subject
held on 14.7.2015 submitted following information on the Master Plan
for Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields:
• Master Plan approved - 12.08.2009
• Estimated investment - Jharia Coalfields: Rs. 7,112.11 crs.
Ranigunj Coalfields : Rs. 2661.73 crs.
• Implementing Agency:
➢ Jharia Rehabilitation and Development Authority for
Jharia Coalfields.
➢ Asansol Durgapur Development Authority for Ranigunj
Coalfields.
• Fire survey/study by National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC),
ISRO, Hyderabad in Aug., 2013 :
Initial Surface fire in JCF - 8.9 sq.km. Present surface fire area -
2.18 sq.km.
Monitored by High Powered Central Committee (HPCC) under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal).
Accidents and Fatalities
2.35 Accident statistics for the year 2014 in CIL subsidiaries up to
August indicate that there were 34 fatalities and 123 serious injuries
as compared to 35 fatalities and 143 serious injuries during the same
period in 2013. After analysis of fatal accidents, several directives/
guidelines on corrective measures to be taken for prevention of
recurrence of similar type of accident in future are being issued from
the safety and Rescue Division of CIL. In this context, the Ministry were
asked to state the reasons for recurrence of accidents though corrective
measures were statedly taken after each accident. The Ministry of Coal
have informed the Committee a written reply as under:—
“Despite the best of precautions and care being taken, accidents
happen mostly due to reasons beyond human control. However,

27
accidents are in declining trend. Following are reasons for recurrence
of accidents:—
1. Coal mining is known to be the most hazardous profession of
the mankind, as the exploitation of the mineral is done by
working against mother nature, which is fraught with dangers
of disturbed roof & sides, toxic gases,, high temperature,
fires, inundation etc.
2. The hazards associated in mining operations are far greater
in numbers due to inherent adverse geo-mining conditions
existing in some of the mines.
3. Most of the accidents are due to behavioural reasons resulting
out of indiscipline.
4. Further , most of the workers of CIL are land losers/ project
affected persons and un-skilled.
5. Some of the workers are habitual drinkers and illiteracy level
among workers is very high compared to other organized
industries.
6. Problem in acquisition of land also endangers safety.
7. Dense population in the mine leasehold areas and difficulty
in shifting them to non-coal bearing areas due to R&R issues.”
2.36 On a pointed query as to the steps that have been taken by
the Government/Coal Companies to bring zero accident rate in
Coal Mines, the Ministry of Coal have replied as follows:—
“As stated earlier, Indian coal mining scenario is completely different
from the same in the other advanced coal producing countries such
as, Australia where high degree of mechanization is adopted in coal
mining operation with least deployment of workmen. Whereas, coal
mining in India is highly labour intensive employing a large no. of
project affected persons/land losers having low level of IQ and
safety awareness. Hence great efforts are being made by the coal
companies to enhance their skill, attitude, aptitude and safety
awareness through constant training, monitoring and review both
job related as well as behavioural aspects. In the above backdrop,
achieving Zero Harm Potential in the mines of CIL is indeed very
challenging. However, constant efforts are being made by the coal
companies to harnessing all available resources to reduce accidents/
incidences. Steps being taken CIL/SCCL/NLC to achieve zero accident
rate are as under:—
• Implementation of Risk Assessment based Safety Management
Plan (SMP).

28
• Formulation of Risk Assessment based Safe Operating
Procedure (SOP).
• Formulation of Principal Hazard Management Plan (PHMP) for
each & every mine to eliminate/mitigate disaster potential
of mine and implement recommendations thereof.
• Emergency response system based on Trigger Action Response
Plans (TARPs).
• Adoption of Proximity warning devices for dumpers.
•T raining on Simulators for dumper operators.
• The technology adopted in NLC is environment friendly and
aids in minimizing the accidents.
Bucket Wheel Excavators, Spreaders, Mobile Transfer
Conveyors and Conveyors are deployed for continuous lignite
mining and allied activities and all machineries are fitted
with limit switches, emergency switches, slip monitoring
devices, various type of safety clutches, safety coupling like
fluid couplings, brakes, like ‘Eldro’ and other failsafe systems,
to ensure machine Safety/avoidance of wasteful breakdown/
stoppage.
• All the required Personal Protective Equipments are
compulsorily issued specific to the job requirement to the
employees/contract workers before taking up the work.
• Systematic in-depth Accident Analysis is being done for
accident prevention/to avert recurrence of accidents.
• Serious/Reportable/Near miss Accident Victims are given
appropriate counselling as a recurrence avoidance and
behavioural transformation.
• Area wise responsibility with priority to Safety is being
enforced at all Mine Operational/Maintenance Activities for
ensuring specific site supervision.
• Slope Stability Monitoring system.
• Gas Chromatograph for better analyzing of mine air samples.
• Environmental Tele-monitoring System for continuous
assessment of mine environment.
• Introduction of UG communication and Miner Tracking system.
• Installation Man Riding System.
• Strata Monitoring Devices.

29
•P hasing out of manual loading of coal (conventional mining)
and introduction of semi-mechanization like SDL/LHD in its
place.
• Use of Continuous Miner and Long wall Technology where
possible to eliminate blasting hazards.
• Introduction of Roof Bolters for Resin Capsules bolting.
•I ntensive training and review to improve competency of front
line officials.
• Skill up-gradation training programme for workmen to adapt
to the changing technology.
• Engaging social science institutes for improving behavioural
aspects for safe working.
• Informal risk assessment training of workmen for hazard
awareness (Take 5).
•T ake 5 (Personal Risk Assessment) is a simple process to
ensure that all work activities are given a final check to
identify and control potential hazards. TAKE-5 process is as
under:
• Stop, step back, observe.
• Think through the task.
• Identify the hazards.
• Control the hazards.
• Complete the task.
• On the job training is being imparted to inculcate Safety
Awareness especially among the Contract Workers to adopt
Safe Work Practices.
• Continuous monitoring of behavioural sense/attitude/
commitment of Employees towards Safety. ”
Compensation of Package Policy
2.37 On a further query as to the compensation package policy of
Coal/Lignite Companies for fatal and accidental cases of regular and
contract workers, the compensation packages being provided by the
CIL, SCCL and NLC to the regular and contract workers in fatal and
accidental cases were as follows:—
“CIL : CIL provides the following compensation, relief and
employment etc. to the family of deceased who died in any mine
accident arising out of and in course of employment as social security.

30
In case of fatal accident:
1. Payment of compensation under Employee ’s Compensation
(Amendment) Act-2009.
2. Employment is offered to eligible kin of the deceased
departmental employee. In case, there is no eligible person
for employment, monetary compensation per month is paid
to the family of the deceased.
3. Special Relief package of Rs. 5 Lakhs, which is in addition to
the amount payable under Employee ’s Compensation
(Amendment) Act-2009 for departmental employee.
4. Immediate payment for funeral expenses and transport etc.
to the family of the deceased.
5. Monetary benefits under Life Cover Scheme (LCS) of
Rs. 1,12,800 w.e.f.  01.02.2012 as per NCWA-IX for
departmental employee.
6. Ex-gratia amount of Rs. 84,600 in case of death or permanent
total disablement resulting on account of accident arising
out of and in course of employment w.e.f. 01.02.2012 as per
NCWA-IX.
7. Gratuity on the basis of the length of service, P .F . as per
CMPF Rule, encashment of EL and Payment of Pension as per
CMPS, 1998 are paid in addition to the above compensations.
In case of serious bodily injury:
1. Compensation under the Employee ’s Compensation
(Amendment) Act-2009 is being paid to serious bodily-injured
person involved with permanent disability, after due
assessment of the percentage of permanent disability by an
approved Medical Board.
2. Additional ex-gratia of amount Rs. 84,600/ (w.e.f. 01.02.2012)
in case of permanent total disablement resulting on account
of accident out of and in course of employment for
departmental employee.
3. Salaries/Wages is paid to the person, who is injured while on
duty (IOD Case), for the period of his absence from duty due
to the said injury and extensive medical treatment facilities
are also provided either in Company ’s Hospital or any other
referred Hospital during his injury period and beyond.

31
The compensation in case of fatal accidents and seriously bodily
injury to contractor workers while on duty is paid by the contractors
as per the provisions made under the Workmen Compensation Act-
2009 (Amended). CIL, as a Principal Employer, ensures that payment
of compensation to the next kin of the deceased contractor worker
is paid by the respective contractor.
SCCL: In the case of fatal accident to a Regular employee of SCCL,
Ex-gratia of Rs. 84,300/- and Special Ex-gratia of Rs. 5,00,000/- are
being paid. Accident compensation and other benefits are paid as
per the extant rules.In case of a contract Employee, the offloading
Agencies are paying the compensation and other benefits. Payment
by offloading Agencies is ensured by Principal employer.
NLC: The employment and other relief measures are being provided
to the dependants of the employees/contract workers who loose
their lives as given below:—
➢ In addition to the compensation paid as per Worker ’s
Compensation Act, 1923, the following schemes are also
available to the next kin of the Accident victims while on
duty.
(a) Employment opportunity is being given on compassionate
ground to eligible the next kin of the accident victims
while on duty.
(b) Family Relief (in lieu of employment) to the eligible
dependants of the deceased, introduced in 1994.
➢ In case of death of an employee as a result of accident
arising out and in the lieu of employment Rs. 8,500/-
per month is paid as Family Relief.
➢ In case of death of Contract Workmen due to accident arising
out of and in course of employment the family relief of
Rs. 5,100/- per month is paid as family relief.
➢ In case of natural death while in service, Rs. 6,750/- month
is paid as Family Relief. ”
2.38 On being asked to furnish details of the fatal/serious injuries
cases in open-cast and underground mines, Subsidiaries-wise, the Ministry

32
of Coal have furnished as follows:—
CIL: Fatal/serious injuries cases in open-cast and underground mines,
Subsidiaries-wise are given below:—
Company FATALITIES
Underground Opencast TOTAL
2012 2013 2014 2012 2013 2014 2012 2013 2014
ECL7 4 5441 1 186
BCCL 3 7 3964 1 2 1 37
CCL 203492695
NCL 000766766
WCL4 2 1679 1 09 1 0
SECL 7 7 7465 1 1 1 3 1 2
MCL 000210210
NEC 100000100
CIL 24 20 19 36 39 27 60 59 46
SCCL 4 7 6 1 10 8
NLC — — — 4 — 2 4 — 2
Company SERIOUS INJURIES
Underground Opencast TOTAL
2012 2013 2014 2012 2013 2014 2012 2013 2014
ECL 81 61 65 8 1 4 89 62 69
BCCL 24 15 9628 3 0 1 7 1 7
CCL 212765977
NCL 0 0 0 9 17 9 9 17 9
WCL 21 35 21 8 12 17 29 47 38
SECL 34 34 23 11 6 9 45 40 32
MCL 5 3 137 1 28 1 0 1 3
NEC 001000001
CIL 167 149 122 52 51 64 219 200 186
SCCL 304 236 45 25 349 261
NLC ——— 532532

33
Further similar information regarding such cases in mines operated
by captive mine holders and private players reportedly based on
information provided by Directorate General of Mines Safety was as
under:—
Company fatal fatalities Serious injuries
2012 2013 2014 2012 2013 2014
GIPCL - 1 - - - -
GMDCL - 4 - - - -
IISCO 1 2 1 - 1 -
ICML - -----
JPL - - - - 1 3
BLMC 1 - 5 - - -
Ms. ECL 3 1 - 2 - -
JNL 3 1 - 2 - -
JSPL 1 2 - - - -
SEML 1 - - 1 - -
TISCO. - 2 2215
MIEL - - - 1 - 1
Director General of Mines Safety
2.39 The Directorate General Mine Safety (DGMS) was vested with
the responsibility to ensure the compliance of provisions under the
Mines Act, 1952 and Rules & Regulations made thereunder for improvement
in safety of mining operation. In this context, Ministry of Coal were
asked as to how many times DGMS has inspected mines of CIL, NLC and
SCCL during the last 3 years to ensure compliance of provisions under
the Mines Act, 1952 and Rules & Regulations made there under for
improvement in safety of mining operation. THe Ministry thereupon
replied that DGMS is divided into various regions for effective monitoring
of safety provisions. Under each region, DGMS officials are deputed to
inspect all mines of CIL in their domain. The records of inspection and
violations/deficiencies observed are maintained in Form-VI as per statute
by each mine. Generally, they inspect each mine at least 4 times in a
year. However the details of inspections carried out by DGMS Officials
at NLC Ltd. Mines during the last three years were given below:—
Sl.No. Year Mine-I Mine-II NLC Mines
1. 2012 3 15 18
2. 2013 7 11 18
3. 2014 7 4 11

34
2.40 On a pointed query as to what were the observations/
recommendations of DGMS and whether the same have been
implemented, the Ministry of Coal stated that during their inspections
DGMS officials point out statutory violations in the mine and record it
in a bound page register (FORM-VI). Necessary corrective actions were
taken by the mine management for compliance of such violations as
pointed out by the DGMS. The compliance report is sent to DGMS for
their records.
Risk Management Committee Meetings
2.41 In SCCL, reportedly all Mine Managers were advised to organize
monthly and quarterly Risk Management Committee Meetings for the
Year 2014-15. On being asked to state how many such meetings have
so far been organized, the Ministry stated that in SCCL monthly and
quarterly Risk Management Committee Meetings were held in all mines
in year 2014-15.
2.42 On a pointed query as to what was the outcome of such
meetings and whether these have been continued during 2015-16, the
Ministry of Coal stated that during the meetings, prioritization of
subjects/items in the Management Plan was reviewed and modified if
necessary. These meetings were being continued during 2015-16.
2.43 To a query as to whether such meetings were being organized
in other subsidiary companies also, the Ministry replied in the affirmative
and provided the details of such meetings held and actions taken in this
regard by subsidiaries of CIL are as under:—
1. “Development of talent pool for risk management : In CIL,
a training programme was arranged by CIL with “Safety in
Mines, Testing and Research Station (SIMTARS), Specialized
Agency for Mine Safety, Research & Training under Department
of Labour of Queensland Government, Australia to develop
Safety Trainer.
2. Training to all unit level executives in risk management:
These executives, who have been trained by SIMTARS, Australia
are engaged for imparting training and upgrading the
knowledge of mine level executives to identify the hazards
and evaluate the associated risks in the mines and prepare
Risk assessment based Safety Management Plans (SMPs).
3. Preparation of Risk assessment based Safety Management
Plans (SMPs): On the basis of training being imparted, the
Risk assessment based Safety Management Plans (SMPs) have
been prepared for all mines of CIL.

35
4. Implementation of the SMPs: It is under progress. However,
in coal mining Risk Management is an on-going activity.
5. Monitoring and review mechanism: In CIL, for reviewing the
implementation of risk assessment based Safety Management
Plans (SMPs) the following is the monitoring system:—
1. Monthly review of SMP by unit level Safety Committee
(PSC),
2. Quarterly review of SMP at Area level,
3. Half-Yearly review of SMP ’s at Company ISO level,
4. Annual review of SMP ’s at CIL. ”
In all subsidiary companies of CIL, at least one meeting of Risk
Management/Safety Committee meeting under Chairmanship of the
respective Mine Manager is organized in every month, where
implementation Risk assessment based Safety Management Plans
(SMPs) are being assessed. Further , SMPs are also being assessed at
area level in every quarter.
Outcome of meetings
Risk assessment based Safety Management Plans (SMPs) prepared
are being reviewed and further modified. These reviewing process
is continuing in this year also i.e. 2015-16 for further upgrading
Safety Management Plans (SMPs).
Risk Management Committee Meetings were conducted 6 times during
the year 2014-15 at NLC. Risk assessment and minimization
procedures are reviewed during the meetings and submitted to the
NLC Board on half yearly basis. The outcome of these meetings is
given below:—
➢ Specific attention to High Impact High Frequency Risks was
given and mitigation procedures were evolved.
➢ It was decided that the members of Risk Cell both at corporate
and unit level may be imparted training on Risk Management.
Accordingly Risk Management Training is being organized for
Senior Management and Middle Management.
The above process is continued for 2015-16.
Manual loading
2.44 The Ministry of Coal is reportedly phasing out of manual loading
as per the recommendations of 10th National Safety Conference was
being undertaken. The Committee desired to know the present status

36
of implementation of recommendations of 10th National Safety
Committee (NSC) in different coal mines of CIL, NLC and SCCL and by
when manual loading will be completely phased out. The Ministry
thereupon stated that no new underground Mines are being planned
with manual loading arrangement. Presently, there are 29 underground
mines in CIL where Manual loading is in operation. CIL has planned to
phase out the manual loading operation from these mines within a
period of 03 years i.e. by 2017-18. While SCCL had already phased out
Manual loading operation at 27 mines out of 31 underground mines and
has planned to phase out manual loading arrangement from the balance
4 mines by 2016-17.
Man Riding System (MRS)
2.45 Man Riding System (MRS) were reportedly being installed in all
underground mines having long haul/arduous travel. The Committee
desired to know the number of Man Riding System (MRS) that have been
installed in underground mines and also the time by which all existing
underground mines will be covered. The Ministry thereupon stated that
man riding arrangement has already been commissioned in 25 mines of
CIL, while man riding arrangement has been planned to be commissioned
at 44 mines within a period of 3 years and at remaining mines within
a period of 10 years. At SCCL, out of 31 underground mines, 29 mines
have been provided with various Man Riding Systems, two underground
Mines are not provided with Man Riding Systems because production
from one mine is yet to be commenced and another mine is planned
for closure within a short period.
2.46 On a further query as to how the Ministry/DGMS ensure that
all mines both in public and private sector were covered by Man Riding
System, the Ministry replied that a regulation has been incorporated at
the proposed CMR 2015 vide regulation no. 94(6) which requires that
all underground mines where the travelling distance from the incline or
adit mouth or pit bottom exceeds one kilometer or the travelling is
arduous must be provided with Man Riding System (MRS) arrangement
within one year from the date of coming into force of these regulations.
Zero Harm Potential (ZHP)
2.47 The Committee have been apprised about a roadmap to achieve
‘Zero Harm Potential (ZHP)’ in CIL areas. Statedly, a comparative chart
of accident status in major coal producing countries viz. USA, China,
Australia revealed that Australia had the lowest accident rate. Based on
the above backdrop in the year 2010, a training programme was arranged
by CIL with ‘Safety in Mines, Testing and Research Station (SIMTARS) ’

37
Specialized Agency for Mine Safety, Research and Training under the
Department of Labour of Queensland Government, Australia to develop
trainer with an objective to improve safety standards in mines. In this
context, the Committee desired to know what had been the tangible
outcome of this initiative and asked for data in support of their
contention. The Ministry thereupon stated that executives who have
been trained by SIMTARS, Australia were engaged for imparting training
and upgrading the knowledge of mine level executives to identify the
hazards and evaluate the associated risks in the mines and prepare risk
assessment based Safety Management Plans (SMPs). On basis of training,
SMPs have been prepared for all mines of CIL and the same were under
implementation. Details are given below:—
No. of executives trained in 1st phase of 1488
training programme
No. of executives trained in 2nd phase of 1341
training programme
No. of persons trained during upgradation/ 1154
review training programme
No. of risk assessment based SMPs prepared All mines of CIL
No. of SMPs already reviewed by SIMTARS 374
accredited executives of CIL for further
modification
2.48 On a pointed query as to whether the training module was a
onetime initiative or a continuous process, the Ministry of Coal stated
that this training module is a continuous process for overall improvement
of safety in mines.
2.49 On a further query as to whether the CIL have actually been
able to adopt and instill the good practice processes relating to Mine
Safety as observed during the training module at Australia, the Ministry
replied in the affirmative and stated that CIL has adopted good practices
as per training module started in 2012 and the same is under
implementation.
2.50 The Committee has been apprised of the framing of Roadmap
to achieve ‘Zero Harm Potential ’:—
“Safety is always our highest priority. Safety is embedded in our
mission statement and is one of the most important factors in our
overall business strategy. CIL has framed a well-defined safety policy
to ensure safety in our mines and establishments. CIL has well

38
established multi-disciplinary internal safety organization in all
subsidiaries for implementation of Safety Policy. All operations,
systems and processes are meticulously planned and designed with
due regard to safety, conservation and sustainable development.
CIL always encourages employees ’ participations at all levels so as
to promote proactive safety culture and to improve safety awareness
at grass root level.
With our consistent efforts, continuous improvement in safety
standards are achieved which is reflected in reduction of fatalities
and serious injuries. To achieve further improvement, initiatives
are being taken in various spheres which are as follows:—
A. Mining Operation: Adoption of the state-of-the art technology
in suitable geo-mining locales.
1. Adoption of Mass Production Technology in more number
of underground mines.
2. Deployment of more number of surface miners to
eliminate blasting operations in O.C.Ps.
3. Deployment of relatively higher capacity HEMM in more
number of O.C.Ps.
4. Mechanisation of underground drilling.
5. Phasing out manual loading in underground mines.
B. Strata Management: Thrust on prevention of roof & side fall
accidents.
1. Roof bolting as an integral part of support system in
underground mines.
2. Switching over to use of resin capsules from cement
capsules in phased manner.
3. Monitoring of strata by strata monitoring devices.
C. Prevention of Spontaneous heating:
1. Expedite construction of sectionalisation stoppings.
2. Pressure Quantity (PQ) Survey for checking efficacy of
ventilation standards at regular intervals.
3. Use of more number of Gas Chromatographs for mine air
sampling.
4. Use of Local Methane Detector (LMD) for early and
accurate detection of methane.

39
5. Environmental Tele-Monitoring System (ETMS) in
degree III & fiery underground mines.
D. Training:
1. Skill upgradation training to frontline officials and
workmen.
2. Behavioural based training for all employees.
3. One Week Training to all frontline supervisors.
4. Training of Dumper Operators on Simulators.
E. Others:
1. Slope monitoring devices in O.C.Ps. for prediction of
bench/dump failure.
2. Digitization of mine plan.
3. Introduction of LED type light weight cap lamps in
underground mines.
4. Man Riding System (MRS) for underground mines having
long and arduous travel.
In an endeavour to achieve “Zero Harm Potential ”, the safety
system of CIL is analyzed in depth vis-a-vis other coal producing
countries. It was revealed that safety standard of Australia has
been by far the best amongst leading coal producing countries.
Australia has achieved almost zero fatality in their mines consistently
during last decade. They are doing risk assessment in all mine
operations based on which they are preparing Safety Management
Plan (SMP) for all mines and the same are being implemented in
true spirit.
To achieve “Zero Harm Potential ”, CIL having explored all
possibilities has finally adopted the safety management system of
Australia which is now recognized as the best in the world.
In the above backdrop, a group consisting of twenty executives
have been trained in Australia in Risk Management System. These
trained executives are being deployed for imparting training to
other executives responsible for implementing the safety
management system in mines of CIL. They are further giving training
to the grassroot level workers for preparation of risk assessment
based Safety Management Plan (SMP).
SMPs for all mines of CIL have been prepared and are being reviewed
on regular basis. SMP is a continuous process which needs regular
review and updation with the dynamics of mines.

40
However due to differences in technological and socio-economic
conditions prevailing in India, the progress in implementation of
the same is slow.
Upon in-depth study, comparison of our mining system with the
same of the other advanced coal producing countries, the following
contrasting differences are observed:—
System
1
Mechanization
Working space
Vicinity of mines
Legacy Problem
Coal mines of Advanced Countries
2
All underground as well as OC workings
are highly mechanized. Very less
manpower is deployed in mining
activities. In underground mines,
requirement of workmen to enter the
area under green roof is minimum. Hence
exposure to risk of workmen is minimum.
Mostly underground mine face machinery
are remotely operated.
Land is not a constraint.
Mining Areas are far away from
dwellings/habitation.
There is no legacy problem.
Coal mines of CIL
3
Underground mines are highly labour
intensive and low productive. In OCPs
relatively low capacity HEMMs are
deployed due to limited working
area.
Due to delay in land acquisition,
many mines especially OCPs are
working in constricted space. Risk
increases many fold due to poor mine
shape. Non-availability of land for
dumping has resulted in many
unstable dumps.
Mining Areas are generally having
dwelling/habitation and other
surface constraints. People do not
vacate land even after receiving
compensation. Many habitants make
a living on coal picking from dumps
and theft of coal from mines, which
increases the risk of accidents.
CIL was formed after taking over
mines from erstwhile private owners.
These mines are even more than
hundred years old. Most of these
mines are having multi seam working
contained water and fire in upper
sections which are abandoned long
back leading to transference of
danger to present sections.

41
Workforce Workforce appointed solely on basis of
job requirement and competency. Hence
all employees are highly educated, skilled
and competent. Labour laws are flexible,
“hire and fire rule ” is practiced for
incompetent workmen.
Mostly land oustees are appointed
who are generally semi-educated/
uneducated.
12 3
To achieve “Zero Harm Potential” in mines of CIL following additional
measures are envisaged to be implemented:—
1. Implementation of SMP in true spirit and continual review
and updation of the same.
2. Implementation of Take-5 as an informal risk assessment tool
before starting of any operations.
3. Upgradation of knowledge to cope with the technological
changing scenario.
4. Risk Management system shall be ingrained right at the project
planning stage, itself.
5. Restructuring/Re-organization of relatively small mines into
bigger mines shall be done for adoption of Mass Production
Technology.
6. Land for O.C.Ps. shall be acquired in one go and all the
mining areas shall be fenced by permanent fencing so that
operations of mines can be done as per approved plan.
7. High capacity equipment shall be deployed in O.C.Ps. for
faster excavation. After mining, land shall be restored back
to its original shape.
8. Effective Training and feedback system shall be introduced
and incompetent and physically unfit workmen shall be
debarred from operational activities. ”
2.51 Regarding Zero Accidents, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal while
deposing before the Committee on 14.7.2015 has submitted as under:—
“At the Ministry level, we want zero tolerance in this. We cannot
get away with the numbers saying 62 is a small number. The point
is there are 62 lives per annum that are lost. So, it is a very serious
concern at our level. The hon. Minister is also extremely concerned

42
about this. In the last Safety Meeting which he held, he was very
clear in his mind that this has to be brought down to zero and
specific steps need to be taken in this regard. ”
2.52 In this regard, a representative of Ministry of Coal further
submitted as under:—
“Training is the most important requirement for zero accident
potential and it is must for everyone from top to bottom level.
Some of our officers were trained in Australia whose details are
given below. They were given special training related to the use of
latest basic facilities to keep the accidents at minimum level. One
more batch of 50 officers is about to go for training. The trainers
will be trained in Australia keeping in view Indian conditions and
then they will come here. Here they will train the lowest level
worker and everyone will be made to understand how to face
different situations in different conditions. ”

43
CHAPTER III
HEALTH FACILITIES FOR INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN COAL/LIGNITE
MINING AREAS
A. Coal India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries
According to the Ministry of Coal, Coal India Limited and its
subsidiaries are extending medical facilities to the employees and their
families through various medical establishments from the Dispensary
level to the Central and Apex Hospitals in different parts of the
coalfields. The company also provides treatment to local inhabitants of
nearby villages. It also extends treatment to CISF Personnel attached
to CIL and its subsidiaries. The contractual workers are also provided
treatment and occupational health services throughout the company.
The company has three-tier medical facilities, namely dispensaries,
hospitals (regional & Central) and empanelled corporate hospitals and
medical colleges. There are 79 hospitals with 5709 beds, 418 dispensaries,
212 empanelled corporate hospitals and medical colleges,
589 ambulances, 1445 doctors including specialists and 3278 paramedical
staffs in CIL and its subsidiaries to provide medical services to the
employees. In addition, 11 Ayurvedic Dispensaries are also being run by
the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited to provide indigenous system of
treatment to workers. There are 29 medical vans for conducting health
camps which covered 325319 beneficiaries from April, 2013 to March,
2014. The hospitals are well equipped with infrastructure like ECG
machines, X-Ray machines (digital), USG machines, ECO machines,
Audiometry, PFT apart from good quality labs CT Scan machines are
also available in different hospitals.
3.2 The Committee desired to know whether any data have been
maintained by hospitals/dispensaries run by CIL and its subsidiaries for
treatment provided to inhabitants of nearby villages and contract workers
and details for the last 3 years. The Ministry of Coal thereon replied
as under:—
“Hospitals/dispensaries run by CIL and its subsidiaries maintain data
on treatment provided to inhabitants of nearby villages and contract
workers. Subsidiary-wise details are given below:—
ECL — (i) Inhabitants of the ECL command area are treated under
CSR activities of ECL through 5 mobile vans.

44
(ii) Contract labours attend the OPD of any of the regional hospitals
of ECL or two central hospitals or colliery dispensaries free of cost.
BCCL — BCCL has maintained data in hospitals & dispensaries as
well as at the head quarter.
CCL — such patients are treated at par with permanent employees
of company without any discrimination. However, health awareness
data related to contractual workers are maintained in PME centers
of CCL.
SECL — under CSR, health camps are organised in various villages
for the villagers and CSR dispensaries are run at company hospitals
for people of BPL category. All contract workers are given free OPD
& indoor treatment with the available facilities at company hospitals
& dispensaries. These data are maintained.
WCL — treatment is being provided to inhabitants of nearby villages
and contract workers through mobile medical vans and data
maintained.
NCL — treatment is provided to inhabitants of nearby villages, free
of cost, through various CSR health camps conducted by the company
& through dispensary on wheels to Ambedkar Nagar & Birkunia
villages. These data are maintained.
MCL — Facilities are extended. Data are maintained.
NEC — People from nearby villages & CIL ’s contract workers are
provided free of cost treatment by NEC. These data are maintained.
Subsidiary-wise details are given below:—
ECL — total number CSR camps organised in the year 2014 = 438.
Total number of beneficiaries = 20214.
IME & PME of contractual workers:—
Year No. of workers
2012 1468
2013 1844
2014 304

45
BCCL-activities No. of camps No. of beneficiaries
2012-13
MMV (Swasthya Rath) 2638 74090
Health camps (Bahujan Hitaya) 250 14595
CSR clinics (Sarokar) 42462
FW camps (Mamta) 24 864
Eye camps (Jyoti Abhiyan) 22 922
2013-14
MMV (Swasthya Rath) 3164 98242
Health camps (Bahujan Hitaya) 247 18499
CSR clinics (Sarokar) — 63261
FW camps (Mamta) 26 882
Eye camps (Jyoti Abhiyan) 15 558
AIDS awareness (Mission Mitwa) 35 1309
Wellness clinic — 18772
2014-15
MMV (Swasthya Rath) 2828 79057
Health camps (Bahujan Hitaya) 220 9864
CSR clinics (Sarokar) — 31033
FW camps (Mamta) 33 943
Eye camps (Jyoti Abhiyan) 15 558
AIDS awareness (Mission Mitwa) 11 409
CCL
Year No. of beneficiaries
CSR 2012-13 90744
2013-14 111559
2014-15 119828
PME 2012 10943
2013 8200
2014 8645
2015 (upto April) 1598

46
Contract workers PME
2013 2815
2014 370
SECL
Year No. of beneficiaries
Village camps CSR dispensaries
2012-13 140325 20326
2013-14 110859 50988
2014-15 71259 24557
All contract workers are treated free of cost.
WCL — the number of camps held and the beneficiaries for the last
three years are as under:—
  Year Camps beneficiaries
2012-13 906 75746
2013-14 866 66794
2014-15 720 42932
NCL — In the year 2013-14 total number of beneficiaries was
(10840+3312)= 14152 & in 2014-15 total number of beneficiaries was
(6054+2235) = 8289. Contractual workers treated as indoor patient free
of cost in NSC in 2013 was 51 in number , in 2014 it was 69 in number
and in 2015 till date 8 in number.
MCL — Various CSR activities and beneficiaries:—
2012-13
No. of camps - 156
Beneficiaries - 2254
Name of camps No. of camps No. of beneficiaries
      1 2 3
2013-14
General health awareness camp 50 7457
Diagnostic camps 14 1920

47
Cancer detection camp 1 194
Eye camp 8 784
Family planning camp 5 319
AIDS awareness camp 13 4370
Routine health camps 169 8196
Total 260 23240
2014-15
General health awareness camp 41 5517
Diagnostic camps 28 2186
Cancer detection camp 1 31
Eye camp 3 432
Family planning camp 4 18
AIDS awareness camp 17 5078
Routine health camps 55 3627
Total 149 16889
NEC — The following are the numbers of patients of above categories
treated by NEC, Margherita as below:
  Year Total no. of patients
2012-13 251
2013-14 163
2014-15 287
PME done during last three years:
  Year Employees Contract workers
2012-13 485 12
2013-14 448 9
2014-15 170
NEC — Last 3 years no workers identified with occupational health
disease. No camp of occupational health camps was held in above
period.”
12 3

48
Occupational Health Hazard
3.3 On a pointed query as to what are the major occupational
hazards faced by workers deputed in coal mines, the Ministry of Coal
stated that as regards CIL, coal worker ’s pneumoconiosis is the major
occupational health hazard beside that, other occupational hazards
faced by coal mine workers are due to dust, vibration, noise, light,
electricity, heat, pressure, machinery, etc. Major occupational hazards
are chronic backache, chronic bronchitis, and dermatitis in underground
mines & in open cast mines deafness, vibrational syndrome, cataract
due to poor light etc.
3.4 Asked to state the preventive measures taken by the Ministry/
Coal PSUs to face the challenges of such occupational health hazards,
the Ministry of Coal have furnished the Committee that as regards CIL,
Periodical Medical Examinations — PME was regularly conducted for all
workers & executives at well-equipped PME centers including Spirometry,
radiography of chest etc. for early detection of occupational health
diseases, super speciality clinics were organised in association with
super speciality hospitals, health awareness programmes held time to
time to educate workers about preventive measures of diseases. Workers
are provided protective gears eg. helmet, cap lamp, mask, boots, etc.
Water was sprinkled regularly at workplace and covering of coal loaded
truck with tarpauline & face masks to protect from dust, use of ear
plugs to protect from noise, regular safety drills and holding of first aid
classes for prevention of accidents. Regular monitoring was done with
the help of lux meter for proper illumination; enough lighting is
maintained to prevent miner ’s nystagmus. ORS provided to all mines.
All mines have dispensary equipped with medical officers and first aid
medicines. Emergencies were attended by dispensary doctor and referred
to central hospital if required.
3.5 On a pointed query as to whether the initiatives statedly taken
up by the Ministry and coal PSUs on the aspect of addressing the health
of workers have actually brought about improvement of overall health
of workers/inhabitants of coal bearing areas, the Ministry of Coal in a
written reply have informed the Committee as under:—
“Throughout all the subsidiaries of Coal India, number of cases of
coal worker’s pneumoconiosis has come down drastically in recent
years. This indicates that continuous biological and environmental
monitoring has resulted in better health conditions of coal mine
workers. Subsidiary-wise details are given below:—
ECL — last three years no occupational disease detected among
workers, this indicates that the workers are well aware of their
health and following the advice of doctors.

49
BCCL — as no worker has been identified with occupational health
disease, that itself is a marker indicating that workers are provided
with good health services.
CCL — continuous efforts are being made to improve the health of
their workers and nearby inhabitants in command areas and drastic
improvement is being noted.
SECL — there is a marked reduction in occurrence of coal worker ’s
pneumoconiosis. Data of cases of coal worker ’s pneumoconiosis for
the last three decades is given below:
Year CWP detected
1984-1993 160
1994-2003 nil
2004-2013 01
WCL — through a system of periodical medical examination, efforts
for early detection of work related disease are made. No cases of
pneumoconiosis have been detected for the last three years.
NCL — different guidelines were issued from time to time for
preventive & promotive health care. It appears that there is
reduction in occupational health hazards reflected by reduced
number (Non-detection) of pneumoconiosis during last several years.
No other occupational health hazards like hearing loss, vibration
induced ailment, skin ailment have been detected.
MCL — last three years no occupational disease detected among
workers in MCL.
NEC — due to a preventive measure on regular PME, no occupational
health disease detected until now. ”
3.6 On being asked as to what improvements have been introduced
on modernization and expansion of medical facilities during the last
few years, the Ministry of Coal in a written reply have furnished the
following:—
“Subsidiary-wise details are given below:
ECL — 14 numbers of PME centres are well equipped with modern
gadgets like 12 lead ECG, spirometer , audiometer and well equipped
laboratory.

50
BCCL — there are 12 regional hospitals & one central hospital to
cater to the workforce & their families, dispensaries in collieries.
There is a team of qualified doctors and specialists with paramedical
staff. There is telemedicine for consultation with super specialists.
There are large numbers of hospitals empanelled with the Company
where patients are referred on company expenses to deal with
medical problems that cannot be tackled here. For dealing with
such cases of diagnostic dilemma patients are also referred to
CMCH, Vellore. No stone is left unturned to see that the employees
and their families lead a perfectly healthy life.
CCL — to improve health status of workers and inhabitants of
command areas, medical department is having 4 central hospitals
(previously it was only two) to cater health services. Further
following improvements have been done: (1) upgradation of
dispensaries & area hospitals, (2) Blood transfusion centre—4 in
number, (3) PME as per recommendation of 11th safety committee.
SECL — during last few years, modern methods of radiological
diagnosis, pathological investigations, spirometry, audiometry, TMT ,
echo cardiography, ultrasonography, video endoscopy, laparoscopy,
bronchoscopy & CT scan are introduced. Three central hospitals,
eight regional hospitals, 56 dispensaries including DCC, 845 beds,
232 doctors, 693 paramedics etc. Apart from these facilities,
243 hospitals are empanelled for providing specialised treatment to
the employees and their dependants.
WCL — the recommendation of 10th & 11th national conference on
safety have been implemented. Procurement of upgraded ECG
machine, audiometer and spirometer is under process. Autoanalysers
have been installed.
NCL — facilities like creation of separate 24 hr casualty/emergency
department, CCU, NICU, blood bank providing services round the
clock to the employees & their eligible dependents & as well as to
the general public. Besides that, investigations like CT scan, MRI,
Echocardiography with colour doppler , mammography, TMT , holter
monitoring, video endoscopy & colonoscopy, haemodialysis, CAPD,
non-invasive external pace making, wellness clinic for diabetic,
hypertensive & kidney patients have been introduced.
MCL — all major medical equipments like CT scan, digital x-ray,
spirometry, audiometry, colour doppler , USG machine, semi auto
analyser etc. One 50 bedded hospital is under construction at BG
area. One 50 bedded hospital is planned for Lakhanpur area.
Upgradation of Central Hospital, Talcher along with establishment
of medical college is under process.

51
NEC — recently, modernization of central hospital, NEC done with
procurement & installation of a digital X-ray machine, USG machine,
eye diagnostic equipment and BMW (bio medical waste) management
equipment.”
3.7 The Committee have been apprised that CIL maintains a well
staffed and well equipped organization for occupational health
surveillance, which is statedly been done as per the system laid in the
statutes. It was further stated that every worker undergoes an Initial
Medical Examination (IMR) and Periodical Medical Examination (PME)
once every five years as per the standards laid down in the Mines Rules
by specially trained medical officers. In this context, the Committee
sought to know whether the stipulation for periodic medical examination
once every five years need to be reviewed and the periodicity reduced
to once every two or three years. In reply thereof, the Ministry of Coal
stated that in all the subsidiaries of CIL, PME was being done following
10th and 11th safety committee recommendation. In all the subsidiaries
except BCCL, PME is done every five years for workers less than 45
years of age and every three years for workers more than 45 years of
age. In BCCL PME is done every three years for all the employees.
However , the periodical medical examination once in every five years
may be reviewed and reduced to once in every three years. For
employees engaged in food handling such as kitchen & canteen
employees, cooks etc. And people engaged in stemming material (gota
makers) — routine stool examination should be done every 6 months
and sputum for AFB and chest radiograph once in a year. Operators
should have eye examination (refraction) on yearly basis.
Year No. of PME
2012 4352
2013 4543
2014 4688
3.8 On being asked to highlight the functions as well as the
achievements of the occupational disease board of CIL in the last three
years, the Ministry furnished the following information:—
“Functions of occupational disease board: Occupational disease board
is constituted with chief of medical services of subsidiary,
occupational health specialist, physician/chest physician and
radiologist. This board meets periodically to examine the suspected
cases of CWP and other notified diseases under mine’s act, detected
during PME at different areas and to confirm the disease.

52
In confirmed cases it decides compensation to be paid to the
employee and rehabilitation by change of job. Board also reviews
the CWP cases on role every year to assess the progress of disease
even after retirement.
Continuous & sustained biological monitoring by medical discipline
as well as environmental monitoring by safety department has
achieved remarkable progress in preventing Coal Worker ’s
Pneumoconiosis (CWP) — the number of new cases of CWP has
come down considerably. At present, though there are 20 cases of
CWP on role, detection of new case in last three years is as follows:
SECL — during last three years only one case of Coal Worker ’s
Pneumoconiosis (CWP) was detected.
MCL — 2 (two) cases of pneumoconiosis in 2013 and one case of
pneumoconiosis in 2014.
In all other subsidiary companies like ECL, BCCL, CCL, WCL,
NCL&NEC, no new case was detected in the last three years.
This is a main achievement of occupational disease board in
preventing major occupational health hazards. ”
3.9 The Committee were further informed that vaccination
programmes are regularly undertaken in command areas of CIL and its
subsidiaries. Some other actions are:—
i. CSR (Medical activities): Medical camps like eye camps,
artificial limb camps, HIV awareness camps are being
organized under CSR activities.
ii. OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH SERVICES: Regular IME (Initial Medical
examination) and PME (Periodic Medical Examination) are done
as per 10th & 11th safety Committee recommendations.
iii. FIRST AID TRAINING PROGRAMME: First aid training
programme is an integral part of mining industry to facilitate
immediate first aid treatment to the injured or sick person.
iv. HIV CONTROL & AWARENESS PROGRAMME: Trained Doctors
and paramedical staffs are engaged in CIL and its subsidiaries
as per National Aids Control Organisation (NACO).
v. NATIONAL HEALTH PROGRAMMES: CIL also takes necessary
measures to implement the different National health
programmes:
(1) National Family Welfare Programme
(2) Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme

53
(3) National Leprosy Control Programme
(4) National Immunization Programme
(5) National AIDS Control Programme
(6) National Blindness Prevention Programme
(7) National Breast Feeding Programme
(8) National Vector Control Programme
(9) National Cancer Prevention Programme.
B. Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
3.10 Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited provides quality medical
treatment and occupational health service through its General Hospital
to all inhabitants of the Neyveli Township and its surrounding villages,
including comprehensive medical treatment to the contract workmen
and their family members. NLC maintains a 355 bed General Hospital
(GH) at Neyveli that takes care of the health and medical care needs
of its regular employees, contract workmen and their eligible
dependants. Delivery of medical care services includes general medicine,
general surgery, paediatrics, obstetrics & gynaecology, orthopaedics,
ophthalmology, ENT , dermatology, chest medicine and psychiatry,
ayurveda and occupational health services. Ayurveda and occupational
health services renders NLC ’s health care model unique. NLC has
upgraded the emergency care unit and the laboratory facility with
state of the art diagnosing devices like bed side multi-parameter
monitors, nebulizers, defibrillators, central oxygen and suction lines
besides ECG, including Tele-ECG. The upgraded minor operation theatre
facilitates taking up minor surgical procedures in trauma cases. General
Hospital contributes to the goal of various National Health Programmes
like:—
➢ National Family Welfare Programme,
➢ Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme,
➢ National Leprosy Control Programme, Immunization
Programme,
➢ National AIDS Control Programme,
➢ National Blindness Prevention Control Programme, and
➢ National Breast Feeding Promotion, etc. by sharing
infrastructure facilities and manpower resources for impacting
outcomes of these programmes. Notable among the advances
made in the implementation of National health programmes
include creation of Polio free society in and around Neyveli,
prevention and control of HIV , TB and leprosy in this region.

54
PREVENTIVE HEALTH CARE PROGRAMME — OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH
OF MINERS
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH SERVICES
3.11 The Occupational Health Services (OHS) model is unique in
Neyveli Lignite Corporation whereby it is integrated with the overall
Hospital Care Delivery System of the company. The OHS has appropriate
system of delivery of occupational health services to Miners, employees
of Thermal plants and CISF security personnel. The OHS informs workers
of how their personal health information is recorded and used, how to
access their personal information and their rights in relation to how
their personal information is shared with statutory authorities and used.
Informed consent is obtained for certain interventional procedures and
the workers are informed of the role of OHS professionals and purpose
of medical examinations.
3.12 Major programme components of OHS in NLC Limited includes
the following:—
Periodic Medical Examination (PME) of Miners: The OHS unit
implements Periodic Medical Examination programme as per DGMS
guidelines to monitor the occupational health and well being of miners.
PME is conducted once in 3 years for miners who are in the age bracket
of 45 years & above and once in 5 years in the case of those who are
below 45 years of age. PME also focuses on prevention of life style and
stress related disorders in addition to examining the miners for any
occupationally related illness through appropriate investigations. During
each phase of PME, around 15,000 miners are examined for life style
disorders and occupationally related disorders like coal miners
pneumoconiosis and noise induced hearing loss. X-rays of suspected
miners are sent to National Institute of Occupational Health for expert
evaluation and assessment towards Notification of Coal Miners
Pneumoconiosis.
Metalliferous Mining Medical Examination Programme: Miners from
across various small mining units in the neighbouring States are annually
examined for fitness assessment at the directive of Director General of
Mines Safety. Annually around 200 miners are examined under this
programme.
First Aid Training Programme: OHS in NLC is also responsible for
conducting First-Aid training to build competency in life saving at plant
level, Basic Life Support to augment potential in pre-hospital emergency
care and disaster preparedness to mobile skilled workers during mass
casualty. OHS also undertakes Master Health Checkup for executives
and non-executives from across all units as preventive health strategy,

55
Cardiac check up for employees above the age of 50 years and Cancer
screening for early detection and management of breast and cervical
cancer among women employees. Starting from 1996, over 11,000
employees/workers have been covered under First Aid training
programme. During the year 2013-14 the following activities were
undertaken by GH, NLC:—
➢ Free medical consultation with minimum antibiotic therapy
and vitamins was extended in 92,912 instances to out-patients
from the rural public. Another 25,620 patients were given
emergency treatment for various causes.
➢ Community Health Screening for diabetes, hypertension and
HIV covering 9,740 persons during the Annual Book Fair and
Safety Week Celebration was carried out and counselled for
behavioural change.
➢ 12 medical camps were conducted in peripheral villages
located in the area surrounding Neyveli Township in Cuddalore
District. 5204 persons of these 12 villages were screened and
given medical advice and medicines through the camps.
➢ From February 2013 onwards, NLC is providing nutritious food
supplement to about 270 HIV affected children belonging to
the Cuddalore District HIV Positive Society, Cuddalore.
Proposal for Establishment of Medical College at Talcher by Mahanadi
Coalfields Limited (MCL)
3.13 The Committee have been apprised that there has been a
public demand for long time for establishment of a Medical College at
Talcher which has been supported by the State Government. In April
2008, during meeting of CMD-CIL with the Hon ’ble Chief Minister of
Odisha, the same was agreed upon. It was further announced in
December 2008 by the Hon ’ble Minister of Coal during his visit to
Odisha. During subsequent visits the assurance had been given at
different fora for establishment of a Medical College at Talcher.
Government of Odisha agreed to get associated with the establishment
of Medical College at Talcher on the request of CMD-MCL in July 2009.
MCL Board in its 117th Board meeting in March 2010, gave ‘in principle’
approval for setting up a Medical College at Talcher. Furtherance to
this, Mahanadi Medical Education Trust was registered under the Societies
Act, 1860 in April 2010 with CMD-MCL as Chairperson of the said Trust.
As a follow-up of the above decision, Expression of Interest was floated
for preparation of DPR and detailed NIT for the construction of Medical
College at Talcher on concept-to-commissioning basis. However, due to

56
some inadequacies in the EoI the Agency could not be finalized.
Application was made to Department of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of Odisha for permission to establish a Medical College at
Talcher. Actions were also taken for issuance of ‘Essentiality Certificate’
from Government of Odisha. Application for affiliation with Utkal
University, Bhubaneswar was made. Also, it was decided to take action
for upgradation of the existing 115-bedded MCL’s Central Hospital (NSCH)
to a 500-bedded hospital. However , when the actions were in full
swing, it was informed that a minimum 20 Acres of land is required for
the establishment of Medical College and it should be located adjacent
to the hospital. A piece of land was identified for the establishment of
the Medical College. However , show cause notice was issued by the
Forest Department against MCL officials as the said land was forest
land. In 2012, a meeting was convened by Government of Odisha to
review the status of Medical College wherein it was decided that forest
clearance should be taken for the forest land before any construction
was started. Accordingly, application for diversion of forest land was
made by MCL. Final forest clearance was received and the land was
handed over in December 2014. During this time, since the land was
already identified, action was taken for floating of EoI amongst public
works organizations like CPWD, RITES, NBCC, etc. MCL Board approved
constitution of a Board Sub-committee for finalizing the agency after
evaluating their response against the EoI. Based on the responses
received, presentations given, it was decided to award the job to
NBCC. The Board approved the proposal for selection of NBCC for
construction of Medical College and upgradation of NSCH to 500-bedded
hospital. Meanwhile, Government of Odisha was pursuing for signing of
MoU. This MoU was approved by Coal India Board in its 305th meeting
held on 28th February, 2014. The decision of the CIL Board was as
under After detail deliberations, Board accorded its approval for
execution of MoU between Government of Odisha and MCL for
establishing a Medical College and Hospital as a part of Corporate
Social Responsibility as brought out in the agenda note. However , the
Board advised to amend Clause 3a (v) of MoU as under:—
“The SECOND PARTY after completion of infrastructure shall run the
Medical College on ‘No Profit and No Loss Basis ’. Hospital attached
to the Medical College will be maintained by the Company. An MoU
was signed on 3 March 2014 between CMD-MCL & Principal Secretary,
Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government  of Odisha for
establishment the said Medical College.
Now, an agreement is going to be signed between MCL and NBCC
for construction of the Medical College. It may be noted that prior
financial commitments for projects under CSR as well as towards

57
construction of toilets under Swatchh Vidyalaya Abhiyana, substantial
amount has been earmarked which has resulted paucity of MCL ’s
CSR fund. Keeping in view of the availability of CSR budget
vis-a-vis commitments made under CSR, necessary policy resolution
is required for CSR spending beyond 2% of the average net profits
of the Company (As per Companies Act, 2013).
On 15th July, 2015,Talcher Suraksha Manch have temporarily called
off the Economic Blockade called from 14th July, 2015 demanding
establishment of Medical college causing huge loss to MCL as well
as public exchequer with expectations that a favourable action will
be taken by the State Government and MCL authorities or else they
will intensify the agitation after ten days. ”

58
CHAPTER IV
EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR INHABITANTS/WORKERS IN
COAL/LIGNITE MINING AREAS
Coal India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries
According to the Ministry of Coal, the primary responsibility of
providing educational facilities lies with the State Governments. However,
the subsidiary companies of CIL have been providing financial assistance
and infrastructure facilities to certain schools like DAV Public Schools,
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Delhi Public School etc. and also providing occasional
financial assistance to other recognized educational institutions. As a
part of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) financial assistance by way
of grant-in-aid/infrastructural facilities are also provided to certain
privately managed schools by the subsidiary coal companies functioning
in and around coalfield areas. There are 681 schools in and around the
coalfields areas of CIL and its subsidiaries. The details are given below:—
1. Project schools fully financed 63
2. Project schools run on their own (given infrastructure only) 15
3. Privately managed schools (ECL, BCCL & CCL) 288
4. Other educational institutions (getting occasional assistance) 315
Total 681
Total number of students studying in above schools are 74135.
4.2 The children from the peripheral villages and the wards of the
contractor employees as well as employees of CIL and its subsidiaries
are also studying in the above schools. During the year 2013-14:—
• An amount of Rs. 1,58,38,520/- has been provided to 11792
students who have been awarded Merit/General Scholarship.
• An amount of Rs. 1,36,71,428/- has been provided to 604
students who have got admission in Government Medical &
Engineering Colleges as well as students of IITs and NITs are
also benefited by way of reimbursement of their entire tuition
fees and hostel charges.
• An amount of Rs. 51,000/- has been provided as Special Cash
Award to 9 meritorious children of employees of CIL (Hqrs.),
Kolkata, Desk Offices of subsidiary companies and Dankuni

59
Coal Complex @Rs. 7,000/- for 3 students who have secured
90% or above marks in the Class-XII Board level examination
and Rs. 5000/- for 6 students who have secured 90% or above
marks in the Class-X Board examination.
• CIL also provides infrastructural and periodical financial
support to 330 Project school running under the jurisdiction
of CIL and its subsidiaries.
• CIL has sanctioned an amount of Rs. 9647.97 lakhs as a grant
to the schools including privately managed schools.
4.3 On being asked about the criteria for sanctioning grants by CIL
to privately managed schools, the Ministry furnished the following
information:—
“The grant-in-aid to privately managed schools functioning in ECL,
BCCL and CCL was enhanced w.e.f. 1st April, 2011 and the enhanced
rate of grant-in-aid are available to those schools with the following
terms and conditions:—
(1) If no Graduate teacher with B.T ./B.Ed. qualification is
available, grant-in-aid @Rs. 5000/- per teachers per month
will be paid to the Managing Committee of the eligible
Privately Managed Schools.
(2) Grant-in-aid would be payable for the same number of
teachers who were paid in 2010-11.
(3) Possibility should be explored to provide infrastructure support
to those schools who fulfil the condition of minimum 25%
attendance and minimum 01 Graduate Teacher in the school.
(4) Efforts should also be made by the concerned Managing
Committee of the schools for amalgamation of the schools as
per practicability to strengthen the school ’s infrastructure.
(5) The payment of grant-in-aid may be restored in respect of
those teachers who have withdrawn their cases filed by them
in the Court of Law subject to submission of documentary
evidence in this respect.
(6) Teachers of such schools who were on roll during 2010-11 and
still continuing will be given free Outdoor treatment in any
Company’s Hospital and a concessional rate will be charged
for Indoor treatment, if required, in line with facilities made
available to BPL citizen.

60
(7) There must be minimum 25 Nos. of students in each class
with minimum 75% attendance. Direction/order will be given
to inspect Attendance Register of each schools by concurred
welfare committee/sub-committee.
(8) The schools getting grant-in-aid from the Government will
not be eligible for the above package. ”
Private Schools Financed by CIL and its Subsidiaries
4.4 Regarding low salaries to teachers and other staff of Schools in
CIL mine areas, the Committee had received a representation. In this
regard, in a note dated 12.6.2015 furnished to the Committee, the
Ministry of Coal had informed that Coal India and its subsidiary companies
do not run any educational institution. Only financial assistance and
grant-in-aid is provided to these schools. The school management
committee manages its operations, apart from appointment and payment
of salary to the teachers and staff. Prior to nationalization of coal
industry, some private coal companies were running their own schools.
The teachers in such schools were salaried employees of the private
Companies. Apart from these schools, there were many other private
schools operating in and around the mines. When private companies
were nationalized, the CPSUs absorbed all the staff of the private
companies including some teachers. Since none of the coal PSUs were
running departmental schools, such teachers had to be utilized as clerical
staff. This issue was finally addressed under N.C.W.A-III which was valid
from 1.1.1983 to 31.12.1986 wherein it was decided that such absorbed
teachers would be given clerical grade of pay. The NCWA-III was meant
for the employees of coal PSUs and not for other teachers of school
operating in the vicinity of coal mines. Colliery teachers were the
original employees of the then Coal Companies who later on were
absorbed in BCCL whereas the teachers of privately managed school
have come into existence at a later date. The Ministry have further
stated that there is no employer-employee relationship with the
management of Privately Managed schools and CIL/subsidiaries companies
which has been confirmed by the Hon’ble Jharkhand High Court, Ranchi
vide its order dated 21.1.2004. The fact was further corroborated by
Judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 6595,
6602-6603 and 6601 of 2005 dated 21.8.2007, that as there is no
employer-employee relationship between Private Committee managed
schools and Management of BCCL. Therefore, BCCL has no liability in
respect of private committee managed schools. On representation of
Shri Vinay Kumar Singh, KKSM, a meeting was convened on
17th November , 2008 at Ranchi where Chairman, CIL informed
representatives of KKSM that in order to improve the standard of

61
education, conditions have been applied for payment of grant-in-aid at
enhanced rate. He stressed the point that there is no employer-employee
relationship between the Teacher of Privately managed schools and
Management of Coal India, as such it was made clear that there is no
scope of employment of these teachers in Coal Industry. Board of
Directors of CIL in its 270th meeting enhanced grant-in-aid. The increased
rate of grant-in-aid circulated vide Office Memorandum dated 23.6.2011
are as under:—
➢ @ Rs. 5000/- per Undergraduate Teacher without B.T ./B.Ed.
qualification per month.
➢ @ Rs. 5500/- per Graduate Teacher without B.T ./B.Ed.
qualification per month.
➢ @ Rs. 6500/- per Graduate Teacher with B.T . but without
B.Ed. qualification per month.
➢ @ Rs. 7000/- per Graduate Teacher with B.Ed. qualification
per month.
4.5 Asked about the other steps that have been taken by coal/
lignite companies to issue free books, school uniforms at least to students
of primary classes to motivate contract workers/local inhabitants to
send their wards to school, besides providing scholarship to meritorious
children, the Ministry of Coal have informed the Committee as under:—
“Following steps are taken by different subsidiaries of CIL:
ECL: In our ECL command Area State Government has set up Primary
Schools/Convent Schools in the vicinity of our Colliery/Unit/Area,
wherein State Government is issuing free books, mid-day meals. In
these schools wards of contract worker/local inhabitants are
studying. However, ECL is contributing infrastructure support
wherever there is a requirement from school managing committee
of aided schools.
BCCL: The tuition fees in the Project and semi-Project schools are
50% of those charged to non-BCCL employees, whereas in the Private
committee Managed Schools no fees are charged from students
whether BCCL or Non-BCCL.
CCL: Besides providing grant-in-aid to privately managed schools in
the command area of CCL and scholarships to CCL wards as per
merit, no other facilities are provided directly to students of these
schools by this department.
NCL: Procurement of plates, Glass & spoons for mid-day meals to
the poor students of Government schools is under process.

62
WCL: Issue of free books, school uniforms etc. are the subject
matter of local school management. The role of WCL is confined to
sanction of grant only.
SECL: Local inhabitant/contract workers who are PAPs are given
fee concession at par with Company employees. Further such SC/
ST & BPL persons are also provided free education under RTE act.
MCL: Reimbursement of tuition fee and hostel seat rent to the
wards of non-executive employees who are studying Medical & Engg.
degree in Government Institutions. ”
4.6 On being asked to state as to whether the initiative taken up
by the Ministry/coal PSUs for provision of educational facilities to the
workers/inhabitants of coal bearing areas have actually improved the
literacy level of the beneficiaries or have improved their overall
proficiency for better employment opportunities, the Ministry of Coal
stated that CIL was not aware of any such data maintained to show the
improvement of the literacy level of the beneficiaries or their overall
proficiency for better employment opportunities on account of various
initiatives taken up by subsidiaries of CIL. However , there had been
remarkable improvement in literacy level and the overall proficiency of
the workers/inhabitants of coal bearing areas which is reflected in the
present performance in the various examination of reputed institutes
and employment in different Government and private sector companies.
4.7 On being asked as to whether the educational facilities being
given also include vocational education or skill development, the Ministry
of Coal stated that in CIL, the educational facilities being given through
the privately managed schools does not include vocational education or
skill development. Efforts are being made to incorporate vocational
education or skill development in some of these schools. Apart from
this, various steps are being taken for vocational education and skill
development by different subsidiary of CIL, some of which are furnished
below:—
i. Skill Development Centre for poor , needy and project affected
person. This includes making apparel in collaboration with
Apparel training and design Center.
ii. Women Empowerment with training in Tailoring and other
Village Industries product like Candle making, Food Processing,
Silk screen painting, Phenyl and liquid soap making etc.
iii. Drive for improvement of female literacy.
iv. Skill Development training are also imparted through ITI in
Electrical, Fabrication, Production & Manufacturing.

63
v. Development of statutory manpower and critical category
manpower.
vi. Skill development of workforce in Computer and Simulator
and motor driving training.
vii. Fishery Training.
viii. Plastic processing technology, testing & Quality control.
ix. Training for security guard.
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
4.8 The Committee have apprised that Neyveli Lignite Corporation
Limited is running 10 Schools through a common school committee in
Neyveli Township, of which 2 are of Elementary level, 3 are of Middle
level, 2 are of High and the remaining 3 are of Higher Secondary level.
The present students ’ strength is 6501. More than 95% of the students
studying in these schools are from the peripheral villages and the
remaining are wards of contract employees, workers and others. During
the year 2013-14:—
➢ NLC issued free school uniforms to all the students of the
primary classes (1st std. to 5th std.) — this year 480 students
(252 Boys + 228 Girls) benefitted at a cost of Rs. 3 lakhs.
➢ 18 school toppers among the girl students of Neyveli Schools
were awarded Rs.10000 cash award + Merit certificates and
a medal.
➢ NLC sponsors HINDI TEACHING for the willing students of
NLC schools in which 400 students of class VI to IX standards
have benefitted at the cost of Rs. 3.4 lakhs. Further in
2014-2015, 1025 students of class VI to IX standards have
enrolled in Prathamik & Madhyamik courses and expected
expenditure towards this would be Rs. 9.9 lakhs.
➢ NLC has imparted Motivational and Exam-Skills training in
the year 2013-14 to 2910 girls and 2356 boys of X and XII
Standards in Neyveli and 14 peripheral village schools.
➢ NLC provides infrastructural support and also periodical
financial support to Rajeev Gandhi Education Society,
Barsingsar for providing quality education and technical
training to the children of villages around NLC ’s project-sites
in addition to the Jawahar Education Society at Neyveli.

64
➢ The establishment of an Industrial Training Institute in
Barsingsar village was completed by NLC in the year 2012-13.
NCVT approved courses in Horticulture and Electrician trades
have commenced from October , 2012 and Fitter and Welder
trades have commenced from October , 2013. During the year
2013-14, 167 students have been imparted Industrial/Technical
Training in these trades.
4.9 Asked about the criteria for sanctioning grants to privately
managed schools, the Ministry of Coal have stated that NLC is not
sanctioning any grant to the privately managed schools.
4.10 On further being asked as to what other steps have been taken
by Coal/Lignite Companies to issue free books, school uniforms at least
to Students of primary classes to motivate contract workers/local
inhabitants to send their wards to school besides providing scholarships
to meritorious children, the Ministry of Coal stated that NLC Schools at
Neyveli, Tamil Nadu are aided by Government of Tamil Nadu. Free
Books and Uniforms are being provided by Government of Tamil Nadu
itself. However at Barsingsar , Rajasthan, NLC issues free books, school
uniforms to students of primary classes to motivate contract workers/
local inhabitants to send their wards to school every year.
4.11 On being asked as to whether the initiatives taken up by the
Ministry/NLC Ltd. for the provision of educational facilities to the
workers/inhabitants of coal bearing areas have actually improved the
literacy level of the beneficiaries or have improved their overall
proficiency for better employment opportunities. The Ministry of Coal
in their written reply have furnished as under:—
“NLC is running 10 schools through a common school committee in
Neyveli Township of which 2 are Elementary Schools (I to V Std.),
3 are Middle Schools (I to VIII Std.), 2 are High Schools (VI to X Std.)
and the remaining 3 are Higher Secondary Schools (VI to XII Std.).
These schools are being run with the aid of Tamil Nadu Government.
The present student strength in these schools is 6515. More than
95% of the students studying in these schools are from the peripheral
villages, wards of contract employees and the remaining are wards
of NLC workers. NLC is also fully funding a Kendriya Vidyalaya
School under Project Mode educating the wards of NLC employees,
CISF personnel, Central and State Government employees and
General Public. During 2014-15, the following activities were taken
up:
➢ NLC is sponsoring Bharat Scouts and Guides movement of
Neyveli Scouts and Guides District. An amount of Rs. 4.09
lakhs has been spent towards activities like Camps and
Uniforms.

65
➢ School Toppers among girl students of Neyveli Schools
(comprising 5 High schools and Higher Secondary Schools run
by NLC and 11 High schools and Higher Secondary Schools run
by private management) were awarded Rs. 10,000/- cash
award, medals and merit certificates. Under the above
scheme, 18 girl students have been awarded for their
performance in 2014 Public examinations. An amount of
Rs. 2.06 lakhs have been spent.
➢ NLC sponsors HINDI TEACHING for the willing students of NLC
schools in which 763 students of Class VI to IX std. were
benefitted at a cost of Rs. 8.79 lakhs. 87.46% have passed
the Prathmic exam and 82.61% have passed the Madhyamik
exam which are being conducted by Dakshin Bharat Hindi
Prachar Sabha.
➢ NLC has imparted motivational and skills development training
to the students of 10th and 12th standards in 16 Neyveli
schools and 14 peripheral village schools.
➢ NLC provides infrastructural support and periodical financial
support for various activities like providing sports and games
facilities, books, journals educational magazines, etc., to
school libraries, periodical ethical awareness classes, Junior
Red Cross Society at an expenditure of Rs. 73.45 lakhs.
➢ Special coaching class in the morning and evening are being
conducted for 10th and 12th std. students to enable to score
high marks in the public exams. Nutritional snacks are being
served to enable them to keep themselves fit.
➢ NLC is conducting computer coaching classes in batches free
of cost for the benefit of students.
➢ Under Swachh Mission regular upkeep of sanitation facilities
is maintained in NLC schools.
➢ NLC provides infrastructural support and periodical financial
support to Kendriya Vidyalaya School at an annual expenditure
of Rs. 110.81 lakhs.
➢ In addition to 10 NLC Schools and Kendriya Vidyalayas, NLC
has facilitated running of 3 Elementary Schools, 2 Middle
Schools, 3 High Schools and 7 Higher Secondary Schools by
Private Management.
➢ To enhance the teaching skills, training is being imparted to
the teachers of NLC and Private schools.

66
Improvement in literacy level/overall proficiency of children in
Neyveli:
➢ 61 students were selected for the prestigious IIT in the year
2014. This year 51 students have cleared the JEE (Advanced)
examination. Similarly a lot of students are successfully getting
admission in various professional institutions offering
Engineering and Medical courses.
➢ A girl student of NLC School has secured third rank in the
State in the subject of Draft Civil in 12th Standard Public
Examination. One Student of a Private School has secured
Overall First Rank in District Level 12th Standard Public
Examination.
➢ The pass percentage is more than 90% in 10th and 12th
standard public examinations. In particular , the pass
percentage of the schools completely catering to the students
of peripheral villages have shown 15% rise (From 63% to 78%)
in pass percentage in public examinations in the last three
years.”
4.12 On being asked as to whether the education facilities being
given also include vocational education or skill development, the Ministry
of Coal replied in affirmative and furnished the following information:—
“NLC Schools are offering the following Vocational Education Courses
at Higher Secondary School Level:
• General Mechanic.
• Electronic Equipment.
•T ype Writing.
• Draftsman Civil.
• Auditing and Accounting.
An ITI has been established at Barsingsar , Rajasthan by Rajiv Gandhi
Education Society under the aegis of NLC at an investment of
Rs. 10.00 Cr. and is in operation since the year 2012. It provides
technical education in Fitter, Electrician, Welder & Horticulture for
the benefit of children and wards of project affected persons and
the people of peripheral villages. It was further stated that Medical
Checkups like Dental Screening are being conducted in NLC Schools.
Safety awareness programmes covering Road safety, environment
etc., are being conducted in NLC Schools. ”

67
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee note that coal meets 52% of the primary
commercial energy requirement of the country and increasing
production of coal has become a national priority with the target set
for achieving production of one billion tonnes by the year 2020. The
Committee however note with concern that for miners, it is a
dangerous and potentially lethal assignment fraught with occupational
hazards such as traumatic injury hazards, ergonomic hazards and
noise. The Committee observe that although substantial progress has
been made in the control of occupational health hazards, there
remain room for further risk reduction towards a total Zero tolerance
for fatal accidents in Mines. Vigilance is also required to ensure
exposure of coal dust and crystalline silica remain effectively
controlled. Despite the best safety precautions, safety risk are
associated with all forms of coal mining due to wide utilization of
heavy machinery for coal excavation. Moreover, coal mining in deep
underground mines involves a higher safety risk than coal mining in
opencast pits primarily due to problem associated with mine
ventilation and potential for mine collapse. Taking into consideration
that in India, coal mining still remains a highly labour intensive field
and coal miners/workers are generally from the poor and illiterate
strata of the population, the Committee feel that the issues of safety,
health and education facilities of coal miners/inhabitants of coal/
lignite areas assumes more significance. The Committee also observed
that coal mining raises a number of environmental challenges including
soil erosion, dust, noise and water pollution with consequent impacts
on local bio-diversity. The Committee, therefore, desire that larger
goals of higher productivity in the coal mining industry is harmonized
with the overall sustainable goals of protection and improvement of
lives of people working in coal mining areas. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should go for a
sustainable mining policy with commitment to safety, health and
education facilities for these miners. The observations/
recommendations of the Committee based on the examination of
the written and oral information/testimony by the Committee on
various aspects of the issues on safety, health and education facilities
of miners are contained in the succeeding paragraphs.

68
Need for review of governing statutes on safety in Coal Mines
2. The Committee observe that some of the statutes governing
safety in Coal Mines viz. Mines Act, 1952; Electricity Act, 2003;
Explosive Act, 1884; Employee Compensation Act, 2009; Factories
Act, 1948; Indian Boiler Act, 1923, etc. were framed decades back
in a totally different work atmosphere and therefore calls for an
urgent holistic review based on the challenges being faced in carrying
out the present day mining operations. In this context the Committee
are happy to note that the Ministry of Labour and Employment
(MoL & E) have proposed to amend the provisions of Mines Act, 1952
and bring out new Coal Mines Regulations, 2015 with a view to
address modern day challenges. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that the Mines Act (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and draft Coal
Mines Regulations, 2015 have been prepared after due deliberations
with all stakeholders and have been notified in the Gazette of India.
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken so far by the
Government in reviewing the old statutes governing mines safety to
cater to the present day needs. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that comprehensive review of all the relevant statutes
may be undertaken by the Ministry so that obsolete and redundant
provisions may be weeded out and appropriate amendments,
whenever necessary may be brought out in the statutes/Rules/
Regulations. The Committee further recommend that the entire
exercise may be carried out in a time bound manner and the
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Safety monitoring mechanism in CIL
3. The Committee note that an elaborate safety monitoring
mechanism exists at different levels in CIL viz. Mine Level; Area
Level; Head Quarter Level; CIL Head Quarter Level; and Ministerial/
National Level which has resulted in continued and sustained
improvement in CIL’s safety performance. It is evident from the fact
that the trend of five yearly average fatalities of 196 in the years
1975-1979 in CIL has come down to 62 in the year 2010-2014 as also
the five yearly average serious injuries in CIL from 1278 in the years
1975-1979 to 228 in the years 2010-2014. The  Committee have
been apprised of various actions being taken for improvement in
safety of mines viz. continuous review of safety status of mines
through the multi disciplinary Internal Safety Organization (ISO);
issue of directives/guidelines on corrective measures for prevention
of recurrence after detailed analysis of fatal accidents; preparation
and implementation of risk assessment based Safety Management

69
Plan (SMP) for every mine; mine safety audit by external independent
agencies; technology upgradation for improving safety in mining
operation; better strata management; prevention of spontaneous
heating; fire and explosion in mines; mine safety inspections; safety
R&D initiatives at CIL, Head Quarter level; prevention of accidents
in Open Cast Mines; emergency response systems; safety awareness
programme; etc. Statedly, new initiatives for adoption of a system
approach for overall improvement of safety standards  viz. adoption
of globally established technique of WRAC (Workplace Risk Assessment
and Control) compliant with Coal Mines Rules (CMR) 2011; uniform
system of documentation of all mining operation activities; adoption
of Risk Assessment based Safety Management in all mines of CIL, etc.
are being put in place. The Committee, however, note with concern
that during the last five years, the trend of fatalities in CIL showed
only a marginal reduction from 62 in 2009 to 58 in 2013, while for
serious injuries, from 290 in 2009, it increased to 308 in 2010 and
came down to 178 in 2013. In this regard, the Committee need not
emphasize that every single life is precious and all out efforts must
be made to bring the fatality rate to zero on utmost priority basis.
The Committee appreciate that laudable initiatives at par with global
standards are being put in place in CIL Mines to further boost the
safety parameters and standards in these mines. The Committee,
however, at the same time desire that the reasons for each instance
of fatality as well as serious injury that had occurred must be properly
analyzed and appropriate remedial mechanism be accordingly devised
to avoid recurrence of such circumstances to bring down the fatality
rate as well as the trend of serious injuries. The Committee hope
that the preventive measures being put into place as well as the
new initiatives would translate into a zero tolerance level for fatalities
as well as serious accidents in these mines. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the tangible results gained from these initiatives
and measures being put in place in CIL Mines.
Safety monitoring mechanism in Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC) Mines
4. The Committee note that in NLC Mines during the last ten
years, the number of fatal accidents has come down from 6 in the
year 2006-2007; to just one in the year 2013-14 and the serious
injuries accidents reported from 10 in the year 2009-10 to 4 in the
year 2013-14. The Committee also note that most of these accidents
had occurred more on account of individual ’s fault rather than due
to any system failure or unsafe conditions of mines or machinery.
The Committee, therefore, feel that there is a heightened need for
sensitization and awareness programmes for mine workers for

70
adherence to safety standards and such programmes are needed to
be accorded top priority. At the same time, the Committee express
their satisfaction that NLC have taken a number of steps to avoid
accidents in Lignite Mines which include provision for personal
protective equipments specific to job requirement; systematic
in-depth accident analysis; accident counselling system to avoid
recurrence and for behavioural transformation; area-wise
responsibility for enforcement of safety in all mine operational/
maintenance activities; exhibition of code of safety practices at
appropriate locations; inter unit safety assessments of every quarter;
risk assessment and safety audit for mines by accredited external
agencies once in two years; inculcation of safety awareness for all
categories of employees including contract employees before
deployment; and continuous monitoring of behavioural sense/attitude/
commitment of employees towards safety. The Committee expect
that the NLC will further augment their safety initiatives so that the
fatality figure comes down to zero. To this end, the Committee
recommend that the NLC’s ongoing initiatives for adherence to safety
standards and also inculcation of safety awareness to all workers
including contract workers be carried on with full vigour so that the
overall target of zero tolerance for fatal accidents or serious accidents
be achieved. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in
the matter.
Safety Monitoring Mechanism in Singareni Coalfields Company Limited
(SCCL)
5. The Committee note that the highest number of fatalities in
SCCL in the last five years stands at 12 during each of the years
2010, 2012 and 2013 with the highest number of serious accidents
of 369 during the year 2013. The Committee have been apprised
that the highest fatality rate per 3 lakh man shifts occurred in the
year 2013 which stands at 0.24 while the highest serious injuries
per 3 lakh man shifts stands at 7.43 during the same year. The
Committee also note that a number of measures have been taken to
improve the safety status in SCCL mines which inter-alia include
gradual phasing out of hand sections to be replaced by Side Discharge
Loaders (SDL) and Load Haul Dump (LHD); Strata Monitoring Cell;
utilization of services of scientific institutions viz. Central Institute
of Mining and Fuel Research (CIMFR), National Institute of Road
Mechanism (NIRM) etc. for designing panels and strata Management
System; critical analysis of accidents for subsequent action plan for
prevention; mandatory safety clearance certificate and DGMS
permission before depillaring panels; effective functioning of pit

71
safety Committees; mandatory inspection before issue of safety
clearance certificate; monsoon audit inspection; propagation of
awareness amongst workers for safety; organization of monthly and
quarterly Risk Management Committee meetings; night shift
inspections at least once in a fortnight by mine managers to improve
safety and discipline in the mine; compliance of recommendations
of the 11th conference on safety (employer ’s responsibilities in
contractor works); formulation of area level team for review and
monitoring of safety management plans of mines; etc. The Committee
express their happiness at such an elaborate safety mechanism being
put into place by SCCL and hope that vigorous and strict adherence
to all such safety measures would ensure significant reduction in the
overall fatality rate as well as the number of serious accidents in the
near future. The Committee, however, at the same time like to
recommend that periodic inspections at the Mines level be made
more stringent with provisions for mandatory follow up at the highest
level and the instances of any kind of negligence or slackness either
by Workers or Managers are needed to be reviewed seriously. The
Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in the matter.
Need for functional connect amongst the various safety monitoring
mechanism existing at all vertical and horizontal levels
6. The Committee note that apart from the statutory monitoring
by Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS), the status of safety is
also monitored by various Safety Committees existing at different
levels viz. Mine Level; Area Level; Subsidiary Level; Company Level
and Ministry Level. The Committee have been apprised that there
exist a functional connect amongst these different safety monitoring
mechanisms by means of interactions/discussions of their findings as
well as recommendations made; evaluation of activities of various
mine level safety bodies during co-ordination meetings; taking up of
unresolved issues at the lower levels to higher levels for compliance;
free horizontal and vertical communication between various safety
monitoring bodies; etc. The Committee also note that safety
monitoring reports of these bodies are circulated as minutes for
compliance and action taken report/compliance reports are also
prepared and submitted. Moreover, depending on the nature of issues,
the timelines are also stipulated for speedy and effective
implementation of the various safety recommendations. The
Committee, however, desire that the Ministry should ensure that the
existence of numerous safety monitoring mechanism at various levels
should not result in duplicacy of efforts or becoming a hurdle in
sorting out the problems or in the matter of fixing responsibility and

72
accountability. The Committee also recommends for strengthening
of the existing co-ordination mechanism for ensuring a vibrant
functional connect amongst all these monitoring bodies.
Safety Management Plan
7. The Committee note that one of the main functions of safety
Committee is to prepare, review and implement Safety Management
Plans (SMP) which are prepared at the unit level, reviewed by the
Internal Safety Organization (ISO) at corporate level and subsequently
approved by Director General of Mines Safety. The Committee further
note that the review of SMP is done monthly by the Safety Committee
at Mine Level; Quarterly by the Area Level; Half-yearly by the
Subsidiary Level and Annually by the Company level. The Committee
find that during the process of formulation for approval of the SMP,
workers at the ground level are involved in identification of safety
needs of the Mine and recommendation of the Safety Operating
Procedure to minimize risks, while officials of ISO and DGMS are
involved in its scrutiny and approval. While observing that effective
formulation and implementation of SMP at each Mines is crucial for
safety, the Committee recommend that SMP of each Mine be
meticulously formulated and then implemented with total involvement
of all stakeholders across the hierarchy so that the target of zero
tolerance fatalities is achieved. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Safety Inspection of Mines
8. The Committee find that the Mines Rules, 1955 stipulate for
a monthly inspection of Mines with a view to assess various aspects
like dangers in relation to mining operations such as condition of
Roof and Sides, adequacy of supports, safety aspects in haulage and
travelling roadways, ventilation, sealed off area, escape route,
machinery etc., compliance to various statutory provisions, status of
functioning of different safety systems installed/commissioned in the
Mines; compliance to safety checklists prescribed; etc. Undoubtedly,
a robust inspection is the sine qua non for effective implementation
of safety monitoring mechanism, the Committee, desire that this
important aspect should be given utmost priority and the findings
and recommendations made by inspection teams be meticulously
followed and implemented in letter and spirit.
Risk Assessment and Safety Audit
9. The Committee are happy to note that CIL have initiated Risk
Management by adoption of the Globally Established Technique of
Work Place Risk Assessment and Control (WRAC). With this mechanism

73
in place, tangible benefits accrued therefrom inter-alia include
sensitization of workers to identification of hazards and associated
risks; need to adopt control measures for elimination and reduction
of risks; enhancing ability of workers to perform their tasks safely
and consequent reduction in the numbers of both fatal and serious
accidents in last three years in CIL. As regards NLC, the Committee
find that NLC carries out Risk Assessment and Safety Audit of Mines
by deploying Accredited External Agencies once in two years, the
major recommendations of which include preparation of SMP;
Emergency preparedness; Plan/Pre monsoon Action Plan for every
Mine; Certification for stipulated quality Norms; etc. and scrupulous
action is taken on the recommendations made by such agency. The
Committee, which appreciating the importance and significance of a
comprehensive, dedicated and objective Risk assessment and safety
audit, conducted periodically by an External Accredited Agency, desire
that the system put in place at NLC be replicated in all other coal
companies/PSUs so that absolute safety of workers/miners/inhabitants
is ensured throughout. The Committee would like to be apprised of
action taken in the matter.
Subsidence Problem
10. The Committee note that un-scientific, unsystematic and
illegal mining are the primary causes of fires resulting into subsidence.
Steps are being taken by Government/Coal PSUs to ensure
implementation of the Master Plan for Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields
dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation and diversion of
surface infrastructure. The Committee find that the Master Plan
which was approved on 11.8.2009 with an estimated investment of
Rs. 7112.11 crore for Jharia Coalfields and Rs. 2661.73 crore for
Raniganj Coalfields, is being implemented by the Jharia Rehabilitation
and Development Authority for Jharia Coalfields and Asansol Durgapur
Development Authority for Raniganj Coalfields with fire survey being
done by the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), ISRO, Hyderabad
since August, 2013 and overall monitoring by High Power Central
Committee (HPCC) headed by Secretary (Coal). The Committee are
happy to note that the initial surface fire in Jharia Coalfields that
stood at 8.9 Sq. Km. have since been reduced to 2.18 Sq. Km. as in
July, 2015. The Committee however, desire that the implementation
of the Master Plan be further accelerated and enhanced so that the
subsidence problem is rooted out completely. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made in the matter.

74
Compensation package policy for fatal and serious accident cases for
regular as well as contract workers
11. The Committee note that the payment of compensation is
governed by the Employees ’ Compensation (Amendment) Act, 2009.
The Committee find that in CIL, a Special Relief Package of Rs. 5
Lakh is given to a departmental employee in addition to the amount
payable under the Employees ’ Compensation Act and the company
also release immediate payment for funeral expenses and transport
etc. to the family of the deceased. Besides this, monetary benefits
under Life Cover Scheme (LCS) of Rs. 1,12,800 w.e.f. 01.02.2012,
ex-gratia amount of Rs. 84,600 in case of death or permanent total
disablement; gratuity on the basis of length to service; encashment
of Earned Leave and Payment of Pensions as per CMPS, 1998 are also
provided to the deceased family. Further, there is provision for offer
of employment to eligible kin of deceased departmental employee
and provision for monetary compensation per month paid to family
if there is no eligible person for employment. The Committee also
observe that in case of serious bodily injury, due compensation under
the Employees ’ Compensation (Amendment) Act, 2009 is paid to
serious bodily injured person impaired with permanent disability
after due assessment of the percentage of permanent disability by
an approved Medical Board. An additional ex-gratia amount of
Rs. 84,600/- ( w.e.f. 01.02.2012) is also given in case of permanent
total disablement resulting on account of accident out of and in
course of employment for departmental employee. Besides salaries/
wages during period of absence and extensive medical treatment
facilities are also provided either in Company’s Hospital or any other
referred Hospital during the injury period and beyond. As regards
contract workers are concerned, the Committee find that
compensation in case of fatal accidents and serious bodily injury
while on duty is paid by the Contractor as per the provisions made
under the Workmen Compensation Act, 2009. CIL as the Principal
Employer ensure that payment of compensation to the next kin of
the deceased contract worker is paid by the respective contractor.
The Committee further find that in SCCL, similar compensation
package and benefits exists with ex-gratia of Rs. 84,300/- and special
ex-gratia of Rs. 5,00,000/- paid to regular employees while in case
of contract employee, the offloading agencies are liable to pay with
their payment ensured by the principal employer. The Committee
are however, happy to note that in NLC, in the case of death of a
contract workman due to accident, a family relief of Rs. 5,100/- per
month is given vis-a-vis Rs. 8,500/- per month paid to a regular
employee. The Committee feel that matter of death cases should be
treated compassionately whether it is a contract or a regular employee.

75
Taking into consideration the rising cost of livelihood, the
Committee recommend that the quantum of various compensation
amounts being provided to the deceased to family/injured person
are needed to be reviewed periodically. The Committee further
recommend that the Government may explore the feasibility of
extending a comprehensive Life and Health insurance cover to all
workers including contract workers so that their lives and health are
duly secured. Similarly, the Committee desire that the current
compensation package for contract workers may also be periodically
reviewed and the Coal Companies as well as the Principal Employer
may consider to contribute in the compensation package. The
Committee would also like to emphasize that all due compensation
package are always released within the prescribed period whether
it is for a departmental employee or a contractual worker. As regards
redressal of grievances related to compensation/relief, the Committee
desire that all such issues are taken up at the highest level and a
robust and responsive mechanism be put in place for redressal of
such grievances. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken
in the matter.
Zero Harm Potential
12. The Committee note that a Roadmap has been prepared to
achieve ‘Zero Harm Potential (ZHP) ’ in CIL mine Areas. In the year
2010, a training programme was arranged by CIL on Safety in Mines,
Testing and Research Station (SIMTARS) at Australia which is
recognized as the best in the world to develop trainers with an
objective to improve safety standards in Mines. The Committee have
been apprised that the initiative is a continuous process with 1488
and 1341 executives already trained in the first and second phase
of the training programme respectively. To achieve ‘Zero Harm
Potential’ in mines, CIL has taken up a numbers of additional measures
viz. implementation of SMPs and Take-5, an informal risk assessment
tool before starting of any operation; up-gradation of knowledge to
cope with technology change; Risk Management System for Project
Planning Stage, Restructuring/Re-organization of relatively small Mines
to bigger Mines for adoption of Mass Production Technology, acquisition
of land for OCPs in one go so that operations in Mines can be done
as per approved plan and all mining areas be permanently fenced;
deployment of higher capacity equipments in OCPs for faster
excavation; effective training and feedback system and weeding out
of incompetent and physically unfit workman from operational
activities, etc. The Committee appreciate the ongoing initiatives
towards ‘Zero Harm Potential ’ and hope that this target would be

76
achieved in a time bound manner. The Committee at the same time
recommend that such training programmes must also be organized
for non-executives also who are engaged in actual mining operations.
The Committee also desire SCCL and NLC to also work out such
training programmes for their executives as well as non-executives.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in the
matter.
Safety Mechanism in Captive Mines/Private Mines
13. The Committee find that there have been negligible cases of
fatalities and serious injuries in the mines operated by Captive Mines
holders and Private Players as compared to the Public Sector Coal
Companies during the years 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively. The
Committee note with appreciation that in the private sector coal
mining companies namely Integrated Coal Mining Ltd. (ICML), Jindal
Power Ltd. (JPL) and Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd. (MIEL) there was
not a single fatal accident reported in all these three years. This
raises serious question mark over the safety policy being followed by
public sector coal mining companies vis-a-vis captive mines holders
and private players and the Committee feel that there is a need for
serious introspection on the part of Public Sector Coal Companies
and recommend the Government to seriously undertake a comparative
study of the safety standards and good practices being followed by
Captive Mines Holders and Private Players and issue requisite
guidelines/orders for replicating them in the Public Sector Coal
Companies also. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken
in the matter.
Health facilities for inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining areas
14. The Committee note with concern that workers and
inhabitants in the coal mining areas faces a number of major
occupational health hazard caused due to sustained exposure to
dust, vibration, noise, light, electricity, heat, pressure, machinery
etc. Notably, other occupational hazards include chronic backache,
chronic bronchitis, dermatitis and in OCMs deafness, vibrational
syndrome, cataract due to poor light, etc. The Committee note that
CIL and its subsidiaries have made available extensive medical
facilities to the employees and their families through various medical
establishments beginning from the dispensary level and going up to
the central and apex hospitals in different parts of the coalfields.
Such infrastructure includes 79 hospitals with 5709 beds,
418 dispensaries, 212 empanelled corporate hospitals and medical

77
colleges, 589 ambulances, 1445 doctors including specialists and
3278 paramedical staff to provide medical services to CIL employees.
Besides, 11 Ayurvedic dispensaries also run by CIL subsidiaries provide
indigenous system of treatment to workers. The Committee have
been given to understand that besides preventive healthcare for
detection of occupational health diseases, workers are also provided
with protective gears such as helmet, cap lamps, masks, boots etc.
The Committee are happy to note that due to the initiatives taken
up by the Ministry and Coal PSUs, the number of cases of
pneumoconiosis has reportedly come down drastically in CIL areas in
the recent years and continuous biological and environmental
monitoring has resulted in better health conditions of coal mine
workers. The Committee further note with satisfaction that
modernization and expansion of medical facilities have been accorded
priority in CIL areas with many modern gadgets and medical
equipments provided and made available for workers/inhabitants in
these areas. Similarly, NLC also provides healthcare facilities through
its General Hospital with 355 beds to all inhabitants of the Neyveli
township and its surrounding villages including comprehensive medical
treatment to contract workers and their family members. Notably,
the Occupational Health Services (OHS) under the Preventive
Healthcare Programme in NLC is integrated with the overall hospital
care delivery system of the company. Major components of Preventive
Healthcare include Periodic Medical Examination (PME) of miners
conducted once in 3 years for those in the age brackets of 45 years
and above and once in 5 years in the case of those who are below
45 years of age; Metalliferous Mining Medical Examination Programme;
First Aid Training Programme; Community Health Screening; etc.
The Committee observe that health issues of workers as well as
inhabitants should be given paramount importance. Taking into
consideration the various occupational health hazards being faced in
Coal Mines by Miners, the Committee desire that the Ministry should
holistically review the working conditions in Mines with special aspects
to hazardous conditions and come forth with a time bound robust
mechanism for ensuring up to date technology upgradation and
mechanization in the mining operations to reduce these hazards to
the minimum possible level. The Committee further desire that
workers must mandatorily be made to wear protective gears in Mines
so that exposure to occupational hazards is minimized. The Committee
also desire that a mechanism be put into place to ensure that workers
mandatorily take periodic preventive health checkups with regular
follow up which may include Periodical Medical Examination of all
miners once in 3 years instead of 5 years in the case of miners who
are below the age of 45 years. Also provision be made for facilitating

78
immediate change of workplace where necessary for those workers
who are affected with some particular kind of working conditions.
The Committee also recommend that requisite healthcare provisions
by way of giving advances, treatment as well as easy and hassle free
settlement of cost of such treatments; etc. may also be incorporated.
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Establishment of Medical College in Talcher, Odisha
15. The Committee note that Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. have given
in principle approval for setting up of Medical College at Talcher,
Odisha in association with the Government of Odisha. The Committee,
however, note that no steps have yet been initiated towards
establishment of the Medical College. The claim that upgradation of
the existing 115 bedded MCLs Central Hospitals (NSCH) to a 500
bedded hospital is noted. While appreciating this laudable initiative
taken by the MCL, the Committee express serious concern that in
spite of long standing assurance for the establishment of the Medical
College by MCL, it has not been materialized so far. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Coal, Coal India Ltd. and MCL in particular
are to revert to the Committee about the concrete steps taken in
setting up of the medical college at the earliest.
Education facilities for inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining areas
16. The Committee note that as part of Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR), the subsidiary companies of CIL have been
providing financial assistance by way of grant-in-aid and infrastructure
facilities to certain schools and other recognized educational
institutions including some privately managed schools. In all there
are 681 schools in and around coalfields areas of CIL and its
subsidiaries with a total number of 74135 students. The Committee
are happy to note that in the year 2013-14, CIL had sanctioned an
amount of Rs. 1,58,38,520 to 11792 students as Merit/General
Scholarships and Rs. 1,36,71,428/- to 604 students who were admitted
in Government Medical and Engineering Colleges; an amount of
Rs. 51,000/- as special cash award to meritorious children of
employees of CIL, as well on other awards. Besides, CIL provided
infrastructural and periodical financial support to 330 project schools
and also sanctioned an amount of Rs. 9647.97 lakh as grant to
schools including privately managed schools. The Committee further
note that NLC also runs 10 schools through a Common School
Committee in Neyveli Township with a total of 6501 students as of
June, 2015. Besides, NLC issues free school uniforms to 480 students,
cash awards to meritorious students; sponsors Hindi teaching in which
400 students have so far been benefited; gives infrastructural and
periodical financial support; and had established an Industrial Training

79
Institution in Barsingsar village in Rajasthan. As a result of such
initiatives, there has been remarkable improvement in literacy level
and the overall proficiency of the workers/inhabitants of coal bearing
areas which was reportedly reflected by their performance in various
examinations of reputed institutes and also employment in different
Government and private sector companies. The Committee note with
appreciation that efforts are also being made to incorporate vocational
education and skill development by CIL. Considering that education
is key to upliftment and a better future, the Committee recommend
that educational facilities extended to Coal and Lignite Mines workers
and inhabitants of Coal/Lignite Mining areas are needed to be further
augmented with special emphasis on imparting vocational education
and skill development training so that the target of full literacy and
enhancing capacity building for better prospects of employment could
be achieved. The Committee further recommend that basic facilities
be extended to poor students by way of provisions of mid-day meals;
school uniforms; Text Books and requisite stationery items by the
sponsoring Coal Companies. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken in the matter.
Private Schools Financed by CIL and its Subsidiaries
17. While observing that there is no employer-employee
relationship between the teachers employed by the management of
privately managed schools and CIL/Subsidiaries companies which has
been confirmed by the Hon ’ble Supreme Court Order dated
21st August, 2007, the Committee appreciate the enhanced rate of
grants-in-aid of Rs. 5000/- per undergraduate teacher to Rs. 7000/-
per graduate teacher with B. Ed. qualification per month being granted
by the CIL. The Committee, however, desire that management of CIL
should ensure that these privately managed collieries schools are
imparting quality education to the children of miners and workmen
of the collieries. The Committee also desire that the management of
these privately managed schools which are getting grants-in-aids
from CIL and its subsidiaries are implementing the wage structure
for different categories of teachers as approved by the respective
State Government/State Education Board.
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
11 August, 2015 Chairperson,
20 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

80
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF  THE SITTING  OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL HELD ON 30th DECEMBER, 2014 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’,
GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shailesh Kumar
3. Shri Godam Nagesh
4. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
5. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
6. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
7. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
8. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
9. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
10. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
12. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
13. Shri Avinash Pande
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF COAL AND ITS PSU ’s
1. Shri Anil Swarup Secretary
2. Dr. A.K. Dubey Addl. Secretary & Acting CMD, CIL

81
3. Shri A.K. Bhalla Joint Secretary
4. Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary
5. Shri Vivek Bhardwaj Joint Secretary
6. Dr. M.R. Anand Economic Advisor
7. Shri D.N. Prasad Adivsor
8. Shri R. Mohan Das Director (P), CIL
9. Shri A.K. Debnath CMD, CMPDIL
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha CMD, ECL
11. Shri Gopal Singh CMD, CCL
12. Shri R.R. Mishra CMD, WCL
13. Shri T .K. Nag CMD, NCL
14. Shri A.N. Sahay CMD, MCL
15. Shri Om Prakash CMD, SECL
16. Shri T .K. Lahiri CMD, BCCL
17. Shri B. Surender Mohan CMD, NLC
18. Shri S. Bhattacharya CMD, SCCL
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, while welcoming the Secretary
and other representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs to the
sitting of the Committee convened in connection with examination of
the subject, “Safety, health and education facilities for inhabitants/
workers in Coal/Lignite Mining areas”, emphasized the crucial importance
of maintenance of safety standards in Coal/Lignite Mines not only for
the safety of work force but also for the economies of the companies.
He further stressed the imperativeness of continuous and sustained
efforts to ensure optimum safety standards and zero tolerance for fatal
accidents in coal/lignite Mines. He also highlighted the importance of
a robust and effective safety monitoring Mechanism for prevention of
accidents and preparedness to handle any eventualities strengthend by
periodic and systematic safety audits by Accredited External Agencies
with mandatory follow up on findings thereof. The Chairperson further
emphasised that issues pertaining to health and education facilities for
inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining need to be accorded utmost
priority.
3. Thereafter , the Secretary, Ministry of Coal briefed the Committee
on the extant provisions on ‘Safety, Health and Education Facilities for
Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas’ highlighting the major
policy initiatives taken up by the Ministry. Subsequently, in separate
visual presentation, the representatives of the Coal PSUs  viz., Coal

82
India Ltd. (CIL), Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) and Neyveli
Lignite Corporation (NLC) highlighted the status of safety, health and
education facilities for inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining areas
under their jurisdiction. The Committee were apprised about the major
statutes governing mine safety; monitoring mechanism of safety status;
trend of accident statistics; safety provisions and initiatives taken to
improve safety in Mines. The representatives also briefed the Committee
on the existing health and educational facilities for inhabitants/workers
in Coal/Lignite Mining areas under their corresponding jurisdictions.
4. The Members then raised queries and sought clarifications from
the representatives on various issues viz. identification of major hazards
in mining operations and associated risks; average life span of workers
deputed in coal mines; feasibility of provision of having own hospitals
instead of referrals to other hospitals, provision of protective equipments
and improvement of working conditions in Coal mines at par with
international standards; training facilities of workers; effectiveness of
the extant safety policy and monitoring of its implementation by the
Internal Safety Organisation; efficacy of the ISOs in terms of adequacy
of staff and techniques/technology; follow up on reports made by ISOs;
roadmap towards achievement of zero tolerance of fatality rate of
accidents in Coal mines, current status of phasing out of manual loading
as per the recommendations of the 10th National Safety conference;
time-frame for mechanised roof support for coverage of all existing
underground mines; etc.
5. The Chairperson, while pointing out to the imperative need for
bringing down the fatality rate of accidents in coal mines to zero,
stressed on the urgent need to bring out a roadmap to achieve the
objective of zero tolerance to such fatalities. He also directed the
representatives of the Ministry of Coal to furnish written replies to the
queries raised by the Members which could not be responded to.
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has
been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

83
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL HELD ON 14th JULY , 2015 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’,
BASEMENT , PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs. to 1500 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve
4. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
5. Shri Shailesh Kumar
6. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
7. Smt. Riti Pathak
8. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan
9. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
10. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
12. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
16. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
17. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
18. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
19. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
20. Shri Jugul Kishore
21. Shri Avinash Pande
22. Shri Sanjay Raut

84
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF COAL AND ITS PSU ’s
1. Shri Anil Swarup Secretary
2. Shri R.P . Gupta Joint Secretary
3. Shri D.N. Prasad Adviser (JS rank)
4. Shri Peeyush Kumar Director
5. Shri Sutirtha Bhattacharya CMD, CIL
6. Shri C.K. Dey CMD, ECL
7. Shri A.K. Debnath CMD, CMPDIL
8. Shri R.R. Mishra CMD, WCL
9. Shri A.N. Sahay CMD, MCL
10. Shri Om Prakash CMD, SECL
11. Shri T .K. Lahiri CMD, BCCL
12. Shri B. Surender Mohan CMD, NLC
13. Shri N. Sridhar CMD, SCCL
14. Shri P .K. Tiwari Director, CCL
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, while welcoming the Secretary
and other representatives of the Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs to the
sitting of the Committee convened for taking oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Coal in connection with examination
of the subject, “Safety, health and education facilities for inhabitants/
workers in Coal/Lignite Mining areas ”, emphasized the utmost priority
to be accorded to the safety and health of workers deputed in Coal/
Lignite Mines. He further stressed the paramount need of a holistic
review of the present system of safety monitoring mechanism through
a revisit of the fundamental provisions made in various statutes pertaining
to the issue. He also highlighted the importance of adopting and instilling
more scientific and good practices of mines safety as well as globally
established techniques such as Workplace Risk Assessment and Control
(WRAC) which would undoubtedly help in achieving the target set for
zero tolerance for fatal accidents in Mines.The Chairperson further
emphasised that issues pertaining to health and education facilities for
inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining were also equally important.

85
3. Thereafter , the Secretary, Ministry of Coal briefed the Committee
on the extant provisions on ‘Safety, Health and Education Facilities for
Inhabitants/Workers in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas’ highlighting the major
policy initiatives taken up by the Ministry. Subsequently, in separate
visual presentation, the representatives of the Coal PSUs viz., Coal
India Ltd. (CIL), Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) and Neyveli
Lignite Corporation (NLC) highlighted the status of safety, health and
education facilities for inhabitants/workers in coal/lignite mining areas
under their jurisdiction. The Committee were apprised about the major
statutes governing safety in Coal Mines; Monitoring Authorities for safety
in Coal Mines, effectiveness of Work Place Risk Assessment and Control
(WRAC); formulation of Safety Management Plan (SMP) and review
thereof; trend of accident statistics; Implementation of the Master Plan
for Jharia and Raniganj Coalfields being monitored by High Powered
Central Committee (HPCC) headed by Secretary(Coal). The
representatives also briefed the Committee on the existing health and
educational facilities for inhabitants/workers in Coal/Lignite Mining areas
under their corresponding jurisdictions.
4. The Members then raised queries and sought clarifications from
the representatives on various issues viz. zero tolerance to fatal accidents
in Coal Mines; Evaluation of Hospitals under CIL; Need for Super-Speciality
Hospitals; Training proportionate number of trainees for handling aspect
of safety in proportion to total work force of nearly 3,70,000 workers
statedly deputed in Coal Mines; Control of Air and Water Pollution
vis-a-vis Health issues; Coal gasification for manufacturing fertilizer;
Need for surprise visits to check upon safety and health of workers;
management of schools funded by CIL and its subsidiaries etc.
5. The Chairperson, while pointing out to the imperative need for
bringing down the fatality rate of accidents in coal mines to zero,
stressed on the urgent need to achieve the objective of zero tolerance
to such fatalities. He also directed the representatives of the Ministry
of Coal to furnish written replies to the queries raised by the Members
which could not be responded to.
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has
been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

86
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF  THE SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL HELD ON 11 AUGUST , 2015 IN HON ’BLE CHAIRPERSON ’S
CHAMBER, ROOM NO. ‘112’, FIRST FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
4. Shri Devji M. Patel
5. Shrimati Riti Pathak
6. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
13. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
14. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
15. Shri Avinash Pande
16. Shri Sanjay Raut
17. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary

87
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Draft
Report on the subject, “Safety, health and education facilities for
inhabitants/workers in Coal/Lignite Mining areas ” pertaining to the
Ministry of Coal.
4. The Committee adopted the Report without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise
the Report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.