THIRTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL AND STEEL
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STEEL
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Demands for Grants 2014-15 ”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.05.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 06.05.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 ( Saka)


CC&S No. 99
Price : R  61.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 13
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 46
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................... 48
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 51
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel (2014-15) held on 05.05.2015 ............. 52
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the  Third Report of
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) ......................................................... 54
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON COAL AND STEEL (2014-15)
Shri Rakesh Singh* — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve
5. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
6. Shri Shailesh Kumar
7. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
8. Shri Godam Nagesh
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
16. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
20. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
23. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu
(iii)
*Shri Rakesh Singh appointed w.e.f. 27.11.2014 vice Shri Hansraj G. Ahir appointed Minister.

(iv)
24. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque @
25. Shri B.K Hariprasad
26. Shri Jugul Kishore
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
#
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Shri Nand Kumar Sai
31. Shri Dilip Kumar Tirkey
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Smt. Vandana P . Guleria — Sr. Committee Assistant
@Shri Md. Nadimul Haque nominated  w.e.f. 08.01.2015 vice Shri Srinjoy Bose.
#Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated  w.e.f. 25.09.2014 vice Shri Basawaraj Patil.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their
behalf, present this Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and
Steel (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2014-15) ”
pertaining to the Ministry of Steel.
2. The Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Coal and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd December,
2014. Replies of the Government to all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 15th April,
2015.
3. The Standing Committee on Coal and Steel considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05.05.2015.
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Third Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-I.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Chapter-I of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
05 May, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee deals with Action Taken by
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in
the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel on Demands for Grants (2014-15) relating to the Ministry
of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
22.12.2014.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry
of Steel in respect of all the 19 observations/recommendations
contained in the Report on 15.04.2015. These have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19
Total : 16
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. No. 16
Total : 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. No. 17
Total : 01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 7
Total : 01
Chapter-V

2
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that final Action
Taken Replies on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapters-I & V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their observations/recommendations made in
the Third Report.
R&D IN IRON AND STEEL SECTOR
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
5. The Committee had observed that a provision of Rs. 14 crore
was made in BE 2014-15 for two new components of ‘Development of
Technology for Cold Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets and
other value added innovative steel products ’ (Rs. 12 crore) and
‘Development of innovative iron/steel making process/technology
(Rs. 2 crore—new project under the existing scheme) ’. These two
components have been added under the scheme ‘Promotion of R&D in
Iron & Steel Sector’. Earlier two schemes on ‘Promotion of beneficiation
& agglomeration of low grade iron ores & ore fines ’ and ‘Improving
energy efficiency of secondary steel sector ’ on Promotion of R&D in
steel sector were proposed to be implemented in the 12th Five Year
Plan. A sum of Rs. 2417 crore was proposed for ‘Promotion of
beneficiation & agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines ’ in the
12th Plan Period and Rs. 1693 crore in the 13th Plan Period. Similarly,
for ‘Improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector ’ a sum of
Rs. 272 crore was proposed in 12th Plan Period and Rs.191 crore in the
13th Plan Period. About the reason for discontinuing the earlier schemes,
the Committee were informed that Planning Commission has not
provided substantial funds to pursue those schemes. Further, the
Government in their Action Taken Replies (46th Report, 15th Lok Sabha)
had informed the Committee that off late a large number of
Beneficiation & Pelletisation plants have been/are being set up. Also,
the Ministry of Steel is supporting two high value R&D projects in this
regard. Further , an Energy Efficiency Improvement Programme in steel
Re-rolling mills in India is already being pursued by the Ministry of
Steel and a new project with financial assistance from UNDP (United
Nations Development Programme) for addressing the issue of energy

3
efficiency in steel re-rolling mills & related sub-sector has been already
approved by the Ministry of Steel. The Committee are unhappy to note
that though they have time and again emphasized the need for proper
allocation of budgetary funds by the Government which are integral to
the growth and development of any sector yet during the time of
allocation of funds due care has not been taken to ensure that there
is no overlap of schemes/projects. The Committee cannot but deplore
the way the schemes were launched/introduced without proper follow
up and left midway for want of approvals or other overlapping schemes.
The Committee therefore, recommended that proper study and analysis
of the purpose/objective of the schemes should be done before
allocation. The Committee expected that the provision of Rs. 14 crore
allocated during 2014-15 for ‘Development of Technology for Cold Rolled
Grain Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets and other value added innovative
steel products ’ (Rs. 12 crore) and ‘Development of innovative iron/
steel making process/technology (Rs. 2 crore—new project under the
existing scheme) ’ be fully utilized.
6. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Replies have informed
the Committee as under:—
“The recommendations of the Standing Committee on proper study
& analysis of the purpose/objective of the schemes before
allocation, has been noted and will be complied with. It is however,
submitted that the two schemes namely ‘promotion of beneficiation
& agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines ’ and ‘improving
energy efficiency of secondary steel sector ’, were for providing
interest subsidy for setting up new capacities for beneficiation &
agglomeration and installation of equipment for enhancing energy
efficiency respectively. The scope of the two high value R&D projects
on the other hand, were specifically for finding relevant technologies
for beneficiation & agglomeration of low grade/lean iron ores to
make them usable for the steel industry.
With regard to the utilisation of the earmarked fund for the CRGO
project (Rs. 12 crore), only an amount of Rs. 0.25 crore could be
utilized as the release of allocated fund was linked to approval of
the project which could not be obtained as some of the stakeholders
insisted for prior preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) of
the project. The order for preparation of the DPR could only be
placed close to the end of the financial year 2014-15, as per the
laid down procedures followed by National Metallurgical Laboratory,
Jamshedpur (CSIR Laboratory). It may also be noted that out of
the earmarked fund of Rs. 2 crore for new projects an amount of
Rs. 1.78 crore have been utilized. ”

4
7. The Committee had observed that under Research and
Development a provision of Rs. 14 crore was made in BE 2014-15
for two new components out of which the major share of Rs. 12
crore was for ‘Development of Technology for Cold Rolled Grain
Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets and other value added innovative
steel products ’ and ‘Development of innovative iron/steel making
process/technology (Rs. 2 crore—new project under the existing
scheme)’. These two components have been added under the scheme
‘Promotion of R&D in Iron & Steel Sector ’. The Committee had also
expected that the provisions made for the above two schemes would
be fully utilized. From the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry, the
Committee have been given to understand that out of the earmarked
fund of Rs. 12 crore for the CRGO project, an amount of only
Rs. 0.25 crore could be utilized as the release of allocated fund was
linked to approval of the project which could not be obtained as
some of the stakeholders insisted for prior preparation of Detailed
Project Report (DPR) of the project. While observing that the order
for preparation of the DPR could only be placed close to the end of
the financial year 2014-15, as per the laid down procedures followed
by National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur (CSIR Laboratory),
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should take immediate
steps to ensure judicious and optimal utilization of allocated funds
for promotion of R&D in Steel Sector during 2015-16.
MODERNIZATION & EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF SAIL
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
8. In order to maintain predominance in the steel sector and to
remain globally competitive, SAIL had drawn up a Modernisation &
Expansion Plan for its five integrated steel plants and special steel
plants including raw material resources and other related facilities.
The Committee noted that the modernization and expansion programme
of plants of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) viz. IISCO Steel Plant
(ISP), Salem Steel Plant (SSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Bhilai Steel
Plant (BSP) and Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) was approved in principle
by SAIL Board between June, 2006 to July, 2007. Apart from increasing
the production capacity, the plan envisaged to address the vital issues
of elimination of technological obsolescence, installing energy efficient
& environment friendly technologies, value addition/product–mix
improvement/sustenance of existing assets of the plants and
introduction of customer–centric processes such as Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) and Manufacturing Execution System (MES). The
Committee have been informed that upgradation of existing facilities

5
at steel plants was necessary to meet the stringent quality requirements
of the customers and to remain cost competitive. SAIL had planned a
expenditure of about Rs.70,000 crore for modernization/expansion and
sustenance schemes of existing Plants/Units, including Rs. 10,000 crore
for development of raw material facilities. The source of funding of
modernization & expansion plan of SAIL was to be done through a
combination of debt & equity (including internal resources) while
maintaining debt-equity ratio of 1:1. The Committee note that till
date an amount of Rs. 53270 crore has been spent on ‘Modernization
and Expansion Programme ’ of SAIL. The original target for completion
of modernization and expansion of plants of SAIL was between June,
2010 to March, 2013. Owing to buoyancy in the steel industry, the
timeline for implementation of different packages was initially
compressed to 2010. However , as per the revised targets, the plants
of SAIL were to be commissioned between August, 2010 to December,
2012. The Committee noted that these targets have been revised many
times and fresh targets were set. Though the Committee felt that
there may be unforeseen factors which are beyond the control of SAIL
management which have led to this delay, but the management cannot
altogether absolve itself for the delay. On review of the progress of
individual units, the Committee came across various constraints such
as dismal performance of civil contractors leading to fresh order
placement, slow progress of work, high prices offered by the only
bidder, delay in supply of equipment, delay in design engineering, civil
and structural works, re-tendering of balance work, inadequate resource
mobilization etc. As each SAIL unit is reportedly facing some or the
other major problems, the Committee recommended that Ministry/
SAIL should take immediate corrective measures and overcome all the
major constraints and would also like to be apprised of the present
target fixed for completion of modernization and expansion of plants
by the company.
9. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Replies have informed
the Committee as under:—
“The Modernisation & Expansion Plan envisages increase in capacity
of crude steel from 12.8 MTPA to 21.40 MTPA. The plant-wise
progress is as under:—
IISCO Steel Plant
All facilities under the integrated process route are in operation,
stabilization and ramp-up.
Rourkela Steel Plant
All new facilities under the integrated process route are in
operation, stabilization and ramp-up.

6
Durgapur Steel Plant
The operation has started from completed facilities viz. Re-building
of Coke Oven Battery-2, Ladle Furnace, Bloom-cum-Round Caster.
The balance facility of Medium Structural Mill (1.0 Mtpa) is planned
to be completed in 2015.
Bokaro Steel Plant
The operation has started from completed facilities viz. Upgraded
Blast Furnace No. 2, Rebuilt Coke Oven Batteries No. 1, Rebuilt
Coke Oven Batteries No. 2 and New 1.2 MTPA Cold Rolling Mill. For
the balance facility of Up gradation of Hot Strip Mill, 95% offline
erection completed. The shutdown of the Mill is planned in next
fiscal in the month of May 2015 and after that upgradation work
will be taken.
Bhilai Steel Plant
The operation has started from completed facilities viz. New Coke
Oven Battery, Sinter Machine in SP-3, Ore Handling Plant and Oxygen
Plant on BOO basis. The balance facilities viz. Blast Furnace
(4060 m3), Bar & Rod Mill (0.9 Mtpa), Universal Rail Rolling Mill
(1.2 Mtpa) and Steel Melting Shop–III (4.0 Mtpa) are in progress.
The balance facilities are planned to be completed in 2015.
In order to arrest delays in implementation of Modernisation &
Expansion Plan and also exercise greater control over defaulting
parties, number of corrective actions have been/are being taken
by SAIL which include Issue of Risk Purchase Notices (RPNs),
encashment of Performance Bank Guarantee, Enforcing stricter
penalty clauses, like Liquidated Damages (LD) for delay in
completion of facilities/non-fulfilment of Performance Guarantee
Parameters, etc. Also, in case of poor performance of Public Sector
Units like HEC, BHEL, EPIL, Bridge & Roof etc., the issue of their
sub-optimal performance has been taken up by the Ministry of
Steel with their respective Ministries at the highest level. ”
10. The Committee had observed that till date an amount of
Rs. 53270 crore had been spent on ‘Modernization and Expansion
Programme ’ of SAIL. The original target for completion of
modernization and expansion of plants of SAIL was between
June, 2010 to March, 2013. The Committee had further observed
that these targets were revised many times and fresh targets were
set. As regards the Committee ’s recommendation that Ministry/SAIL
should take immediate corrective measures and overcome all the
major constraints for completion of Modernization and Expansion of

7
Plants of SAIL, the Ministry has informed that all facilities under the
integrated process route at IISCO Steel Plant and Rourkela Steel
Plant are in operation, stabilization and ramp-up. Further, expansion
work is likely to be completed in Durgapur Steel Plant, Bokaro Steel
Plant and Bhilai Steel Plant during the current year. The Committee
also note that the roadblocks/constraints caused by unavoidable
factors like poor/sub-optimal performance by Public Sector Units,
like HEC, BHEL, EPIL etc. have been taken up by the Ministry of
Steel with their respective Ministries at the highest level. While
appreciating the various corrective steps taken by the Ministry/SAIL
to arrest delays in implementation of Modernisation & Expansion
Plan and also exercise greater control over defaulting parties, which
include Issue of Risk Purchase Notices (RPNs), encashment of
Performance Bank Guarantee, Enforcing stricter penalty clauses like
Liquidated Damages (LD) for delay in completion of facilities/non-
fulfillment of Performance Guarantee Parameters, etc., the
Committee expect that the current phase of Modernization and
Expansion of SAIL plants will be completed at the earliest.
SAFETY MEASURES TAKEN BY RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
11. The Committee noted that RINL has almost completed the first
phase of 6.3 mtpa expansion, with many units already operational for
over a year. The Committee had been informed that Blast Furnace
commissioned under this phase has already produced more than 3.6 Mt
of hot metal and other major units commissioned and put into operation
include the Oxygen Plant, Turbo Blower-4, Raw Material Handling Plant,
Sinter Plant, Steel Melt Shop-2, Wire Rod Mill-2 & several auxiliary
systems, viz. water, power & utility systems. The last major unit under
Stage-1 i.e., Calcining & Refractory Material Plant (CRMP) was planned
to be commissioned by October, 2014. Stage-2 of 6.3 mtpa Expansion
includes installation of Special Bar Mill (SBM) and Structural Mill (STM).
In both the mills, major equipment erection has been completed.
Rolling in both SBM & STM was likely to commence from December,
2014/January, 2015. The Committee also noted that RINL had received
a setback during the hot trial runs of Convertor at SMS-2 on 13.06.12
as there was an unfortunate incident of explosion at new Pressure
Reducing Station resulting in 19 fatal cases. Furthermore, two engineers
of a private agency died while carrying out inspection job in a container
laboratory at the RINL Plant pushing back the commissioning schedules
of Expansion plan of the Company. The Committee were concerned to
note such accidents at RINL Plant in 2012 and 2014 and recommended

8
that the Government/RINL should take necessary steps for ensuring
adequate safety of the workforce and apprise them of the action taken
thereon on the recommendations of enquiry reports on these accidents.
12. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Replies have informed
the Committee as under:—
“Major units of stage-1 have been commissioned and are under
regular operation. The balance units under Stage-2 i.e., Special
Bar Mill and Structural Mill were planned for commissioning in
December , 2014. However, due to devastating cyclone “HUDHUD”
in October, 2014, these were impacted and commissioning
rescheduled.
Safety is accorded highest and top priority in RINL and adequate
measures are being taken for the safety of the workforce.
Recommendations given by various Investigation Committees have
been implemented and ensured for compliance, as per the details
given below:
Inquiry Committees have been constituted on occurrence of
accidents/mishaps by the Management of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam
Ltd. In serious accident cases high level inquiry is ordered by the
Ministry in addition to the plant level inquiry and inquiry ordered
by the State Government/Local authorities. The findings of the
Committees include causes of such accidents and recommendations
for preventing recurrences etc. The recommendations of the inquiry
Committees are implemented, monitored and reviewed at
appropriate levels in plants/units. Various measures taken to
strengthen the safety mechanism include, inter-alia, the following:
(i) Review of Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment Training
programme has been conducted by Director Safety, Regional
Labor Institute, Chennai, and DGFASLI in October, 2012.
(ii) Comprehensive safety audit has been conducted by Regional
Labour Institute, Chennai, DGFASLI (Directorate General,
Factory Advice Service and Labour Institutes) in July, 2012.
(iii) Mock-drills as per the emergency plan conducted periodically.
(iv) Automatic gas leak detection alarm in critical and gas prone
areas provided.
(v) Spreading safety awareness through training programs and
workshops.

9
(vi) Enforcing usage of job specific personal protective equipment.
(vii) Conducting special training programmes on Behavioral Based
Safety and Legal awareness.
(viii) Training programme conducted on ‘Prevention of Fire in
Oxygen enriched systems etc. ”
13. The Committee had observed that RINL had suffered a setback
during the hot trial runs of Convertor at SMS-2 on 13.06.12 as there
was an unfortunate incident of explosion at new Pressure Reducing
Station resulting in 19 fatal cases. Furthermore, two engineers of
a private agency died while carrying out inspection job in a container
laboratory at the RINL Plant pushing back the commissioning
schedules of Expansion plan of the Company. The Committee had,
therefore, recommended that the Government/RINL should take
necessary steps for ensuring adequate safety of the workforce and
apprise them of the action taken thereon on the recommendations
of enquiry reports on these accidents. In their Action Taken Reply,
the Ministry have informed the Committee that safety is accorded
highest and top priority in RINL and adequate measures are being
taken for the safety of the workforce. The recommendations of the
inquiry committees are implemented, monitored and reviewed at
appropriate levels in plants/units. Although, the Ministry have
mentioned various measures taken to strengthen the safety
mechanism which inter-alia include review of Hazard Identification
and Risk Assessment Training Programme, comprehensive safety audit
by Regional Labour Institute, Mock-drills as per the emergency plan,
Automatic gas leak detection alarm in critical and gas prone areas,
Safety awareness through training programmes and workshops,
Enforcing usage of job specific personal protective equipment etc.,
the Committee desire that the Government should not only give
adequate publicity to precautionary measures to be observed by
the work force as pointed out by various expert/inquiry committees
but at the same time responsibility must be fixed for mishaps/
accidents resulting in fatal/grievous injuries.
AVAILABILITY OF RAW MATERIAL FOR RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
14. The Committee also acknowledged that the plan of RINL for
expansion of its capacity upto 20 Million Tonnes is being hampered due
to lack of raw material security. Being the only Public Sector Steel
Plant without captive iron ore mines till now, RINL has been incurring
about 60% of expenditure on raw material while other major producers

10
are incurring 31-44% cost on raw material. The Committee were,
however, happy to note that RINL will soon start work on developing
its low grade iron ore mines in Bhilwara District of Rajasthan. In this
regard, a Letter of Intent (LoI) has already been received from the
Rajasthan Government. This will be the first captive mine for RINL as
so far the company has sourced iron ore from NMDC. The Committee
had been further informed that Phase-I exploration of Banera Iron ore
Block by M/s. MECL is in progress and is scheduled to be completed
by June, 2015. Government of Rajasthan is being followed up to obtain
various clearances in respect of Banera iron ore block and for providing
infrastructure facilities for the project. In the meantime, the Committee
recommended that RINL should continue to pursue allotment of more
iron ore blocks to ensure that it gets raw material for its expanded
capacity of 20 Million Tonnes.
15. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Replies have informed
the Committee as under:—
“Mining Plan has been submitted to Indian Bureau of Mines on
06.01.2015 for approval in respect of Banera Block Iron Ore Mines
in Bhilwara District of Rajasthan. Matter regarding obtaining various
clearances is being pursued regularly.
Iron Ore mine applications: As per the MMDR Amendment Ordinance,
2015, all the applications received prior to the Ordinance are
ineligible.
Further , Government of Rajasthan has recommended allotment of
iron ore blocks to RINL (VSP) in Jahajpur of Bhilwara District and
sent the recommendation to Ministry of Mines, Government of
India. The matter is being followed up with the State Government
of Rajasthan and Government of India.
RINL has requested the Ministry of Mines to consider RINL for
empanelment to carry out exploration works of good Iron Ore
Mines, in line with the relevant provisions of the MMDR Act 2015. ”
16. As regards the Committee’s recommendation that RINL should
continue to pursue allotment of more iron ore blocks to ensure that
it gets raw material for its expanded capacity of 20 Million Tonnes,
the Committee note that Mining Plan has been submitted to Indian
Bureau of Mines on 06.01.2015 for approval in respect of Banera
Block Iron Ore Mines in Bhilwara District of Rajasthan. Matter
regarding obtaining various clearances is being pursued regularly.
Further, Government of Rajasthan has recommended allotment of

11
iron ore blocks to RINL (VSP) in Jahajpur of Bhilwara District and
sent the recommendation to Ministry of Mines, Government of India.
The matter is being followed up with the State Government of
Rajasthan and Government of India. In their Action Taken Reply, the
Ministry have further informed that as per the MMDR Amendment
Act, 2015, all the applications received prior to the Ordinance are
ineligible. While acknowledging that RINL being the only Public Sector
Steel Plant without captive iron ore mine till now the Committee
strongly reiterate their recommendation regarding allotment of iron
ore blocks to RINL for ensuring that it gets the raw material for its
planned capacity expansion of 20 MT.
DECLINE IN PROFITABILITY OF MECON
Recommendation (Serial No.17)
17. The Committee observed a decline in profit of both MECON and
MSTC Ltd. during the last 3 years. As regards MECON, the company
recorded a profit of Rs. 136.36 crore during 2011-12 which got reduced
to Rs. 101.02 crore in 2012-13. The Committee were dismayed to note
that during 2013-14, only Rs. 18.77 crore was registered as profit by
MECON which got reduced by 7 times the profit in 2011-12 and is only
about 1/5 of the profit during 2012-13. Similarly, in case of MSTC Ltd.,
Profit After Tax (PAT) for 2011-12 was Rs. 118.39 crore. During
2012-13, PAT was Rs. 130.73 crore and it got reduced to a mere
Rs. 99.04 crore during 2013-14. For the year 2014-15, Rs. 75.57 crore
is the targeted PAT . The major reasons furnished by MECON for slump
in profit are economic slowdown, ban on iron ore mining which resulted
in delay in implementation of projects, non materializing of expected
projects and uncertainty in availability of coal, etc. Similarly, MSTC
Ltd. has also given reasons of unrealized dues for gold jewellery export
during 2008-09 and a significant reduction in volume of trading business.
The Committee were not satisfied with the reasons put forward by the
two companies and believe that they have to strive hard to remain
competitive in the market to ensure their survival. The Committee,
therefore, strongly urged both the companies to step up efforts to
increase their profitability and they be apprised of the same.
18. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Replies inter-alia
have informed the Committee as under:—
“There is a decline in profit of MECON Ltd. during the Last 3 years.
MECON recorded a profit of Rs. 136.36 crores during 2011-12 which
got reduced to Rs. 101.02 crores in 2012-13. In the FY 2013-14, the
company registered a profit of Rs. 49.48 crores only  i.e. 2.75 times

12
less than the profit in 2011-12 and is only about 1/2 of the profit
during 2012-13. The major reasons for slump in profit are economic
slowdown, ban on iron ore mining which resulted in delay in
implementation of projects, non-materializing of expected projects
an uncertainty in availability of coal, etc. ”
19. Taking note of decline in profit of MECON, the Committee
had desired that the company should strive hard to remain
competitive in the Market to ensure its survival. The Committee are
concerned to note that although the Ministry in their Action Taken
Reply have mentioned the major reasons for slump in profit of
MECON which are economic slowdown, ban on iron ore mining
resulting in delay in implementation of projects, non-materialization
of expected projects, uncertainty in availability of coal, etc., the
reply is silent about the steps taken by the MECON to improve its
performance. The Committee, while taking note of the conducive
atmosphere that has been created in the country for mineral
exploration with the passing of the Mines and Mineral (Development
& Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 and the Coal Mines (Special
Provisions) Act, 2015, reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire that MECON should take advantage of the same to increase
its profitability.

13
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BUDGET ALLOCATION
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee observe that a provision of Rs. 14 crore has been
made in BE 2014-15 for two new components of ‘Development of
Technology for Cold Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets and
other value added innovative steel products ’ (Rs. 12 crore) and
‘Development of innovative iron/steel making process/technology
(Rs. 2 crore—new project under the existing scheme) ’. These two
components have been added under the scheme ‘Promotion of R&D in
Iron & Steel Sector’. Earlier two schemes on ‘Promotion of beneficiation
& agglomeration of low grade iron ores & ore fines ’ and ‘Improving
energy efficiency of secondary steel sector ’ on Promotion of R&D in
steel sector were proposed to be implemented in the 12th Five Year
Plan. A sum of Rs. 2417 crore was proposed for ‘Promotion of
beneficiation & agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines ’ in the
12th Plan Period and Rs. 1693 crore in the 13th Plan Period. Similarly,
for ‘Improving energy efficiency of secondary steel sector ’ a sum of
Rs. 272 crore was proposed in 12th Plan Period and Rs. 191 crore in
the 13th Plan Period. About the reason for discontinuing the earlier
schemes, the Committee were informed that Planning Commission has
not provided substantial funds to pursue those schemes. Further , the
Government in their Action Taken Replies (46th Report, 15th Lok Sabha)
had informed the Committee that off late a large number of
Beneficiation & Pelletisation plants have been/are being set up. Also,
the Ministry of Steel is supporting two high value R&D projects in this
regard. Further an Energy Efficiency Improvement Programme in steel
Re-rolling mills in India is already being pursued by the Ministry of
Steel and a new project with financial assistance from UNDP (United
Nations Development Programme) for addressing the issue of energy
efficiency in steel re-rolling mills & related sub-sector has been already
approved by the Ministry of Steel. The Committee are unhappy to note
that though they have time and again emphasized the need for proper
allocation of budgetary funds by the Government which are integral to
the growth and development of any sector yet during the time of
allocation of funds due care has not been taken to ensure that there

14
is no overlap of schemes/projects. The Committee cannot but deplore
the way the schemes were launched/introduced without proper follow
up and left midway for want of approvals or other overlapping schemes.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that proper study and analysis
of the purpose/objective of the schemes should be done before
allocation. The Committee expect that the provision of Rs. 14 crore
allocated during 2014-15 for ‘Development of Technology for Cold Rolled
Grain Oriented (CRGO) Steel Sheets and other value added innovative
steel products ’ (Rs. 12 crore) and ‘Development of innovative iron/
steel making process/technology (Rs. 2 crore—new project under the
existing scheme) ’ be fully utilized.
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Standing Committee on proper study
& analysis of the purpose/objective of the schemes before allocation,
has been noted and will be complied with. It is however, submitted
that the two schemes namely ‘promotion of beneficiation &
agglomeration of low grade iron ore & ore fines ’ and ‘improving energy
efficiency of secondary steel sector’, were for providing interest subsidy
for setting up new capacities for beneficiation & agglomeration and
installation of equipment for enhancing energy efficiency respectively.
The scope of the two high value R&D projects on the other hand, were
specifically for finding relevant technologies for beneficiation &
agglomeration of low grade/lean iron ores to make them usable for
the steel industry.
With regard to the utilisation of the earmarked fund for the CRGO
project (Rs. 12 crore), only an amount of Rs. 0.25 crore could be
utilized as the release of allocated fund was linked to approval of the
project which could not be obtained as some of the stakeholders
insisted for prior preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) of the
project. The order for preparation of the DPR could only be placed
close to the end of the financial year 2014-15, as per the laid down
procedures followed by National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur
(CSIR Laboratory). It may also be noted that out of the earmarked fund
of Rs. 2 crore for new projects an amount of Rs. 1.78 crore have been
utilized.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)

15
UNDER-UTILIZATION OF OUTLAYS EARMARKED FOR 12TH FIVE YEAR
PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee are dismayed to observe that though massive outlays
had been approved by the Planning Commission for the 12th Five Year
Plan (2012-17), yet even after the passage of 2 years of the Plan
Period, insignificant amount has been utilized so far for schemes by
the PSUs. This is evident from the dismal figures of expenditure by all
PSUs especially NMDC, KIOCL, MOIL and MSTC. Total Internal & Extra
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) for MSTC for the 12th Plan is Rs. 105 crore
out of which only Rs. 0.35 crore have been spent so far. Out of an
approved IEBR of Rs. 27872.17 crore of NMDC for 12th Plan, only
Rs. 4125.38 crore has been spent so far. Similarly, KIOCL has spent only
Rs. 17.27 crore out of total IEBR of Rs. 3080 crore and against the
outlay of Rs. 1459.47 crore for MOIL, only Rs. 142.58 crore have been
spent so far. The Committee desire that PSUs should come out of their
laxity mode and make serious efforts to utilize the unspent amount
during the remaining 3 years of the plan. The Committee feel that
adequate and extensive financial planning is required in the matter
and PSUs should make advance action plans to fix the priority areas
and allocate the funds judiciously. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the efforts made in this regard.
Action Taken
The capital expenditure of SAIL during the 1st two years of
12th Plan, i.e. in 2012-13 and 2013-14 has been 81% and 86% of revised
approved outlay respectively. However, the expenditure during
2014-15 (Apr.-Jan. 2015) has been about 95% of the revised approved
outlay. The capital expenditure during any financial year mainly depends
on the actual progress of physical work during that year which may not
be uniform in every quarter. SAIL is taking all measures so as to make
the outlays more realistic and for maintaining more or less uniform
quarterly fund utilisation.
Though all efforts are being made at various levels including
continuous & extensive monitoring of the physical & financial progress
of capital schemes, the actual capital expenditure is lesser than the
outlay mainly because of poor performance of contractors including
PSU contractors like HEC, HSCL, EPI, BHEL etc.
For monitoring of capital expenditure, quarterly reviews are taken
at various levels in SAIL and by MOS wherein quarterly actual
expenditure is compared with quarterly targets and reasons for shortfall
are identified and remedial measures taken, as required.

16
For 12th Plan period, a target of Rs. 11,183 crore has been envisaged
for RINL. However , RINL has not been able to proceed with the next
phase of Expansion to 11 Mtpa as envisaged, as its efforts for raw
material security in the form of Captive Iron Ore mines have not yet
been successful and it is continuing to experience higher expenditure
on raw materials and lower margins.
The Annual Plan estimates are submitted year to year after thorough
review of status of projects and the Utilisation has been more than
100% for the year 2012-13 and 2013-14. More than 100% of the target
has been achieved during the year 2014-15 till December , 2014 with
the utilization of funds to the tune of Rs. 989.06 crore as against the
target of Rs. 936 crore.
The Actual Plan Outlay of MOIL Limited during 12th Five Year Plan
is Rs. 1459.47 crore. The actual expenditure for April, 2012 to December,
2014 was Rs. 215.84 crore. MOIL Ltd. being a mining organisation,
while executing mining projects such as sinking/deepening of vertical
shafts, developmental works especially in underground mines, a number
of unforeseen difficulties have been experienced such as sudden in-
rush of water , encountering loose soil requiring additional concerting
than estimated, etc.; causing unavoidable delays to ensure safety and
are beyond human control. However , adequate precautions are being
taken to minimize these delays through proper planning and getting
expert opinions, wherever necessary.
The utilization of outlays earmarked for 12th Five Year Plan, that
a total amount of Rs. 105.00 crore was earmarked under IEBR for MSTC
for 12th Five Year Plan. The said amount comprised of Rs. 100.00 crore
for Auto Shredding Plant and Rs. 5.00 crore for Mining Development.
While the proposal for Mining Development expenditure has been
shelved, for Auto Shredding Plant, it has been decided to execute the
project under Joint Venture with a private party. Hence only an amount
of Rs. 0.35 crore could be spent on account of preparation of DPR for
the project so far. Under proposed JV , MSTC has to contribute only
Rs. 15.00 crore towards equity for its share of the total equity capital
of the proposed JV of Rs. 30.00 crore. An amount of Rs. 5.00 crore is
proposed to be spent during financial year 2014-15 and balance amount
of Rs. 10.00 crore is proposed to be spent during Financial Year 2015-16.
The plan outlay figure of Rs. 3080 crore was reviewed and due to
various constraints including inter-alia lack of raw material security
and adverse market conditions, the outlay was revised to Rs. 288.03 crore

17
by KIOCL Ltd. Since, major projects as envisaged while formulating the
Plan Outlay have not materialized, the actual expenditure achieved
till December, 2014 was Rs. 28.97 crore.
However , efforts are being made by KIOCL Ltd., for allotment of
mines in the State of Karnataka and effective utilization of resources
for instance KIOCL has entered into O&M contract with NMDC for
operating their upcoming pellet plant at Donimalai, Bellary Distt.,
Karnataka. An MoU was signed among KIOCL, APMDC and RINL in June,
2013 for exploration and exploitation of Memkal iron ore deposit in
Ananthapur Distt. of Andhra Pradesh.
Orissa Minerals Development Company Ltd. (OMDC) is engaged in
mining and marketing of Iron and Manganese Ore from its mines located
in district Keonjhar , Odisha. OMDC was allocated Brahmani Coal Block
by the Ministry of Coal, Government of India on 07.11.2013. OMDC and
Ministry of Steel are pursuing with Ministry of Coal for early execution
of agreement. The total plan outlay of OMDC Ltd. during 12th Five
Year Plan is Rs. 2055.28 crore. The underutilization of plan outlays is
due to suspension of mining operation and non-renewal of mining
leases.
Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited (BSLC) is engaged in the mining
and marketing of Limestone and Dolomite ore from its mines located
in district Sundargarh, Odisha. The mining operation was suspended
from 03.06.2014. The Government of Odisha has granted the permission
on 02.03.2015 for resumption of mining operation of BSLC. The total
plan outlay of BSLC during 12th Five Year Plan is Rs.40.00 crore. The
underutilization of plan outlays is due to suspension of Mining operation
and non-renewal of mines of BSLC.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
PRODUCTION OF STEEL
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee observe that during 2013 India was the 4th largest
producer of crude steel and recorded a growth of 5.1 per cent over
2012. Though India is reported to be amongst top 5 countries in
production of steel but the fact is that the current per capita
consumption of steel in the country is awfully 60 kg compared to the
world average of estimated 222 kg. The Committee further observe
that per capita consumption of steel has not grown much in the rural

18
areas and is currently 9.78 kg. only. The Committee were informed
that the Joint Plant Committee (JPC) constituted to assess the demand
for steel in rural India has assessed an increase of only about 3 kg. by
2020 i.e. the steel consumption in rural India is pegged at only 12 kg.
by then. A mere 3 kg. per capita increase in about six years is a
disappointing scenario. The Committee observe that Institute for Steel
Development and Growth (INSDAG), promoted by the Ministry of Steel
and Major Steel Producers of India has been operating for more than
a decade towards promotion of steel intensive structures in Indian
construction and infrastructural sectors. The Committee also note that
the Institute disseminates steel related information/knowledge through
seminars, workshops, publications, etc., to professionals and academics,
organize award competitions, explores and innovates new and better
avenues of steel usage and provides specialized consultancy. The
Committee, however , observe that despite various efforts made by
INSDAG to popularize steel consumption, no significant increase is
discernible in steel consumption in rural areas and recommend that
the Institute needs to step up its work and relocate the target areas
by focusing more on the rural areas where there is huge growth
potential. The Committee would like to be apprised of the necessary
steps taken by the Ministry of Steel/INSDAG to enhance steel
consumption in rural areas as enhancing the production and being the
4th world in steel production would be futile as the per capita steel
consumption is only 1/3rd of the world consumption of 222 kg.
Action Taken
1. India was the 4th largest producer of crude steel in 2014 as well
as in 2013 as per provisional data released by JPC and rankings released
by the World Steel Association (WSA).
2. Per capita consumption of total finished steel in India during
2013-14 was 59.2 Kg. The same is provisionally estimated to be around
59 kg. in April-December 2014-15 in view of the slowdown in domestic
steel demand during the current year. Compared to standards achieved
globally, the Indian per capita consumption of finished steel is considered
low. During 2013, the World Steel Association (WSA) shows that per
capita consumption of total finished steel was 219 kg. for world,
545 kg. for China, 517 kg. for Japan, 463 kg. for Germany and 301 kg.
for USA.
3. As desired by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal
and Steel on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Steel, the
Ministry of Steel carried out a Study through the Joint Plant Committee
(JPC) to assess the demand for steel in rural India.

19
4. The Study had assessed average per capita consumption of
finished steel in rural India at 9.78 kg. during the period 2007 to 2009
which was expected to increase to around 12-14 kg. in 2019-20 based
on increased rural penetration of steel products.
5. The Study had also made recommendations for enhancing the
consumption of steel in rural India such as shift in type of housing
structure, re-looking steel designs for various applications, investment
in community structures, small and medium steel products
manufacturing, highlighting advantages of steel, increasing aesthetics
of steel, improving logistics and supply chain for steel and addressing
steel quality issues.
6. To implement the recommendations of the Study, the Ministry
of Steel has constituted a ‘Monitoring Committee ’ under the
chairmanship of Joint Secretary to Government of India and comprising
of representatives from SAIL, RINL, Ministry of Steel, JPC and INSDAG.
7. Institute for Steel Development and Growth (INSDAG) has
organized steel campaign in rural areas by training the masons/local
engineers on the benefits of steel usage and to promote best practices
using reinforcement bars.
INSDAG has successfully conducted Masons Training in 29 rural
locations covering 6 States till date:—
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 (Target)
No. of Programmes 14 24 30
In Association with Tata Steel, Tata Steel, Tata Steel,
RINL SAIL SAIL, RINL
Total No. of Mason/ 625 927 1000
Contractors trained
8. INSDAG organizes Entrepreneurs-cum-Skill Development
Programme (ESDP) for rural/semi-urban areas under MSME scheme to
make rural entrepreneurs as steel fabricators of various household
items like tables, chairs, furniture, racks, sheds, storage bins, fencing,
etc. INSDAG selects about 30 potential entrepreneurs through paper
advertisement/other means in consultation with the sponsoring agency
to conduct 3-weeks training programme (theoretical and hands-on
training) to enable the entrepreneurs to acquire skill in steel fabrication.
INSDAG also prepares the Detailed Project Report (DPR) to enable
them to register with DIC as well as in PMEGP and submit the same

20
to the banks through KVIC. INSDAG also identifies the machinery and
equipments required for setting up the facility and also selects the
products having demand in the market. Once the entrepreneurs sets
up the fabrication facility it will not only lead to increase steel
consumption in an around the village but also lead to employment and
income generation of the people. The ready availability of steel
fabrication facility would make the rural people aware of steel use.
9. INSDAG has developed and constructed a prototype rural house
of 200 sq.ft. at a remote village at Burdwan, West Bengal. The building
uses Steel frames and Ferro-cement Panels for roofing and cladding.
10. Encouraged by the effectiveness of this technology, Government
of Tripura has assigned INSDAG to construct similar buildings near
Khumlung Village (tribal) near Agartala under ICDS schemes which has
since been completed.
11. INSDAG carried out the Feasibility Study of Cluster Development
on fabrication and also prepares Diagnostic Study Report (DSR) as well
as provides expert service for Cluster Development by the Group of
Entrepreneurs.
12. Ministry of Steel has written to the Ministry of Rural Development
to give wide publicity for the design developed by INSDAG among the
various States which are implementing construction of rural houses
under the Government of India schemes. Ministry of Steel has also
written to all the PSUs under our administrative control and the Private
Sector Steel Plants to consider development of model steel villages in
rural areas under their CSR activities.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
As regards the Rural Dealership Programme of SAIL and RINL, the
Committee feel that instead of operating individual Rural Dealership
programmes both the companies should take up rural dealership
programmes as a Joint Venture and make combined efforts to make
deep inroads into the rural area in the entire country. The Committee
also recommend that a Joint Committee consisting of Directors from
both PSUs should be appointed to look into this aspect. The Committee
feel that a joint effort would go a long way in revising the projected
per capita rural consumption of 12 kg. to atleast 25 kg. by 2020. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the joint effort made by SAIL
& RINL to target coverage of rural areas in the entire country.

21
Action Taken
A meeting of Director (Commercial), SAIL & Director (Commercial),
RINL was held at New Delhi on 4th Feb 15 to discuss the issue.
Inter-alia, it was decided that since both the PSUs are independent
Corporate identities and manage their marketing network independently,
operating Rural Dealership programmes jointly may not be feasible.
However , joint efforts will be made by both the organizations to
undertake activities which promote and propagate increased usage of
steel with particular emphasis on rural areas. A joint task of officers
at GM level in both the organization has been set up to implement the
decisions taken in this regard. The progress, however , will be monitored
periodically by both the Directors.
Further, RINL gives utmost importance for promotion of steel
consumption in rural areas. With a view to making the Rural Dealership
Scheme (RDS) more effective, RINL revisited the scheme in 2014-15
and implemented a revised scheme. Special efforts like issuing
advertisements for appointment of rural dealers in different regions
are carried out. RINL also issued advertisement in its website
www.vizagsteel.com for appointment of Rural Dealers. Interested
entrepreneurs can approach the Branch Sales Office of RINL in the
respective areas for appointment as Rural Dealers. The procedure for
appointment of Rural dealers is also very simple. Up to December,
2014 RINL has a total number of 453 Rural Dealers.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
DECLINE IN PROFIT OF SAIL
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee are concerned to note the continuous declining
trend in the profitability of SAIL year after year since 2009. From
2009-10 to 2013-14, the Profit After Tax (PAT) of SAIL was Rs. 6754
crore (2009-10), Rs. 4905 crore (2010-11), Rs. 3543 crore (2011-12),
Rs. 2170 crore (2012-13) and Rs. 2616 crore (2013-14). The Committee
are unhappy to note the decline in profit by more than Rs. 4000 crore
in 2013-14 as compared to that in 2009-10. Though, in 2013-14 there
has been a marginal increase in PAT as compared to that in 2012-13,
the Committee feel that a serious brain storming is required on the
part of SAIL management. Even the massive capacity addition through

22
Modernization and Expansion Programme of SAIL has not been translated
into increase in the profits of the company. The Committee feel that
SAIL management needs to rebuild a strategy to improve production,
efficiency by giving attention to proper maintenance/repair and upkeep
of equipments, introduction of new technology and cost cutting
measures. The Committee feel that SAIL being a premier Steel PSU of
the Government, immediate steps should be taken to reverse this
declining trend of profitability. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken by the Government/SAIL to increase the profitability
of the company.
Action Taken
Plan for 2015-16 envisages following which will help in increasing
production and profits of SAIL:—
• Proposed production of 14.54 MT of saleable steel with a
growth of 11% over 2014-15 (likely).
• Proposed production of 5.67 MT of value added steel with a
growth of 7% over 2014-15 (likely).
• Proposed production of 11.0 MT of crude steel through energy
efficient concast route with a growth of 7% over 2014-15
(likely).
In addition, measures are as under being taken by SAIL to arrest
the fall in profits:
1. Close interaction and meetings with Plants/Units to reduce
cost and improve revenue in various areas of operations.
2. All Plants/Units have been advised to focus on operating as
well as on non-operating areas to improve the profitability
position of the Company. In addition to improvement in
production, sales, product-mix and value added products,
techno-economic parameters, the following are the other
areas for profitability improvement:—
• Maximizing production through modern and energy
efficient new units.
• Enriching product mix by developing new products.
• Increase usage of Coal Dust injection in Blast Furnaces
thereby reducing the BF Coke consumption.
• Maximizing production through the energy and cost
effective Concast route.

23
• Reduction in specific water consumption.
• Identification and sale of idle assets.
• Maximizing sales of coal chemicals, by-products and
secondary steel.
• Identification and closure of uneconomic activities.
• Waste utilisation/Management.
• Maximizing utilisation of engineering shops and replacing
purchased items.
• Strict control on demurrage expenses.
• Reduction in procurement cost through strict monitoring.
• Thrust on cost control, through dedicated cost control
groups at plants.
Further , Steel Authority of India Ltd. has undertaken Modernisation
& Expansion of its integrated steel plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela,
Durgapur & ISP and special steel plant at Salem. SAIL envisages increase
in its crude steel production capacity from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.4 Mtpa in
the current phase. The indicative investment for the current phase is
Rs.61,870 crore. Besides, a provision of Rs.10,264 crore has been made
towards investment in existing mines under Raw Materials Division
(RMD) & development of Rowghat mine.The Expansion Plan of SAIL,
besides capacity enhancement, adequately addresses the need of SAIL
Plants towards eliminating technological obsolescence, energy savings,
enriching product mix, pollution control, developing mines & collieries
to meet higher requirement of key inputs, introduce customer centric
processes and have matching infrastructure facilities in the Plant to
support higher production volumes.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
MODERNIZATION & EXPANSION PROGRAMME OF SAIL
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
In order to maintain predominance in the steel sector and to
remain globally competitive, SAIL had drawn up a Modernisation &
Expansion Plan for its five integrated steel plants and special steels
plants including raw material resources and other related facilities.
The Committee note that the modernization and expansion programme
of plants of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL) viz. IISCO Steel Plant (ISP),

24
Salem Steel Plant (SSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL), Bhilai Steel Plant
(BSP) and Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) was approved in principle by SAIL
Board between June, 2006 to July, 2007. Apart from increasing the
production capacity, the plan envisaged to address the vital issues of
elimination of technological obsolescence, installing energy efficient &
environment friendly technologies, value addition/product–mix
improvement/sustenance of existing assets of the plants and
introduction of customer–centric processes such as Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) and Manufacturing Execution System (MES). The
Committee have been informed that upgradation of existing facilities
at steel plants was necessary to meet the stringent quality requirements
of the customers and to remain cost competitive. SAIL had planned a
expenditure of about Rs. 70,000 crore for modernization/expansion
and sustenance schemes of existing Plants/Units, including Rs. 10,000
crore for development of raw material facilities. The source of funding
of modernization & expansion plan of SAIL was to be done through a
combination of debt & equity (including internal resources) while
maintaining debt-equity ratio of 1:1. The Committee note that till
date an amount of Rs. 53270 crore has been spent on ‘Modernization
and Expansion Programme ’ of SAIL. The original target for completion
of modernization and expansion of plants of SAIL was between June,
2010 to March, 2013. Owing to buoyancy in the steel industry, the
timeline for implementation of different packages was initially
compressed to 2010. However , as per the revised targets, the plants
of SAIL were to be commissioned between August, 2010 to December,
2012. The Committee note that these targets have been revised many
times and fresh targets were set. Though the Committee feel that
there may be unforeseen factors which are beyond the control of SAIL
management which have led to this delay, but the management cannot
altogether absolve itself for the delay. On review of the progress of
individual units, the Committee come across various constraints such
as dismal performance of civil contractors leading to fresh order
placement, slow progress of work, high prices offered by the only
bidder, delay in supply of equipment, delay in design engineering, civil
and structural works, retendering of balance work, inadequate resource
mobilization etc. As each SAIL unit is reportedly facing some or the
other major problems, the Committee recommend that Ministry/SAIL
should take immediate corrective measures and overcome all the major
constraints and would also like to be apprised of the present target
fixed for completion of modernization and expansion of plants by the
company.

25
Action Taken
The Modernisation & Expansion Plan envisages increase in capacity
of crude steel from 12.8 Mtpa to 21.40 Mtpa. The plant-wise progress
is as under:—
IISCO Steel Plant
All facilities under the integrated process route are in operation,
stabilization and ramp-up.
Rourkela Steel Plant
All new facilities under the integrated process route are in
operation, stabilization and ramp-up.
Durgapur Steel Plant
The operation has started from completed facilities viz. Re-building
of Coke Oven Battery-2, Ladle Furnace, Bloom-cum-Round Caster. The
balance facility of Medium Structural Mill (1.0 Mtpa) is planned to be
completed in 2015.
Bokaro Steel Plant
The operation has started from completed facilities viz. Upgraded
Blast Furnace No. 2, Rebuilt Coke Oven Batteries No. 1, Rebuilt Coke
Oven Batteries No. 2 and New 1.2 MTPA Cold Rolling Mill. For the
balance facility of Upgradation of Hot Strip Mill, 95% offline erection
completed. The shutdown of the Mill is planned in next fiscal in the
month of May, 2015 and after that upgradation work will be taken.
Bhilai Steel Plant
The operation has started from completed facilities viz. New Coke
Oven Battery, Sinter Machine in SP-3, Ore Handling Plant and Oxygen
Plant on BOO basis. The balance facilities viz. Blast Furnace (4060 m
3),
Bar & Rod Mill (0.9 Mtpa), Universal Rail Rolling Mill (1.2 Mtpa) and
Steel Melting Shop–III (4.0 Mtpa) are in progress. The balance facilities
are planned to be completed in 2015.
In order to arrest delays in implementation of Modernisation &
Expansion Plan and also exercise greater control over defaulting parties,
number of corrective actions have been/are being taken by SAIL which
include Issue of Risk Purchase Notices (RPNs), encashment of
Performance Bank Guarantee, Enforcing stricter penalty clauses, like

26
Liquidated Damages (LD) for delay in completion of facilities/non-
fulfilment of Performance Guarantee Parameters, etc. Also, in case of
poor performance of Public Sector Units like HEC, BHEL, EPIL, Bridge
& Roof etc., the issue of their sub-optimal performance has been
taken up by the Ministry of Steel with their respective Ministries at the
highest level.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
PERFORMANCE OF RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee observe a continuous decline in the income and
profit of RINL during the last 3 years. During 2011-12, the income of
RINL was Rs. 14898.58 crore which got reduced to Rs. 14020.70 crore
in 2012-13. Again, during 2013-14, the income further declined to
Rs. 13739.34 crore. Similarly, the Profit After Tax of RINL which was
Rs. 751.46 crore in 2011-12 got reduced to Rs. 352.83 crore in
2012-13 which is even less than half of the earlier profit. Though,
during 2013-14 there was a slight increase in company profit which
was Rs. 359.18 crore, the Committee are concerned to note the lower
profit target set at Rs. 292.26 crore by RINL for the year 2014-15. With
the completion of capacity expansion plan of RINL, the Committee
expect that the company should have fixed higher target of profitability
during 2014-15. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
steps taken by the Government/RINL to overcome the problems faced
like fall in net sale realization due to market conditions, increase in
iron ore prices, fall in prices of imported coal which was offset by
rupee depreciation, increase in railway freight without commensurate
increase in prices, etc.
Action Taken
The target of Rs. 292.26 crore for Profit After Tax for the year
2014-15 was set keeping in view the impact of estimated increase in
depreciation and interest expenses. A provision of Rs. 550 crore was
made for depreciation for 2014-15 as against the actual depreciation
of Rs. 271 crore in the year 2013-14. Similarly, a provision of Rs. 580
crore was made for interest for 2014-15 as against the actual interest
of Rs. 338 crore in the year 2013-14.

27
Some of the initiatives taken to improve the Sales realizations
are:—
• Enriching Product mix in line with Customers requirement.
• Developing new products as per customer requests.
• Market mix changes by increasing sales in Higher Net Sales
Realization (NSR) regions like Andhra Pradesh, Telangana &
Southern regions.
• Thrust on Exports for reducing pressure in Domestic market.
To mitigate the impact of variation in the prices of iron ore
(especially increase), RINL has applied for mining leases in various
States. RINL has been allotted Banera Iron Ore block in Bhilwara district
of Rajasthan. Mining Plan has been submitted to Indian Bureau of
Mines. Matter regarding obtaining various clearances is being pursued
regularly. Further , RINL has also requested the Ministry of Mines to
consider RINL for empanelment to carry out exploration works of good
Iron Ore mines, in line with the relevant provisions of the MMDR Act,
2015.
To secure captive coal mines, RINL has submitted applications to
Ministry of Coal for allocation of 4 thermal coal blocks in Angul, Talcher
coalfields, Odisha. i.e. Bramanbil, Karadabahal, Phuljhari East and
Phulajhari West. Matter is being pursued with Ministry of Coal. Ministry
of Steel has also taken up with Ministry of Coal for allotment of Coking
and Thermal Coal Blocks to RINL, preferably in Odisha and Jharkhand.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
MODERNIZATION & EXPANSION PLAN OF RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that RINL has almost completed the first
phase of 6.3 mtpa expansion, with many units already operational for
over a year. The Committee have been informed that Blast Furnace
commissioned under this phase has already produced more than 3.6 Mt
of hot metal and other major units commissioned and put into operation
include the Oxygen Plant, Turbo Blower-4, Raw Material Handling Plant,
Sinter Plant, Steel Melt Shop-2, Wire Rod Mill-2 & several auxiliary
systems, viz. water, power & utility systems. The last major unit under
Stage-1 i.e., Calcining & Refractory Material Plant (CRMP) was planned
to be commissioned by October, 2014. Stage-2 of 6.3 mtpa Expansion

28
includes installation of Special Bar Mill (SBM) and Structural Mill (STM).
In both the mills, major equipment erection has been completed.
Rolling in both SBM & STM was likely to commence from December,
2014/January, 2015. The Committee also note that RINL had received
a setback during the hot trial runs of Convertor at SMS-2 on 13.06.12
as there was an unfortunate incident of explosion at new Pressure
Reducing Station resulting in 19 fatal cases. Furthermore, two engineers
of a private agency died while carrying out inspection job in a container
laboratory at the RINL Plant pushing back the commissioning schedules
of Expansion plan of the Company. The Committee are concerned to
note such accidents at RINL Plant in 2012 and 2014 and recommend
that the Government/RINL should take necessary steps for ensuring
adequate safety of the workforce and apprise them of the action taken
thereon on the recommendations of enquiry reports on these accidents.
Action Taken
Major units of stage-1 have been commissioned and are under
regular operation. The balance units under Stage-2 i.e., Special Bar
Mill and Structural Mill were planned for commissioning in December,
2014. However , due to devastating cyclone “HUDHUD” in October , 2014,
these were impacted and commissioning rescheduled.
Safety is accorded highest and top priority in RINL and adequate
measures are being taken for the safety of the workforce.
Recommendations given by various Investigation Committees have been
implemented and ensured for compliance, as per the details given
below:
Inquiry Committees have been constituted on occurrence of
accidents/mishaps by the Management of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. In
serious accident cases high level inquiry is ordered by the Ministry in
addition to the plant level inquiry and inquiry ordered by the State
Government/Local authorities. The findings of the Committees include
causes of such accidents and recommendations for preventing
recurrences etc. The recommendations of the inquiry committees are
implemented, monitored and reviewed at appropriate levels in plants/
units. Various measures taken to strengthen the safety mechanism
include, inter alia, the following:
i. Review of Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment Training
programme has been conducted by Director Safety, Regional
Labour Institute, Chennai, and DGFASLI in October 2012.
ii. Comprehensive safety audit has been conducted by Regional
Labour Institute, Chennai, DGFASLI (Directorate General,
Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes) in July 2012.

29
iii. Mock-drills as per the emergency plan conducted periodically.
iv. Automatic gas leak detection alarm in critical and gas prone
areas provided.
v. Spreading safety awareness through training programmes and
workshops.
vi. Enforcing usage of job specific personal protective equipment.
vii. Conducting special training programmes on Behavioural Based
Safety and Legal awareness.
viii. Training programme conducted on ‘Prevention of Fire in
Oxygen’ enriched systems etc.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee while acknowledging another unfortunate incident
faced by RINL during recent cyclone resulting in stoppage of electricity
supply to RINL Plant by AP TRANSCO (Transmission Corporation of Andhra
Pradesh). This had led to decrease in temperature of Coke Oven Battery
& Blast Furnace. During evidence on 16.10.2014, the Committee were
informed that electricity to the plant would be restored after 2-3 days
and the Plant would be functional to its original capacity after about
3-4 weeks of restoration of power. The Committee desire that all out
efforts should be made to bring the plant back to its original capacity
as soon as possible and thereafter, RINL should resume with its plan
of enhancement of capacity.
Action Taken
With the intervention of Government of Andhra Pradesh and
Government of India, emergency power supply to the Plant was restored
on 16th October , 2014. All the major units were restarted progressively
by 2nd November, 2014. However , as the Blast Furnaces and Converters
in Steel Melt Shop had undergone severe thermal shocks, they had to
be carefully nurtured to return to normal levels of operation.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]

30
CONSTRAINTS FACED BY RINL
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee observe that the issue of allotment of coal blocks
to RINL has been pending since long and they have time and again
recommended for allotment of coal blocks to RINL. The Committee
are, however , unhappy to note that not much progress has been made
in the matter so far. The Committee have now been informed that
4 Coking Coal blocks have been identified by Ministry of Coal, for
allocation to Public Sector Steel Industries. Secretary, Ministry of Steel
had written to Secretary (Coal) for allotment of Aluara and Parbatpur
North mines preferably to RINL, but Ministry of Coal is yet to finalise
modalities for the same. The Committee have also been given to
understand that besides coking coal mines, RINL had also applied for
coal mines for thermal power generation. Applications have been filed
for 3 thermal coal blocks in Andhra Pradesh on 28.10.2005, 3 non-
coking coal blocks, one each in Odisha, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh on
30.01.2013 and 4 more thermal coal blocks on 09.01.2014 in Angul,
Talcher Coalfields, Odisha i.e. Brahmanbil, Karadabahal, Phulajhari
East and Phulajhari West Coal Mines. The Committee are apprehensive
of allocation of these coal blocks to RINL after the recent orders of
Hon’ble Supreme Court for de-allocation of coal blocks. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the new initiatives taken and present
status of allocation of the above referred coal blocks to RINL.
Action Taken
Coal blocks earmarked earlier
RINL had submitted applications to Ministry of Coal on 09-01-2014
for four (4) thermal coal blocks in Angul, Talcher coalfields, Odisha.
i.e. Bramanbil, Karadabahal, Phuljhari East and Phulajhari West. Matter
is being pursued with Ministry of Coal.
Coal blocks cancelled
Ministry of Coal has brought out Coal Mines (Special Provision)
Ordinance, 2014 for Auction and Allotment of 204 Coal Mines/Blocks
cancelled by the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court. Ministry of Coal has
been requested for allotment of at least one or two Coking Coal and
Thermal Coal blocks in favour of RINL out of the blocks earmarked for
PSUs by Ministry of Coal.
Ministry of Steel has also taken up with Ministry of Coal for allotment
of Coking and Thermal Coal Blocks to RINL, preferably in Odisha and
Jharkhand.

31
RINL is taking actions for securing some coal blocks through auction
process also.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee also acknowledge that the plan of RINL for expansion
of its capacity upto 20 Million Tonnes is being hampered due to lack
of raw material security. Being the only Public Sector Steel Plant
without captive iron ore mines till now, RINL has been incurring about
60% of expenditure on raw material while other major producers are
incurring 31-44% cost on raw material. The Committee are, however,
happy to note that RINL will soon start work on developing its low
grade iron ore mines in Bhilwara District of Rajasthan. In this regard,
a Letter of Intent (LoI) has already been received from the Rajasthan
Government. This will be the first captive mine for RINL as so far the
company has sourced iron ore from NMDC. The Committee have been
further informed that Phase-I exploration of Banera Iron ore Block by
M/s. MECL is in progress and is scheduled to be completed by June,
2015. Government of Rajasthan is being followed up to obtain various
clearances in respect of Banera iron ore block and for providing
infrastructure facilities for the project. In the meantime, the Committee
recommend that RINL should continue to pursue allotment of more
iron ore blocks to ensure that it gets raw material for its expanded
capacity of 20 Million Tonnes.
Action Taken
Mining Plan has been submitted to Indian Bureau of Mines on
06.01.2015 for approval in respect of Banera Block Iron Ore mines in
Bhilwara District of Rajasthan. Matter regarding obtaining various
clearances is being pursued regularly.
Iron Ore mine applications: As per the MMDR Amendment Ordinance,
2015, all the applications received prior to the Ordinance are ineligible.
Further , Government of Rajasthan has recommended allotment of
iron ore blocks to RINL (VSP) in Jahajpur of Bhilwara District and sent
the recommendation to Ministry of Mines, Government of India. The
matter is being followed up with the State Government of Rajasthan
and Government of India.

32
RINL has requested the Ministry of Mines to consider RINL for
empanelment to carry out exploration works of good Iron Ore mines,
in line with the relevant provisions of the MMDR Act 2015.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
PERFORMANCE OF NMDC
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee note that after merger of Sponge Iron India Limited
with NMDC in the year 2010-11, NMDC has entered in the field of
manufacturing “Sponge iron”. While reviewing the physical performance
of NMDC, the Committee observe that there has been a continuous
decline in the production and sale of sponge iron. Against 37237.40
MTs of sponge iron produced in 2011-12 production got reduced to
36289 MTs in 2012-13. During 2013-14, the production further declined
to 29734 MTs. Similarly, against the sale of 33731.79 MTs and 37600 MTs
of sponge iron in 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively, only 30572 MTs of
sponge iron was sold during 2013-14. Regarding this, the Committee
were informed that there were major problems with the DR (Direct
Reduction) Plant, and it was not operational for many days during
2011-12, 2012-13 and was shut down for about 3 months during 2014
due to major maintenance works. Moreover, the declining trend of
sponge iron production was also reported to be due to subdued market
demand, lack of sufficient raw materials, etc. In view of the foregoing,
the Committee would like to be apprised of the current demand of
sponge iron in the country vis-à-vis the total production and the steps
taken to make available sufficient raw material for sponge iron
production.
Action Taken
The sponge iron industry in the country is currently operating at
less than 50% capacity owing to higher input cost and poor demand,
falling Sponge iron prices to almost their lowest levels, import of
scrap, higher freight cost, increase in power tariff etc. During the last
3 years, the production of sponge iron of the country has been

33
decreasing inspite of having good installation capacity as seen from
following table:—
Year Installed Capacity Production of Sponge Iron
(in million T) (in million T)
2011-12 36.30 24.98
2012-13 45.23 23.01
2013-14 45.34 22.87
Source: JPC
Even though imported scraps is expensive compared to Sponge
Iron, Secondary Steel Plants prefer to use it, since the percentage of
yield works out to be higher which eventually nullifies the high cost
imported scarp.
Sponge Iron Unit (SIU), NMDC is also facing the similar problems as
faced by sponge iron industry of the whole country. During the current
year of FY 2014-15 (April 2014-December 2014), the production and
sale of sponge iron by SIU, NMDC is as follows:—
Year Production Sale
(in metric tonnes) (in metric tonnes)
2014-15 (April, 14-Dec. 2014) 21820.53 21206.38
It could be seen from the above that the sponge production is in
sync with sale keeping in view of poor demand, falling sponge iron
prices. However, there is no dearth of availability of raw material (iron
& coal) for sponge iron production for SIU, NMDC. But due to subdued
market demand and lower sponge iron prices, the sponge unit is
currently operating at reduced capacity.
In fact, the sponge iron production in Andhra Pradesh (Undivided)
has decreased to 0.25 million tonnes in FY 2013-14 from 0.47 million
tonnes during FY 2012-14 indicating poor demand of sponge iron in
Andhra Pradesh (Undivided).
At NMDC Limited Sponge Iron Unit suitable steps were taken and
now there is stock of Raw Materials i.e. Iron Ore Coal and Dolomite
to meet consumption for three Months. Sufficient stocks of product
(Sponge Iron) are available due to depleted off-take.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]

34
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee also note that the original date of commissioning
of the 3.0 Mtpa Integrated Steel Plant at Nagarnar , Chhattisgarh which
was approved in March, 2011 was February, 2015. This was later
rescheduled for May, 2015. Now, the Committee have been informed
that the likely date of commissioning of the plant is December , 2016
as the environmental clearance for the construction of steel plant
from the Ministry of Environment & Forest has been received, stage II
Forest Clearance for certain matters is still pending. Out of the approved
project cost of Rs. 15525 crore, Rs. 4230.52 crore has already been
expended. The Committee desire that though the date of completion
of the project has been rescheduled twice, Ministry of Steel/NMDC
should ensure that no further delay occurs in the matter and
environmental clearance for the same be obtained expeditiously.
Action Taken
NMDC has been constructing 3.0 MTPA Integrated Steel Plant at
Nagarnar , Chhattisgarh with likely date of commissioning as December,
2016. In order to ensure that there is no further delay in commissioning
of steel plant, Ministry of Steel holds regular review meetings on
progress made in Nagarnar Steel Plant with NMDC Ltd.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No.H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee also note that NMDC is also in the process of
expanding its business through integration in both Greenfield and
Brownfield projects by setting up a 2 MTPA pellet plant in Chhattisgarh,
a 1.2 MTPA Pellet plant at Donimalai in Karnataka and a 0.36 MTPA
Bended Haematite Jeshpar (BHJ) ore beneficiation plant at Donimalai.
NMDC has also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with
RINL for setting up a joint venture project under which a pellet plant
of 6 MTPA capacity would be set up at Visakhapatnam and an
underground pipeline of 336 kms. would be laid from Nagarnar to
Visakhapatnam. The Committee has also been informed that NMDC is
contemplating a major expansion to meet the demand of iron ore. The
Committee would like NMDC to prepare an action plan for the early
commissioning of the Greenfield and Brownfield projects and they may
be apprised in this regard.

35
Action Taken
Action Plan for the early commissioning of the Greenfield and
Expansion Projects
Sl. Name of the Approved/ Scheduled/ Status of the Project
No. Modernisation & Estimated/ Expected
Expansion Projects awarded cost Completion
of the project
1 234 5
New Mine Opening
1. Bailadila Iron Ore Rs. 607.17 March-2015 90% of the total work is
Deposit 11B , (approved on completed.
Chhattisgarh 16.05.2008)
(capacity-7 MTPA)
2. Kumaraswamy Iron Rs. 898.55 Aug.- 2015 75% of the total work is
Ore Project, (Approved on completed.
Karnataka 26.11.2010)
(Capacity-7 MTPA)
3. Bailadila Deposit–4 1899.74 cr. Production Plan • Government of CG issued
(7 MTPA Capacity) (As per TEFR • FY 17-18–2 MTPA LOI mentioning precise
(This project will prepared in • FY 18-19-3 MTPA area on 12.01.2012. IBM,
be developed by 2010) • FY 19-20-6 MTPA Nagpur approved Mining
JV Company i.e. • FY 20-21-7 MTPA Plan on 26.07.2013.
NMDC-CMDC • En vironment Clearance
Limited) (EC): EC application
applied on 06.03.2014 to
MoEF . On 12.08.2014
issued ToR, preparation of
EIA/EMP is under process.
• Forest Clearance (FC):- FC
application submitted to
PCCF , Raipur on
30.03.2013 for an area of
741.726 Ha. State Forest
Department asked to
submit FC application
excluding tree fern area;
the same is under
preparation for submission
to forest department.

36
4. Bailadila deposit–13 2194.42 cr. Production Plan • Government of CG issued
(10 MTPA Capacity) (as per TEFR • FY 16-17-2 MTPA LOI mentioning precise
(This deposit will prepared in • FY 17-18-3 MTPA area on 08.10.2007. IBM,
be developed by 2009) • FY 18-19-5 MTPA Nagpur approved Mining
NMDC–CMDC Ltd. • FY 19-20-9 MTPA Plan on 12.09.2008.
(NCL) • FY 20-21-10 MTPA • En vironment Clearance
(EC): EC process
completed but clearance
letter is kept in abeyance
for want of forest
clearance. After getting
first stage forest
clearance on 12.11.2014,
NMDC vide letter dated
15.11.2014 requested for
grant of EC order. The
issue is pending with
MoEF .
• Forest Clearance (FC):
Stage-I forest clearance
obtained on 12.11.2014,
compliance report for
Stage-II forest clearance
is under preparation.
Expansions
1. Installation of Rs. 16.40 cr . June-2015 Engineering & Major Supplies
4th line in existing (Awarded on are completed. Site const-
screening plant of 04.10.2012) ruction work in progress.
Bailadila deposit
10/11A, Bacheli,
Chhattisgarh (For
augmentation of
production from
5 to 7 MTPA
from deposit
10/11A at
Bacheli)
2. Construction of Rs. 399.75 cr. Aug.-2018 • Appointment of EPCM
Screening & (Approved by Consultant is under
Beneficiation Board on process.
Plant–II at 28.11.2014.) • The project is planned to
Donimalai, be completed by Aug. 2018
1 234 5

37
Karnataka • Submitted Forest
Objective: To clearance application
process iron through online portal on
ore from both 13.12.2014. The same is
KIOM & DIOM pending with Nodal
(10 MTPA) O fficer, Forest Dept.,
Aranya Bhavan, and
Bangalore.
3. Refurbishment of To be finalised To be finalised after Finalisation of facilities for
Screening plant-1 the finalisation of capacity expansion of
at Kirandul f acilities K irandul Complex is under
deposit-14 along study.
with other related
works. Objective:
For Augmentation
of production
from 5 to 7 MTPA
4. Screening Plant-III Rs. 951 cr. Scheduled completion • The EPCM consultancy
at Kirandul (Approved by period is 36 months work is awarded.
Complex, Board on from zero date (zero • The project is divided into
Chhattisgarh. 29.05.2009) date yet to be 07 packages. 04 packages
Objective: For finalised) w ere tendered and
Augmentation of subsequently the tenders
production from were cancelled due to non-
12 MTPA to availability of clearances.
19 MTPA • Stage-1 Forest Clearance
is obtained on 17.01.2012
from MoEF .
• Final stage Forest
Clearance is pending with
MoEF , New Delhi from
10.12.2014.
• Tree felling permission is
pending with DFO
Dantewada, Chhattisgarh.
5. a. Construction Rs. 16.48 cr. Sept. , 2017 • Scheme for both the
of 5th line in (Estimated works is finalised.
the existing cost as on • Tree felling permission is
screening plant Oct.-14) to be obtained from
of Deposit-5 at Government of CG.
Bacheli
1 234 5

38
b. Upgradation of Rs. 48.23 cr.
downhill (Estimated
conveyor system cost as on
of Deposit-5 at Oct.-14)
Bacheli
Objective: For
Augmentation of
production from
8 to 10 MTPA
from Deposit-5
at Bacheli
6. New crushing ———— Feb. , 2019 • Board has accorded in
plant & Downhill principle approval to
conveyor system initiate action for seeking
of Bld-14 in statutory clearances on
Kirandul (7 MTPA) 06.01.2014.
• Process of obtaining
necessary clearances from
various statutory autho-
rities for 5 MTPA capacity
plant have been initiated.
• Proposal requires change
in land use plan of
Bailadila Deposit-14
mining lease. These
changes have been
incorporated in the FC
application submitted for
obtaining clearance for
renewal of ML for Deposit-
14, due in Sept., 15. All
the formalities as per the
check list including Gram
Sabha resolution and
Collector certificate
under FRA 2006 submitted
to DFO, Dantewada on
28.11.2014. DFO recomm-
ended and forwarded the
proposal to CCF , Jagdalpur
on 30.12.2014.
1 234 5

39
• However , as suitable
parallel action is to be
initiated for getting
required clearances/
permission for operating
the mine & plant at
10 MTPA capacity as per
growth plan. For this
following DPRs it to be
prepared.
√ DPR for modified mine
plan, Heavy earth
moving machinery,
mine infrastructure,
crushing plant and
downhill conveying
system.
√ DPR for additional
TCP , Lump stacking,
reclaiming and loading
facility
√ DPR for refurbishment
of SP-1
√ DPR for new rail
siding/yard.
• A proposal for engaging
EPCM consultants for
implementation of growth
plan is in progress.
• The proposal for
appointment of EIA
consultant have been
approved by C/A.
7. 5th Screening line Rs. 24.61 cr. July, 2017 The Engineering scheme is
in SP-II in Kirandul (Estimated finalised including the
complex Objective: cost under estimated project cost. The
To process 1.5 to finance same is under process of
2.0 MTPA ore from vetting) approval of C/A.
deposit 11B initially
& after wards it
will process
10 MTPA ore from
Deposit-11C.
1 234 5

40
Modernisation
1. 1.2 MTPA Pellet Rs. 572 cr. June, 2015 94% of the total work is
Plant at Donimalai, (Approved on completed. The operational
Karnataka 29.05.2009) power supply line to plant is
(Objective of the held up due to forest
project is value clearance. The file is
addition of Slimes presently with RFO, Sandur,
& fines and to Karnataka.
prolong the life
of Tailing Dam
at Donimalai
Iron Ore Mines)
Diversification
1. 3.0 MTPA Rs. 15525 cr. Dec., 2016 • M ajor Technological
Integrated Steel (approved on Packages (09) Nos. All the
Plant at Nagarnar , 07.01.2010) 09 Major Technological
Chhattisgarh packages are awarded.
Civil work, structural
erection and equipment
erection work is
progressing at site except
for Lime & Dolomite
Plant.
• Auxiliary packages
(26 Nos.) Out of the Total
26 packages, 07 Nos. are
awarded, tenders issued
for 10 nos. of packages
(05 Nos. are under
different stages of tender
evaluation & 05 nos. of
tenders yet to be opened)
and remaining 09
packages are under
different stages of tender
document finalisation.
• Infrastructure Packages
(15 Nos.) Out of the Total
15 packages, tenders
1 234 5

41
issued for 05 Nos. of
packages (05 Nos. are
under tender evaluation)
and remaining 11
packages are under
different stages of tender
document finalisation.
• Enabling Packages
(11 Nos.) Out of the Total
11 packages, 08 Nos. of
packages are awarded (05
Nos. completed & 03 Nos.
Nearing completion),
tenders issued for 02 No.
of packages (01 pkg.
under Tender evaluation &
01 yet to be opened) and
remaining 02 packages are
under different stages of
tender document
finalisation.
• Railway Siding Packages
(05 Nos.)
➢ DPR of Railway siding is
approved by E. Co.
Railway.
➢ Diversion plan approved
by E. Co. Railway.
➢ Out of the Total 05
packages, tenders issued
for 02 no. of packages
(01 under tender
evaluation & one yet to
be opened) and remaining
02 packages are under
different stages of tender
document finalisation.
One No. package to be
executed by NHAI on
deposit basis.
2. Slurry Pipeline Total Capex is March, 2018 on • Detailed Route survey of
Project Rs. 10000 cr. obtaining all statutory Pipeline corridor for first
1. Slurry Pipeline (proposed) clearances and land phase of implementation
1 234 5

42
Project which will The first for Right of use/Right for laying Slurry Pipeline
be owned and phase of of Way for laying between Bacheli &
executed by NMDC Implementation Slurry pipeline and Nagarnar and Water
is as below: will involve a water pipeline by Pipeline from River Sabri,
(i) Ore Capex of Oct., 2015. near Sukma to Bailadila is
Beneficiation Rs. 2907 completed.
Plant at crores for • Mecon is appointed as
Kirandul to setting up of EPCM Consultant on
produce Ore processing 23.1.15 for rending
6 MTPA Ore plant at Engineering, Contract
concentrate Bacheli, P rocurement, Construc-
(ii) Ore 15 MTPA tion and Project Manage-
Beneficiation Slurry Pipeline ment Services for imple-
Plant at system from mentation of the Project.
Bacheli to Bacheli to NMDC initiated various
produce Nagarnar, activities for obtaining
4 MTPA Ore 2 MTPA Pellet Statutory clearances for the
concentrate Plant at first phase of implemen-
(iii) 11 MTPA Nagarnar and tation as below:
Slurry Pipeline associated (i) Application submitted in
between feed water March, 2013 to enter into
Kirandul and and Electrical Mem orandum of
Bacheli power supply Understanding with
(iv) 15 MTPA systems. Chhattisgarh State
Slurry Pipeline Government for sanction
between of Utilities like land,
Bacheli and Water etc. for implemen-
Nagarnar tation of the Project.
(v) Associated Status—Pending for approval
Electrical and by State Government.
Water P ipeline (ii) Environment clearance
system for se tting up of Ore
(vi) 2 MTP A Pellet processing plant at
Plant at Bacheli, Slurry Pipeline
Nagarnar with system from Bacheli to
associated Nagarnar and Pellet
filtration Plant at Nagarnar.
facilities Status — For Ore processing
(vii) Return Plant at Bacheli and Slurry
water pipeline Pipeline from Bacheli to
from Nagarnar Nagarnar—Public hearing to
to Bacheli be conducted by Statutory
2. Slurry P ipeline Authority.
Project from For Pellet Plant at Nagarnar–
1 234 5

43
Nagarnar to Vizag Environment monitoring
(to be executed under studies taken up by NMDC.
JV) in which NMDC (iii) Fo rest clearances for
and RINL will be laying slurry Pipeline,
prime members. Feed Water Pipeline and
shall be as below: Auxiliary tailing
(i) 13 MTPA Slurry pipelines and conveyor
Pipeline galleries for Ore
between processing plant.
Nagarnar and Status—Separate applications
Vizag submitted to Forest
(ii) 6 MTPA Pellet Department.
Plant at Vizag (iv) Perm ission to cross
with associated Railway lines, National
filtration Highways, Water bodies
facilities Return and other roads.
water pipeline Status—Separate applications
from Vizag to are submitted to East Coast
Nagarnar Railways, NHAI (Jagdalpur),
PWD and Irrigation
departments.
3. Panthal Magnesite Rs 202.46 cr. Commissioning period • Pkg.-4 (Balance Civil and
Project is 18 months and Structural works are in
subsequently 6 months progress.
for PG test from • P rice bid for main
signing of Contract package (Pkg.-1) has been
of Main Package op ened on 29.12.2014.
(Pkg-1) (Material Bid evaluation is in
Handling, Material progress.
Processing and Kilns).
4. BHJ Benefication Rs. 68.68 cr. 18 months as per LAC • W ork awarded on
Plant (0.36 MTPA) plus USD placed on 15.02.2012. H industan Dorr Oliver
Objective: For 662650 Lim ited, Bateman
processing BHJ (A warded Engineering India Private
Iron Ore to price). Lim ited and Bateman –
produce BF grade South Africa consortium
Pellet feed partners.
concentrate • Site activities couldn ’t
start for want of ‘Forest
Clearance’ to be obtained
1 234 5

44
from Karnataka State
Government/MoEF for
change of ‘land use
pattern’ towards part of
land already under mining
lease, which is in process.
The file is with DCF
Bellary.
• Finally, work awarded on
HDOL is cancelled in
August, 2013 due to
non-availability of forest
clearance.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
MERGER OF SMALL COMPANIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
The Committee observe that there are 8 PSUs viz. SAIL, RINL,
NMDC Ltd., MOIL Ltd., KIOCL Ltd., HSCL, MECON Ltd. and MSTC Ltd.
under the administrative control of Ministry of Steel. Out of these
8 PSUs, SAIL, RINL and NMDC are the major PSUs and are engaged in
development of iron ore mines and production of steel. Taking note of
the fact that most PSUs profit has been declining, the Committee are
concerned to observe that at times the issue regarding chances of
survival of smaller companies crops up. The Committee also feel that
due to smaller units, a lot of expenditure is incurred under the
Non-Plan Head as all provisions like infrastructure, salary, bonus,
incentives, etc. have to be provided to the staff employed. The
Committee are of the opinion that the functions of these companies
are inter-related in major ways. The Secretary, Ministry of Steel, was
candid enough to admit during evidence that a study has already been
conducted to look into the matter of repositioning of MSTC & FSNL.
MSTC is the holding company of Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd. (FSNL) whose
100% paid up equity shares are held by MSTC. FSNL is into selling of
scrap whereas MSTC is in the business of e-commerce. In a post evidence
reply, the Ministry have informed the Committee that feasibility of
merger of smaller PSUs would be examined taking into account the
desirability, shareholding pattern, functions and other aspects of the
1 234 5

45
larger entities companies. The Committee recommend that an extensive
study for this should be undertaken regarding other PSUs under
administrative control of Ministry of Steel within the next three months
and the Committee be apprised of the outcome of this study.
Action Taken
The Public Sector Undertakings under the Ministry of Steel were
set up for a specialized nature of work and they continue to perform
such work. The suggestions/observations of the Committee have been
taken note of and would be examined taking into account the
desirability, shareholding pattern, functions and other aspects of the
larger entities companies.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN
35TH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
The Committee have analyzed the implementation of the
observations/recommendations contained in their Thirty-Fifth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants for the year 2013-14 of the
Ministry of Steel. The analysis of the Committee shows that out of the
21 recommendations pertaining to the Ministry of Steel contained in
their Report, 2 recommendations (Recommendation Sl. Nos. 11, 16)
have been implemented by the Government. 14 recommendations
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17 &
21) are under the process of being implemented by the Ministry, the
reply in respect of 2 recommendations (Recommendation Sl. Nos. 5 &
20) has not been accepted by the Committee and 3 recommendations
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 14, 18 & 19) are yet to be implemented by
the Government. The Committee would review the implementation of
recommendations by the Ministry in due course. The Committee,
therefore, wish that the process of implementation of the
recommendations under process be also expedited at the earliest and
they be apprised of the same.
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]

46
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
KIOCL
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
While reviewing the performance of KIOCL, the Committee note
that during 2011-12 about 1.710 million tonne of pellets were produced
by KIOCL. During 2012-13, there was a decline in the pellet production
and only 1.265 million tonne of pellets were produced. Also the Profit
After Tax (PAT) of KIOCL has been steadily declining during the last
3 years even though the decline in production of pellets is not so
drastic. From Rs. 94.30 crore in 2011-12, the PAT reduced to Rs. 31.04
crore in 2012-13 which is about one third of the profit in 2011-12. The
PAT for 2013-14 is Rs. 39.93 crore and Rs. 43.57 crore is targeted for
2014-15. The Committee acknowledge that the mining activity at KIOCL
Ltd. was stopped w.e.f. 1.1.2006 as per the Hon’ble Supreme Court
Order. At present, KIOCL is mainly operating the pellet plant at
Mangalore by sourcing Iron Ore from the market. The Committee have
been informed that demand for pellets in the country is only 50% of
what is produced, leading to lower margin. In the absence of captive
iron ore mines, KIOCL is forced to source iron ore from NMDC incurring
huge logistics cost. Moreover, M/s JSW Ispat which accounted for 70%
of sales of KIOCL in 2013-14 has commenced its own captive pellet
plant. Even PSUs have stopped lifting pellets from KIOCL due to huge
landed cost. The Committee have been apprised that due to all these
factors there is a major impact on the profitability of the company.
The Committee feel that Ministry of Steel/KIOCL should make concerted
efforts to acquire mines for its sustainability and M/s KSIDC (Kerala
State Industrial Development Corporation) be pursued to identify iron
ore bearing area in Kasaragod district of Kerala. For this purpose,
Ministry of Steel/KIOCL should also consider formation of Joint Venture
between KIOCL, KSIDC & Kerala State Mineral Development (KEMDEL)
Corporation Ltd. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.
Action Taken
A MoU was signed between KIOCL Limited and Kerala State Industrial
Development Corporation Limited (KSIDC) for iron ore mining, setting
up of beneficiation & pelletisation Plant in the Kasaragod/Kozhikode

47
Distt. In the State of Kerala on September, 2011 at New Delhi. The
MoU was valid for a period of one year from the date of signing i.e.
21.09.2012. KSIDC informed KIOCL in February, 2012 that in Kozhikode
Dist. no iron ore bearing area is available for exploitation and KSIDC
in consultation with State Directorate of Mines and Geology, is exploring
possibilities to identify the iron ore bearing area in Kasaragod Distt.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]

48
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  BY THE COMMITTEE
DECLINE IN PROFITABILITY OF MECON AND MSTC LTD.
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee observe a decline in profit of both MECON and
MSTC Ltd. during the last 3 years. As regards MECON, the company
recorded a profit of Rs. 136.36 crore during 2011-12 which got reduced
to Rs. 101.02 crore in 2012-13. The Committee are dismayed to note
that during 2013-14, only Rs. 18.77 crore was registered as profit by
MECON which got reduced by 7 times the profit in 2011-12 and is only
about 1/5 of the profit during 2012-13. Similarly, in case of MSTC Ltd.,
Profit After Tax (PAT) for 2011-12 was Rs. 118.39 crore. During
2012-13, PAT was Rs. 130.73 crore and it got reduced to a mere
Rs. 99.04 crore during 2013-14. For the year 2014-15, Rs. 75.57 crore
is the targeted PAT . The major reasons furnished by MECON for slump
in profit are economic slowdown, ban on iron ore mining which resulted
in delay in implementation of projects, non-materializing of expected
projects and uncertainty in availability of coal, etc. Similarly, MSTC
Ltd. has also given reasons of unrealized dues for gold jewellery export
during 2008-09 and a significant reduction in volume of trading business.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons put forward by the
two companies and believe that they have to strive hard to remain
competitive in the market to ensure their survival. The Committee,
therefore, strongly urge both the companies to step up efforts to
increase their profitability and they be apprised of the same.
Action Taken
There is a decline in profit of MECON Ltd. during the Last 3 years.
MECON recorded a profit of Rs. 136.36 crores during 2011-12 which got
reduced to Rs. 101.02 crores in 2012-13. In the FY 2013-14, the company
registered a profit of Rs. 49.48 crores only i.e. 2.75 times less than the
profit in 2011-12 and is only about 
1/2 of the profit during 2012-13. The
major reasons for slump in profit are economic slowdown, ban on iron-
ore mining which resulted in delay in implementation of projects, non
materializing of expected projects an uncertainty in availability of
coal, etc.

49
The physical and financial performance of MSTC LTD. for the last
3 years are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
A. Physical
(i) E-Commerce 16005.03 15482.46 19395.25
(ii) Trading 5746.15 10024.20 7488.15
(iii) Total Vol. of Business 21751.18 25506.66 26883.40
B. Financial
(i) Income 2695.92 6455.25 5230.30
(ii) Operating Cost 2517.69 6259.40 5108.94
(iii) Gross Margin 178.23 195.85 121.36
(iv) Extraordinary Item - - 226.78
(v) Profit/(Loss) before Tax 176.15 193.40 (107.37)
(vi) Profit/(Loss) after Tax 118.39 130.73 (70.03)
(vii) Dividend (%) 1077% 300% -
An amount of Rs. 226.78 crore has been provided for towards non-
realisation of outstanding from foreign buyers on export of gold
jewellery made during 2008-09.
The decline in profit during 2013-14 was due to dip in volume of
trading business in which profit margin is more as compared to other
segment i.e. e-Commerce. The prolonged slowdown in the economy
particularly in the steel sector has forced many plants to shut down
or scale down the production. This has resulted in the poor recovery
of MSTC’s outstanding. In view of inherent high risk in trading business,
a decision has been taken to gradually reduce exposure in this segment.
This situation is salvaged to a greater extent by way of increased
value of import of thermal coal for power utilities which is less
remunerative than the other raw materials for steel sector hence not
giving commensurate increase in make-up.
In order to make up the decrease in income in trading segment,
MSTC put more thrust on increasing e-Commerce business but the
commensurate increase in income could not be realized due to Principals’

50
insistence to reduce service charge rates during renewal of the
agreements and increased tendency for resorting to tenders wherein
MSTC has bleak prospect of winning the same due to abysmally low
quote by the small private service providers.
The way forward of opening of the opportunities in e-Auctions of
agriculture and forest produce, minerals, coal and non-coal mining
blocks and e-Procurement will stem the decline in profits further in
the forthcoming years.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report)

51
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
DEDICATED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FOR THE STEEL SECTOR
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
As regards setting up a dedicated institution to finance capacity
expansion in the steel sector on the lines of Power Finance Corporation
(PFC) which is committed to the integrated development of power and
its associated sectors, the Committee were informed that the idea
floated by SAIL was examined at length by the Ministry and they felt
that the enormous problems of land, water and linkage to mineral
resources are affecting the expansion programme of steel sector rather
than the issue of lack of finance. While emphasizing the need that the
Government should take all out steps to remove the bottlenecks like
non-availability of land, water and mineral linkage, the Committee
recommend that the proposal mooted by SAIL should be given a fresh
look by the Government for arranging preferential/cheaper credit to
the steel sector so as to enhance national steel production.
Action Taken
The Ministry of Steel has constituted a Committee on 31.03.2015
under the Chairmanship of Chairman, SAIL, to examine the issue of
setting up of a dedicated institution to finance capacity expansion in
the steel sector on the line of Power Finance Corporation (PFC). The
Committee will submit its report by 30.09.2015.
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. H-11014(10)/2014-Parl.,
dated 15.04.2015]
   N
EW D ELHI; RAKESH SINGH,
05 May, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Coal and Steel.

52
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL
AND STEEL HELD ON 05 MAY , 2015 IN HON ’BLE CHAIRPERSON ’S
CHAMBER, ROOM NO. ‘112’, FIRST FLOOR, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1700 hrs. to 1730 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Rakesh Singh — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee
4. Dr. Banshilal Mahato
5. Shri Godam Nagesh
6. Shri Devji M. Patel
7. Shrimati Riti Pathak
8. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
10. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
11. Shri Janardan Singh “Sigriwal”
12. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
14. Shri Rama Kishore Singh
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
17. Shri Jugul Kishore
18. Shri Avinash Pande

53
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg — Director
3. Shri Arvind Sharma — Additional Director
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
Draft Reports:—
(i) ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** **
(iii) Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on
the observations/recommendations contained in the Third
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on “Demands for
Grants (2014-15) ” relating to the Ministry of Steel.
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without any changes/
modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Do not pertain to this Report.

54
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para IV of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL
I. Total No. of Recommendations made 19
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the 16
Government
(vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8,
9, 10, 11,  12, 13, 14, 15, 18 and 19)
Percentage of total 84.21%
III. Recommendation which the Committee do not desire 01
to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 16)
Percentage of total 5.26%
IV . Recommendation in respect of which replies of 01
the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 17)
Percentage of total 5.26%
V. Recommendation in respect of which final replies 01
of the Government are still awaited
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 7)
Percentage of total 5.26%