1 
 
22 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL AND STEEL (2015-2016) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY/RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT IN MINING SECTOR  
 
 
                 
  
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL AND STEEL (2015-2016) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY/RESERACH & DEVELOPMENT IN MINING SECTOR  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.8.2016 
 
                     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.8.2016 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938(Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS      
PAGE 
  PART I 
 
          
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations ……………………………………………………      50      
 
 ANNEXURES  
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2015-
16) held on 30.9.2015 …………………………………………………………………………….. 
68 
II Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2015-
16) held on 16.2.2016 …………………………………………………………………………….. 
70 
III Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (2015-
16) held on 9.8.2016 …………………………………………………………………………….. 
73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………………………………………………..  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION…………………………...……………………………………………………………………………..  (v) 
CHAPTER I  Introductory…………………………………………………………………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER II  Science & Technology Programme in Mining Sector.............. 5 
CHAPTER III  R&D by Autonomous Bodies of Ministry of Mines.................. 24 
CHAPTER IV  R& D by PSUs  and attached & subordinate Offices in Mining Sector 
……………………………………………………................................... 
35 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL(2015-16) 
              Shri Rakesh Singh-  Chairperson  
 Name of the Member 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A Arunmozhithevan 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
5. Shri Godam Nagesh 
6. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste$ 
7. Shri Shailesh Kumar 
8. Dr. Banshilal Mahato 
9. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
10. Shrimati Riti Pathak  
11. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan 
12. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
14. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
15. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
16. Shri Janardan Singh "Sigriwal" 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
18. Shri Rama Kishore Singh   
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
20.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
21.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 Sabha 
22. Shri M.J. Akbar@ 
23. Shri  
24.  
25.  
26.  
27.  
28. Shri  
29.  
30. Shri  
31.  
32. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya* 
33.  
 
 $ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 5.7.2016 on his induction in the Council of 
Ministries.  
 @Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 17.6.2016 after his resignation from 
Membership of  Rajya  Sabha.  
 #Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4.7.2016 after his retirement from  Rajya  
Sabha. 
 * Nominated  w.e.f. 25.7.2016. 
                                    (ii) 

5 
 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi           -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  -    Director  
3. Shri Arvind Sharma     -    Additional Director  
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  -    Deputy Secretary  
5. Smt. Madhu Tandon    -    Sr. Executive Assistant   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
   

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal and Steel having  been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Science & Technology/Research & 
Development in Mining Sector relating to the Ministry of Mines. 
2. The Standing Committee on  Coal and Steel (2015 -16) had selected the 
subject for detailed examination and report to the Parliament. The Committee were 
briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of Mines and PSUs on 30.9 .2015 and 
took oral evidence on 16.2.2016. Based on the ora l and written testimony 
submitted to the Committee, a report on the subject was prepared.  
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Mines and PSUs for placing before them and in furnishing material/information from 
time to time as desired by the Committee.  
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
9.8.2016.   
5.  The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials o f the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee.  
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of 
the Report.   
 
 
 
 
      NEW DELHI;                                                       RAKESH SINGH 
              9 August, 2016                                                                       Chairperson 
              18 Shravana, 1938(Saka)                   Standing Committee on Coal and Steel 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  
 
  

7 
 
Report 
 Part -I 
Chapter-I 
Introductory  
 
 Research & Development in Mining Sector  
 
 The National Mineral Policy, 2008 seeks to ensure that the development of 
mineral resources keeps pace, and is in consonance with the national goals. Important 
areas of focus in the National Mineral Policy inter-alia  include ushering in greater 
liberalization  and private sector involvement, developing partnership with stakeholders 
viz. State Government, mineral and mineral  based industries and various concerned 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government; deepen scope of the development 
framework by mandating better management of resources, enhancing the imports on 
Research and Development  and also by developing Human Resource in the sector; 
ensuing that the interests of host populations and other vulnerable sections are fully 
protected and the benef it of the economics activities in the mining sector flow equitably 
to the stakeholders.   
 Recognizing the paramount importance of safety, economy, speed and efficiency 
in extraction of ore resources and in its convergence into viable economic alloy and 
metals, the National Mineral Policy, 2008 has accorded higher priority to R&D 
programmes. With a view to promoting R&D in the mining sector, Ministry of Mines has 
launched a comprehensive Science & Technology Programme which includes (i) R&D 
component (ii) I nformation, Education and Communication (IEC) and (iii) one -time 
capital component for up -gradation of R&D facilities of Jawaharlal Nehru Research 
Development & Design Centre (JNRDDC), National Institute of Miners‟ Health (NIMH)  
and National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM). In addition  to these three  
autonomous bodies, three PSUs viz. National Aluminum Company Ltd. (NALCO), 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) and Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL), 
one attached office i.e. Geological Survey of India (GSI) and  one subordinate office i.e. 
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) also contribute to R&D sector. 

8 
 
 The underlying principle behind R&D Component is to foster utilization of the 
available mineral resources judiciously, economically efficient and envir onmentally 
sustainable manner. Under the R&D component of the Science & Technology 
Programme, Research projects are funded through grant –in–aid. The broad thrust 
areas for supporting research in mining sector include – (i) Prospecting exploration for 
strategic rare and rare earth minerals. (ii) Research in mining methods. This includes 
rock mechanics, mine designing, mining equipment, energy conservation, 
environmental protection and mine safety. (iii) Improve efficiency in process, operations, 
recovery of by-products and reduction in specification and consumption norms. (iv) 
Research in metallurgy and mineral beneficiation techniques to utilize lower grade and 
finer size ores. (v) Extraction of value added products from mine waste, plant tailings 
etc. (vi) Development of new alloys and metal related products etc. (vii) Evolve low 
capital and energy saving processing systems (viii) Production of materials of high 
purity. 
 Based on scrutiny which passes through different stages of evaluation including 
presentation of shortlisted projects before the Project Evaluation and Review Committee 
(PERC) and final approval of an inte r-ministerial Standing Scientific  Advisory Group 
(SSAG) chaired by Secretary (Mines), grants are given to the projects submitted by 
R&D institutions 
R&D related Investments by Organizations associated with Ministry of Mines 
 
 During the recent past organizations associated with Ministry of Mines are 
 making investments of Rs. 75 crores per annum on R&D. This is projected to 
 increase to about Rs. 87 crores in 2015-16 which depicts a significant increase of 
 19%. The comparative chart of related to organization wise R&D Investments is 
 presented below: 
(Rs. Crore) 
 
Name of the Organization 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16* 
Science and Technology schemeMinistry of Mines   1.97 6.60 7.30 
Autonomous Bodies 
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research 
Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC) 
6.3 7.9 15.5 
National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM) 16.8 14.0 16.0 
National Institute of Miners‟ Health   (NIMH) 2.5 2.5 2.6 

9 
 
Non Ferrous Materials Technology Development 
Centre (NFTDC) 
13.12 14.68 15.30 
Public Sector Undertaking (PSUs‟) 
National Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO) 13.87 7.31 13.22 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) 3.1 2.9 0.71 
(MECL) 0.30 0.39 0.42 
Attached and Subordinates Offices  
Geological Survey of India (GSI) 8.25 12.56 12.63 
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 5.56 5.78 3.49 
Total 71.77 74.62 87.17 
    * Projected 
 
1.2 For fructification of principles as enunciated in the National Mineral Policy, 
guidelines for support to  „Mining Research‟ was issued in May 2013 by the Ministry of 
Mines. It seeks  to provide renewed scientific impetus to address the emerging mining 
challenges, broaden the participation of stakeholders, int roduce the concept of cost -
sharing and make the research in Mines more productive, with an emphasis on outputs 
and outcomes. The Guidelines set forth the objectives and thrust areas of research, 
procedure for invitation and processing of research proposals  for funding support, 
norms for funding, conditions of support and participation of public and private sectors in 
mutually agreed bilateral, multilateral, cross -sectoral and inter -institutional projects. 
Special attention has been given to dissemination of research findings and scaling up of 
the leads, which are generated through research projects and are of societal relevance.  
Statedly the vision of the R&D Schemes is to p romote research in applied geosciences, 
mineral exploration, mining and allied areas,  mineral processing, optimum utilization 
and conservation of the mineral resources of the country, for the benefit of the nation 
and its people. The pronounced mission is to plan,  support and coordinate mining 
research in public interest for enhancing the understanding of the mines and geology, 
and devising strategies and solutions for conservation and mining protection and 
management. The  guidelines  also broadly define the thrust areas of research in Mines and 
the scope and coverage of research grants for R&D projects.  
 
1.3  The underlying principle behind the R& D Component in the Science and 
Technology Programme is to foster utilization of the available mineral resources 
judiciously, economically, efficiently and in an environmentally sustainable manner. 

10 
 
Under the R&D component of the Science & Technology Program me, Research 
projects are funded through grant –in–aid. The broad thrust areas for supporting 
research in mining sector include – (i) Prospecting exploration for strategic rare and rare 
earth minerals; (ii) Research in mining methods which includes rock mec hanics, mine 
designing, mining equipment, energy conservation, environmental protection and mine 
safety; (iii) Improve efficiency in process, operations, recovery of by -products and 
reduction in specification and consumption norms; (iv) Research in metallu rgy and 
mineral beneficiation techniques to utilize lower grade and finer size ores; (v) Extraction 
of value added products from mine waste, plant tailings etc.; (vi) Development of new 
alloys and metal related products etc.; (vii) Evolve low capital and e nergy saving 
processing systems; and (viii) Production of materials of high purity. 
 
 
  

11 
 
Chapter-II 
Science & Technology Programme in Mining Sector 
2.1 The Science & Technology programme which has been operational since 1978 
has three components, namely: 
 
 R&D Component 
 Information Education and Communication Component 
 One Time Capital Grant  Component 
 
 Funds released to the various institutes under S&T Programme Scheme during 
the last three years are given as under: 
 (Rs.in crores) 
Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Expenditure 
2013-14 Rs. 3.97 Rs. 1.97  Rs. 1.97  
2014-15 Rs. 6.60  Rs. 6.60 Rs. 6.60  
2015-16* Rs. 7.30 -- Rs. 3.22 
*one time capital component for up-gradation for R&D facility.  
  
2.2 During  the Financial Year 2014 -15,  funding to the tune of Rs. 6.60 crore  was 
released for 16 approved projects. For the year 2015 -16, the Ministry received 86 
proposals which were under scrutiny of the Expert Committee for selecting the 
proposals on the basis of the identified thrust areas as enunciat ed in 2013 guidelines.  
 With the participation of large number of Research Institutes , the Scheme has  
become more broad based . D uring 2014 -15, various research proposal pertaining to 
many Institutes have been cleared. This includes inter-alia research projects  of 
Jawaharlal Nehru Research Development  & Design Centre, National Institute of 
Miners‟ Health and National Institute of Rock Mechanics,  the proposals of Institutes of  
Non Ferrous Material  Technology Centre for purification of comme rcial Rare Earth 
Oxides, Indian School of Mines for development of low density emulsion explosives,  
Aligarh Muslim University for study on Synthesis, characterisation and photocatalytic 
performance of  Metal doped semiconductor Nano -Materials, Indian Inst itute of 

12 
 
Technology, Roorkee for study of Alkaline Carbonatite, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Khargpur for development of Nickel containing steel from Chromite over burden, Gandhi 
Institute of Engineering and Technology, Odisha for study on production on Geopolymer 
based construction material from pond ASH, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, 
for development Time Domain Reflectometry ( TDR) based wireless system for slope, 
Directorate of Geology and Mining, Govt. of Nagaland for prospecting/explora tion of 
platinum groups of metals. 
 
R&D Works undertaken by the Ministry of Mines 
2.3 On being enquired by the Committee about the details of the Research and 
Development works undertaken by the Ministry/organization for prospecting/exploration 
of strategi c rare and rare earth minerals, research in mining methods including rock 
mechanics, mine designing, mining equipment, energy conservation, environmental 
protection and mine safety , the Ministry of Mines in its written response furnished the 
following information: 
 
A. Research Programme supported by Ministry of Mines under Science and 
Technology Programme 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Project/ Duration Name & Address of Institute 
Prospecting/exploration of strategic rare and rare earth minerals 
1.  Purification of commercial rare earth 
oxides, e.g. Ceria, by molten salt 
fusion and re-crystallization. 
Non-Ferrous Material Technology 
Development Centre (NFTDC), Hyderabad 
2.  Physico-chemical processing of low 
grade chromite ore for beneficiation 
and agglomeration of fines for 
recovery of metal values. 
Jadavpur University, 
 Kolkata 
 
3.  Study of alkaline -carbonatite 
complexes as potential resource for 
REEs, NB-TA and U-TH 
Institute of Technology, 
Roorkee 
 
4.  Prospecting/Explorations of Platinum 
group of metals within Na ga Hills 
ophiolite at Thengahu Ridge -Moke 
area, Phek District, Nagaland. 
 
 
Directorate of Geology and mining, 
 Government of Nagaland 
 

13 
 
Research in mining methods including rock mechanics, mine designing 
5.  Development of low density 
emulsion explosives for energy 
efficient blasting in environmentally 
sensitive areas 
Indian School of Mines, 
Dhanbad 
 
 
Energy conservation, environmental protection and mine safety 
6.  Development of copper bio -leaching 
methodology/ technique from tailing 
waste at Hi ndustan copper limited, 
Khetri, Birla Institute of Technology & 
Science, Pilani. 
Civil Engineering Department, Birla Institute 
of Technology & Science, Pilani, Rajasthan 
7.  Development of TDR based wireless 
system for slope stability monitoring 
in opencast mines 
National Institute of Technology, 
 Rourkela.  
 
8.  Value addition in mine waste tailing 
materials through geopolymer 
formation, Christ University, Faculty 
of engineering Kaniminike, 
Kumbalagodu, Bangalore. 
Deptt. of Mechanical EngineeringChrist 
University,Faculty of Engineering, 
Kumbalagodu, Kaniminike, Bangalore 
9.  Development of Standard 
Framework and Guidelines for Noise 
Mapping in Mines and Surrounding 
Community, NIMH, Nagpur. 
National Institute of Miners Health, 
JNARDDC, Campus, Amravati Road, Wadi, 
Nagpur 
10.  Development of viable technique for 
assessment of reclaimed land and 
for safety of structures under settling 
environment. 
National Institute of Rock Mechanics, 
Champion Reefs, Kolar Gold Fields-
Karnataka 
11.  Estimation of seismic hazard in and 
around the mines out areas of Kolar 
Gold Fields,  
National Institute of Rock Mechanics, 
Champion Reefs, Kolar Gold Fields-
Karnataka. 
12.  Beneficiation of low grade iron ore 
and tailings by selective flocculation. 
Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad.  
(Jharkhand) 
13.  Evaluation of Biomarkers for early 
detection of noise induced hearing 
loss. 
 
National Institute of Miners Health, 
JNARDDC, Campus, Amravati Road, Wadi, 
Nagpur 
14.  Multi Centric Study of dust related 
diseases in stone mines and 
development of sustainable 
preventive program. 
National Institute of Miners Health, 
JNARDDC, Campus, Amravati Road, Wadi, 
Nagpur 
15.  Study of toxic fumes and 
development of Carbon nanotubes 
based sensing Device, CIMFR and 
Amity University (Jointly) (Duration 3 
Year) 
Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad, Jharkhand  
 
 

14 
 
B. NALCO 
 
R&D Works undertaken by NALCO for prospective/ exploration of 
strategic metals and rare earth minerals, research in mining methods 
including rock mechanics, mine designing, mining equipment, energy 
conservation, environmental protection and mine safety are as given 
below: 
i. Rare Metals : For exploration of rare metals such as gallium an d 
 vanadium, study was under progress.  
ii. Trial production of about 6 MT of vanadium sludge done successfully. 
 Vanadium balance was being done to find out feasibility of setting up of a 
 plant. 
iii. Regarding production of Gallium, it is being explored for MoU with 
 Chalieco, China, for R&D co -operation in the field of Gallium and its 
 technology developments.  
iv. Environmental protection : For treatment of surface water having 
 fluoride, pilot scale study was done successfully. Proposal for setting up of       
  a plant using nano-technology for control of fluoride was under process.  
v. Energy Conservation : NALCO had R&D co -operation agreement with 
 AP/ RTA, Canada, the technology provider for out Smelter P lant to 
 upgrade the pots with higher amperage with a target to increase the 
 productivity of the pots upto 9%, thereby reduction of specific power 
 consumption by >5%. The technology was named as AP2XN. 
vi. A collaborative R&D project for extrusion of rare ea rth elements from Red 
 mud was  in progress with NML, Jamshedpur.  
 
C.  GSI 
 
Research and Development (R&D) in GSI was restricted to assessment of 
mineral resources, characterization of ore mineralization and 
understanding of the genesis of minerals which has long term impact on 
the mining sector for understanding the nature of the mineral deposit. 
GSI‟s main focus was to establish subsurface behavior of the 
mineralization, tonnage etc. Services of three National Centers for 
Geoscience Research‟ (NCEGR)  of GSI situated at Kolkata, Bengaluru 
and Faridabad engaged in research on fundamental geosciences were 
being taken for future R&D work with respect to mineral characterization 

15 
 
and ore beneficiation. At present there is no specific R&D project by GSI 
on strategic rare and rare earth minerals. However, GSI had taken up 
regular exploratory items for exploring these minerals in XII Five Year 
Plan.  Rare Earth Element ( REE) occur usually in very low content (<1%) 
in rocks. Hence, these a re difficult to locate and identify by normal 
megascopic and microscopic techniques, which were used in identification 
of rock –forming minerals that occur in major to minor quantities (>1%). 
The present investigation strategy of GSI for search of REE miner alisation 
includes identification of zones of anomalous concentration of Rare Metal 
(RM)/ Rare Earth Element (REE) on the basis of Base Line Geoscience 
Data Generation (STM & NGCM) and delineation of target zones for 
enhanced potential through reconnaissan ce stage investigations. If 
enhanced potentiality was established in the area, follow up investigation 
under prospecting stage was carried out.  
 GSI was trying to collect and examine the chemical and other data 
generated from the past mapping and investig ation reports for locating 
suitable target areas for further search of REE. 
  52 programmes have been taken up by GSI for search of REE in 
XII Plan period  in the states of Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Rajasthan , Gujarat and 
Meghalaya." 
 
R&D Work for Mineral Beneficiation Techniques   
 
2.4 As regards the R&D works that had been done in identifying mineral beneficiation 
techniques to utilize lower grade and finer size ores and  development of new alloys and 
metal related projects, the Ministry of Mines apprised the Committee in writing as under 
:-  
A. " Ongoing beneficiation projects supported by Ministry of Mines under Science and 
Technology Programme were provided in the table below: 
 
 

16 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project/ Duration Name & Address of Institute 
1.  Development of hard and high 
temperature refractory 
material/aggregate from saprolite 
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development & Design 
Centre (JNARDDC),Nagpur. 
2.  Development of Nickel containing steel 
from chromite over burden 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur and Institute of Minerals & 
Materials Technology, 
 Bhubaneswar (Jointly) 
3.  Novel synthesis routes for high purity 
kesterites (CZTS:Cu -Zm-Sn-S; Cu -Zn-
Sn-Se) and development of cost 
kesiterite based solar PV cells and 
modules 
Nonferrous Materials Technology 
Development Centre, Hyderabad 
 
4.  Recovery of copper from copper 
smelter dust and novel fixation of 
arsenic in geopolymer matrix derived 
from converter slag - Scientific and 
techno-feasibility studies. 
Phase- 1 Lab scale studies on copper 
recovery from Cu flue dust and TCLP 
studies for Arsenic fixation, NFTDC, 
Hyderabad 
Nonferrous Materials Technology 
Development Centre, Kanchanbagh, 
Hyderabad.   
5.  Development o f process for making 
value added materials from ilmenite 
mineral. 
Advanced Materials Technology 
Department, Institute of Minerals & 
Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar.   
6.  Development of portable analytical kit 
for field analysis of bauxite:  Emphasis 
on In -situ Micro -Analysis of Mineral 
Entitites for Mineral Prospecting.  
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development & Design 
Centre, Nagpur.   
7.  Process Development for production of 
low soda (Na2O) hydrate in Bayer 
Circuit. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development & Design 
Centre, Nagpur.   
8.  Up-gradation & Utilization of Laterite of 
East and West Coast deposits.  
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development & Design 
Centre, Nagpur.    
9.  Development of Mathematical Model 
(using fuzzy logic) to Control superheat 
of Aluminium Electrolysis Bath. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research & Development & Design 
Centre, Nagpur.   
10.  Characterisation of Indian lean grade 
magnesite ore and improvement of its 
high temperature refractory properties 
with or without beneficiation. 
Central Glass & Ceramic Research 
Institute, 196, Raja S.C.Mullick Road, 
Kolkata. 
 

17 
 
11.  Mineral systematics and pre -
concentration of PGE values from low 
grade chrome ores of Boula mines, 
orissa.  
Institute of Minerals & Materials 
Technology, Council of Scientific & 
Industrial Research, Bhubaneswar 
Orissa. 
 
12.  Development of Multilayered materials 
for melting, liquid metal handling and 
casting under high pressure and loads.  
 
Non-Ferrous Materials Technology 
Development Centre (NFTDC), 
Hyderabad.  
 
 
 
 
Projects related to development of new alloys and metal supported by Ministry of 
Mines under Science and Technology programme are provided in the table below:  
 
Sl. No Name of Project/ Duration Name & Address of Institute 
1.  Integrated approach for development of 
process models and pilot production of 
aluminium alloy extrudates using 
porthole dies 
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development & Design 
Centre (JNARDDC),Nagpur. 
2.  Synthesis, characterization and 
photocatalytic  performance of metal 
doped semiconductor nanomaterials 
Aligarh Muslim University, 
Aligarh.   
3.  Production of geopolymer based 
construction material from pond ASH: 
an industrial waste 
 
Gandhi Institute of Engineering and 
Technology,Gunupur, 
Odisha. 
4.  Development of a real time 
instrument/system to measure bath 
ratio, alumina concentration and 
superheat of the Aluminium electrolysis 
bath.  
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development &  Design 
Centre, Nagpur.   
5.  Development of Super Thermal 
Aluminium (STAL) conductor for Indian 
Power Sector. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium 
Research Development & Design 
Centre, Nagpur and Non -Ferrous 
Technology Development Centre, 
Hyderabad.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
B.      NALCO 
 
Following R&D had been done by NALCO for mineral beneficiation techniques to 
utilize lower grade: 
(i) R&D Works for Mineral beneficiation to utilize lower grade ores:  
For extraction of Alumina from low grade ore i.e. Partially LateratisedKhondalite 
(PLK), NALCO has undertaken a collaborative project with CSIRO, Australia. 
Further study is going on.   
(ii) New Alloy and Metal Related Projects:  
(a) Collaborative project proposal for development of Al -Li Alloy Metal Matrix is 
being studied. 
(b) Trial production of high speed extrusion alloy done and its performance was 
tested at Jindal Aluminium, Bangalore. It was found to be better than normal 
billets. In order to confirm  the findings further trials at different plants are in 
progress.  
(c)  Developmental trial production of cookware from Rolled Product sheets has 
been successful at two different cookware industries. Marketing and production 
departments have been intimated  to take up cookware further for 
commercialization.  
C.  JNARDDC, Nagpur 
 
The work ha d been carried out by some agencies/ organizations on 
beneficiation of bauxite by various techniques such as tabling, magnetic 
separation, acid leaching etc. JNARDDC had  rich experience in 
beneficiation of low grade bauxite/laterite ores.  
 
JNARDDC, which ha d world class analytical facilities and highly qualified 
& trained manpower, ha d offered services in the field of Bauxite 
Processing (Characterization & Technological Testing) to almost all those 

19 
 
companies in the country engaged in mining, processing or export of 
bauxite ore, in the last 25 years of its existence.  
 
During the period 2009 -14, JNARDDC had  carried out beneficiation 
studies on low grade bauxite/ laterite d eposits in Gujarat (Sabarkantha, 
Kachchh and Jamnagar) employing various techniques such as crushing, 
grinding, magnetic separation, acid leaching and gravity separation etc 
obtaining satisfactory results.  
 
Following R&D work has been undertaken in identi fying mineral 
beneficiation techniques to utilize lower grade and finer size ores:- 
 
 (i)  Various beneficiation techniques such as sieving/ screening, magnetic 
separation, acid leaching, roasting, flo atation and hydro cyclone have 
been adopted for quality  improvement of low grade bauxite and Laterite 
under various projects. Presently the following S&T project was under 
execution.  
 (ii)       Upgradation & utilization of laterite of East- and West Coast deposits. 
 
 (iii)     R&D work had also been undertaken in development of new alloys in the 
 following project.  
 
(iv) Development of Super Thermal Aluminium Alloy (STAL) conductor for 
 Indian Power sector 
 
2.5 When the Committee asked about the details of governmental/non-governmental 
bodies which are engaged in the R&D activities in the mining sector and the initiatives 
that have been taken by the Government to synergi se such initiatives in order to 
maximize the R&D outcomes, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:  
 The names of the agencies which  were associated with the Ministry of Mines  
under R&D activities through S&T programme in the Mining Sector are given as below: 
i Non-Ferrous Material Technology Development Centre (NFTDC),  Hyderabad 
ii Jadavpur  University, Kolkata 

20 
 
iii Institute of Technology, Roorkee 
iv Directorate of Geology and Mining, Government of Nagaland 
v Indian School of Mines,Dhanbad 
vi Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani, Rajasthan 
vii National Institute of Technology, Rourkela.  
viii Christ University, Faculty of Engineering, Kumbalagodu, Kaniminike,             
       Bangalore 
ix National Institute of Miners Health, JNARDDC, Campus, Amravati Road,   
     Wadi, Nagpur 
x National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Champion Reefs, Kolar Gold Fields -         
Karnataka 
xi Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, Dhanbad, Jharkhand  
xii Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development & Design Centre       
     (JNARDDC),Nagpur. 
xiii Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. 
xiv Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
xv Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar  
xvi Gandhi Institute of Engineering and Technology, Gunupur,Odisha. 
xvii Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, 196, Raja S.C.Mullick Road,   
        Kolkata. 
 In addition, PSUs of Ministry of Mines i.e. NALCO, MECL and HCL: sub -
ordinate office of IBM and attached office of GSI have their own R&D programme 
which was also monitored by Ministry of Mines through their work programme 
discussion and periodic reviews of the PSUs in the Ministry. The endeavor of 
Ministry of Mines was to synergis e the efforts to achieve the objectives as 
enunciated in the National Mineral Policy (NMP) 2008." 
  
2.6 According to the Ministry of Mines, India is far behind in R&D at world level and 
ranked 48th in capacity innovation and 52 nd in scientific institution and 30th in R&D 
expenditure in the world.   When the Committee asked to state the 
standards/parameters on the basis of which this „ranking‟ has been awar ded, the 
Ministry responded in writing as under:-  
  "The Standard/parameters on the basis of which this ranking has been  
  rewarded are as follows:   

21 
 
 
 Percentage of economic output, the countries devote to R&D 
investment. 
   
 Scientific and engineering researchers per capita. 
  
 The innovations, measured as patents per capita." 
 
2.7 Replying to a query in writing on the standards/parameters based on which 
India‟s ranking was judged as poor, the Ministry stated as under that the reasons for 
poor ranking are  due to:- 
 
a) Lower percentage of economic output the country devotes to R&D 
 investment 
b) Lower Scientific and engineering researchers per capita in India.  
  
2.8 On a further query  regarding steps taken during the last three yea rs to „improve‟ 
these standards, the Ministry of Mines stated as under: 
 "The Ministry of Mines had only a supplementary role in improving the standards/ 
parameters of scientific research.  The nodal Ministry for taking action to improve 
standards is the Ministry of Science & Technology. 
NIRM 
 
 The steps taken  during the last three years to improve these standards are to 
increase the number of publications in international journals; improving the 
qualifications/expertise of the existing staff by exposing them to expertise in other 
institutions in India and through interaction with foreign experts; procuring the 
state-of-the-art equipment and computer software. 
 
JNARDDC 
 
JNARDDC being a scientific R&D centre is taking all efforts to convince the 
aluminium industry to increase the investment in R&D sector. The Centre is in 
constant interaction with the industry. It is also trying to increase the number of 
publications and patents filed with a view to propagate the benefits of various 
R&D achievements and as there is a need to commer cialize the same for the 
overall benefit of the industry and the nation as a whole." 

22 
 
 
2.9 Regarding the ranking in R&D expenditure in the world, a representative of the 
Ministry of Mines while deposing before the Committee on 16.2.2016  submitted as 
under: 
   
"........ Our country stands 30th when we go to the first criteria. I will share some 
data that I have. India spends only 0.81 per cent of their GDP on R&D. If you 
compare it with other countries, China spends 2.05 per cent of their GDP.  The 
biggest C ountry, namely, South Korea spends 4.36 per cent of their GDP on 
R&D. In fact, when it comes to Global Technology Index, Finland has the top slot 
in it. US spends 2.7 per cent of the GDP and if I share the numbers, the per 
capita expenditure of various cou ntries on R&D, this is an information from the 
internet, South Korea spends $ 1,347 per capita.  One more ranking is there, 
that is, a 2015 Report that is available, which says Global Innovative Index (GII) 
in which India stands 81 out of 141 countries. There are about 12-13 parameters, 
which they take to have the ranking in it. There is 'h' index, which connects the 
patents as per its applicability. So, there are information available in it."  
 
  
2.10 On the issue of the need for more focus on R&D as compared to other Countries 
and whether  sufficient number of technical specialist s, scientist and engineers and 
adequate resources are available to meet the present requirement s and to comp ete 
with other countries of the world in R&D sector, the Ministry stated in writing as under:  
 
"A large number of technical specialists, scientists and engineers join the 
workforce annually in the Country (as per AICTE, there were 8,56,021 enrollment 
for the academic year 2015 -16 in 3364 engineering and technology  Institutes at 
Undergraduate level and 1 ,18,201 enrollment for the academic year 2015 -16 in 
2304 engineering and technology Institutes at Postgraduate level ). However, the 
Country‟s R&D expenditure (0.88% of GDP on R&D) was lower as compared to 
that of developed  Countries (normally more than 2% of GDP). Also there was 
wide variation in the facilities and infrastructure available for R&D across various 

23 
 
sectors. Therefore, there was a need to augment R & D by providing more 
resources in terms of facilities and infr astructure and making R&D jobs attractive 
for young scientists and professionals. The Country needs to take the lead by 
laying more emphasis on developing indigenous technologies while learning from 
international experience. There was a need to have greate r institutional 
collaboration with renowned foreign universities and technology institutions for 
exposure of Indian scientists.  Scientists, faculty & student exchange 
programmes needs to be promoted. In order to compete with the world, the focus 
of the R&D should be not only to tackle the present situation but also  to cater to 
the  needs for future upcoming technologies.  
 In the mining and metal sector, the Ministry ha d a limited role in R &D, 
which was primarily driven by private sector and PSUs, to meet global challenges 
in value -added products, technology and cost competitiveness. However, the 
Ministry promotes R&D in mining -related activities viz. exploration of mineral 
deposits including deep seated and hidden minerals, extraction of minerals and 
rock mechanics, ore beneficiation and waste minimization, metallurgy specially in 
non-ferrous metals, miners‟ health related issues etc.,  through its limited 
budgetary allocation under S&T scheme.  
 There are  three autonomous institutes under the Ministry of Mines viz. 
NIMH, NIRM and JNARDDC which were carrying out specific R&D activities in 
their respective fields. These institutions receive partial financial support from the 
Ministry to meet around 80% of th eir expenditure and also get funding from 
research projects sponsored by other sources including private sector. The 
Ministry‟s S&T budget was  just a small grant and it needs to be enhanced to 
strengthen infrastructure facilities and capacity of  these research institutions for 
developing indigenous cutting edge technologies in their respective field. 
 
Apart from these,  Geological Survey of India (GSI) and  Indian Bureau of 
Mines (IBM) also support R&D and training in their areas of work. GSI ha d 
commissioned a state-of-the-art research vessel Samudra  Ratnakar and 

24 
 
Heliborne geophysical survey system Garuda Vasudha which ha d 
significantly enhanced the capacity for data acquisition and analysis. GSI 
was also in the process of modernization of its laboratory fac ilities with the 
procurement of high resolution chemical analyses instruments, isotope 
dating facility, seismological geodetic system etc. which was enhancing its 
capacity for research in the field of geo -science.  IBM does important 
research in ore beneficiation for better recovery of minerals from ores. IBM 
also guide in sustainable mining practices and restoration of mined up 
areas which require considerable research activities. 
  
As far as autonomous Institutions were concerned, Jawaharlal Nehru 
Aluminium Research Development and Design Center (JNARDDC) is the 
only R&D facility in India carrying out research from bauxite to finished 
product. As compared to other R&D facilities in t he world like Rio Tinto 
R&D Centre, Automobile Research and Development Centre (ARDC), 
Canada, The Laboratory of Hydraulics, Hydrology and Glaciology 
Vereinigte Aluminium -Werke AG, (VAW) Germany, Aluminium Pechiney, 
France and Suzhou Non -ferrous Research I nstitute, (SNIR) 
China  (SNIR), China, JNARDDC requires necessary infrastructure and 
equipments for developing indigenous alumina/aluminium technology 
including research in energy reduction, environment friendly technologies 
and indigenization of special u tility aluminium alloys for overall 
development of Indian aluminium sector.  
National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM)  is an autonomous research 
institute to aid to the growing needs of the Mining and Civil Construction 
Industry in the area of Rock Engin eering for design and development. The 
Institute provides research and consultancy support in almost entire 
spectrum of rock mechanics for improving safety and productivity in the 
mining and civil engineering sectors at par with international standards. As 
shallow deposits were exhausting, we ha d to go for deeper depths to 

25 
 
extract the minerals, thereby facing more strata related problems. With 
environment restrictions becoming stringent, we need to look for hitherto 
uneconomical deposits and deposits in rem ote places, where we have to 
face complex strata conditions. To deal with the above situations, NIRM 
needs to carry out R&D in new areas, for which increased government 
funding was needed. 
 
National Institute of Miners‟ Health (NIMH) is the only institute of its kind 
providing services to the mining sector with respect to health of the mine 
workforce and environmental monitoring. Currently , services for dust 
monitoring, vibration, noise and illumination measurement were provided. 
To develop NIMH as state of  art centre catering to the comprehensive 
occupational health research for miners like international organizations 
working in the field of occupational health, we have to further add services 
such as drinking water quality, ergonomics assessment and interv ention, 
environmental health impact assessment of mining activities and 
intervention for prevention of workplace related diseases. The Pradhan 
Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) will be implemented by 
the  District Mineral Foundations (DMFs) of t he respective districts using 
the funds accruing to  the DMF. Under this scheme, it was envisaged that 
the expertise available with NIMH may also be drawn upon to design 
special infrastructure  needed to take care of mining related illnesses and 
diseases.  
  
Though the three autonomous institutes were trying to generate funds on 
their own, but  that was just sufficient to run the institute and not enough to 
carry out more extensive research. In the past, plan grant was not given to 
these institutes on a regular basis. There was need to provide plan grant 
on regular basis for infrastructure up  gradation so that these institutes are 
able to properly channelize their focus on R & D activities. Additionally, 
timely and regular disbursal of non -plan grant will ca ter to the operational 

26 
 
and maintenance related needs of these institutes besides meeting salary 
component of the researchers employed in these institutes. These 
institutes can be used by Govt. for guided research work which would help 
India develop technologically in that field.  
 
Science and Technology Scheme of the Ministry also needs to be up  
scaled allowing researcher or institute to form consortium and undertake 
research at  Technology Readiness Level (TRL)  5 and 6 level while 
continuing to support researchers as was done presently. These kind of 
researches would be more fruitful for the growth and development of India. 
The Ministry was already in the process of consultations with stakeholders 
to identify the problem areas for specific research." 
 
2.11 On the aspect of Research and Development works undertaken by the 
Ministry/organization, the Ministry of Mines furnished details on prospecting/exploration 
of strategic rare and rare earth minerals, research in mining methods including rock 
mechanics, mine , designing, mining equipment, energy conservation, environmental 
protection and mine safety.  On being a sked by the Committee about the major 
constraints faced during implementation of  these R&D works, the Ministry in its written 
reply stated as under:  
 
 "The Ministry of Mines lays great emphasis on proper and efficient utilization of  
rich mineral resources of the C ountry, which includes scientific exploration and 
exploitation. Innovation, R&D and induction of advance technologies were key 
ingredients in t he Ministry‟s Science and Technology Programme. However, the 
Ministry has only a supporting or supplementary role to play as the concerned 
mining and metal processing industries were required to play the primary role in 
promotion and application of appropr iate technologies in their respective fields to 
remain competitive, cost- effective and sustainable. 
  

27 
 
 The Ministry under its Science &  Technology Scheme provides assistance to its 
autonomous institutions namely Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research Design &  
Development Centre (JNARDDC), National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM) 
and National Institute of Miners‟ Health (NIMH).These institutions carry out 
specific research activities in consultation with the concerned 
industries/agencies.   
  
 As regards to any specific constraint was faced during implementation of R&D 
programmes, no institution except Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) has cited any 
major constraints. NIRM  has reported that  occasionally there were delay in site 
preparation by the user agencies d ue to their internal  issues and also in 
procuring/fabricating the required equipment/instruments in view of  their 
specialized nature which need to be imported at times.  JNARDDC also 
mentioned that in some cases the implementation of R&D activities gets del ayed 
due to lack of timely delivery of requisite sophisticated and fabricated equipment.  
  
 HCL has cited lack of “state -of-the-art” testing facilities in the C ountry for 
beneficiation studies of copper ore as one of the major constraints  in improving 
the efficiency of the existing process. HCL also lack in -house talent for R&D 
activities and has plans to tie up with Non -Ferrous Materials Technology 
Development Centre (NFTDC), Hyderabad to impart requisite training. IBM , 
Nagpur were proposing upgradation o f existing facilities for beneficiation studies 
.Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) reported lack of adequate 
infrastructure and manpower as the main constraint faced in implementation of 
R&D projects." 
 
2.12 On being asked by the Committee about the monitoring mechanism for 
overseeing these R&D works, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
"Presently, under the Ministry‟s S&T Scheme, the proposals for undertaking R&D 
programme were invited from various institutions in the form of projects. There is 
an in -built system for appraising, monitoring, reviewing and recommending the 

28 
 
research proposals, by a team of experts viz. Project Evaluation and 
Recommendation Committee (PERC), Standing Scientific Advisory Group 
(SSAG) for final approval and sanction. A system of Peer Group Review ha d 
been devised for evaluation of the completed projects which recommends 
release of the withheld amount of 10% of last installment of funds for the project 
based on achievement of the desired outcomes." 
2.13 On being asked  by the Committee as t o how new and emerging global 
technologies are being adopted for the S&T Programmes , the Ministry in its reply 
stated as under:  
 "The new and emerging global technologi es adopted for the S&T Programmes 
 were as under: 
"NIRM 
Communication networks, such as the V -SAT are used for direct data 
transmission from the field to the laboratory; latest computer software are 
procured and used for faster and accurate analysis of the data.  State –of-the-art 
equipment are available to carry out on-site/lab-testing in rocks. 
NIMH 
Latest and advanced equipment are used for the analysis of human biological 
and environmental samples collected during field study. 
JNARDDC 
JNARDDC has initia ted the process to adopt various new and emerging global 
technologies in the following S&T programs with regard to :- 
 Effective distribution of power,  
 Effective use of mining resources  
 Upgradation in extrusion of aluminium alloys 
 
These processes are further elaborated as below :- 
a) “Development of Super Thermal Aluminium (STAL) Conductor for Indian 
Power Sector”. The project aims to develop super thermal resistant aluminium 

29 
 
conductor (STAL) for high capacity and economical distribution of power. With 
growing economy and Government‟s commitment of “Power to All”, it is 
imperative to develop indigenous technology to produce such ne w generation 
conductors in the C ountry. Since this technology will be indigenous it can be 
transferred to SMEs at a very afford able cost compared to the imported 
technology. 
 
b) “Development of hard and high temperature refractory material / aggregate 
from saprolite”. The objective of this project is to develop refractory aggregate 
from saprolite. It is unutilised (waste) material ge nerated during bauxite mining. 
saprolite is exposed in association with bauxite deposits of Central India, West 
Coast and Gujarat. Development of technology/product from Saprolite which is 
cheaper and readily available source as compared to other refractor y raw 
material. The development refractory product from saprolite can be the backbone 
for existing as well as new bauxite mining industry. 
 
c) “Integrated approach for development of process models and pilot 
production of aluminium alloy extrudates using porthole dies”.  The project aims to 
target SMEs for the technology upgradation in terms of simulation of die design, 
process models development and process parameters for extrusion of different 
aluminium alloys." 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
Chapter-III 
 
R&D by Autonomous Bodies  
 
3.1 The Ministry of Mines have three autonomous bodies, namely, JNARDDC, NIMH 
and NIRM which partially depend upon plan and non -plan grant from Ministry of Mines. 
They indulge in the field of Aluminium Research, health and rock mec hanics 
respectively.  These three autonomous bodies are partly dependent on the plan and 
non-plan grants from Government of India and they also cover substantial activities of 
research through their clientele and associated services.   In addition to these  three 
organisations, Ministry of Mines also heads the Governing Body of Non Ferrous 
Materials Technology  Development Centre which is a leading research Centre on 
specialty metals and materials.  
One time capital component for updation of R&D facilities    
 
3.2 The quality of R&D hinges upon availability of state of art research facilities in the 
country.  In the mining sector R&D activities are being pioneered by the   three 
autonomous bodies functioning under Ministry of Mines i.e. Jawaharlal Nehru Resear ch 
Development & Design Centre, Nagpur National Institute of Miners‟ Health, Nagpur and 
National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Kolar.    As these Institutions were carrying out 
R&D related work with obsolete equipment, need was felt to replace the capital 
equipment which have outlived their life.  Since these autonomous bodies are unique 
from the point of view of the national importance and keeping their core competence in 
mind, the Ministry modified the S&T Scheme after due evaluation by an impartial and 
independent agency and considered to add one more component in the Scheme viz 
“One-Time Grant to the Autonomous Bodies under the Ministry of Mines for Capacity 
Building”.  During the year 2014 -15, grant   to the tune of Rs 13.70 crore was released 
to these Institutions.  
 
3.3 The details of amount allocated and released to the three institutes during 
the previous years, under “One Time Grant” is given as under : 

31 
 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Expenditure 
2013-14 Rs. 0.03 Rs. 0.03 Rs. 0.03 
2014-15   Rs.13.70 Rs. 13.70 Rs.13.70 
2015-16 Rs.7.70 -- -- 
As on 10.9.2015 
 Ministry of Mines accords high priority to R&D and in 2014 -15 actual expenditure 
in R&D activities has been 8.5% of its plan budget. 
A. Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research  Development and Design Centre 
(JNARDDC) 
3.4 JNARDDC is an autonomous body set up in 1989 as a joint venture of Ministry of 
Mines and UNDP with a view to provide major R&D support system for the emerging 
modern aluminium industry in India.  The Centre caters to R&D needs of both primary 
and secondary producers.  It has made key contributions in the area of beneficiation, 
characterisation, and technological evaluation, upgradation of bauxites and reduction of 
energy consumption and utilisation of residua l material such as red mud.   Against the 
sanctioned strength of 61 scientific and administrative staff, currently 47 members are in 
place. 
3.5 The R&D Expenditure during last 3 years (including 2015 -16) is provided in the 
table below.  Since it is an R&D Organization, salary of Scientists is also included in the 
R&D related expenditure.   
(`in Lakhs) 
Head of Account 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 (*) 
INCOME 
1 Special Plan Grant from the Ministry 1.00 740.00 460.00 
2 Plan project Grant from the Ministry 22.88 151.84 479.00 
3 Non-Plan Grant-in-Aid from Ministry 360.00 400.00 440.00 
4 Income from projects & testing (IR) & 
AMDF (EBR) :  IEBR 
252.95 307.14 360.00 
Total  636.83 1598.98 1739.00 
R&D EXPENDITURE 

32 
 
1 Expenditure on Pay & Allowances 478.23 528.85 580.00 
2 Expenditure on Projects, Admin, etc. 157.45 261.85 970.00 
Total  635.68 790.70 1550.00 
(*) – target 
  Achievements of JNARDDC 
3.6 Innovative schemes taken up in the last 3 years  in general and 2015 -16 in 
particular include inter-alias 
 
 Indigenization and development of wrought aluminium alloys for Indian defence.   
 Development of Super Thermal Aluminium (STAL) Conductor for Indian Power 
Sector: 
 Development of hard and high temperature refractory material/aggregate from 
Saprolite 
 Development of instrument for measuring liquidus temperature of the smelting 
cells. 
 Process developed for production of low soda (Na2O) hydrate in Bayer Circuit. 
 Developed a suitable process for preparation of low ferric alum and ceramic 
aggregate from waste or low grade aluminium dross.  
 
3.7  The Institute has completed number of research projects, published papers and 
above all filed a number of patents in the recent past.  A table showing its project and 
research related activities is provided below:-  
 
 
YEAR Projects 
completed 
Ongoing 
projects 
Papers 
published / 
presented 
Patents 
filed 
Seminars 
organized 
2013-14 8 12 15 1 0 
2014-15 7 11 23 3 4 
2015-16 
(*) 8 12 25 3 2 
(*) - projected 
 Action Plan for promoting in-house R&D  
3.8 JNARDDC is diversifying in the areas of energy, environment and alloy 
development. With a view to promote in -house R&D, the centre is upgrading its state of 
art facilities and installing new alloy development set up for attending to the needs of the 

33 
 
downstream sector  in order to address the needs of automobile sector, building & 
construction industry & packaging industry. 
  Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Center 
(JNARDDC), Nagpur is one of the major Research and Development support system for 
the emerging modern aluminium industry in India. On a query as to w hat was the 
contribution of the mineral s ector in the GDP of the country during the last five years 
and what has been the impact of R&D activities undertaken over the last 5 years to 
enhance the mineral contribution in the GDP, the Ministry stated that:  
 "The contribution of mining and quarrying  including coal sector  in the GDP at 
constant price was 2.83% in 2010 -11, 2.65% in 2011 -12, 2.37% in 2012 -13, 
2.13% in 2013 -14 and 2.39% in 2014 -15. However, statistics related to value 
addition under each segment including R&D is not available.The exact 
contribution of R&D activities in the mineral output could not be ascertained 
because contribution of different sectors in GDP measured in terms of gross 
value added by the sectors as a whole and in the year 2014 -15, mining and 
quarrying has contributed 275 ,812 (Rs in crore) and Minerals has direct 
correlation with manufacturing sector and in 2014 -15, manufacturing sector 
contributed 19,87,173 (Rs in crore)." 
B. National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM) 
3.9 The National Institute of Rock Mechanics was esta blished in 1988 as an 
autonomous research institute under the administrative control of Ministry of Mines. The 
main objectives of the Institute are : 
 To undertake research in Rock Mechanics under different mining conditions to find 
solutions. 
 To evolve new mining methods to promote productivity, safety and conservation in 
mines. 
 To provide consultancy on charge to mining and other organizations. 
 To provide facilities for training of mining students. 
 To publish and disseminate the results of research. 
 

34 
 
3.10 The R&D Expenditure as incurred by NIRM during last 3 years (including 2015 -
16) is provided in the table below.  Since it is a R&D Organisation salary of Scientists is 
also included in the R&D related expenditure.   
 
                      (Rs. In lakhs) 
Head of Account 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
INCOME 
1 Special Plan Grant from the Ministry 0.00 505.00 185.00 
2 Non-Plan Grant-in-Aid from Ministry 477.00 232.00 543.00 
3 Income from projects & testing 555.29 1605.22 791.54 
Total  1032.29 2342.22 1519.54 
R&D EXPENDITURE 
1 Expenditure on Pay & Allowances 775.78 589.57 757.24 
2 Expenditure on Projects, Admin, etc. 446.56 1093.68 652.60 
Total  1222.34 1683.25 1409.84 
*Target 
3.11 As per the information made available to the Committee, the Budget of National 
Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM) in the year 2014 -15 was Rs. 14 crore. It has been 
increased to Rs. 16 crore in the year 2015 -16. Similarly, the budget of National Institute 
of Miners‟ Health (NIMH) has been increased from Rs. 2.5 crore to Rs. 2 .6 crore in the 
year 2015-16. When the Committee asked about the reasons for such meager increase 
in the budget of the two Institutes and details of R&D works done by them, the Ministry 
in its written response stated as under: 
"Ministry of Mines provide 80 % of salary component to its autonomous institute 
and also provide one time capital grant restricted for the 12 th plan only further 
under science and technology scheme they are eligible to submit any project but 
approval depends after the projects get appr oved by technical Committees of the 
Ministry. The one time grant scheme undertaken during the 12 th Plan brings in 
substantial investment in the initial year of the 12 thplan for revamping the capital 
infrastructure and making the capacity of the respective institute to venture into 

35 
 
the area of advance research. As the allocated one time increase is tapering off , 
it would have an impact on total R&D expenditure incurred by these institute. 
However, this tapering can be offset by the institutes in -house by way  of taking 
advance research proposals from other stakeholders. A concerted action by the 
institute in this direction would consolidate the extra budgetary resources leading 
to larger investment in R&D in subsequent years.   
 Ministries handholding to these  institutes would continue in the form of 
grants towards salary, towards one time increase till corpus of Rs. 27.05 crores is 
exhausted and also through the suitable R&D projects approv ed under the 
Ministry of Mines Scheme of S&T programme. The budget shown by JNARDDC, 
NIRM and NIMH in the year 2014 -15 and 2015 -2016 contain the total fund 
received by them in 2014 -15 and likely to be received in the year 2015 -16 from 
the various projects which they receive from different organization including 
Ministry of Mines. However, any major increase in the activities of these institutes 
hinges upon in-house expertise and its utilization by various stakeholders." 
 
Key Achievement of NIRM 
3.12 The projects of national importance carried out by the Institute inter-alia include:  
 
 Controlled blasting carried out for a canal project near highly industrialized zone 
for SSNNL, Gujarat, and for Kota Atomic Power Plant. 
 Design of controlled blasting for speedy construction of Road Under Bridges 
(ROBs) to South Western Railways. 
 3-D numerical modeling of Mangdechhu Hydro -electric Project, Bhutan, and for 
Tehri Pumped Storage Project, Uttarakhand. 
 Engineering geological studies for Pranahitha -Chevella Sujala Shravanthi 
(Telangana) Scheme and Rajasthan Atomic Power Project  – Units 7 & 8, 
Rawatbhata. 
 Geophysical resistivity image captured below the Haldia -Barauni oil pipeline of 
IOCL to identify old mining galleries below. 

36 
 
 In-situ hydrofracturing, deformability and shear tests carried out at Attunli Hydro -
electric Project, Arunachal Pradesh and at Wangchhu Project, Bhutan. 
Strategy for future 
3.13 NIRM is expanding its activities into newer areas, such as oil & gas (for projects 
related to excavation of large underground caverns for strategic storage of these fuels), 
metro ra ils (underground rail tunnels and underground stations) major river -linking 
projects (irrigation tunnels) and other infrastructure projects.  
 Centers of Excellence are proposed to be established in core areas of rock 
mechanics; presently Centre for Testin g Services and Centre for Site Characterization 
have been identified; in future, other Centres like Mining Technology, Excavation 
engineering, Design & Monitoring  and Advanced Rock Mechanics Training will be 
identified. 
  
C. National Institute of Miners‟ Health (NIMH) 
3.14 The National Institute of Miners‟ Health was established in 1989 with the mandate 
to conduct applied research in the field of occupational health and hygiene of workers 
employed in mining and mineral industry with the vision of „safe mines and healthy 
miners‟,  its headquarter is at Nagpur and against the sanctioned 22 posts , currently 18 
number of scientists are in place. 
 R&D Expenditure during last 3 years  
Head of Account 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
INCOME 
1 Special Plan Grant from the Ministry 0.00 01.00 125.00 
2 Non-Plan Grant-in-Aid from Ministry 170.00 162.08 150.00 
3 Income from projects & testing 115.15 80.49 110.00 
 Total  285.15 243.57 385.00 
R&D EXPENDITURE 
1 Expenditure on Pay & Allowances 138.84 170.37 162.31 
2 Expenditure on Projects, Admin, etc. 97.80 84.13 94.73 
 Total  236.64 254.50 257.04 

37 
 
 
 The key initiatives taken by NIMH include the following:-  
 
 Development of standard framework and guidelines for noise mapping in mines 
and surrounding community. 
 Multi Centric Study of dust Related Diseases in Stone Mines and Development of 
Sustainable Preventive Programme. 
 Identification of biomarkers for detection of Noise Induced Hearing Loss in the 
Miners. 
 9 Research papers have been published in reputed Journals during the year 
2014-15 primarily on occupational hazard associated with the mining activities.   
Strategy for future  
 
This institute carry out clientele projects on occupational health and industrial 
hygiene in various mines and mineral based industries as per the demand of the mines/ 
industries. In these projects research questions are incorporated to facilitate small scale 
in house R&D activities in addition to providing services to these clients. 
 
3.15 When the Committee  a sked  to state the reasons for allocating only Rs. 7.70 
crore in the year 2015 -16 for JNARDDC, NIRM and NIMH under “One Time Grant” , 
while Rs. 13.70 crore was provided in the year 2014 -15 under this scheme, the Ministry 
in its written response submitted as under: 
"The Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has approved an expenditure not 
exceeding Rs. 66.05 crores for the “Science & Technology Programme” Scheme 
for the 12 th Plan period, with a one -time capital component of Rs. 27.05 crores, 
an R&D component of Rs. 36 crores and an IEC component of Rs. 3 crores. 
The details of one-time grant of three Institutes in 12th Plan period are as under:- 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 Capital Cost towards 
purchase of 
equipment 
Modification of 
existing 
spaces/creation of 
new laboratories 
Total 
JNARDDC, 
Nagpur 
Rs. 16 crore Nil Rs.16 crore 
NIRM, 
Karnataka 
Rs. 8.30 crore Rs. 50 lakhs Rs.8.80 crore 
NIMH, Nagpur Rs. 1.75 crore Rs. 50 lakhs Rs.2.25 crore 
 
 
 There are three grant receiving autonomous bodies under the Ministry of Mines, 
namely, Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development & Design Centre 
(JNARDDC), Nagpur, National Institute of Miners Health (NIMH), Nagpur and 
National Institute of Rock Mecha nics (NIRM), Kolar. The reasons and 
justifications for proposing this component in this S&T program is that most of the 
equipment were procured long time back and many of them have not been 
replaced as they have outlived their life.  
 This component has fixed outlay of Rs. 27.05 crores to be disbursed in 12 th Plan. 
In 2013-14, the budget was not allocated as per 12 th Plan, only 1 lakh of each 
institutes was allocated. In the financial year 2014 -15, it was clubbed of two year 
i.e. 2013-14 and 2014-15 and budget allocated Rs. 13.70 crores and thereafter in 
the financial year 2015 -16, it is allocated only for one year as per 12 th Plan 
allocation. This is the reason why during financial year 2015 -16, funds are 
allocated less in comparison of 2014-15.  With Rs. 21.43 crores already released 
in the years 12 th plan till date, the disbursement under one time grant in the 
remaining period would further decrease.  
 
D. Non Ferrous Materials Technology Development Centre (NFTDC) 
3.16 NFTDC is an autonomous and self -financing R & D institution under the aegis of 
Ministry of Mines dedicated to the development of advanced materials, innovative 
processes on the one hand and mechanical design, analysis, electronics, 
instrumentation and control leading to component and systems development & 
integration on the other.  NFTDC is a unique Technology Centre, in that it is a multi -

39 
 
disciplinary knowledge domain based institution which enables the centre to undertake 
complex technology development endeavours as interdisciplinary project s involving 
both knowledge creation (scientific know -why) and knowledge integration (technical 
knowhow). NFTDC‟s uniqueness also stems from its three genetic characteristics, 
namely (i) self -financing nature, (ii) its multi -disciplinary all executive Human  resource 
and (iii) R & D policy of applied R & D as contract / sponsored research oriented to 
needs of user agencies.   
 The institute is entirely executive based with nearly 60 scientists and engineers  
as staff covering a range of multidisciplinary knowledge domains.  In addition,  there are 
visiting scientists and emeritus professors.  NFTDC also has an active academic 
programme in terms of Joint M Tech and PhD in advanced materials, System 
Engineering and Design with NITs, Universities and IITs and nearly 40 M Tech and PhD 
students do their thesis in NFTD. 
 The R&D expenditure incurred by NFTDC is provided in the table below:-  
          (In Rs. Crore) 
NFTDC FY 2014-15 FY 2013-14 FY 2012-13 FY 2011-12 
Revenue Income  14.02 12.89 12.05 
Expenditure Including 
Depreciation 
 14.76 13.12 11.28 
Depreciation  2.22, 1.39 1.43 
 
Key Achievements  
3.17 NFTDC is involved in development of advanced materials, components and 
systems in high technology areas such as (i) aeronautical and aerospace (ii) 
metallurgical & Process Engineering, (iii) energy (conventional and nonconventional), 
(iv) automotive, (v) b iomedical and health care and (vi) environment sectors. The basic 
core competence of NFTDC in  (a) Design, (b) advanced materials & Manufacturing and 
(c) Controls and Instrumentation have been integrated in all projects to render 
technology solutions in an  end to end paradigm.   NFTDC's systems approach to 
technology development enables concept to product development spanning Technology 

40 
 
Readiness Levels 3 to 7, thus addressing the real gaps in translational research. Apart 
from aerospace &automotive, the institute specialized in following fields: 
 Rare Earth Materials 
 Energy Materials and Devices  
 Next Generation alloy conductors for Power Sector 
 Advanced Engineering Ceramics from Minerals. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

41 
 
  Chapter- IV 
 
R&D by PSUs  and Attached & Subordinate Offices  
 When the Committee enquired about the extent of investments in the R&D in 
mining sector as a percentage of revenue and how it  compares with global standards 
including initiatives undertaken  to boost  investment on R&D activities, the Ministry of 
Mines in its written reply stated as under: - 
"The Indian Mining Sector is fragmented and dominated by large number of 
players mostly those belonging to private sector. A consolidated figure of R&D 
expenditure by large number of mining companies / firms / individuals is not 
available.  
 
However, at macro level according to global competitiveness report 2014 -15 
India‟s capacity for innovation in general has been lower than that of many 
countries like USA, UK, South Korea and eve n other BRICS countries such as 
Brazil, China and South Africa. This is also exhibited through poor score on 
industry collaboration on R&D. In terms of companies spending on R&D in 
absolute terms and also the ratio is far less in comparisionto advance and 
emerging countries. In terms of capacity for innovation India Ranks 48, for quality 
of scientific institution it ranks 52 and for company spending it ranks 30 in the 
world.  
 
Ministry of Mines accords high priority to R&D and in 2014 -15 actual expenditure 
in R&D activities has been 8.5% of its plan budget. 
 
The PSUs under Ministry of Mines are following the guidelines of Department of 
Public Enterprises which provides for the minimum amount of expenditure for 
R&D activities as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of CPSE Minimum Expenditure on R&D as a 
percentage of PAT 
1 Maharatna &Navratna 1% of the Profit after Tax 
2 Miniratna – I & II and below 0.5% of the Profit after Tax 
 
A.  National Aluminium Company Limited(NALCO) 
4.2 National Aluminum Company Limited (NALCO) is a Navratna CPSE under 
Ministry of Mines, Govt. of India. It was established on 7th January, 1981, with its 
registered office at Bhubaneswar. The Company is a group „A‟ CPSE having integrated 
and diversified oper ations in mining, metal and power with sales turnover of Rs 7024 

42 
 
crore in financial year 2013-14. Presently, the Government of India holds 80.93% equity 
of NALCO.   
 The company has a 68.25 lakh TPA Bauxite Mine & 22.75 lakh TPA Alumina 
Refinery located at Damanjodi in Koraput dist. of Odisha, and 4.60 lakh TPA Aluminum 
Smelter & 1200 MW Captive Power Plant located at Angul, Odisha. As per 
diversification plan, NALCO has ventured into renewable energy sectors. The Company 
has successfully commissioned two w ind power plants. A 50.4 MW wind power plant at 
Gandikota, Andhra Pradesh and another of 47.6 MW wind power plant at Jaisalmer, 
Rajasthan are operational since December, 2012 and Janu ary, 2014 respectively. 260 
KW Rooftop Solar Power System has been made o perational at Office and Township, 
Bhubaneswar during FY 2014-15. 
 
4.3 R&D Expenditure by NALCO during the last 3 years (including 2015-16) in 
terms of total turnover, profit/ budget is as under: 
2012-13 (Rs. In Crores): Turn Over-Rs. 7247 Crore;  PAT: Rs. 593 Crore. 
Fund 
Allocated 
(Budget) 
Fund Utilized/ 
R&D Expenditure 
R&D Exp as % 
of Turnover/  
 
R&D Exp as 
% of Profit 
After Tax 
(PAT) 
R&D Exp as % 
of PAT of 
previous year 
as per DPE 
guideline. 
15.76 18.92 0.26 3.19 2.23 
2013-14 (in Rs Crores): Turn Over-Rs 7024 Crore;  PAT: Rs 642 Crore 
12.96 13.87 0.20 2.16 2.34 
2014-15(in Rs Crores): Rs 7771 Crore;  PAT: Rs 1322 Crore 
8.59 7.31 0.09 0.55 1.14 
 
2015-16(in Rs Crores) 
Projected Turnover Projected Expenditure on R&D 
9026 13.22 
 
 
4.4 As per the information made available to the Committee, Rs. 18.92 crore was 
spent by NALCO in the year 2012 -13. This expenditure was 13.87 crore in the year 
2013-14 and in the year 2014-15, only Rs. 7.31 crore was spent by NALCO on R&D. On 
being asked by the Committe e about the reasons for lesser expenditure by NALCO on 

43 
 
R&D and the schemes formulated  by NALCO to utilize Rs. 13.22 crore in the year 
2015-16, the Ministry in its written response stated as under:  
"The expenditure incurred during 2012 -13, 2013 -14, as not ed by Hon‟ble 
Members have exceeded the allocation, made based on DPE guidelines. 
However NALCO fell short by 1.28 crore from allocation during 2014 -15. The 
major reasons for such shortfall are: 
Delay in completion of certain in house as well as collaborat ive projects and the 
desired success could not be achieved in some projects such as;  
(a)  „Tile from Fly Ash Project‟, in which scaling up of the projects to pilot/ 
plant scale, as perceived could not taken up  
(b) Delay in finalization of R&D agreement with RTA due to various issues, which 
delayed the expenditure on the account.  
However the balance of above R&D allocation shall be added to the expenditure 
planned in the current years, 2015-16 as per DPE guidelines." 
 
The key initiatives taken include the following:- 
 
 Studies on Solubility of Lime from different sources to establish their suitability as 
Filter Aid. 
 Optimization of synthetic flocculent from different sources for use in High Rate 
Thickener and Deep Cone Washers for better settling and substitution of natural 
Flocculent, Wheat Bran. 
 A novel process on destruction of toxic Cyanide and recovery of valuables 
(Sodium, Fluoride etc.) from spent pot lining material (SPL) has been developed 
and the process knowhow has been commercialized to 2 parties. 
 A new method has been developed for extraction of Alumina from fly Ash through 
Pyro/ Hydro Metallurgical routes.  
 Seed Grinder has been introduced in Refinery for control of grain size and 
maintains liquor productivity. 
 Tri Calcium Aluminate has be en introduced as filtrate in place of Lime for better 
through put of Liquor. 

44 
 
 Factors contributing to Melt Loss identified and the same is under implementation 
to reduce the melt loss. 
 Use of Slotted Anodes and anodes with higher stub hole depth in pot line s have 
been introduced for reduction of energy consumption. 
Strategy for future 
The main thrusts areas which form the goals and objectives of R&D are: 
 Increasing extraction efficiency and productivity to maximize production; 
 Reduction in the cost of production of bauxite, power, alumina and aluminum; 
 Development of new  Aluminum alloys and value added products; 
 Waste utilization and disposal and 
 Attain analytical excellence along with development of reference standards. 
International collaboration: 
 NALCO has collaborated with CSIRO, Australia on extraction of Alumina from 
low grade ore/ fly ash  
 NALCO has collaborated with Aluminum Pechiney/Rio Tinto Alcan to take up 
various developmental R&D Projects. 
4.5 NALCO is reported to be in  the process of finalizing various R&D projects and 
facilities that are to be taken up in its R&D centers including NRTC (NALCO Research 
and Technology Centre). Board level technology Committee and Research and 
Scientific Advisory Committee (RSAC) meetings are  being held periodically to review 
the R&D activities of the company including technological up gradation and  innovative 
modification carried  out in different units and benefits derived thereon for further 
improvement in the process and productivity and also to review MOU Project.  
 When the Committee  asked to f urnish details of the R&D projects finalized by 
NALCO to be taken up during the current year, the Ministry in its written reply stated as 
under:  
"Details of the R&D projects finalized / to be final ized shortly by NALCO, to be 
taken up during the current year are as given below:- 
 
 

45 
 
I. In-house Projects: 
1. Controller System for compressed air in Smelter Plant, as an energy 
saving tool by optimizing the running of compressors has been undertaken. 
Tendering activity for the procurement and installation of the system is in 
progress. 
2. For large scale plant trial of the project “Improvement in oxidation behavior 
of anodes- action has been initiated. Bench scale trial results to improve anode 
quality for trial & implementation.  
3. Trial of Synthetic flocculent in washers at Alumina Refinery as a suitable 
replacement of natural flocculent. 
II. Collaborative Projects in pipeline: 
Sl. 
No. 
Proposal in Brief Agency 
1 Up-gradation of Pot in Smelter with high amperage 
for increase in current efficiency and productivity. 
RTA Alcan 
2 Recovery of alumina and titania from red mud 
through hydrometallurgical route. 
IMMT 
3 Defluoridation of Smelter surface water through 
EMRION Technology. 
Eesavyassa 
4 Development of NALCO alumina nano -fluid: a cost 
effective formulation and study of its stability. 
GIFT, 
Bhubaneswar 
5 Development of electronic material for device 
fabrication using NALCO red mud 
Sikhsa-o-
Anushandhan 
University and 
GIFT combined 
6 Project on Development & implementation of 
specialized energy saving motors in generators, wind 
mills, conveyors, agitators etc 
Eesavyasa 
Technology, 
Hyderabad 
7 Extraction of gallium from aluminium waste in plant 
scale. 
BARC, Mumbai 
8 Fabrication and commercialization of a highly porous 
pervious concrete material from fly ash. 
KIIT University, 
Bhubaneswar 
9 Embedded system for compressed air consumption 
monitoring in aluminium smelter plant. 
NIT, Rourkela 
10 Pilot scale trial of “DC electric degassing process‟ for 
molten aluminium/alloys 
NML, 
Jamshedpur 
11 Multi scale modeling and prediction of microstructure 
for processing of Al -Li alloys for structural 
applications. 
IIT, Kgp& KIST, 
Bhubaneswar 

46 
 
All the above projects will be taken up for a period of 2 -3 years with an 
investment of about Rs 35-40 crore." 
 
B.  Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) 
4.6 Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) , a public sector undertaking under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Mines, was incorporated on 9th November 1967. 
It has the distinction of being the nation‟s only vertically integrated copper producing 
company as it manufactures copper right from the stage of mining to beneficiation, 
smelting, refining and casting of refined copper metal into downstream saleable 
products.  
 The Company markets copper cathodes, copper wire bar, continuous cast 
copper rod and by -products, such as anode slime (containing gold, silver, etc.), copper 
sulphate and sulphuric acid. More than 90% of the sales revenue is from cathode and 
continuous cast copper rods. HCL‟s mines and plants are spread across four operating 
Units, one each in the States of Rajasthan, Mad hya Pradesh, Jharkhand and 
Maharashtra 
 
4.7 The total sanctioned number of posts of scientists  in HCL  is 25.  All are working 
in R&D.  
  
R&D Expenditure during last three years (including 2015 -16) in terms of total turnover 
and profit/budget are as follows:- 
Period R&D 
expenditure 
 (in Crore) 
% R&D 
expenditure 
w.r.t  turnover 
% R&D 
expenditure 
w.r.t  PAT 
2013-14 3.068 0.19 1.07 
2014-15 2.85 0.25 4.19 
2015-16 2.34 0.47 (prov) 7.0 (prov)  
 
4.8 The key initiatives taken by HCL, as under:  
 Rock mechanics study of underground mines to improve safety. 
 Subsidence study of Khetri Copper Mine &Kolihan Copper mine at Rajasthan. 

47 
 
 Trial run of 90mm high chrome grinding media for lowering spillage 
generation and obtaining higher % of fines. 
 Study of utilization of copper slag in cement Industry. 
 Test work & desktop study for recovery of LME -A grade copper from the 
copper concentrate through hydrometallurgical route. 
 Mineral processing test work of copper ore. 
 Recovery of valuable metals and mineral from copper ore tails ( waste)  at 
Rajasthan 
 Recovery of nickel salts/ nickel from the spent electrolyte of copper refinery. 
  Replacement of high pressure burner with low pressure burner at Smelter 
plant, Jharkhand. 
 Bench scale pilot study of copper recovery of sulphide c oncentrates through     
hydrometallurgical route. 
 
Strategy for future 
 Human resource building for R&D by additional recruitment and training. 
 Strengthening of R&D infrastructure and enhancement of funding. 
 
 During the year 2015 -16, HCL has spent an amoun t of Rs 275.0 lakhs on 
purchase of R&D equipment which is 48% of the total expenditure on R&D by the 
Company. During 2014 -15 & 2013 -14, the amount spent on equipment is Rs 6.97 & 
6.25 lakh respectively which is 2.5 & 2.1 percent of the total R&D expenditur e amount 
respectively." 
 
C. Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) 
4.9 MECL functioning under Ministry of Mines, Government of India, is a premier 
exploration agency in the country engaged in detailed mineral exploration for various 
minerals such as Coal, Lignite, Copper, Lead, Zinc, Gold, Iron Ore, Lime Stone, and 
Bauxite etc. except Oil & Natural Gas.  
 MECL projects are executed as promotional exploration for Ministry of Mines 
and Ministry of Coal and contractual work for Central / State Governments, PSUs and 

48 
 
Private Sectors.  MECL‟s Geological Report forms the basis for Pl anning and 
Development of Mines.   
 
4.10 R&D expenditure of MECL during last three years  and 2015-16 are 
as under: 
                                                                                                 (Value in Rs. lakhs) 
Financial Year Expenditure on 
R&D 
Gross 
Revenue  
Profit After Tax 
2012-13 15.73 17168 2067 
2013-14 29.95 19856 2546 
2014-15 39.33 27557 5944 
 
  
The key initiatives taken in R&D activities in the field of geophysics 
 
4.11 MECL has identified the l imitation of a single  method of Surface Geophysical 
survey technique due to complicated Geological set up . Research and Development  
Projects have been conceived with a basic objective to establish an integrated method 
of different techniques which can be fruitfully adapted for exploration of any type of 
Sulphide ore deposit such as massive/ disseminated and map their subsurface 
disposition, continuation and structural features in comparatively lesser time as well as 
at lesser cost.Under the scheme of R&D work, all the projects were formulated with the 
help of  National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad.  
The key initiatives taken in R&D activities in the field of drilling 
4.12 The aim of research activities undertaken was to improve the quality of drilling 
activity by enhancing the time available for drilling and reducing the wear and tear of 
mud pumps, cutting tools, barrels and drill rods. 
4.13 There are no such sanctioned posts of Scientists /Engineers for R&D in MECL. 
The Scientists and Engineers in MECL carry out R&D work as and when required.  
 MECL has started recruiting Scientists & Engineers on regular basis from the last 
3 years. After fulfilling the demand of regular post of Scientists & Engineers, MECL may 
deploy a team of newly recruited Scientist & Engineers dedicated for R&D work in 
mineral exploration. 

49 
 
R&D by  Attached & Subordinate Offices 
A.  Geological Survey of India(GSI) 
4.14 The Geological Survey of India (GSI) was set up in 1851 primarily to find coal 
deposits for the Railways. Over the years, it has not only grown into a repository of geo -
science information required in various fields in the country , but has also attained the 
status of a geoscientific organisation of international repute. The main functions o f GSI 
relate to creation and up dation of national geoscientific information and mineral 
resource assessment. These objectives are achieved through ground surveys, air-borne 
and marine surveys, mineral prospecting and investigations, multidisciplinary geo -
scientist, geo -technical, geo -environmental and natural hazards studies, glaciology, 
seismotectonics, and carrying out fundamental research.  
 GSI, headquartered at Kolkata, has six Regional offices located at Lucknow, 
Jaipur, Nagpur, and Hyderabad, Shillong and Kolkata and State Unit offices in almost all 
States of the Country. Presently, Geological Survey of India is an attached office to the 
Ministry of Mines. 
 R& D Expenditure in GSI 
4.15 The R & D expenditure in GSI incurred in last three years and current year are as 
follows. 
 
(In crores) 
Year Budget Actual Expenditure  
2013-14 8.33 8.25 
2014-15 12.91 12.56 
2015-16 
(upto March 2016) 
11.8 11.72 
 
 The key initiatives taken in R&D activities 
4.16 Research and Development  in GSI is in the field of assessment of mineral 
resources, characterization of ore mineralization and understanding of genesis of 
minerals. The main R&D areas are- 

50 
 
 GSI‟s main focus is to establish subsurface behavior of the mineralization, 
tonnage and methodology to obtain best yield of concerned commodity. The 
three National Centers for Geoscience Research (NCEGR)  of GSI situated at 
Kolkata, Bengaluru and Faridabad are e ngaged in research on mineral 
characterization and ore beneficiation. 
 GSI has taken up research projects on Platinoid Group of Elements ( PGE) 
Exploration, Polymetallic minerals, coal, gold exploration etc.  
 Another area of research related to the explorati on of minerals is National 
Geochemical Mapping (NGCM). 
 New concept oriented approach in the form of Hyper Spectral Mapping has been 
initiated to understand the nature of ore deposit and alteration pattern.  
 The State-of-the-art scientific vessel R.V. Samud ra Ratnakar has been procured 
by GSI in 2013 having 27 scientific equipment fitted on -board for geological, 
geophysical and geochemical exploration of the sea bed for establishment off 
shore marine mineral resource and research in Exclusive Economic Zone ( EEZ) 
of India. 
  Strategy for future  
 The emphasis of R & D is to be on mineral beneficiation for the samples of gold 
investigation, base metal investigations, tin -tungsten-copper investigation, Iron ore 
investigation, PGE investigation & Andalusite inves tigation. The other areas identified 
for R&D activities are - 
 Glauconitic sandstones and shales are to be studied thoroughly from the point of 
view their direct utilisation in the fertilizer industry.  
 Tracking down the sources of high REE bearing rocks, t he mineral phases 
responsible for enrichment of REE in the endogenic host rocks and availability of 
technology for separation. 
 
 
 

51 
 
Strategy for future  
 
4.17 Fundamental Research & Development activities in GSI are carried under 
Mission-IV. In so far as R& D in mining Sector is concerned, R&D of GSI is restricted to 
assessment of mineral resources, characterization of ore mineralization and 
understanding of genesis of minerals which has long term impact on the mining sector 
for understanding the nature of the mineral deposits.   
 In various fundamental research projects of GSI , tentatively 86 Geologists , 6 
Geophysicists and one chemist are engaged during the current Field Season 
programme i.e. Field Season ( FS) 2015-16. During Field Season ( FS) 2014-15, 64 
Geologists and one Geophysicist and in Field Season  (FS) 2013-14, 44 Geologists and 
3 geophysicists were engaged in different fundamental research projects of GSI.  
 There is no separate sanctioned post of Geologist/ Geophysicist/Chemist for 
R&D work. The t otal sanctioned strength and filled strength of Science & Technology 
(S&T) stream of GSI as on 31.01.2016 is as given below: 
Status of Sanctioned & Filled Strength of S&T streams in GSI as on 31.01.2016 
 
  
 
 
S&
T 
(a) 
Stream           Sanctioned strength                   Filled strength 
 Gr. 
A 
Gr. B 
(inclu
ding 
NG) 
Gr. C Total  Gr. 
A 
Gr. B 
(includi
ng NG) 
Gr. C Total 
Geology 2786 660 150 3596 1893 136 81 2110 
Geophysic
s 
555 220 70 845 224 216 34 474 
Chemistry 509 315 150 974 152 117 83 352 
Engineeri
ng 
90 416 744 1250 55 190 285 530 
Total (a) 3940 1611 1114 6665 2324 659 483 3466 
 
As per the perspective plan of GSI the recruitment for the vacant posts in 
Science & Technology streams are being done to achieve the sanctioned 
strength of GSI. 

52 
 
4.18 R&D expenditure in GSI incurred  during  last three years (FY. 2013 -14, 2014-15 
and 2015-16 till September 2015) were as follows:- 
         (Rs. In crores) 
 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
Schemes BE 
Grant 
RE Actual 
Exp. 
BE 
Grant 
RE Actual 
Exp. 
BE Actual 
Exp. 
(upto 
Sept. 
2015) 
Research & 
Development 
8.33 8.33 8.25 25.89 12.91 12.56 12.63 6.59 
 
 As regards the reason for reduction from BE of Rs.25.89 crore in 2014 -15 to 
Rs.12.91 crore at RE stage, the Ministry in its written response stated as under:  
 
"GSI was allocated a BE Grant of Rs. 25.89 crores during FY 2014 -15 under R & 
D scheme. A major portion of this grant was under supply & material head. This 
was intended to be used for procurement of number of instruments required for 
various laboratories o f GSI. However, many of these instruments were procured 
from the funds allotted under Machinery & Equipment head since a certain 
amount was available under the Machinery and Equipment head. This was due 
to the fact that the GTV project of GSI had not mater ialized in the F.Y. 2014 -15. 
Therefore, there was a reduction at RE stage." 
B.  Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
4.19 The Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) is a subordinate office under the Ministry of 
Mines. It is engaged in the promotion of scientific development  of mineral resources of 
the country, conservation of minerals, protection of environment in mines, other than 
coal, petroleum and natural gas, atomic minerals and minor minerals. It discharges 
regulatory functions with respect to the relevant provisions o f Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and enforcement of the rules framed 
thereunder namely Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988, Mineral 
Concession Rules, 1960, Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986 and Rules made 
thereunder. IBM undertakes scientific, techno -economic, research oriented studies in 

53 
 
various aspects of mining, geological studies, ore beneficiation and environmental 
studies. 
 R&D Expenditure 
4.20 The R&D investments in IBM are mainly through its ore dressing wi ndow. The 
details of the expenditure on R&D by IBM are provided below: 
        (Rs. In crores) 
Sl.No Year BE RE Actual Expenditure 
1 2013-14 6.33 5.91 5.56 
2 2014-15 6.80 6.56 5.78 
3 2015-16 7.31 7.45  7.08                              
(up to March 2016) 
  
 The key initiatives taken include the following:- 
The R&D activities are carried out through IBM‟s Scheme No. 2 namely “Mineral 
beneficiation Studies - Utilization of Low grade and Sub -grade ores and analysis of 
Environmental samples”. The activities inter alia cover: 
 Development of process flow sheet/process know -how by testing on batch 
laboratory and continuous pilot plant scale on low grade, ferrous, non-ferrous and 
precious metal ores as well as industrial minerals. 
 Preparations of techn o-economic pre -feasibility reports for beneficiation of low -
grade ores Establishment of process flow sheet and design parameters for 
commercial concentrators.  Development of process parameters for 
agglomeration. 
 Environmental analysis of mine rejects/waste s beneficiations plant 
effluents/tailings etc. by utilizing instruments like Ion Chromatograph. 
 Characterization/Mineralogical studies on ores, rocks, sinters, slags etc. with the 
help of Microscopic techniques, X-ray Diffraction (XRD) studies, TG/DTA Thermo 
Analyzer, DTA Equipments." 
 

54 
 
Strategy for future  
 
 
 Directed consortia research in mission mode in collaboration with institutionsand 
industry in areas such as Mining Equipment Design, Development and Engineering, 
Energy Efficient Mining Solutions, Mine/mineral waste management, New and 
innovative and energy efficient Mineral & Metal processing Technologies, etc. 
 Initiating Training Programmes on Chemical Analysis and Ore Dressing at 
Modern Mineral Processing Laboratory and Pilot, IBM office, Nagpur. 
 
 
4.21 One of the major developmental function of IBM is to play a role of a catalytic 
agency to promote and develop the much needed R&D in mineral processing in the field 
of mineral beneficiation, mineral characterization, chemical analysis of ores and 
minerals and an alysis of environmental samples.  When asked by the Committee  to 
furnish details of the steps taken by IBM in promotion and development of research and 
development projects in the mining  sector during the last 5 years, the Ministry in its 
written response  stated as under:  
"Mineral Processing (Erstwhile Ore Dressing) Division of IBM carries out R& D 
studies in the field of mineral beneficiation. It‟s Modern Mineral Processing 
Laboratory (MMPL) and Pilot Plant comprising of Ore Dressing Laboratory, 
Mineral Beneficiation Pilot Plant, and Analytical Laboratory Complex established 
with the assistance of  UNDP is well equipped with state -of-the-art facilities to 
carry out R&D studies in the field of mineral beneficiation and mineral 
characterization, and analysis of environmental samples. The Bureau has zone -
wise facilities in mineral testing and beneficia tion with regional ore dressing 
laboratory and pilot plants at Ajmer and Bangalore which are also well equipped 
with sophisticated equipment. A „Clay Laboratory‟ has also been established to 
cater to the needs of the north -eastern region exclusively.  The Mineral 
Processing Division of IBM conducts mineral beneficiation investigations, 
chemical and mineralogical studies, both on promotional as well as on charge 
basis. This supports the small mine owners on one hand and mineral 
beneficiation trouble shooting for all mines.  

55 
 
 
 Important steps taken by IBM in promotion and development of research and 
 development projects in the mining sector during the last 5 years include  the 
 following : 
(i) Development of process flow sheets for upgradation of ores and minerals  
other than coal and atomic minerals with a view to conservation of ores and 
minerals other than coal and atomic minerals for conservation and mineral 
growth. 
(ii) Amenability studies for beneficiation of samples collected through Regional 
Mining Geologist Stud ies (RMGS) and Regional Mineral Development 
Studies (RMDS) aimed at promotion and development in the mining sector 
towards compliance of regulatory functions of IBM for systematic and 
scientific mining. 
(iii) Conducting studies such as process mineralogy, analyt ical and physical 
characterization and beneficiation of waste dumps, mineral rejects, sub 
grade mineral stocks for implementation of zero waste mining and 
sustainable growth. 
(iv) Beneficiation studies aimed at suggesting blending options for effective 
utilization of waste dumps/low grade ores for mineral conservation and 
sustainable growth. 
(v) Recovery of metal values and valuable by -products from tailing waste 
dumps. 
(vi) Beneficiation studies for utilization of ors and minerals which are even below 
the threshold value of minerals as notified by IBM. 
(vii) Publications – (1) Iron and Steel Vision 2020 and (2) Monograph on 
Manganese Ore. 
(viii) Mineral Beneficiation studies on samples received from exploratory 
agencies like GSI, MECL etc. 
  

56 
 
Part -II 
Observations/ Recommendations  
R&D in Mining Related Activities 
 
1. The Committee note that in the mining and metal sector, the Ministry  of 
Mines have  a limited role in Research and  Development ( R&D) activities  which 
is primarily driven by private sector and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), 
mainly for the purpose of development of value-added products, technology 
upgradation and cost competitiveness. However, the Ministry promotes R& D in 
mining-related activities viz. exploration of mineral deposits including deep 
seated and hidden minerals, extraction of minerals and rock mechanics, ore 
beneficiation and waste minimization metallurgy specially in non -ferrous metals, 
miners' health re lated issues etc. through its limited budgetary allocation under 
Science and Technology ( S&T) scheme. In this context, the Committee find that 
the National Mineral Policy, 2008 recognizes the paramount  importance  of 
safety, economy, speed and efficiency in extraction of ore resources and its 
convergence into viable economic alloy and metals and has accorded higher 
priority to Research and Development (R&D) programmes. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Ministry of Mines has launched a comprehensive Science 
and Technology Programme inclusive of three main components viz. Research 
and Development (R&D); Information Education and Communication (IEC); and 
One-time Capital Component for up -gradation of R&D facilities in three 
autonomous bodies i.e. Jawaha rlal Nehru Research Development and Design 

57 
 
Centre (JNRADDC),  National Institute of Miners' Health (NIMH)  and  National 
Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM). Besides, the three Mining PSUs viz. National 
Aluminum Company Ltd. (NALCO), Hindustan Copper Limite d (HCL) and Mineral 
Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL) as well as attached office of   Geological 
Survey of India (GSI) and  subordinate office of Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) also 
contribute to R&D sector.  The Committee are happy to note that in order  to 
fructify the principles enunciated in the National Mineral Policy, guidelines for 
support to 'Mining Research' were issued in May, 2013 which set forth the 
objectives and thrust areas of research and sought to provide renewed scientific 
impetus to addr ess the emerging mining challenges. The Committee hope that 
earnest efforts will be made by the various bodies involved in R&D in the Mining 
Sector so that tangible results are achieved from these initiatives. To these 
extent, the Committee desire the Mini stry to set clear targets to achieve the 
objectives as set out in the vision document within  a broad timeframe. The 
Committee expect that the tangible results from all these R&D Programme foster 
greater utilization of the available mineral resources judic iously, economically 
and efficiently in an environmentally sustainable manner.  
Science & Technology Programme in Mining Sector  
2. The Committee note that there has been a quantum jump in the allocation 
of funds for Science and Technology Programme as evident in the Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2013 -14 standing at Rs. 3.97 crore with expenditure of Rs. 1.97 
crore which was increased to Rs. 6 .60 crore in the Budget Estimates 2014 -15 with 
100% utilization of the funds. The BE 2015 -16 was further increased to Rs. 7.30 

58 
 
crore. Admittedly, the scheme has become more broad based with the 
participation of a large number of Research Institutes and in the year 2015-16, 86 
research proposals were received in  the Ministry and are reported to be  awaiting 
clearance as compared to the 16 approved projects for the year 2014 -15. The 
Committee observe that the Research Programme supported by the Ministry 
include important components pertaining to prospecting/exploration of strategic 
rare metals and rare earth minerals; Research in Mining Methods including rock 
mechanics, mine designing, energy conservation, environmental protection and 
mine safety, and Mineral Beneficiation Techniques to utilize lower grade minerals 
and for quality improvement. Keeping in view the importance of R&D in the 
Mining Sector, the Committee feel that the Ministry's endeavour to synergise all 
the initiatives on these fronts would resul t in maximizing R&D outcomes. The 
Committee also stress on the need of putting into place an effective coordinating 
and monitoring mechanisms at a distinctly higher level in the hierarchy not only 
for achievement of targets set out  in the National Mineral  Policy, 2008 but also 
for ensuring effective utilization of R&D results to boost efficient, economic and 
safe mining activities in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken by the Government in this regard. The Committee wou ld also like 
to be apprised of the outcome of 16 R&D projects approved during 2014 -15 and 
the present status of 86 Research Projects received during 2015-16.   
Global Ranking in R&D  
3. The Committee find that in R&D sector at the international level, Indi a is  
ranked at  48th in capacity innovation, 52nd in scientific institution and 30th in 

59 
 
R&D expenditure in the World. While observing that the parameters taken into 
consideration for ranking were percentage of economic output devoted to R&D 
investment, sc ientific and engineering researchers per capita and innovations 
measured as patents per capita, the Committee note that India's poor ranking was 
mainly on account of lower percentage economic output devoted to R&D 
investment and lower scientific and engine ering researchers per capita. The 
Committee feel unhappy to find that India spends a meager only 0.81 percent of 
their GDP on R&D as compared to 2.05 percent by China, 4.36 percent by South 
Korea and 2.7 percent by USA. Further, India stands at a lowly 81 out of 141 
countries in the Global Innovative Index. The Committee, therefore, are of the 
considered opinion that there is an imperative need to boost the R&D 
infrastructure across various sectors by allocation  of more funds for R&D 
resources; making R&D jobs attractive to young talented scientists and 
professionals; greater institutional collaboration with renowned foreign 
universities/technology institutes; focus on future upcoming technologies to 
meet global challenges in value -added products, technolog y and cost 
competitiveness and development of indigenous cutting edge technologies.  
 
4. The Committee also note that the Indian Mining Sector is fragmented and 
dominated by a large number of players mostly belonging to  the  private sector. 
India's capacity for innovation is far lower than that of many countries like USA, 
UK, South Korea and even other BRICS countries such as Brazil, China and 
South Africa  as per the G lobal Competitiveness Report 2014 -15. This is also 

60 
 
evident in the poor score on industry c ollaboration on R&D. The Committee  have 
been apprised that the Ministry of Mines has only a supplementary role in 
improving the standard parameters of scientific research  and the nodal Ministry  
responsible for taking action to improve R&D standards is the Ministry of Science 
& Technology. The Committee are, therefore, of the firm view that to sustain and 
improve the competitiveness of India's Mining Secto r, adoption of modern and 
state-of-the-art technologies both in  existing and new plants is required by 
pursuing appropriate R&D programmes. The Committee, therefore, desire that a 
holistic approach encompassing the various aspects of shortcomings affecting 
the Indian R&D sector in mining should be followed besides bringing out a 
roadmap towards tackling the ground level impediments and constraints.  The 
Committee further desire the Ministry  of  Mines to make sustained efforts in 
coordination with Ministry of Science and Technology to raise India's low ranking 
in R&D at the international fora. The Committee w ould like to  be apprised of the 
action taken by the Govt. in this regard.  
R&D by Autonomous Bodies of Ministry of Mines 
5. The Committee note that there are three grant receiving autonomous bodies 
under the Ministry of Mines, namely, Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research 
Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC); Nagpur,  National Institute of Rock 
Mechanics (NIRM), Kolar and  National Institute of Miners' Health (NIMH), Nagpur 
which are pioneering the R&D activities in the Mining Sector under the Science &  
Technology (S&T) Scheme of Ministry of Mines.  T hese institutions receive partial 
financial support from the Ministry to meet around 80% of their expenditure and 

61 
 
also get funding from research projects sponsored by other sources including 
private sector. At the same time, the Committee note that these Institutions were 
carrying out the R&D related work with obsolete equipment and a need was felt to 
replace the capital equipment which  have outlived their life. Since these bodies 
are unique from the view of  national importance and keeping their core 
competence in mind, the Ministry modified the S&T Scheme and considered to 
add one more component in the Scheme namely 'One Time Grant for Capacity 
Building' and grant to the tune of Rs. 13.70 crore was released  to these 
Institutions during the year 2014 -15. Additionally, timely and regular disbursal of 
non-plan grant will cater to the operational and maintenance related needs of 
these institutes besides meeting salary component of the researchers employed 
in these institutes. The Committee further note that though the three autonomous 
institutes are trying to generate funds on their own, the fact remain that the same  
is just sufficient to run the institute and not enough to carry out more extensive 
research. In the past, plan grant was not given to these institutes on a regular 
basis. The Committee observe that plan grant on a regular basis for infrastructure 
upgradation is needed so that these institutes are able to properly channelize 
their focus on R&D activities. The Committee feel that these institutes can be used 
by Government for guided research work to help the Country to develop 
technologically. While observing that Ministry's S&T budget  is just a small grant , 
the Committee recommend that  it needs to be enhanced in order to strengthen to 
the   infrastructure facilities and capacity of these research institutions for 
developing indigenous cutting edge technologies in their respective field.   

62 
 
6. The Committee have been apprised that Science and Technology Scheme 
of the Ministry also needs to be up scaled allowing researcher or institute to form 
consortium and undertake research at Technology Readiness Level (TRL) 5 and 6 
level while continu ing support   to the researchers. Admittedly, the Ministry wa s 
already in the process of consultations with stakeholders to identify problem 
areas for specific research. The Committee desire that the Mining Sector need to 
focus on R&D for better resource utilization, better cost efficiency and production 
of world class prod ucts. The Committee may be apprised of the sustained efforts 
made by the Ministry of Mines/ PSUs and Autonomous bodies to undertake 
research covering various aspects viz. ore beneficiation for better recovery of 
mineral from ores ; developing indigenous cut ting edge  technologies in their 
respective field; exploration of mineral reserves including deep seated and hidden 
minerals; extraction of minerals  and rock mechanics ; minimization metallurgy 
specially in non -ferous metals miners' health related issues; etc. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Gov ernment should take necessary steps so that 
the pace of R&D activities  gains adequate momentum to sustain a high growth in 
mineral exploration and extraction . The Committee would like to be  apprised of 
the action plan of the Government to bring the mine exploration and extraction in 
the Country to international standards in the near future.   
Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research Development and Design Centre 
(JNARDDC) 
 
7. The Committee find that R&D by Autonomous Bodies under the Ministry of 
Mines partially depend upon plan and non -plan grant from the Ministry and the se 
Bodies also cover substantial activities of research through their clientele and 

63 
 
associated services. The Committee observe a considerable increase in R&D 
expenditure from Rs. 635.68 lakhs in 2013 -14 to Rs. 1 550.00 lakhs in 2015 -16 by 
JNARDDC. Further, 23 projects during the year 2013 -14 to 2015 -16 were 
completed by JNARDDC and  35 projects were reported to be under 
implementation. The Ministry of Mines extends all possible support to JNARDDC 
for fulfilling its requirement of necessary infrastructure and equipment for 
development indigenous alumina/aluminum technology including research in 
energy reduction, environment friendly technologies and indigenization of special 
utility aluminum alloys for overall development of Indian aluminum sector.  
Admittedly, JNARDDC not only provides a  major R&D support system for the 
emerging modern aluminum industry in India but also caters to R&D needs of 
both primary and secondary producers. The Committee  also note that JNARDDC 
has made key contribution s in the area of beneficiation, characterization and 
technological evaluation, up -gradation of bauxite and reduction of energy 
consumption and utilization of residual material such as red mud. The Committee 
appreciate the research work undertaken by JNARDDC  during the last 3 years  
which inter-alia include i ndigenization and development of wrought aluminum 
alloys for defence, development of Super Thermal Aluminum (STAL) conductor 
for Power Sector ,  Development of hard and high temperature refractory 
material/aggregate from Saprolite, Development of instrument for measuring 
liquidus temperature of the smelting cells, Process developed for production of 
low soda (Na 2O) hydrate in Bayer Circuit, Develop ment of a suitable process for 
preparation of low ferric alu m and ceramic aggregate from waste or low grade 

64 
 
aluminum dross, etc. While appreciating the  JNARDDC for promoting in -house 
R&D, the Committee desire that attention should also be paid for completion of 
the ongoing schemes  like upgradation of its state -of-art facilities and installation 
of new alloy development set up for attending to the needs of the downstream 
sectors like automobile sector, building and construction industry and  
packaging industry. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the ste ps 
taken to ensure commercial use of the outcomes of various R&D projects 
implemented by mine PSUs and Private Sector Mining Companies.  
National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM)  
8. The Committee note that NIRM is an autonomous research institute 
providing  research and consultancy support in almost entire spectrum of rock 
mechanics for improving safety and productivity in the mining and civil 
engineering sectors at par with international standards.  The Committee also 
observe that R&D expenditure of NIRM  during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014 -15 was 
Rs. 1222.34 lakh, Rs. 1683.25 lakh and 1409.84 lakh respectively. Admittedly, 
NIRM is  expanding its activities into  newer areas, such as oil & gas, metro rails, 
major river -linking projects and other infrastructure  projects. Centers of 
Excellence are proposed to be established  in core areas of rock mechanics. 
Presently,  Centre for Testing Services and Centre for Site Charac terization have 
been identified.  In future, other Centers like Mining Technology, Excavation 
engineering, Design & Monitoring and Advanced Rock Mechanics Training will be 
identified. NIRM has reported that occasionally there was delay in site preparation 
by the user agencies due to their internal issues and also in procuring/fabricating 

65 
 
the requir ed equipment/instruments in view of their specialized nature which 
need to be imported at times.  The Committee were also  given to understand that  
as shallow deposits were exhausting, one has to go for deeper depths to extract 
the minerals, thereby facing  more strata related problems. With environment 
restrictions becoming stringent, NIRM needs to look for hitherto uneconomical 
deposits and deposits in remote places, where one has to face complex strata 
conditions. The Committee feel that to deal with the above situations, NIRM needs 
to carryout R&D in new areas, for which increased Government funding is 
needed. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that not only the 
Government should grant more funds to NIRM to carryout R&D in new areas but 
the NIRM should also make earnest efforts to successfully implement their 
projects/schemes in these new areas.  
 
National Institute of Miners' Health (NIMH) 
 
9. The Committee note that National Institute of Miners‟ Health was 
established with the mandate to conduct applied research in the field of 
occupational health and hygiene of workers employed in mining and mineral 
industry with the vision of „safe mines and healthy miners‟ . The R&D expenditure 
of NIMH during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 were Rs. 236.64 lakh, Rs. 254.50 lakh 
and 257.04 lakh respectively.  The Committee observe that the key initiatives 
taken  up by NIMH inter -alia include development of standard framework and 
guidelines for noise mapping in mines and surrounding community; Multi Centric 
Study of dust Related Diseases in Stone Mines and Development of Sustainable 

66 
 
Preventive Programme; Identification of biomarkers for detection of Noise 
Induced Hearing Loss in the Miners; etc. While expecting that latest and advanced 
equipment are used by NIMH to analyse the human biological and environmental 
samples collected during field study, the Committee would like to be apprised of 
the mechanism with NIMH/Ministry of Mines to monit or that the recommendations 
of NIMH  are implemented by all mining companies so that these initiatives fructify 
into tangible benefits.  
 
10.  According to NIM,H to develop the institute as a state-of-art centre catering 
to the comprehensive occupational h ealth research for miners like international 
organizations working in the field of occupational health, there is a need to further 
add services such as drinking water quality, ergonomics assessment and 
intervention, environmental health impact assessment o f mining activities and 
intervention for prevention of workplace related diseases. The Pradhan Mantri 
Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) will be implemented by the  District 
Mineral Foundations (DMFs) of the respective districts using the funds accruing  
to  the DMF. Under this scheme, it was envisaged that the expertise available with 
NIMH may also be drawn upon to design special infrastructure  needed to take 
care of mining related illnesses and diseases. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the p erspective plan of Ministry of Mines/NIMH to implement the 
same.   
 
 

67 
 
R&D by PSUs  
National Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO)  
11. The Committee note that expenditure on R&D by NALCO during 2012 -13 
was Rs. 18.92 crore which came down to Rs. 13.87 crore  during 2013-14 and was 
further reduced to Rs. 7.31 crore  during 2014-15.  During 2015-16, the projected 
expenditure on R&D has been Rs. 13.22 crore. The Committee also note that as a 
part of its International Collaboration Strategy, NALCO has collaborated with 
CSIRO, Australia, on extraction of Alumina from low grade ore/fly ash and  also 
collaborated with Aluminum Pechiney/Rio Tinto Alcan to take up various 
developmental  R&D projects.  As regards the major achievements of the 
Company in R&D, the Committee are happy to note that NALCO has so far filed 27 
patent applications and 9 (nine) patents, have already been granted and 5 (five) 
have been commercialized and 1 (one) patent has been filed in 2015 -16 on the 
process for the production of alumina with additio nal recovery of calcium silicate 
from fly ash. The Committee are concerned to note that though the Profit After 
Tax (PAT) of the company, increased from Rs. 642 crore during 2013 -14 to Rs. 
1322 crore during 2014 -15, there was a reduction in R&D expenditure  from 2.16% 
of PAT to 0.55% of PAT during the two years. The Committee note that as a part 
of R&D initiative, NALCO has undertaken works like prospecting/exploration of 
strategic rare metals and rare earth minerals, research in mining methods 
including roc k mechanics, mine designing mining equipment, energy, 
conservation, environment protection and mine safety etc.The Committee 
appreciate the concerted efforts made towards completion of  R&D activities by 

68 
 
NALCO and desire that NALCO should augment steps tow ards ensuring  full 
utilization of allotted funds for R&D Projects  with a systemic periodical 
assessment  mechanism. To this end, t he Committee feel that NALCO should set 
up a separate centre for R&D activities and research facilities with requisite 
diagnostic and research facilities, pilot plants and simulation facilities. The 
Committee also desire that the Company should take necessary steps to ensure 
minimum allocation of 1% of its PAT for R&D activities and would like to be 
apprised of the perspective plan of NALCO to increase its R&D expenditure  as 
well as tangible outcomes from its R&D projects.    
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) 
12. The Committee note that R&D expenditure of Hindustan Copper Ltd. was 
Rs. 3.068 crore during 2013 -14 and it was reduced to Rs. 2.34 crore during the 
year 2015 -16. In spite of reduced budgetary  outlays for R&D by HCL, the R&D  
expenditure with respect to Profit After Tax (PAT) has increa sed from 1.07% in 
2013-14 to 7.0 % during 2015 -16.  The Committee were apprised of the vari ous 
R&D initiatives/studies undertak en by HCL like utilization of copper slag in 
cement industry, mineral processing test work of copper , recovery of valuable 
metals from copper waste , etc.  The Committee, however, observe that HCL has 
cited lack of “state -of-the-art” testing facilities in the Country for beneficiation 
studies of copper ore as one of the major constraints in improving the efficiency 
of the existing process. The Committee also note that HCL lacks in -house talent 
for R&D activities and has pl ans to tie up with Non -Ferrous Materials Technology 
Development Centre (NFTDC), Hyderabad to impart requisite training.   While 

69 
 
stressing the  need for  infusing more funds for R&D activities by HCL, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the future stra tegy of HCL to overcome 
the constraints faced by the company to improve its operating  efficiency and 
become a market leader.  
Mineral Exploration Company Limited (MECL) 
13. The Committee note that MECL is engaged in detailed mineral exploration 
for variou s minerals such as Coal, Lignite, Copper, Lead, Z inc, Gold, Iron Ore, 
Lime Stone  and Bauxite etc. except Oil & Natural Gas. MECL projects are 
executed as promotional exploration for Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Coal 
and contractual work for Central / State Governments, PSUs and Private Sectors.  
The R&D expenditure by MECL during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 are  Rs. 15.75 
lakh, Rs. 29.95 lakh and Rs. 39.33 lakh respectively.  MECL has identified the 
limitation of a single method of Surface Geophysical  survey technique due to 
complicated Geological set up. Research and Development Projects have been 
conceived with a basic objective to establish an integrated method of different 
techniques which can be fruitfully adapted for exploration of any type of Su lphide 
ore deposit such as massive/ disseminated and map their subsurface disposition, 
continuation and structural features in comparatively lesser time as well as at 
lesser cost. Under the scheme of R&D work, all the projects were formulated with 
the help  of  National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad.  
According to the Ministry there are no such sanctioned posts of Scientists 
/Engineers for R&D in MECL. The Scientists and Engineers in MECL carry out 
R&D work as and when required. Taking not e of the reported lack of adequate 

70 
 
infrastructure and manpower as the main constraint faced in the implementation 
of R&D projects by MECL, the Committee recommend that MECL should start 
recruiting  scientists and depute them for R&D work in mineral explora tion to 
improve the quality of drilling activity and reducing the wear and tear of drill 
machines and other tools/equipments.  
Need to Increase R&D Investment 
14. Keeping in view low expenditure for R&D activities by the PSUs of the 
Ministry of Mines the Committee desire that Mining Sector PSUs  must  look into 
this aspect seriously and take adequate steps to increase their R&D investment 
and achieve not only  the stipulated target of 1% of  their profit after tax as R&D 
expenditure but also take necessa ry steps to ensure utilization of  1% of the total 
turnover of the Company  by the terminal year of the 12th Plan  i.e. 2016-17. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should issue necessary directions 
to PSUs as well as private sector companies to c halk out a strategy  for 
increasing expenditure on R&D activities and desire that the Ministry should take 
necessary steps to ensure setting up of Centralized R&D organization like Steel 
Research and Technology  Mission of India (SRTMI) in the steel indust ry to 
ensure concerted and coordinated system of R&D in Mining Sector in the 
Country.   
Attached and Subordinate Offices  
Geological Survey of India (GSI)  
15. The Committee note that GSI‟s main focus is to establish subsurface 
behavior of the mineralization, tonnage and methodology to obtain best yield of 

71 
 
concerned commodity. The three National Centers for Geoscience Research 
(NCEGR)  of GSI situated at Kolkata, Bengaluru and Faridabad  are engaged in 
research on mineral characterization and ore beneficiation . GSI has taken up 
research projects on Platinoid Group of Elements (PGE) Exploration, Polymetallic 
minerals, coal, gold exploration etc. Another area of research related to the 
exploration of minerals is National Geochemical Mapping (NGCM) . Further, n ew 
concept oriented approach in the form of Hyper Spectral Mapping has been 
initiated to understand the nature of ore deposit and alteration pat tern. The 
Committee were also informed tha t  the State -of-the-art scientific vessel R.V. 
Samudra Ratnakar has been procured by GSI in 2013 having 27 scientific 
equipment fitted on -board for geological, geophysical and geochemical 
exploration of the sea bed for establishment off shore marine minera l resource 
and research in Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of India.  The Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that against the sanctioned strength of 6665 
personnel in S&T streams in GSI as on 31.1.2016, the actual filled strength is only 
3466. There are 1486 vacancies in the stream of Geology, 371 in Geophysics, 622 
in Chemistry and 720 vacancies in Engineering stream. Although, the Ministry 
have informed that a perspective plan for recruitment to various posts in S&T 
stream has been prepared, the Commi ttee feel that such a huge shortage of 
personnel in S&T stream will adversely affect the various fundamental research 
projects of GSI and these projects cannot be carried out in mission -mode. The 
Committee, therefore,  recommend that the sanctioned  streng th of GSI in S&T 

72 
 
stream be immediately filled up and   they be apprised  of the action taken in the 
matter.  
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
16. The Committee observe that one of the major developmental function of 
IBM is to play a role of a catalytic agency to promote and develop the much 
needed R&D in mineral processing in the field of mineral beneficiation, mineral 
characterization, chemical analysis of ores and minerals a nd analysis of 
environmental samples. Against the RE of Rs. 5.91 crore for R&D investment in 
IBM during 2013 -14, the actual expenditure was Rs. 5.56 crore and against RE of 
Rs. 6.56 crore during 2014 -15, the actuals were Rs. 5.78 crore. According to the 
Ministry of Mines "Mineral Processing (Erstwhile Ore Dressing) Division of IBM 
carries out R&D studies in the field of mineral beneficiation. It‟s Modern Mineral 
Processing Laboratory (MMPL) and Pilot Plant comprising of Ore Dressing 
Laboratory, Mineral Bene ficiation Pilot Plant, and Analytical Laboratory Complex 
established with the assistance of UNDP is well equipped with state -of-the-art 
facilities to carry out R&D studies in the field of mineral beneficiation and mineral 
characterization, and analysis of environmental samples. The Bureau has zone -
wise facilities in mineral testing and beneficiation with regional ore dressing 
laboratory and pilot plants at Ajmer and Bangalore which are also well equipped 
with sophisticated equipment. A „Clay Laboratory‟ has  also been established to 
cater to the needs of the north -eastern region exclusively.  Taking note of the 
static performance of IBM for ore Dressing Investigation and Mineralogical 
examination varying from 55 to 65  and 2060 to 2509 during the last 5 years  and 

73 
 
declining Chemical Analysis carried out by Mineral Processing unit from 49,139 
during 2011-12 to 34,660 during 2014 -15, the Committee would like to apprised of 
the reasons for the same. The Committee would also like to be  informed about 
the steps taken by the IBM to improve the performance of its Mineral Processing 
Division. 
Vision Document to Promote R&D  
17. The Committee find that Research and Development in the mining sector 
holds the key to maximize   efforts towards more productivity in the expl oration 
and extraction of many minerals which the Country is abundantly  blessed with. 
The Committee observe that India's ranking is poorly placed on many parameters 
pertaining to R&D sector in the global scenario. While it is recognized that only a 
holistic approach towards meeting the various challenges facing and constraints 
being faced in the R&D initiatives of Indian Mining Sector would only result in a 
positive outcomes, the Committee desire that the Government come out with a 
Vision Document to promo te R&D in mining sector, which goes beyond the 
objectives and targets set out in the National Mineral Policy, 2008 as well as in the 
Guidelines for Mineral Research Support, 2013. The Committee appreciate the 
laudable initiatives put in place by various institutes working in the R&D sector of 
the Mining Industry and hope that earnest efforts are made to raise the dismal 
position of India's ranking in the Global scenario. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter.   
     NEW DELHI;                                                       RAKESH SINGH 
      9   August, 2016                                                                              Chairperson 
      18 Shravana, 1938(Saka)                       Standing Committee on Coal and Steel     
  

74 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL HELD 
ON 30 TH SEPTEMBER, 2015 IN COMMITTEE ROOM „C‟, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI. 
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1330  hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Rakesh Singh - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
34. Shrimati Jyoti Dhurve 
35. Shri Godam Nagesh 
36. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
37. Dr. Banshilal Mahato 
38. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
39. Shrimati Riti Pathak  
40. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan 
41. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
42. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
43. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
44. Shri Janardan Singh "Sigriwal" 
45. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
46. Shri Rama Kishore Singh   
47. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
48. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
 Sabha 
 
49. Shri  M.J. Akbar 
50.  
51.  
52.  
53. Shri  

75 
 
54.  
55. Shri  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.       Shri Ravindra Garimella -    Joint Secretary   
2.       Shri Ajay K. Garg  -   Director 
3.       Shri Arvind Sharma -   Additional Director 
4.      Ms. Miranda Ingudam   -   Deputy Secretary 
WITNESSES 
               MINISTRY OF MINES AND ITS PSU's 
Sl. No. Name  Designation  
 
  1. Shri Balvinder Kumar Secretary 
  2. Shri R. Sridharan Additional Secretary  
  3. Shri Nikunja Bihari Dhal Joint Secretary  
  4. Shri Sudhaker Shukla Economic Advisor 
  5. Dr. Joyesh Bagchi Director (Tech.) 
  6. Shri T.K. Chand  CMD, NALCO 
  7. Shri K. D. Diwan CMD, HCL 
  8. Dr. Gopal Dhawan CMD, MECL 
  9. Dr. Anupam Agnihotri Director, Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research 
Development & Design Centre 
10. Shri V. Venkateswarlu Director, National Institute of Rock Mechanics 
11. Dr. K. Balasubramanian Director, Non Ferrous Materials Technlogy 
Development Centre 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary, CMDs and other representatives 
of the Ministry of Mines to the sitting of the Committee convened in connection with 
examination of the subject, "Science and Technology/Research and Development in Minin g 
Sector." The Chairperson then drew attention of the witnesses to the provisions of the Direction 
55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
 
3. Thereafter, a visual presentation was made by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Mines, respective CMDs and other concerned organisaions. The Committee broadly discussed 
the issues relating to Amendment in the Mines and Minerals(Development & Regulation) Act; 
Constitution of District Mineral Foundation for the development and welfare of persons affected 
due to mining activities; Grant in aid to the Autonomous bodies under Research & 
Development component; Role of mining sector in GDP of the country; one time grant to 
autonomous bodies during 12th Five Year Plan for purchase of equipments; Constitution of  
National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET) for detailed exploration of resources by Geological 
Survey of India and Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.; provision of one percent of total 
revenue or total budget to be invested on R&D activities by PSUs and autonomous bodies;  
patents pertaining to R & D activities in the mining sector; reasons for less expenditure incurred 

76 
 
on R&D activities by NALCO; Health problems in mining areas; investment of  Rs. 6.5 crore by 
HCL and Rs. 40 crore by NALCO in the last three to four years under R&D activities; Research 
work being carried out by nine institutions- three PSUs, two subordinate and attached offices of 
GSI and IBM and four autonomous bodies and shortage of skilled manpower in those 
institutions; and need for increased budget on R&D activities.  
4. The Members raised their concerns on the above issues and sought clarifications from 
the representatives of the Ministry of Mines. The Chairperson directed the representatives of 
the Ministry of Mines to furnish writte n replies to the queries raised by the Members which 
could not be responded to within fifteen days.    
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept on record. 
              The Committee then adjourned 
  

77 
 
 
Annexure-II 
MINUTES OF THE  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 16th FEBRUARY, 2016 IN COMMITTEE ROOM No. 139, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1430  hrs. 
PRESENT 
             Shri  Rakesh Singh- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A Arunmozhithevan 
3. Shri Shailesh Kumar 
4. Dr. Banshilal Mahato 
5. Shrimati Ranjit Ranjan 
6. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
7. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
8. SHri Tathagata Satpathy 
9. Shri Janardan Singh "Sigriwal" 
10. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
11. Shri Rama Kishore Singh   
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
 Sabha 
14. Shri  Ali Anwar Ansari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.       Shri U.B.S. Negi   -    Joint Secretary  
2.       Shri Ajay Kumar Garg    -    Director 
3.       Shri Arvind Sharma  -   Additional Director 
4.       Ms. Miranda Ingudam  -   Deputy Secretary  
 
WITNESSES 

78 
 
   Ministry of Mines and its PSUs 
Sl. No. Name  Designation  
 
1. Shri Balvinder  Kumar  Secretary, Ministry of Mines  
2. Shri R. Sridharan Additional Secretary, Ministry of  Mines 
3. Dr. Niranjan Kumar Singh Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Mines 
4. Shri Nikunja Bihari Dhal Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Mines 
5. Shri Subhash Chandra Joint Secretary, Ministry of Mines 
6. Shri Sudhaker Shukla Economic Advisor,  Ministry of  Mines 
7. Smt. Farida M. Naik Director, Ministry of Mines 
8. Dr. Joyesh Bagchi  Director (Tech.), Ministry of Mines  
9. Dr. Anupam Agnihotri Director, Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminum Research 
Development & Design Centre 
10. Shri V. Venkateswarlu Director, National Institute of Rock Mechanics 
11. Dr. Rajnarayan R. Tiwari  Director, National Institute of Miners' Health 
12. Shri N. R. Mohanthi Director (Project), NALCO 
13. Dr. B. K. Satpathy Exe.  Director, NALCO 
14. Dr. Gopal Dhawan CMD, MECL 
15. Shri K. D. Diwan CMD, HCL 
16. Shri J. N. Das Dy. Director General, GSI 
17. Shri R. K. Sinha  Controller General (I/c), IBM 
18. Smt. Indira Ravindran  Director, IBM 
19. Dr. K. Balasubramanian  Director, Non Ferrous Materials Technology 
Development Centre 
             
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry of Mines and its PSUs to the sitting of the 
Committee convened in connection with examination of the subject, "Science & 
Technology/Research & Development (R&D)  in Mining Sector". The Chairperson 
then drew attention of the witnesses to Direction 55 of the "Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Thereafter, a visual presentation on the subject was made by representatives 
of Ministry of Mines which included the highlights of the thrust areas of R&D 
activities taken  up by the autonomous bodies under purview of the Ministry viz: 
National Institute o f Rock Mechanics (NIRM), Bengaluru; National Institute of 
Miners' Health (NIMH), Nagpur; Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research 
Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC), Nagpur; Non -Ferrous materials 
Technology Development Centre (NFTDC), Hyderabad; National A luminium 
Company Ltd. (NALCO), Bhubaneswar; Hindustan Copper Ltd.(HCL), Kolkata; 

79 
 
Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL), Nagpur; Geological Survey of India 
(GSI), Kolkata; and Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), Nagpur. The Committee broadly 
discussed the issues relating to need for improving efficiency in process, research 
in mining methods and mineral beneficiation; R&D expenditure in mining sector 
and parameters for deciding a country's ranking in R&D Sector, utilization of 
industrial waste to realize val ue added commercial products for environmental 
sustenance; recruitment of additional persons for R&D in NALCO; development of 
new aluminium alloys and value added products; integrated methods of different 
techniques for exploration; application of Advance Geophysical Technology for 
identification of deep seated potash deposit in collaboration with National 
Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) in MECL; pre -concentration of heavy 
minerals i.e. Rare Earth Elements (REE) by physical separation; potential of Mining 
in North Eastern Region; Monitoring Mechanism in R&D works and achievement in 
R&D sector; level of R&D activities in Bauxite deposits and low grade minerals; 
time bound road map to achieve the R&D targets set, etc. 
 
4.  The Members raised their querie s on the above issues and the clarifications 
were furnished by the representatives of the Ministry of Mines. On a futuristic note, 
the Committee were also apprised of the future plans for development and 
indigenization of Aluminium alloys for defence, aero space, automobiles and 
construction sector; Recycling of aluminium for secondary aluminium industry; 
Noise Mapping in Mines and surrounding community with a vision of `Safe Mines 
and Healthy Miners'; evolutions of new mining methods to promote productivity , 
safety and conservation in mines, etc.  The Chairperson then directed the 
representatives of the Ministry of Mines to furnish written replies to the queries 
raised by the Members which could not be responded to.    
 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept 
on record separately. 
              The Committee then adjourned 
  

80 
 
Annexure-III 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND 
STEEL HELD ON 9th August, 2016 IN ROOM NO. '112', FIRST FLOOR,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI. 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Rakesh Singh - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri A. Arunmozhithevan 
3. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4. Smt. Jyoti Dhurve 
5. Shri Shailesh Kumar 
6. Shri Devji M. Patel 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
9. Dr. Ravindra Kumar Ray 
10. Shri Tamradhwaj Sahu 
11. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
12. Shri Janardan Singh"Sigriwal" 
13. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
15. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
16. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
 Sabha 
 
17.      Dr. Pradeep Kumar Balmuchu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri U.B.S. Negi  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  -  Director 
3.  Shri Arvind Sharma  -  Additional Director 
4.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam  -  Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 

81 
 
Committee.  
 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft 
Reports:- 
(i)     **    **   **   ** 
(ii)     Draft Report on “Science & Technology/ Research & Dev elopment in Mining 
Sector” of the Ministry of Mines; and 
 
(iii)    **    **   **   **  
4. The Committee also considered the letter of dissent dated 09.08.2016 given 
by Shri Tathagata Satpathy, M.P. in respect o f certain recommendations conta ined 
in its draft Report relating to "Research  & Development in Iron and Steel Sector" of 
the Ministry of Steel. 
5. The Committee adopted the Reports with minor changes/modifications in 
Draft Report on "Research and Development in Iron and Steel Sector". The 
Committee d ecided that a copy of the aforesaid letter of dissent given by Shri 
Tathagata Satpathy be appended to the Report in terms of Rule 331I.(3) of Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Committee then authorized 
the Chairperson to finalise  the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the 
concerned Ministries and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________. 
**Do not pertain to this Report  
 