 
35 
COAL
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the 
Sabha) of the Standing 
“Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country” of the 
Ministry of Mines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUGUST
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2021
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
commendations contained in the Thirty–First Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject 
“Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country” of the 
Ministry of Mines (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)]
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
                                  
 
  
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2022/SRAVANA, 1944(Saka)
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  21-2022) EENTH LOK SABHA [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ First Report (Seventeenth Lok Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject “Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country” of the h Lok Sabha)]                                    
(Saka) 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
COAL, MINES
(SEVEN
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject 
“Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country” of the 
Ministry of Mines
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUGUST
 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
, MINES AND STEEL (2021-2022)
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
commendations contained in the Thirty–First Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject 
“Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country” of the 
Ministry of Mines (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)]
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.08.2022
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2022
   
                                                               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
AUGUST, 2022/SRAVANA, 1944(Saka)
 
 
 
) [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject “Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries in the Country” of the h Lok Sabha)] .2022 22 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page 
Composition of the Committee (ii) 
Introduction (iv) 
Chapter – I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
Chapter – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by Government………………………………………………. 
 
10 
 
Chapter – III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
replies……………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
23 
 
Chapter – IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
24 
 
Chapter – V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which 
final replies of the Government are still 
awaited……………………………………………………………………………. 
 
25 
 ANNEXURES  
I Status of Mining lease auction alongwith operationalization  26 
II The Aluminium related projects approved in 51st and 52nd 
SSAG Meeting under Science and Technology Programme Scheme of Ministry of Mines 2019-20 and 2020-21 
54 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel (2021-22) held on 02.08.2022 …………. 56 
IV Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) ……………………………………………… 
58 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2021-2022) 
Chairperson -    Shri Rakesh Singh  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Balubhau Dhanorkar alias Suresh Narayan 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
4. Shri Kunar Hembram 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
6. Shri Saumitra Khan 
7. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
8. Shri S. Muniswamy  
9. Shri Ajay Nishad  
10. Shri Basanta Kumar Panda        
11. Smt. Riti Pathak 
12. Shri S.R. Parthiban 
13. Shri Komati Reddy Venkat Reddy 
14. Shri Chunni Lal Sahu 
15. Shri Arun Sao 
16. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
17. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh   
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
19. Dr. Beesetti Venkata Satyavathi 
20. Dr. Thirumaavalavan Thol 
21. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav# 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
23. Dr. Prashanta Nanda 
24. Shri Samir Oraon 
25. Shir Deepak Prakash 
26. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
27. Shri Shibu Soren 
28. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
29. Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav 
30. Vacant* 
31. Vacant* 
______________________________________________________________ 
#Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 07.02.2022 vice Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
*Shri Ram Vichar Netam ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.6.2022 after his retirement 
from Rajya Sabha. 
*Dr. Vikas Mahatme ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 04.07.2022 after his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha. 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.M. Baisakh    -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma   -  Director  
3. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Lalit Sharma    -  Executive Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
  

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Thirty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on "Development of Aluminium and Copper 
Industries in the Country" relating to the Ministry of Mines.  
  
2.  The Thirty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 
22.03.2022. Replies of the Government to all the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 30.06.2022. 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel considered and 
adopted this Report at their sitting held on  02.08.2022.   
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-IV.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Chapter-I  of the Report. 
 
NEW DELHI; 
02, August, 2022 
11, Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
RAKESH SINGH 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel 
 
 
 
(iv)  

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty–First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject “Development of Aluminium 
and Copper Industries in the Country” of the Ministry of Mines which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.03.2022. 
2. The Report contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Replies 
have been received from the Ministry of Mines on 30.06.2022 in respect of all the 12 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows:  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
 Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,12                  (Total:  11) 
                                                                             (Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government : 
 
Sl. No. Nil                                                                   (Total: NIL)   
          (Chapter III) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Sl. No. Nil          (Total: NIL)       
                                                                                        (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited : 
   Sl. No.8        (Total: 01) 
                                                                               (Chapter V) 
 
3. The Committee do hope and trust that utmost importance would be accorded to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  In 
case, where it is not feasible for the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter 
and spirit for any reason, the matter must be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapters-I of this Report be furnished to 
them within three months. 

 4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on  some of their 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report. 
 
COORDINATION COMMITTEE FOR CLEARANCES FOR ENVIRONMENT / FOREST / 
WILDLIFE CLEARANCES 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee found that only 656 million tonne (17 %) bauxite (an aluminium ore) are 
under (proven & probable) category and balance 3240 million tonnes are yet to be fully explored 
out of 3896 million tonne bauxite resources. The Committee note that Grant of mining lease, 
environmental clearance, land acquisition and forest clearance have been the major constraints 
in development of new mines. As the wide availability of the minerals provides a base for the 
growth and development of the mining sector of the country, the Committee expect the Ministry 
to facilitate the development of more bauxite mines and ensure that the mining industry get a 
continuous support of the Government/ State Governments and other supporting agencies to 
ensure timely clearance of the environment and forest, land acquisition and consent to operate. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard so 
that industries do not encounter any problem on these account. 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Mines have stated as under:- 
“The Ministry of Mines amended the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) 
(MMDR) Act, 1957 through MMDR Amendment Act, 2021 with effect from 28.03.2021. 
The objectives of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2021 inter alia are increasing mineral 
production and time bound operationalization of mines, increasing employment and 
investment in the mining sector, maintaining continuity in mining operations after change 
of lessee and increasing the pace of exploration and auction of mineral resources. 
Section 8B(1) of the amended Act provides that all valid rights, approvals, clearances, 
licences and the like granted to a lessee in respect of a mine shall continue to be valid 
even after expiry or termination of lease and such rights, approvals, clearances, licences 
and the like shall be transferred to, and vested in the successful bidder of the mining 
lease selected through auction. Further, as per Section 8B(2) of the amended Act, it shall 
be lawful for the new lessee to continue mining operations on the land till expiry or 
termination of mining lease granted to it, in which mining operations were being carried 
out by the previous lessee. This will ensure continuity in mining operations even with 
change of lessee, conservation of mineral and avoid repetitive and redundant process of 
obtaining clearances again for the same mine. In pursuance of the above amendment, 
MoEF&CC has issued guidelines on 07.07.2021 under Forest (Conservation) Act (FCA), 
1980 for transfer of approvals granted under the FCA, 1980 to mining leases allotted to 
new lessee as per the provisions of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2021. Notification has 
been issued by MoEF&CC on 13.07.2021 for transfer of prior Environmental Clearance to 
the successful bidder of the mining leases. Environmental Clearance (EC), Forest 
Clearance (FC), and Wildlife Clearance (WC) are administered by MoEF&CC. MoEF&CC 
has constituted an inter-ministerial coordination and monitoring committee for EC, FC and 
WL proposals requiring approval from MoEF&CC.”  

  
7.             The Committee note that in the pursuance of Mines and Minerals (Development 
& Regulation) Act, 2021 (MMDR Amendment Act, 2021),  the Ministry of Environment 
Forest and Climate Changes (MoEF&CC) have already issued guidelines on 07.07.2021 
under Forest (Conservation) Act, (FCA) 1980 and notified them on 13.07.2021.  
Considering  it a positive step in the right direction the Committee further note the 
MoEF&CC have constituted an inter-ministerial coordination and monitoring Committee 
for Environmental Clearance (EC), Forest Clearance (FC), and Wildlife Clearance (WC) 
proposal requiring approval from MoEF&CC. While  welcoming this move by the 
MoEF&CC, the Committee recommend  that meeting of this inter-ministerial coordination 
and monitoring Committee be held at regular intervals to consider the pending proposals 
of Environmental Clearance (EC), Forest Clearance (FC), and Wildlife Clearance (WC) , 
clear them through a single window system and in a time bound manner. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the projects cleared by this Coordination Committee 
since it's constitution. 
 
ACTION PLAN TO BRING UNAPROVED BAUXITE RESERVES TO PROVEN CATEGORY 
Recommendation Serial No.3 
 
8. While appreciating the National Mineral Policy vision to double the mineral production in 
the country in the next 5 years, the Committee were of the considered view that the urgent 
measures should be taken for early clearances on procedural, administrative, legal and 
environmental fronts for the uninterrupted development of the bauxite mines in the country. The 
Committee also desired the Government to take concrete steps to bring the remaining 3240 
million tonne of unproved bauxite reserves in different States under proven and probable 
category. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Government in this 
regard. 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Mines have stated as under:- 
  "The MMDR Act was further amended with effect from 28.03.2021. As per Section 
9C(5) of the amended Act, provision has been made in for funding of eligible private 
exploration agencies from National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET). Enabling 
provisions have been made so that private entities may be notified under second proviso 
to Section 4(1) of the MMDR Act for conducting exploration without prospecting licence. 
Ministry of Mines issued guidelines on 12.08.2021 for notification of accredited private 
exploration agencies. Eight agencies have been notified under the second proviso to 
Section 4(1) of the MMDR Act:  
o M/s Natural Resources Division - Tata Steel Limited  
o M/s Indian Mine Planners and Consultants 

o M/s United Exploration India Private Limited 
o M/s Gemcokati Exploration Private Limited 
o M/s Geotechnical Mining Solutions 
o M/s GeoExpOre Private Limited 
o M/s V. M. Salgaocar and Brother Private Limited 
o M/s Geovale Services Private Limited 
 
  Ministry of Mines has introduced several reforms to promote exploration and 
auction of mineral blocks including mineral blocks of bauxite. The Minerals (Evidence of 
Mineral Contents) Amendment Rules, 2021 were notified on 18.06.2021. As per the 
amended rules limestone, iron ore, manganese and bauxite blocks having surficial 
deposits can be auctioned for mining lease at G3 level of exploration (earlier requirement 
was G2 level exploration). Further, auction for composite licence for all minerals has been 
allowed at G4 level of exploration (earlier requirement was G3 level exploration). The 
Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Second Amendment Rules, 2021 were notified 
on 14.12.2021 which provides that any person intending to obtain composite licence in 
respect of an area may submit a proposal to the State Government in the specified format 
along with available geoscience data for notification of the area for auction to grant a 
composite licence. The Mineral (Auction) Amendment Rules, 2022 were notified on 
18.02.2022. In order to facilitate the auction of large area blocks, global positioning 
system has been allowed for identification and demarcation of the area where a 
composite licence is proposed to be granted through auction. Further, the requirement of 
classification of area to be auctioned, for composite licence, into forests land, land owned 
by the State Government, and land not owned by the State Government has been 
removed. Further, Rule 12(3) of the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules 
(MCDR), 2017 provides that the holder of a mining lease shall carry out detailed  
exploration (G1 level) over the entire potentially mineralised area under the mining lease, 
in the manner specified in the Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Rules, 2015 or the 
Atomic Minerals Concession Rules,  2016, as the case may be, within a period of five 
years from the date of opening of the mine after execution of such mining lease. Rule 
12(4) of the MCDR, 2017 provides that in the case of existing mining leases, detailed 
exploration (G1 level) over the entire potentially mineralised area under the mining lease 
shall be carried out in the manner specified in the Minerals (Evidence of Mineral 
Contents) Rules, 2015 or the Atomic Minerals Concession Rules, 2016, as the case may 
be, within a period of five years from the date of commencement of MCDR Amendment 
Rules, 2021 i.e. 03.11.2021. These amendments are brought out with the objective of 
increasing the pace of exploration of minerals to identify more mineral blocks for auction. 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has handed over 11 geological reports of bauxite blocks 
to various State Governments to facilitate auction of bauxite blocks viz. 4 blocks in 
Chhattisgarh, 4 blocks in Jharkhand, 2 blocks in Madhya Pradesh and 1 block in Kerala. 
MECL has also handed over 2 geological reports of bauxite blocks to State Government 
of Chhattisgarh.  
The State-wise bauxite reserves & remaining resources in India are as follows: 
Figures in million tones 
State Reserves(proven & 
probable) 
Remaining 
Resources 
Total 
 
Odisha 325 1669 1,994 

Andhra Pradesh 0 615 615 
Gujarat 185 165 350 
Chhattisgarh 15 159 174 
Madhya Pradesh 24 150 174 
Jharkhand 63 176 239 
Maharashtra 26 158 184 
Goa 14 41 55 
Others 4 107 111 
Total 656 3240 3,896 
(Source: Indian Mineral Year Book 2019 published by Indian Bureau of Mines) 
 
10.         The Committee are happy to note that  not only the nodal Ministry i.e. the 
Ministry of Mines have taken several legislative and administrative steps to facilitate the 
exploration  of mineral ores particularly bauxite but the other Union Ministries like 
MOEF&CC have  also taken many legislative and executive initiatives to help   promotion 
and production of important minerals including bauxite  throughout the  Country.  While   
appreciating  such  initiatives by the Government, the Committee recommend  that to 
implement and execute these  legislative and administrative decisions to achieve 
concrete and tangible results  on the ground, focussed steps are required to be taken by 
administrative ministries.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and  desire that steps should be taken to expedite the process of 
converting the remaining unproved bauxite resources of 3240 million tonne into proven 
and probable category. The  Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the 
Ministry to bring these unproved reserves into proven ones. 
 

NEED TO INCREASE PER CAPITA ALUMINIUM CONSUMPTION 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5 & 7) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.5  
11. Appreciating the new initiatives like National Mineral Policy, 2019 and MMDR 
(Amendment) Act, 2021, the Committee hoped that the Ministry of Mines and aluminium 
companies would be able to achieve the requisite demand for the aluminium in view of the 
proposed rapid urbanization and growth in the manufacturing sector in India. They, however, are 
of the view that to achieve the desired growth potential, and to increase per capita consumption 
of aluminium in the country, the Government should prepare a plan to ensure year wise increase 
in consumption targets to achieve global per capita consumption average of 11kg and they be 
apprised of the same.  
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Mines have stated as under:- 
“The per capita consumption of Aluminium in India is low and is about 2.5 kg (F Y 20-21) 
to 2.9 kg (F Y 18-19) only as compared to global average of 11kg (CY 2020). There is 
significant scope for increase in consumption of Aluminium in India and as the economy 
matures, it is expected that Aluminium consumption will increase significantly. It is 
predicted that the demand growth of Aluminium in the next few years is going to be 
subsequently higher due to projected high GDP growth in the coming years. Multiple 
initiatives of Government of India like Make in India, 100% Rural electrification, Housing 
for All, Smart cities, National Infrastructure pipeline of Rs.100 lakh crore, renewable 
energy and FAME (Faster adoption of manufacturing of Hybrid and EV) schemes for 
electric vehicles, increase in FDI etc. will boost the consumption of the metal in the 
country. The country is having substantial bauxite reserves and huge coal reserves. 
Availability of bauxite and coal will facilitate further capacity addition for production of 
Aluminium metal. Increasing urbanisation in the country will lead to increase in per-capita 
consumption of Aluminium in the country.” 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
13. In view of the fact that Aluminium is a recyclable and environment-friendly metal having a 
host of applications in a number of diverse sectors - power, transportation, building, 
construction, packaging and many more, the Committee do hoped that there is an urgent need 
that Aluminium manufacturing companies in the country identify newer aluminium value added 
products of mass consumption and achieve higher target of per capita aluminium usage in the 
country. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Mines, in coordination and collaboration 
with Ministries of Railways, Defence, Transport, Power and Civil Aviation, etc should vigorously 
identify and explore the areas where aluminium can replace other metals without compromising 

quality, strength and cost. Acknowledging the significance of major steps taken by the Ministry 
for promoting aluminium industry to cater to the needs of different sectors of the economy, the 
Committee desire the Ministry of Mines/Aluminium Companies to have consultations/ 
deliberations with all the stakeholders/user industries to create the demand of aluminium for 
their projects. Simultaneously, the Committee endorse the view that mineral wealth of the 
country be used judiciously under the Prime 'Minister's Vision of 'Atma-nirbhar Bharat' and 
desire that increase in export of finished aluminium goods should also be explored and 
promoted. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
in this regard and progress made therein.” 
 
14. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Mines have stated as under:- 
  
“The per capita consumption of Aluminium in India is low and is about 2.5 kg(FY20-
21)to2.9kg (F Y 18-19) only as compared to global average of 11kg(CY2020).There is 
significant scope for increase in consumption of Aluminium in India and as the economy 
matures, it is expected that Aluminium consumption will increase significantly.  It is 
predicted that the demand growth of Aluminium in the next few years is going to be 
subsequently higher due to projected high GDP growth in the coming years. Multiple 
initiatives of Government of India like Make in India, 100% Rural electrification, Housing 
for All, Smart cities, National Infrastructure pipeline of Rs.100 lakh crore, renewable 
energy and FAME (Fasteradoption of manufacturing of Hybrid and EV) schemes for 
electric vehicles, increase in FDI etc. will boost the consumption of the metal in the 
country.  The country is having substantial bauxite reserves and huge coal reserves. 
Availability of bauxite and coal will facilitate further capacity addition for production of 
Aluminium metal. Increasing urbanisation in the country will lead to increase in per-capita 
consumption of Aluminium in the country. As per the data available from Department of 
Commerce, the export of primary aluminium is already high vis-a-vis the domestic 
production. The export of primary aluminium is 2.3 Million Tonne in 2020-21 as compared 
to total aluminium production of 3.62MillionTonne(table below).The domestic 
consumption requirement is being met through import of primary aluminium (0.27 Million 
Tonne) and import of Aluminium waste and scrap (1.37 Million Tonne) to feed secondary 
aluminium producers. 
 
Production of Aluminium, Export and Import of Primary Aluminium (HS Code 
7601) and Aluminium waste and Scrap (HS Code 7602) 
HS Code Commodity 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
(Apr-Feb) 
Production 
76 Aluminium 3,656 3,616 3,664 
Export 
7601 Unwrought aluminium- Ingots, 
Billets, Wire Rods, Wire 
Bars(Alloyed & not-alloyed) 
1,961 2,324 2,654 
7602 Aluminium waste and Scrap 6.11 5.43 8.47 
76 Aluminium and articles thereof. 2,371 2,736 3,126 
Import 

 
(
Q
u
a
n
t
i
ty in 000’ tonne) 
 
15. The Committee in their original Report had observed  that the extant per capita 
consumption of aluminium in the country at  2.5 kg is very low as compared to the global 
average consumption of 11 kg. They had  also noted that there is significant scope for 
increase in aluminium consumption in the years to come particularly in view of the 
flagship schemes/programmes/projects like Atma-nirbar Bharat, Make in India,. and 
upcoming projects in the defence, railways, transport, power civil aviation etc.  Although,  
the Ministry have admitted  that the per capita consumption of aluminium will grow 
substantially  in the country due to initiatives taken by the government, but the 
Committee would like  the Ministry of Mines to take   pro-active  steps through taking 
concrete and decisive action with close coordination and  association of other 
Ministries/State governments. Therefore, while reiterating  their earlier recommendations  
to take up the average consumption growth of aluminium from 2.5 kg per capita to  global 
average consumption of 11 Kg, the committee recommend that a year-wise strategic plan 
to increase per capita aluminium  consumption in the country be prepared and they be 
apprised of the same.  
CONSUMPTION AND DEMAND OF COPPER 
Recommendation Serial No.12 
16. The Committee noted that the total consumption of refined copper in the country in 2020 
was around 6.60 lakh tonne. The Committee were informed that Copper demand in electrical 
segment is growing due to demand in infra sector as a result of affordable housing schemes, 
rural electrification and more urbanization. As regards consumption of copper in the country, the 
Committee think that per capita consumption of copper in the country is expected to increase 
from the current level of 0.6 Kg to 1 kg in coming years against world per capita consumption 
level of 3.2 kg. In view of targeted per capita consumption in India is expected to increase from 
the current level of 0.6 kg to 1 kg in the coming years, the Committee feel that t he Ministry of 
Mines should pursue with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce to give more 
incentives to the domestic copper industries so that more and more capacity addition projects 
are commissioned under 'Make in India' campaign. 
7601 Unwrought aluminium- Ingots, 
Billets, Wire Rods, Wire 
Bars(Alloyed & not-alloyed) 
266 265 190 
7602 Aluminium waste and Scrap 1,348 1,370 1521 
76 Aluminium and articles thereof. 2,152 2,060 2,130 

 
17. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Mines have stated as under:- 
“The above suggestion is noted. Also, the Ministry of Mines makes  appropriate 
recommendation for the promotion and protection of the domestic Copper sector to the 
Department of Revenue as part of Union Budget proposals, and to the Department of 
Commerce in respect of negotiations for Free Trade Agreements (FTAs).” 
 
18. The  Committee had noted in their original Report that the consumption  of Copper 
is expected to increase from the current level of 0.6 kg to 1 kg per capita per year against 
the average global 3.2 kg per capita per year. To increase the consumption of  
domestically produced refined copper, the committee feel that Ministry of Mines should 
pursue with Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce to give more incentives to 
the domestic copper industries so that more and more capacity addition projects are 
commissioned under 'Make in India' campaign. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Government that specific action plan  be prepared to promote indigenous copper 
industry and  some measures be taken to reduce  dependency on   import of refined 
copper/copper scrap. 
 
 

 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Utilisation of Mineral Resources 
Recommendation SI. No. 1 
 
The Committee note that India is well endowed with natural resources, particularly 
minerals which serve as raw material for many industries, paving a path for rapid industrial, 
infrastructural and economic development. Minerals being valuable natural resources, constitute 
the vital raw materials for many basic industries. The wide availability of the minerals provides a 
base for the growth and development of the mining sector in India, which is an important 
segment of the Indian economy. The Committee also note that India produces as many as 95 
minerals, which includes 4 fuels, 10 metallic, 23 non-metallic, 3 Atomic and 55 minor minerals 
(including building and other minerals). 
The Committee further note that the Government has introduced important reforms to 
open up the mineral sector to ensure its contribution in achieving the national policy goals like: 
introduction of Right of First Refusal for RP/PL holders; encouraging the private sector to take 
up exploration; transfer of mining leases and creation f dedicated mineral; corridors to boost 
private sector mining areas; proposes to make efforts to harmonize taxes, levies & royalty with 
world benchmarks to help private sector; etc. Major reforms included enactment of the Mines 
and Mineral (Development & Regulations) (Amendment) Act, 2021, which made the process of 
allocation of mineral concessions completely transparent by introducing public auctions with 
active participation of the State Governments. While appreciating the efforts of the Government 
to ensure contribution of Mineral Sector in achieving the national policy goals, the Committee 
recommend that greater transparency should be ensured in auction of mineral concessions with 
pre-embedded clearances to give fillip to auction process and to achieve optimal utilization of 
India's mineral resources for rapid industrial growth and socio-economic development of the 
country. 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Act, 1957 was amended on 
12/1/2015. The most important feature of the said amendment was the provision for grant of 
mineral concessions through auction in order to bring in greater transparency and remove 
discretion at all levels in grant of mineral concessions. The method of auctions also ensure that 
the State Governments will collect revenue accruing from the auction premiums. Government of 
India (GoI) has already issued orders on 3/6/2020 and guidelines for auction of mining leases 
with pre- embedded clearances on pilot basis. The clearances will be transferred to the 
successful bidder seamlessly, so that mining operation can be started quickly. This will help in increasing mineral production in the country. Status of Mining lease auction alongwith operationalization is at Annexure -1. 
                        [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 Reserves and Production Recommendation SI. No. 2 The Committee find that only 656 million tonne (17%) bauxite (an aluminium ore) are under (proven & probable) category and balance 3240 million tones are yet to be fully explored out of 3896 million tonne bauxite resources. The Committee note that Grant of mining lease, environmental clearance, land acquisition and forest clearance have been the major constraints in development of new mines. As the wide availability of the minerals provides a 

base for the growth and development of the mining sector of the Country, the Committee expect the Ministry to facilitate the development of more bauxite mines and ensure that the mining industry get a continuous support of the Government/State Governments and other supporting agencies to ensure timely clearance of the environment and forest, land acquisition and consent to operate. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard so that industries do not encounter any problem on these account.  ACTION TAKEN The Ministry of Mines amended the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) (MMDR) Act, 1957 through MMDR Amendment Act, 2021 with effect from 28.03.2021. The objectives of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2021 inter alia are increasing mineral production and time bound operationalization of mines, increasing employment and investment in the mining sector, maintaining continuity in mining operations after change of lessee and increasing the pace of exploration and auction of mineral resources. 
 
Section 8B(1) of the amended Act provides that all valid rights, approvals, clearances, licences and the like granted to a lessee in respect of a mine shall continue to be valid even after expiry or termination of lease and such rights, approvals, clearances, 
licences and the like shall be transferred to, and vested in the successful bidder of the mining lease selected through auction. 
 
Further, as per Section 8B(2) of the amended Act, it shall be lawful for the new lessee to 
continue mining operations on the land till expiry or termination of mining lease granted to it, in which mining operations were being carried out by the previous lessee. 
 
This will ensure continuity in mining operations even with change of lessee, conservation of mineral and avoid repetitive and redundant process of obtaining clearances again for the same mine. 
 
In pursuance of the above amendment, MoEF&CC has issued guidelines on 07.07.2021 under Forest (Conservation) Act (FCA), 1980 for transfer of approvals granted under the FCA, 1980 to mining leases allotted to new lessee as per the provisions of the MMDR Amendment Act, 2021. Notification has been issued by MoEF&CC on 13.07.2021 for transfer of prior Environmental Clearance to the successful bidder of the mining leases. Environmental Clearance (EC), Forest Clearance (FC), and Wildlife Clearance (WC) are administered by MoEF&CC. MoEF&CC has constituted an inter-ministerial coordination and monitoring committee for EC, FC and WL proposals requiring approval from MoEF&CC.            [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 7 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
                     Recommendation SI. No. 3 
While appreciating the National Mineral Policy vision to double the mineral production in the country in the next 5 years, the Committee are of the considered view that the urgent measures should be taken for early clearances on procedural, administrative, legal and environmental fronts for the uninterrupted development of the bauxite mines in the country. The Committee also desire the Government to take concrete steps to bring the remaining 3240 million tonne of unproved bauxite reserves in different States under proven and 

probable category. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Government in this regard. 
 
                                                           ACTION TAKEN 
The MMDR Act was further amended with effect from 28.03.2021. As per Section 9C(5) of the amended Act, provision has been made in for funding of eligible private exploration 
agencies from National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET). 
 
Enabling provisions have been made so that private entities may be notified under second proviso to Section 4(1) of the MMDR Act for conducting exploration without prospecting 
licence. Ministry of Mines issued guidelines on 12.08.2021 for notification of accredited private exploration agencies. Eight agencies have been notified under the second proviso to 
Section 4(1) of the MMDR Act: 
o M/s Natural Resources Division - Tata Steel Limited 
o M/s Indian Mine Planners and Consultants 
o M/s United Exploration India Private Limited 
o M/s Gemcokati Exploration Private Limited 
o M/s Geotechnical Mining Solutions 
o M/s GeoExpOre Private Limited 
o M/s V. M. Salgaocar and Brother Private Limited 
o M/s Geovale Services Private Limited 
 
Ministry of Mines has introduced several reforms to promote exploration and auction of mineral blocks including mineral blocks of bauxite. The Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Amendment Rules, 2021 were notified on 18.06.2021. As per the amended rules limestone, iron ore, manganese and bauxite blocks having surficial deposits can be auctioned for mining lease at G3 level of exploration (earlier requirement was G2 level exploration). Further, auction for composite licence for all minerals has been allowed at G4 
level of exploration (earlier requirement was G3 level exploration). 
 
The Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Second Amendment Rules, 2021 were notified on 14.12.2021 which provides that any person intending to obtain composite licence 
in respect of an area may submit a proposal to the State Government in the specified format along with available geoscience data for notification of the area for auction to grant a composite licence. 
 
The Mineral (Auction) Amendment Rules, 2022 were notified on 18.02.2022. In order to 
facilitate the auction of large area blocks, global positioning system has been allowed for 
identification and demarcation of the area where a composite licence is proposed to be granted through auction. Further, the requirement of classification of area to be auctioned, for 
composite licence, into forests land, land owned by the State Government, and land not owned 
by the State Government has been removed. 
 
Further, Rule 12(3) of the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules (MCDR), 2017 
provides that the holder of a mining lease shall carry out detailed exploration (G1 level) over the entire potentially mineralised area under the mining lease, in the manner specified in the Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Rules, 2015 or the Atomic Minerals Concession Rules, 2016, as the case may be, within a period of five years from the date of 
opening of the mine after execution of such mining lease. 
 
Rule 12(4) of the MCDR, 2017 provides that in the case of existing mining leases, detailed exploration (G1 level) over the entire potentially mineralised area under the mining 

lease shall be carried out in the manner specified in the Minerals (Evidence of Mineral 
Contents) Rules, 2015 or the Atomic Minerals Concession Rules, 2016, as the case may be, within a period of five years from the date of commencement of MCDR Amendment Rules, 2021 i.e. 03.11.2021. 
 
These amendments are brought out with the objective of increasing the pace of exploration of minerals to identify more mineral blocks for auction. 
 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) has handed over 11 geological reports of bauxite blocks to various State Governments to facilitate auction of bauxite blocks viz. 4 blocks in Chhattisgarh, 4 blocks in Jharkhand, 2 blocks in Madhya Pradesh and 1 block in Kerala. MECL has also handed over 2 geological reports of bauxite blocks to State Government of Chhattisgarh. 
 
The State-wise bauxite reserves & remaining resources in India are as follows: 
Figures in million tonnes 
State Reserves(proven & 
probable) 
Remaining Resources Total 
Odisha 325 1669 1,994 
AndhraPradesh 
0 615 615 
Gujarat 185 165 350 
Chhattisgarh 15 159 174 
MadhyaPradesh 
24 150 174 
Jharkhand 63 176 239 
Maharashtra 26 158 184 
Goa 14 41 55 
Others 4 107 111 
Total 656 3240 3,896 
(Source: Indian Mineral Year Book 2019 published by Indian Bureau of Mines) 
 
                      [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 10 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
Aluminium Production Capacity 
 
     Recommendation SI. No. 4 
 
 The Committee note that Aluminium represents the second largest metals 
market in the world after iron and steel. The aluminium industry encompasses the extraction of 
the ore (bauxite) as well as primary and secondary processing of the metal. The Committee 
also note that the Indian primary Aluminium industry consists of three major players i.e. National 
Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO), Hindalco Industries and Vedanta Ltd., having a total production 
capacity of about 4.0 million tonne. The total production of primary Aluminium metal during Financial 
Year 2019-20 was about 3.62 million tonne and in Financial Year 2020- 21, it was 3.56 million tonne. At 
present National Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO) is the only Public Sector Enterprise engaged in 
production of alumina(bauxite) and primary aluminium in India. The other two primary producers i.e. M/s 
HINDALCO and M/s Vedanta Ltd. are in the private sector. Having holistic view of the performance of 
Aluminium Sector, which could not achieve production to the desired level of installed capacity, the 

Committee feel that the Ministry should step up the extra efforts for overall improvement in its physical 
performance so as to make the country self reliant for Aluminium metal. 
 
                                                   ACTION TAKEN 
Aluminium Metal is sold based on LME and not on cost plus basis of the producers. Hence production is regulated by the entities taking into consideration cost vs LME to prevent losses. However production is in increasing trend in the FY21-22. The total increase in production of Aluminium over 2020-21 is 11.56%. NALCO, the only CPSE in the Aluminium sector has achieved 100% production of installed capacity in the FY21-22 in its lifetime for the first time i.e.4.60 lakh tonnes. Over the period its production of aluminium metal has improved in the country in comparison to year 2018-19 to 2021-22. The production of Aluminoium was on lower side due to COVID 19 during in FY 2019-20 and 2020-
21. HINDLACO and Vedanta Ltd has also achieved approximately 96% and 98% respectively of there installed capacity during the year 2021-22. 
Production of Aluminium in India (in lakh tonne) 
 
Company Installed 
Capacity 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
NALCO 4.60 4.40 4.18 4.18 4.60 
HINDALCO 13.54 12.96 13.13 12.41 13.03 
Vedanta Ltd. 
23.15 19.59 18.88 19.55 22.69 
TOTAL 41.29 36.95 36.19 36.14 40.32 
Source: Primary Producers Data        [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Consumption and Demand 
 
     Recommendation SI. No. 5 
 
The Committee observe that per capita consumption of Aluminium in the country is low at 
about 2.5 kg (Financial Year 2020-21) to 2.9 kg (Financial Year 2018-19)only as compared to 
global average of 11 kg. There is significant scope for increase in consumption of Aluminium in 
the country and as the economy matures, it is expected that Aluminium consumption will 
increase significantly. It has also been informed that the demand growth of Aluminium in the 
next few years is going to be substantially higher due to high GDP growth projected in the 
coming years. The Ministry has also informed that multiple initiatives have been taken by the 
Government like 'Make in India', 100% rural electrification, Housing for All, Smart Cities, 
National infrastructure pipeline of ₹ 100 lakh Crore, renewable energy and FAME (Faster 
adoption of manufacturing of Hybrid and EV) schemes for electric vehicles, increase in Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI), etc. which in the opinion of the Committee will certain boost the 
consumption of the metal in the country. 
Appreciating the new initiatives like National Mineral Policy, 2019 and MMDR 
(Amendment) Act, 2021, the Committee hope that the Ministry of Mines and aluminium 
companies would be able to achieve the requisite demand for the aluminium in view of the 
proposed rapid urbanization and growth in the manufacturing sector in India. They, however, are 
of the view that to achieve the desired growth potential, and to increase per capita consumption 
of aluminium in the country, the Government should prepare a plan to ensure year-wise 

increase in consumption targets to achieve global per capita consumption average of 11 kg and 
they be apprised of the             same. 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
 
The per capita consumption of Aluminium in India is low and is about 2.5 kg (F Y 20-21) to 2.9 kg (F Y 18-19) only as compared to global average of 11kg (CY 2020). There is 
significant scope for increase in consumption of Aluminium in India and as the economy 
matures, it is expected that Aluminium consumption will increase significantly. 
It is predicted that the demand growth of Aluminium in the next few years is going to be subsequently higher due to projected high GDP growth in the coming years. Multiple initiatives of Government of India like Make in India, 100% Rural electrification, Housing for All, Smart cities, National Infrastructure pipeline of Rs.100 lakh crore, renewable energy and 
FAME (Faster adoption of manufacturing of Hybrid and EV) schemes for electric vehicles, increase in FDI etc. will boost the consumption of the metal in the country. The country is having substantial bauxite reserves and huge coal reserves. Availability of bauxite and coal will facilitate further capacity addition for production of Aluminium metal. 
Increasing urbanisation in the country will lead to increase in per-capita consumption of Aluminium in the country. 
[Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 15 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
 
Research & Development in Aluminium Industry 
 
     Recommendation SI. No. 6 
 
The Committee find that the efforts are being made by the Government to promote R&D activities to create new applications of aluminium. The Ministry provide funds to Academic institutions, universities, national institutes and R&D institutions recognized with the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Government of India for implementing R&D projects under Science and Technology Programme of Ministry of Mines with the vision to promote research in applied geosciences, mineral exploration, mining and allied areas, mineral processing, optimum utilization and conservation of the mineral resources of the country, for the benefit of the nation and its people. The Committee have been informed that during the year 2019-20, 11 projects have been identified and approved for grant-in- aid by the Ministry under this Programme.   The Committee have been further apprised that the Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Centre (JNARDDC), an autonomous body, functioning under the administrative control of Ministry of Mines is devoted to research in Aluminium Sector. The Committee appreciate the research work undertaken by JNARDDC which inter-alia include development of high speed extrusion alloys, indigenization and development of wrought Aluminium Alloys, development of Super Thermal Aluminium (STAL) Conductor, National Facility for R&D on Extrusion of Aluminium Alloys, production and certification of certified reference materials (CRMs), development of high strength and thermally stable aluminium alloys, indigenous development of lead free 

Aluminium alloy, etc. NALCO has also undertaken R&D towards development of Aluminium Alloy & increasing its applications in various sectors. etc.  While appreciating the JNARDDC and NALCO for promoting R&D, the Committee desire that attention should also be paid for completion of the 11 and 3 projects for which grant-in-aid were approved by the Ministry of Mines under R&D programme during 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively. The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the status of the said 14 Research and Development projects sponsored by them. 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
           JNARDDC is also conducting R&D activities in Aluminium application and finding new 
areas for increased use of Aluminium application to cater the needs of different sectors of the economy. 
During 2019-20, 11 projects were approved under the Science and Technology Programme 
Scheme of Ministry of Mines out of which 5 were related to research in Aluminium sector. During 
2020-21, 22 projects were approved under the said Scheme out of which 3 were related to 
research in Aluminium sector. The project proposals are of varying duration ranging from 1 to 3 years. Further, as per guidelines of the Scheme, the projects are reviewed and monitored by Project Evaluation and Review Committee (PERC), chaired by Joint Secretary, at least once 
in a year. The emphasis is placed on timely and successful completion of projects and also that how the projects can be useful for the Industry. The Aluminium related projects approved in 
51st and 52nd SSAG Meeting under Science and Technology Programme Scheme of Ministry of Mines 2019-20 and 2020-21 are at Annexure-II. 
 
                      [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
 
       Future Scope and Expectations 
 
Recommendation SI. No. 7 
 
The Committee note that future growth prospects for aluminium in the country are seen in 
aerospace sector, products like beverage cans, alloy wheels, automobile bodies, railway 
coaches, etc. According to the Ministry, one of the major demand areas in the coming years 
would be in the high-end aluminium alloys which propelled huge scope and they also observe 
that the stimulus packages announced by the Union Government for economic uplift will 
increase aluminium demand in the near future. The other significant areas for consumption of 
aluminium are Railways, Transport, Power, Defence, Consumer Durables/Packaging, 
Aerospace & Civil Aviation, etc. 
 
In view of the fact that Aluminium is a recyclable and environment-friendly metal having a 
host of applications in a number of diverse sectors - power, transportation building, construction, 
packaging and many more, the Committee do hope that there is an urgent need that Aluminium 
manufacturing companies in the country identify newer aluminium value added products of mass 
consumption and achieve higher target of per capita aluminium usage in the country. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Mines, in coordination and collaboration with 
Ministries of Railways, Defence, Transport, Power and Civil Aviation, etc should vigorously 
identify and explore the areas where aluminium can replace other metals without compromising 
quality, strength and cost. Acknowledging the significance of major steps taken by the Ministry 
for promoting aluminium industry to cater to the needs of different sectors of the economy, the 
Committee desire the Ministry of Mines/aluminium companies to have 
consultations/deliberations with all the stakeholders/user industries to create the demand of 

aluminium for their projects. Simultaneously, the Committee endorse the view that mineral 
wealth of the country be used judiciously under the Prime Minister's Vision of 'Atmanirbhar 
Bharat' and desire that increase in export of finished aluminium goods should also be explored 
and promoted. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the 
Ministry in this regard and progress made therein. 
 
ACTION TAKEN 
The per capita consumption of Aluminium in India is low and is about 2.5 kg (F Y 20-21) to 2.9 kg (F Y 18-19) only as compared to global average of 11kg (CY 2020). There is 
significant scope for increase in consumption of Aluminium in India and as the economy 
matures, it is expected that Aluminium consumption will increase significantly. 
 It is predicted that the demand growth of Aluminium in the next few years is going to be subsequently higher due to projected high GDP growth in the coming years. Multiple initiatives of Government of India like Make in India, 100% Rural electrification, Housing for All, Smart cities, National Infrastructure pipeline of Rs.100 lakh crore, renewable energy 
and FAME (Faster adoption of manufacturing of Hybrid and EV) schemes for electric vehicles, increase in FDI etc. will boost the consumption of the metal in the country. The country is having substantial bauxite reserves and huge coal reserves. Availability of bauxite and coal will facilitate further capacity addition for production of Aluminium metal.  Increasing urbanisation in the country will lead to increase in per-capita consumption of Aluminium in the country. 
 
As per the data available from Department of Commerce, the export of primary aluminium is already high vis-a-vis the domestic production. The export of primary aluminium is 2.3 Million Tonne in 2020-21 as compared to total aluminium production of 3.62 
Million Tonne (table below). The domestic consumption requirement is being met through import of primary aluminium (0.27 Million Tonne) and import of Aluminium waste and scrap 
(1.37 Million Tonne) to feed secondary aluminium producers.  

 Production of Aluminium, Export and Import of Primary Aluminium (HS Code 7601) and Aluminium waste and Scrap (HS Code 7602) 
(Quantity in 000’ tonne) 
HS Code Commodity 2019-20 
2020-21 2021-22 (Apr-Feb) 
Production 
76 Aluminium 3,656 3,616 3,664 
Export 
7601 Unwrought aluminium- Ingots, 
Billets, Wire Rods, Wire 
Bars(Alloyed & not-alloyed) 
1,961 2,324 2,654 
7602 Aluminium waste and Scrap 6.11 5.43 8.47 
76 Aluminium and articles thereof. 
2,371 2,736 3,126 
Import 
7601 Unwrought aluminium- Ingots, 
Billets, Wire Rods, Wire 
Bars(Alloyed & not-alloyed) 
266 265 190 
7602 Aluminium waste and Scrap 1,348 1,370 1521 
76 Aluminium and articles thereof. 
2,152 2,060 2,130 
Source: Production: Ministry of Mines; Export and Import: Department of Commerce            [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 15 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
   Initiatives for Promotion of Aluminium 
 
       Recommendation SI. No. 9 
 The Committee note that the total domestic production of aluminium metal during 
2020-21 stayed at about the same level of 3.61 million tonnes as in 2019-20. According to 
the Ministry, due to the onset of Covid-19 pandemic and the resulted lockdown, there was a 
severe demand destruction for Aluminium in the country. They further note that total domestic 
consumption of Aluminium during FY 2020-21 has decreased to 3.40 million tonne as 
compared to FY 2019- 20 levels of 3.70 million tonne i.e. a fall of about 8%. For promoting 
aluminium industry, the Ministry of Mines has issued National Mineral Policy 2019 in 
February, 2019. This Policy inter- alia, provides that efforts shall be made to export minerals 
in value added form as far as possible and the indigenous mineral industry will be attuned to 
the international economic situation in order to derive maximum advantage from foreign 
trade by carefully anticipating technology and demand changes in the international market for 
minerals; making industry competitive with products worldwide, reducing the cost of critical 
raw materials and the custom duty on critical raw materials like Aluminium Fluoride, etc. 
The Committee are of the view that this will assist the Aluminium Industry to plan its 
pricing and production strategy by providing advance and accurate import information.; 
improving ease of doing business and reducing compliance burden; issuing the guidelines for 
auction of mineral blocks with pre-embedded clearances for mining projects, directives for 
the implementation of these guidelines to promote the ease of doing business in the mining 

sector and to expedite the auction process as well as operation of mining lease by the 
successful bidder; and preparing a Non-Ferrous Metal Scrap Recycling Policy which focuses 
on developing a sustainable non-ferrous metal recycling ecosystem with special focus on 
recycling of scrap metal. The Committee would like to be apprised of the focussed steps taken 
by the Government to implement National Mineral Policy, 2019. 
 
ACTION TAKEN Ministry of Mines announced the National Mineral Policy 2019 (“NMP 2019”) in March, 2019 which replaced the National Mineral Policy 2008. Subsequently, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act (MMDR Act) 1957 was amended in the 
years 2020 and 2021. The objectives of Mineral Laws (Amendment) Act, 2020 is to allow State Governments to take advance action for auction mineral blocks before the expiry of lease period and to allow transfer of statutory clearances, permissions etc. to a new lessee facilitate seamless continuity of mining operations. Further, the MMDR Amendment Act, 2021 inter alia provides for increasing mineral production and time bound operationalization of 
mines, increasing employment and investment in the mining sector, maintaining continuity in mining operations after change. lf lessee, increasing the pace of exploration and auction of mineral resources and resolving long pending issues that have slowed the growth of the sector. These reforms ensure self-sufficiency in minerals requirements of the country. 
Ministry of Mines brought out National Non-Ferrous Metal Scrap Recycling Framework, 2020 in January, 2021 to promote a formal and well-organized recycling ecosystem by adopting energy efficient processes for recycling leading to lower carbon 
footprints and to work towards sustainable development and intergenerational equity. Major 
objectives of the framework include: to minimize the effect of end-of –life products on landfills and environmental pollution by promoting an environmentally sound processing and recycling system for secondary industry; to work towards economic wealth creation, job 
creation and increased contribution to GDP through metal recycling; to shift towards a circular economy in the coming years for base metals, critical raw materials and other essential materials etc. 
Actions as stipulated in the framework are being taken for giving effect to and timely implementation of the framework.            [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Reserves, Production and Development of Copper 
 
    Recommendation SI. No. 10  
 The Committee observe that Copper is the second largest non- ferrous metal by usage. 
Against the global copper demand of about 25.04 million tonne in 2020, the growth rate as 
compared to 2018 declined by around 0.13%. According to United States Geological Survey 
(USGS), total global copper reserves amount to 870 million tonne of copper. The Ministry of 
Mines have informed that our country has very limited known reserves of exploitable copper ore 
and currently India's copper share of world's reserve is only 0.31%. The total resources of 
copper ore in the country as on 1.4.2015 were estimated at 2.73 million tonne of copper metal. 
Although, Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL) is the only producer of copper ore in the country, the 
ore mined by it caters to its captive consumption. Copper ore production of HCL in last ten 
years has been in the range of about 4.0 million tonne per annum which is equivalent to 4.5% of 
the country’s requirement. The Committee have been apprised that Hindustan Copper Ltd. 
(HCL) has plans to increase its mining capacity from current level of 4.0 million tonne per 
annum to 12.2 million tonne per annum in phase–I (under implementation) and from 12.2 million 
tonne per annum to 20.2 million tonne per annum in phase-II through expansion of existing 

mines, re-opening of closed mines and opening of new mines by investing Rs. 3434.00 crore for 
Phase-I and Rs. 2066.00 crore for Phase-II. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
holistic plan be prepared by Ministry of Mines and HCL ensuring proportionate increase in 
production of copper ore on yearly basis so that the target of production of 12.2 million tonne 
per annum in phase-I and 20.2 million tonne per annum proposed target in phase-II shall be 
achieved. They also recommend that requisite expenditure allocation for this enhanced 
production plan be ensured to realize the outcome of this proposal. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken and the yearly investment plan to increase production targets by 
the Company. 
 
     ACTION TAKEN 
 
The yearly production plan & expenditure allocation of HCL for achieving the targeted 
production of 12.2 million tonne per annum in Phase -I with yearly plan of investment is given in 
table -1 and this is based on Corporate plan 2030 of the company. The detail phase -II plan will 
be prepared at a suitable time prior to achievement of targeted ore production as per phase -I mine expansion plan as follows. 
Financial Year Target of Copper ore production (in Million Tonne 
per Annum) 
Yearly investment planto increase 
production (Rs. in 
Crore) 
2022-23 3.94 350 
2023-24 6.19 550 
2024-25 7.53 681 
2025-26 8.43 619 
2026-27 10.31 556 
2027-28 11.81 591 
2028-29 12.20 339 
2029-30 12.20 339 
 
    [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
              Recommendation SI. No. 11 
 The Committee further note that Copper demand in India is expected to grow due to 
increased thrust of the Govt. towards "Make in India" and "Smart City" programmes, 
AatmaNirbhar Bharat in Defence, 100 GW targets for Renewable Energy by 2022, etc. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that Ministry of Mines has taken up a slew of measures like 
MMDR Amendment Act 2021, which will help increase in the pace and participation of private 
sector in exploration and will bring advance technology in exploration of minerals by giving level 
playing field for government and private agency. The Committee have also been informed that 
NMET is to be made Autonomous body to ramp up exploration by engaging public and private 
entities to increase Mineral production in the country. Further, under seamless prospecting 
license cum-mining lease, exploration activity is seamlessly integrated with mining; validity of 
statutory clearances of expired mining leases are continued even after expiry or termination 
of mining lease and shall be transferred to next lessee of the mine. This will ensure continuity 
in mining operations and production despite change in lessee. 
There is no denying the fact that as the global demand for electrical and electronic 
products, building construction, industrial machinery and equipment, transportation equipment 
and consumer and general products will increase, the demand of copper will also increase. 
Due to progress of implementation of electric vehicle, the demand of copper will also be 

derived in the country. To meet the enhanced demand of copper in the country, the 
Committee feel that more copper deposits needed to be exploited. Hence, the Committee 
desire the Ministry of Mines to take initiatives accordingly and have consultations/deliberations 
with all the user industries across major sectors to generate and meet the requisite demand of 
copper for their projects. The Committee desire the Ministry of Mines to plan and take 
initiatives accordingly and they be apprised of the steps taken in this direction. 
 
     ACTION TAKEN     The following initiatives have been taken by Ministry of Mines and HCL to increase the Copper production in the country subsequently meeting the future demand of copper: 
 
I. Ministry brought MMDR Amendment Act 2021 in March 2021 
 
a. which will help to increase the pace and participation of private sector in exploration and will bring advance technology in exploration of mineral by giving level playing field for government and private agency. 
b. NMET to be made Autonomous body to ramp up exploration by engaging public and private entities. 
c. Under seamless prospecting licence cum-mining lease, exploration activity is 
seamlessly integrated with mining 
d. Validity of statutory clearances of expired mining leases to continue even after expiry or termination of mining lease and shall be transferred to next lessee of the mine. This will ensure continuity in mining operations and production despite change in lessee. 
 
II. The National Mineral Policy 2019 was issued in February 2019 which, inter-alia, provides that efforts shall be made to export minerals in value added form as far as possible. 
 
III. Ministry of Mines has introduced Non-Ferrous Metal Import Monitoring System (NFMIMS) for Copper. NFMIMS will assist Copper industry to plan its pricing and production strategy by providing advance and accurate import information like exact quantity of material being imported etc. 
IV. Ministry is also working on improving ease of doing business and reducing 
compliance burden. 
V. Ministry has developed a Non-Ferrous Metal Scrap Recycling Framework which focuses on developing a sustainable non-ferrous metal recycling eco system with special focus on recycling of scrap metal. 
VI. Ministry is regularly following up with State Govt. at highest level for increasing auctions and thus increasing production of copper ore. Auction of two new copper mines (Thanewasana and Dubarpeth) for composite license in Maharashtra has already done. Recently exploration has started in Thanewasana. 
VII. HCL has chalked out an expansion plan to increase ore production from 3.6 million tonnes per annum to 20 million tonnes per annum. VIII. Likely operationalization of additional 1 MT copper plant in Gujarat by the private player to increase total refining capacity. 
    [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 

 
Consumption and Demand of Copper  
     Recommendation SI. No. 12  
 The Committee note that the total consumption of refined copper in the country 
in 2020 was around 6.60 lakh tonne. The Committee were informed that Copper demand in 
electrical segment is growing due to demand in infra sector as a result of affordable housing 
schemes, rural electrification and more urbanization. As regards consumption of copper in the 
country, the Committee think that per capita consumption of copper in the country is expected 
to increase from the current level of 0.6 Kg to 1 kg in coming years against world per capita 
consumption level of 3.2 kg. In view of targeted per capita consumption in India is 
expected to increase from the current level of 0.6 kg to 1 kg in the coming years, the 
Committee feel that    the Ministry of Mines should pursue with the Ministry of Finance and the 
Ministry of Commerce to give more incentives to the domestic copper industries so that more 
and more capacity addition projects are commissioned under 'Make in India' campaign. 
 
ACTION TAKEN  The  above  suggestion  is  noted.  Also,  the  Ministry  of  Mines  makes  appropriate recommendation for the promotion and protection of the domestic Copper sector to the Department of Revenue as part of Union Budget proposals, and to the 
Department of Commerce in respect of negotiations for Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). 
 
[Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para 18 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 

 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  -NIL- 
 

CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
Import of Aluminium and Scrap Policy 
    Recommendation SI. No. 8 
 The Committee observe that the imports have remained consistently high around 60% of 
the total domestic consumption in the year 2020-21 mostly dominated by import of scraps, 
constituting around 66% of total imports. The total aluminium imports including scrap during 
Financial Year 2020-21 was 2.06 million tonne as compared to 2.15 million tonne in previous 
year. The Committee note that Ministry has notified a National Non-Ferrous Metal Scrap 
recycling Framework on 31.3.2021 to enable indigineous Scrap Recycling industry to be a 
formal and organized sector by cutting down scrap imports particularly non-quality and low 
graded/standard scrap. The Committee appreciate such innovative and indigenous growth 
oriented steps to cut cost and improve quantity of Aluminium being produced in the country. 
The Committee further note that the development and promotion of aluminium can be 
ensured only by way of encouraging aluminium producers to produce more by providing 
enabling environment and protecting this Sector from flooding of imported aluminium. In this 
regard, the Committee think that the Ministry of Mines should endorse the demand of 
domestic Aluminium Industry to suitably enhance custom duty on imported aluminium to 
discourage the import which acts as a deterrent to boost indigeous production in the country. 
As the mandate to increase/decrease custom duty lies with the Ministry of Commerce, the 
Committee are of the considered opinion, the matter of increasing custom duty on imported 
aluminium be taken up at the highest level in the Government to protect this sector and made 
the Country 'Atam Nirbhar' in Aluminium Production. The Committee also desire that Ministry 
of Mines need to work out a viable mechanism with the Ministry of Commerce so that 
negotiations for Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) are undertaken by the Ministry of Commerce 
keeping in view the interests of domestic industry. 
    ACTION TAKEN 
 
Ministry of Mines is seized of the above imperatives for the domestic Aluminium sector and in that respect it makes appropriate recommendations for the promotion and protection of the domestic Aluminium sector to the Department of Revenue as part of Union Budget proposals, and to the Department of Commerce in respect of negotiations for Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). 
 
       [Ministry of Mines OM No. 1/1/2022-Met.I Dated 30-06-2022] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
02, August, 2022 
11, Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
RAKESH SINGH 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and 
Steel 
 

 
Annexure-I 
 Status of Mining lease auction alongwith operationalization 
 
S No State Name of the 
Block 
Mineral Date of 
auction 
ML / 
CL 
Area (in 
Ha) 
Reserves    
(in MT) 
Final 
Bid (in 
%)  
Preferred 
Bidder 
Whether 
ML 
Executed 
Operationa
lization 
Status 
Production 
Status 
Reason 
1 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Gudipadu block Limestone 08.06.2016 ML 40.82 26.66 8.12 Penna 
Cements 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes 
 2 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Erragudi-
Hussainapuram
–Yanakandla 
Limestone 26.09.2017 ML 131.5
7 
9.03 10.6 SreeJayajothi 
Cements Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
3 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Nandavaram–
Venkatapuram 
Limestone 26.09.2017 ML 24.73
9 
1.66 10.7 SreeJayajothi 
Cements Pvt 
Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
4 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Chigargunta – 
Bisanatham 
Gold 27.07.2018 ML 262.0
1 
2.22 38.25 NMDC 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
5 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Chintalayapalle-
Abdullapuram-
Korumanipalli 
(CAK) 
Limestone 28.11.2018 ML 417.5
1 
92.24 13.4 Adani 
Cementation 
Ltd 
(Surrendered) 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
6 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Gorlagutta Limestone 27.05.2021 ML 181.0
3 
61.14 7.25 M/s. 
SreeJayajothi 
Cements 
Private 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   

Limited 
7 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Devada Block Mangnese 04.10.2021 ML 81.95 6.52 7.3 Mahalakshmi 
Minerals 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
8 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Gutupalli, 
Kurnool 
Iron Ore 26.10.2021 ML 29.75 1.23 105.3 M/s 
TejaInfratech 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
9 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Veldurthy Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 15.03.2022 ML 22.04
4 
  41.6 M/s AMODA 
Iron & steel 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
10 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Chinnabantupall
i 
Manganes
e 
22.04.2022 ML 44.53   11.7 M/s 
Veerashiva 
Granites 
Exports pvt 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
11 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Nanda Manganes
e 
21.04.2022 CL 204   12 M/s Andhra 
Mining 
Corporation 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
12 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Mulagapadu Manganes
e 
21.04.2022 CL 402   11.1 M/s AZ 
Mining and 
Trading 
Enterprises 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
13 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Garikapeta Manganes
e 
21.04.2022 CL 460   11 M/s MOR 
Metals and 
Minerals 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

14 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Sivannadoraval Manganes
e 
21.04.2022 CL 420   11.2 M/s Hill Side 
Estates LLP 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
15 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Budharayavalas
a 
Manganes
e 
22.04.2022 CL 638   11.1 M/s MOR 
Metals and 
Minerals 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
16 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Batuva Manganes
e 
22.04.2022 CL 243   11.1 M/s AZ 
Mining and 
Trading 
Enterprises 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
17 Andhr
a 
Prade
sh 
Peddalingalaval
asa 
Manganes
e 
22.04.2022 CL 472   11 M/s 
Easterwood 
Estates LLP 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
18 Chhatt
isgarh 
Karhi-Chandi Limestone 18.02.2016 ML 242.1
3 
155 58.95 Shree Cement Yes Operation
al N.A.   
19 Chhatt
isgarh 
Kesla Limestone 19.02.2016 ML 108 67 10.15 Century 
Cement 
Yes Operation
al N.A.   
20 Chhatt
isgarh 
Baghmara Gold 26.02.2016 CL 474.3 2.7 12.55 Vedanta Ltd No  Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
21 Chhatt
isgarh 
Kesla II Limestone 01.05.2017 ML 357.0
7 
215 96.15 Dalmia 
(bharat) 
cement 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
22 Chhatt
isgarh 
Guma 
Limestone 
block, Palari 
Limestone 12.03.2018 ML 249.0
3 
124 138.3 Ultratech 
Cement 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A.   

23 Chhatt
isgarh 
Mohra (Block 
A), Balodabazar, 
Balodabazar-
Bhatapara 
Limestone 08.09.2020 ML 127.0
5 
56.847 5.45 State Govt to 
inform 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
24 Chhatt
isgarh 
Parsabhadar, 
Balodabazar, 
Balodabazar-
Bhatapara 
Limestone 08.09.2020 ML 28.46
1 
9.614 34.15 State Govt to 
inform 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
25 Chhatt
isgarh 
Kathiya-Pachri 
Block 
Limestone 11.10.2021 ML 323.3
32 
190.59 150.1 Mangalam 
Cement 
Industries 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
26 Chhatt
isgarh 
Nahardih-
Maghaipur 
Limestone 12.10.2021 ML 365.2
52 
77.84 66.05 Nalwa Steel& 
Power Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
27 Chhatt
isgarh 
Dallirajhara Iron Ore 04.05.2022 ML 80 50.95 70.15 Staya Power 
&Ispat Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
28 Chhatt
isgarh 
Serangdag Block Bauxite 06.05.2022 ML 93.85 1.99 67 Balaji Marble 
and Tiles Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
29 Chhatt
isgarh 
Kalwar Block Iron Ore 06.05.2022 ML 23.72 0.332 62.26 M/s 
Pitambara 
Logistics & 
Infrastructure 
Pvt. Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
30 Chhatt
isgarh 
KesadaEklamaC
helikama 
Iron Ore 10.05.2022 ML 755.0
39 
60.074 117.5
5 
M/s Arecelor 
Mittal Nippon 
Steel India 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
31 Gujara
t 
Mudhvay Sub- 
block B 
Limestone 25.05.2017 ML 233.5 301.5 20 Shree Cement No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

32 Gujara
t 
Mudhvay Sub- 
block C 
Limestone 26.05.2017 ML 251.9 325 30.05 Adani 
Cementation 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
33 Gujara
t 
Mudhvay Sub- 
block D 
Limestone 30.05.2017 ML 107.1 125 35 JSW Cement No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
34 Gujara
t 
Mudhvay - A Limestone 31.01.2021 
ML 
198.9 264 
7.01 
J K Lakshmi 
Cement Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
35 Gujara
t 
Dhank - A Limestone 21.10.2020 ML 22.06 1.76 22.56 Mignesh 
Infrastructure  
Pvt 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
36 Gujara
t 
Dhank - C Limestone 21.10.2020 ML 64.28 15.31 103.4 Shree Digvijay 
Cement 
Company 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
37 Gujara
t 
Sutrapada Limestone 21.10.2020 ML 39.72 3.91 6.5 Gujarat Siddhi 
Cement Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
38 Gujara
t 
Mevasa Bauxite 12.05.2021 ML 8.73 0.99 5.62 Patel Kaushik 
Kumar 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
39 Gujara
t 
Satpara Bauxite 07.05.2021 ML 5.54 2.23 5.14 Karan 
PolabhaiGojiy
a 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
40 Gujara
t 
Lamba Bauxite 11.05.2021 ML 6.63 2.33 5.14 RamsiMeram
anbhai Barad 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

41 Jharkh
and 
Pahardia Gold 26.10.2016 CL 279.0
9 
1.162 28.1 MaithanIspat 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Period 
of 
composi
te 
license 
has 
expired. 
The 
preferre
d bidder 
has 
applied 
for 
extensio
n of CL, 
which is 
under 
consider
ation 
42 Jharkh
and 
Hariharpur-
Lem-
Bicha_Block-I 
Limestone 12.02.2016 CL 180 0.424 12 Burnpur 
Cement 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI has 
been 
revoked
, Fresh 
tender 
process 
for 
auction 
of 
mineral 
block 
has 
been 
initated. 
43 Jharkh
and 
Hariharpur-
Lem-
Bicha_Block-II 
Limestone 12.02.2016 CL 379 0.671 12 Burnpur 
Cement 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI has 
been 
revoked
, Fresh 
tender 

process 
for 
auction 
of 
mineral 
block 
has 
been 
initated. 
44 Jharkh
and 
Parasi Gold and 
Associated 
Minerals, Tamar 
Block 
Gold 01.11.2017 ML 69.24 9.894 17 Rungta Mines 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Forest 
Clearea
nce is 
pending 
45 Jharkh
and 
Bhangaon Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 28.06.2018 ML 118 38.25 89 South West 
Mining Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Forest 
Clearea
nce is 
pending 
46 Jharkh
and 
Lesliganj Graphite 01.08.2018 ML 94.52
1 
0.6689 75 Team Geo 
Resources Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearean
ces are 
pending 
47 Jharkh
and 
Dulsulma Graphite 01.03.2019 ML 36.29 1.48 149.2 Team Geo 
Resources Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearean
ces are 
pending 
48 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2621, 
Ramgad, Bellary 
Iron Ore 01.10.2016 ML 33.8 31.53 90.82 JSW Ltd Yes Operation
al Yes   
49 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2487, 
Karadikolla, 
Bellary   
Iron Ore 03.10.2016 ML 86.12 14.709 100.3 MSPL Ltd Yes 
Operation
al Yes   

50 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2366, 
Ittanahalli, 
Bellary   
Iron Ore 04.10.2016 ML 33.21 6.939 58.9 JSW Ltd Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
51 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2365, 
Ittanahalli, 
Bellary   
Iron Ore 04.10.2016 ML 130.5
3 
33.89 81.1 JSW Ltd Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
52 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2313, 
Malgolla, 
Bellary 
Iron Ore 05.10.2016 ML 21.61 10.026 100.1 JSW Ltd Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
53 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2559, 
Swamimalai 
range, Bellary   
Iron Ore 05.10.2016 ML 26.71 28.47 111.1 MSPL Ltd MDPA 
and 
Lease 
deed 
yet to 
execute 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Temple 
and FC 
issue 
54 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2290, 
Sandur, Bellary 
Iron Ore 06.10.2016 ML 100.5
4 
28.618 102.5 JSW Ltd Yes Operation
al Yes   
55 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2148  Iron Ore 06.09.2018 ML 60.66 63.33 129.9 MSPL Limited MDPA 
and 
Lease 
deed 
yet to 
execute 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
FC 
Clearnac
e yet to 
submit 
56 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2563  Iron Ore 05.09.2018 ML 30.09 9.26 111 MSPL Limited MDPA 
and 
Lease 
deed 
yet to 
execute 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
FC 
Clearnac
e yet to 
submit 
57 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 995  Iron Ore 04.09.2018 ML 32.89 9.708 95.2 JSW Steel Ltd Yes 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Stopped 
due to 
FC 
Expiry 

58 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2433  Iron Ore 03.09.2018 ML 29.49 10.024 59.5 Minera Steel 
and Power 
Pvt Ltd 
MDPA 
and 
Lease 
deed 
yet to 
execute 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
FC 
Clearnac
e yet to 
submit 
59 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2245,  Iron Ore 03.09.2018 ML 24.47 7.577 55.5 Kirloskar 
Ferrous 
Industries Ltd 
Yes 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Stopped 
due to 
FC 
Expiry 
60 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2566  Iron Ore 05.12.2018 ML 7.57 3.179 36.7 Kirloskar 
Ferrous 
Industries Ltd 
MDPA 
and 
Lease 
deed 
yet to 
execute 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
FC 
Clearnac
e yet to 
submit 
61 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2185 A  Iron Ore 05.12.2018 ML 44.42 9.224 39.1 HothurIspatPv
t Ltd 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
62 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2346  Iron Ore 24.07.2019 ML 93.6 60.67 67.1 JSW Steel 
Limited 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
63 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2239  Iron Ore 24.07.2019 ML 43.58 12.207 97.5 JSW Steel 
Limited 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
64 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2531 Iron Ore 25.07.2019 ML 56 3.567 72.1 MSPL Limited Yes Operation
al Yes   
65 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 1602 Iron Ore 25.07.2019 ML 107.5
1 
22.266 102.7 JSW Steel 
Limited 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
66 Karnat
aka 
 Kannur wadi 
Block 
Limestone
  
 19.12.2020 ML  550  376.51 35.15  ACC  No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

67 Karnat
aka 
Hanamaneri Limestone 10.12.2021 ML 730 708.2 52 JK Cement 
Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
68 Karnat
aka 
Ravur Limestone 09.12.2021 ML 430 147.9 50.2 Ultratech Ltd. No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
69 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2584 
M/s Auro 
Minerals  
Iron Ore 21.02.2022 ML 32.05 6.72 107.5 Minra Steels No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
70 Karnat
aka 
ML No. 2586 
M/s 
GoggaGurushan
thaiah and 
Brothers  
Iron Ore 19.01.2022 ML 15025 0.562 60.1 M/s Baig 
Trading 
Company 
Yes 
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
71 Karnat
aka 
Bommanalli Limestone 14.01.2022 ML 500 463.925 25.1 M/s Ramco 
Cement 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
72 Karnat
aka 
AjjanahalliTuma
kuru 
Gold ######## CL 9.49 5.55 15.1 M./s Kundker 
Products 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
73 Karnat
aka 
Diggaon Limestone ######## ML 786.3
2 
812.67 23.34 M/s Ultratech 
Cements 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
74 Karnat
aka 
Belagatta, 
Chitradurga 
Gold 30.03.2022 CL 2501.
58 
  13.1 M/s PM 
Granites  
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

75 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Hatupur Block, 
Brijpur 
Diamond 05.10.2016 CL 133.5 0.604 22.31 Bansal 
Construction  
Company 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
76 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Deora- Sitapuri- 
Udiyapura 
Limestone 15.05.2018 ML 344.7
8 
61.96 77.1 Ultratech 
Cement Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
77 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Hinauti- 1 Limestone 15.05.2018 ML 20.23 2.81 21.05 Digiana 
Industries Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
78 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Hinauti- 2 Limestone 16.05.2018 ML 12.14 1.67 25.05 Digiana 
Industries Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
79 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Gauthana-Tikari 
Graphite Block 
Graphite 17.05.2018 ML 33.01
6 
6.24 200.1 Urmila 
DilipChandan 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
80 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Pratappura 
Iron-ore Block 
Iron Ore 18.05.2018 ML 9.02 2.43 275 SwastikBuild
mat India Pvt 
Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al N.A.   
81 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Bunder Diamond 10.12.2019 ML 364 34.20 
Million 
Carats 
30.05 Essel Mining 
& Industries 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
82 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Gauthana Graphite 23.12.2019 CL 9.993 4.69 97.55 Team Geo 
Resources Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   

83 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Badarkha 
Limestone 
Block, Satna 
Limestone 24.06.2020 ML 121.1 17.2 5.95 Dalmia 
Cement 
Bharat Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
84 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Kosdana 
Limestone 
Block, Dhar 
Limestone 24.06.2020 ML 44.29
3 
14.21 100.7 Wonder 
Cement Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
85 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Baghrelisani 
Bauxite Block, 
Dindori 
Bauxite 24.06.2020 ML 20.15
1 
0.133 32 Yash Logistic 
Pvt Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
86 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Imaliya Gold 
Block, Katni 
Gold 24.06.2020 ML 6.51 0.35 6.5 Prospect 
Resources Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
87 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Chakariya Gold 
Block, Singrauli 
Gold 24.06.2020 ML 23.57 0.137 5.4 Garima 
Natural 
Resources Pvt 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
88 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
RamstahnGhun
chihai Block 
Limestone 13.07.2021 ML 1917.
15 
209.77 65.5 Ultratech Ltd. No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
89 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Jamuwantikala Limestone 07.01.2022 ML 6.313 2.98 55.15 M/s Jitendra 
Kumar 
Kushwaha 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
90 Madh
ya 
Prade
Tikar, Distt. 
Rewa 
Bauxite 04.01.2022 ML 26.77 1.04 52 Katni Minerals 
Pvt. Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

sh 
91 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Mardeora, 
Distt. 
Chhatarpur 
Rock 
Phosphat
e 
05.01.2022 ML 9.951 3.59 320 Shobha 
Minerals 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
92 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Jam Manganes
e 
19.04.2022 CL 6.81 0.02 45.5 M/s Jitendra 
Kumar 
Kushwaha 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
93 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Pahari-Narora-
Tiloura-
TanajaBansipur 
Limestone 19.04.2022 ML 256.9
98 
52.13 70.05 Roadway 
Solutions 
India Infra 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
94 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Pipariya Mal Bauxite 19.04.2022 ML 273.2
15 
47.7 5.7 Anand Mining 
Corporation 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
95 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Botejhari Manganes
e 
20.04.2022 CL 6.094 0.07 45.1 Om Sairam 
Steels & 
Alloys Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
96 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Dhaukan-
Dhaurra-
Urdaurra 
Iron Ore 20.04.2022 ML 153.0
31 
40.12 120.5 Pacific Iron 
Manufacturin
g Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 

97 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Pahari, Narora, 
Tiloura 
Limestone 20.04.2022 ML 227.5
5 
24.35 132 Roadway 
Solutions 
India Infra 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
98 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Baruyee Bauxite 21.04.2022 ML 9.049 0.24 31.95 M/s Sanjay 
Rai 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
99 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
AtarharaParsok
ha 
Limestone 21.04.2022 ML 349.1
72 
41.47 40 Ultratech 
Cement 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
100 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Kubri Bauxite 
and 
Limestone 
22.04.2022 CL 12.44 4.63 65.55 Yash Logistic 
Pvt. Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
101 Madh
ya 
Prade
sh 
Jamuwanikala Bauxite 26.04.2022 CL 6.313 0.12 26.6 Shri Krishan 
Stone Crusher 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
102 Mahar
ashtra 
Chitale- watangi Bauxite 20.06.2017 ML 75 2.86 55 Gamma Iron 
India Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
103 Mahar
ashtra 
NandgaonEkodi Limestone 20.06.2017 ML 369.5
2 
42.1 125.1 Ambuja 
Cements Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
104 Mahar
ashtra 
Guguldoh Manganes
e 
12.04.2018 ML 105 0.44 55.6 Shanti GD 
Ispat 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 

105 Mahar
ashtra 
Parli Bauxite 08.05.2019 ML 7.12 0.64 51.6 Shree Malhar 
Minerals 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
106 Mahar
ashtra 
Humdara- 
Ghodepaiwadi 
Bauxite 08.05.2019 ML 120.4
8 
2.365 115.2 Gamma Iron 
India Limited 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC 
Pending 
107 Mahar
ashtra 
Parseoni Manganes
e 
08.05.2019 ML 44 0.159 92.1 Universal 
Impex 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC 
Pending 
108 Mahar
ashtra 
Thanewasana Copper 08.05.2019 CL 768.6
2 
8.02 3.6 Vedanta 
Limited 
Yes Operation
al N.A.   
109 Mahar
ashtra 
Lohardongri Iron Ore 09.05.2019 ML 35.73 1.48 90.2 Sunflag Iron 
and Steel 
Company 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
110 Mahar
ashtra 
Ghungur- I Bauxite 09.05.2019 ML 14.24 0.8 87.3 Shri 
Bhairavnat 
Earthmover 
and Company 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
111 Mahar
ashtra 
Dubarpeth Copper 09.05.2019 CL 816.2
9 
1.343 2.1 Vedanta 
Limited 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoIexten
dion 
pending 
112 Mahar
ashtra 
Nanar Bauxite 10.05.2019 ML 144.9
5 
7.94 25.1 Sociedade De 
Fomento 
Industrial 
Private 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 

113 Mahar
ashtra 
Ghungur- II Bauxite 10.05.2019 ML 10.65 0.32 69.3 Shri Jugai 
Minerals 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
114 Mahar
ashtra 
Gojoli–
Somanpalli–
Dongargaon 
Limestone 10.05.2019 ML 646.5
5 
43.4 5.2 Dalmia 
Cement 
Bharat 
Limited 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
EC and 
FC 
Pending 
115 Mahar
ashtra 
Kurai Limestone 11.01.2022 ML 480.8 89.14 185 ACC Limited No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
issued 
by Govt 
on dt. 
07.03.2
022 
116 Mahar
ashtra 
Hivra Manganes
e 
11.01.2022 ML 6.9 0.042 92.4 PM Granite 
Export Pvt 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
issued 
by Govt 
on dt. 
07.03.2
022 
117 Mahar
ashtra 
Girola(Jamdi)  Kyanite 11.01.2022 ML 6.55 0.393 32.05 Shanti GD 
Ispat& Powers 
Pvt Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
issued 
by Govt 
on dt. 
07.03.2
022 
118 Mahar
ashtra 
MandriPanchala Manganes
e 
11.01.2022 CL 44.77 0.213 111.1 PM Granite 
Export Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
issued 
by Govt 
on dt. 
07.03.2
022 

119 Mahar
ashtra 
Dongargaon 
Block 
Limestone 31.03.2022 ML 252.3
6 
12.95 176 RCCPL Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Letter 
issued 
to 
preferre
d bidder 
for 
depositi
ng 1st 
installm
ent of 
upfront 
paymen
t on dt 
31.03.2
022 
120 Mahar
ashtra 
Chikhalgaon 
(West) Block 
Bauxite 31.03.2022 ML 21.87 2.8 5.2 GNP Reality 
LLP 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Ist 
Installm
ent of 
upfront 
paymen
t 
received 
on 
11.04.2
022 
121 Mahar
ashtra 
Bidwadi Block Graphite 31.03.2022 ML 157.0
2 
3.58 5.1 Elegant 
Hospitality 
Services 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Letter 
issued 
to 
preferre
d bidder 
for 
depositi
ng 1st 
installm
ent of 
upfront 
paymen
t on dt 

31.03.2
022 
122 Mahar
ashtra 
Ajgaon Block Iron Ore 31.03.2022 CL 8.4 NA 25 JSW Steel Ltd. No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Letter 
issued 
to 
preferre
d bidder 
for 
depositi
ng 1st 
installm
ent of 
upfront 
paymen
t on dt 
31.03.2
022 
123 Mahar
ashtra 
GhanpurMudho
li (West) 
Copper & 
Gold 
31.03.2022 CL 917.4
2 
NA 2.05 M/s Vedanta 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Perform
ance 
Security 
Bank 
Guarant
ee 
received 
on 
dated 
18.04.2
022 

124 Mahar
ashtra 
Satarda Iron Ore 01.04.2022 CL 12 NA 71.25 M/s Arcelor 
Mittal  
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Perform
ance 
Security 
Bank 
Guarant
ee 
received 
on 
dated 
18.04.2
022 
125 Mahar
ashtra 
Mauli Iron Ore 06.04.2022 ML 24.26 0.98 96 M/s 
Sociedade De 
Fomento 
Industrial Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Ist 
Installm
ent of 
upfront 
paymen
t 
received 
on 
13.04.2
022 
126 Odish
a 
Ghoraburhani- 
Sagasahi 
Iron Ore 02.03.2016 ML 139.2 99.59 44.35 Essar Steel Yes Operation
al Yes   
127 Odish
a 
Lasarda-Pacheri Manganes
e 
27.12.2016 CL 256.3 11.16 44.65 Thriveni 
Earthmovers 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 

128 Odish
a 
Kottameta Limestone 27.12.2016 ML 801.1
7 
98.69 12.05 Dalmia 
(bharat) 
cement 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
129 Odish
a 
Kalamang West 
(Northern part) 
Iron Ore 18.05.2017 ML 92.87
5 
92.85 100.1 Bhushan Steel 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
130 Odish
a 
Netrabandha Iron Ore 19.05.2017 ML 139.2
2 
81.973 87.15 Bhushan 
Power and 
Steel Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
131 Odish
a 
Khatkurbahal 
Block (North) 
Limestone 25.10.2019 ML 156.0
1 
47.308 25.6 Shiva 
Cements Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 

132 Odish
a 
Jagdalpur Block Graphite 25.10.2019 ML 17.86
3 
0.981 63.55 Kalinga 
Enterprises 
Pvt Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
133 Odish
a 
Kamarda Block Chromite 25.10.2019 ML 107.2
4 
2.375 96.8 T. S. Alloys Ltd Yes Operation
al Yes   
134 Odish
a 
Saruabil Block Chromite 25.10.2019 ML 246.8
6 
10.126 88.5 T. S. Alloys 
Ltd. 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
135 Odish
a 
Nuagaon Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 31.01.2020 ML 776.9
7 
789.05 95.2 JSW Steel Ltd Yes Operation
al Yes   
136 Odish
a 
Narayanposhi 
Iron Ore & 
Manganese 
Block 
Iron Ore & 
Manganes
e 
01.02.2020 ML 347.0
1 
185.1 98.55 JSW Steel Ltd Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
137 Odish
a 
Thakurani Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 02.02.2020 ML 228.7
4 
179.27 107.6 Arcelor Mittal 
India Pvt Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
138 Odish
a 
Balda Iron Ore 
Block 
Iron Ore 03.02.2020 ML 343.9
8 
200.11 118.1 Serajuddin& 
Co. 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
139 Odish
a 
Ganua Iron Ore 
Block 
Iron Ore 04.02.2020 ML 88.51
6 
118.92 132 JSW Steel Ltd Yes Operation
al Yes   

140 Odish
a 
Jilling - 
Langalota Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 05.02.2020 ML 456.0
4 
72.84 135 Shyam Ores 
Jharkhand 
Pvt. 
Ltd(Reserved 
for OMC) 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
141 Odish
a 
Jajang Iron Ore 
Block 
Iron Ore 06.02.2020 ML 669.0
8 
39.42 110 JSW Steel Ltd Yes Operation
al Yes   
142 Odish
a 
Roida II Iron Ore 
Block 
Iron Ore 07.02.2020 ML 74.70
2 
25.89 90.9 Narbheram 
Power and 
Steel Pvt Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
143 Odish
a 
Mahulsukha 
Iron Ore & 
Manganese 
Block 
Iron Ore 
and 
Manganes
e 
08.02.2020 ML 390.3
2 
33.54 92.7 Patnaik 
Minerals 
Private Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
144 Odish
a 
Gorumahisani 
Iron Ore Block 
Iron Ore 10.02.2020 ML 348.0
5 
17.6 115 Ghanshyam 
Mishra & Sons 
Private 
Limited 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
145 Odish
a 
Nadidih Iron 
Ore and 
Manganese 
Block(Feegrade) 
Iron Ore 
and 
Manganes
e 
16.09.2021 ML 117.2
1 
23.69 92.3 ESL Steel Ltd. Yes 
Operation
al Yes   

146 Odish
a 
Kolmong Iron 
Ore and 
Manganese 
Block 
Iron Ore 
and 
Manganes
e 
12.02.2020 ML 218.4
8 
Fe-1.4, 
Mn-3.69 
100 Yazdani Steel 
& Power Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
147 Odish
a 
Siljora-Kalimati 
Block 
Iron Ore 
and 
Manganes
e 
13.02.2020 ML 713.5
1 
Fe-0.72, 
Mn-3.79 
154 DebabrataBeh
era 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
148 Odish
a 
Jaribahal Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 14.02.2020 ML 107.4
4 
7.15 150 Kashvi 
International 
Pvt Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
149 Odish
a 
Teherai Iron 
Ore and 
Manganese 
Block 
Iron Ore 
and 
Manganes
e 
15.02.2020 ML 135.0
8 
Fe-8.90, 
Mn-0.06 
93.06 TaramaAppart
mentPvt 
Ltd(Forefeited
) 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
150 Odish
a 
Jururi Iron Ore 
Block 
Iron Ore 16.02.2020 ML 73.41
3 
2.7 126.3 Jagat Janani 
Services 
Private 
Limited 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
151 Odish
a 
Katasahi 
Manganese 
Block 
Manganes
e 
17.02.2020 ML 200.5
1 
0.65 130.3 Agrasen 
Sponge Pvt 
Ltd 
Yes Operation
al Yes   

152 Odish
a 
Kanther - Koira 
Manganese 
Block 
Manganes
e 
18.02.2020 ML 73.30
1 
0.62 110.1 P.M. Granite 
Export Private 
Limited 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
153 Odish
a 
Guali Iron Ore 
Block 
Iron Ore 17.03.2020 ML 365.0
3 
194.94 144 Jindal Steel & 
Power 
Ltd(Reserved 
for OMC) 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
154 Odish
a 
Sukinda 
Chromite Block 
Chromite 
Ore 
18.03.2020 ML 406 92.548 93.75 T S Alloys 
Limited 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
155 Odish
a 
Badampahar 
Iron Ore Block 
Iron Ore 01.07.2020 ML 128.4
3 
4.484 95.15 GM Iron & 
Steel 
Company Ltd 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
156 Odish
a 
Kasia Iron Ore & 
Dolomite Block 
Iron Ore & 
Dolomite 
16.09.2021 
ML 194.1
9 
278.04 118.1 Jindal Steel & 
Power Ltd. 
Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
157 Odish
a 
Nadidih Iron 
Ore Block 
(BICO) 
Iron Ore 16.09.2021 ML 74.5 27.04 95.6 ESL Steel Ltd. Yes 
Operation
al Yes   
158 Odish
a 
Chandiposhi 
Iron Ore Block 
Iron Ore 16.09.2021 ML 131.5
8 
47.07 113.1 Rungta Mines 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 

159 Odish
a 
JumkaPathiripo
shiPahar Iron 
Ore Block 
Iron Ore 16.09.2021 ML 158.5
09 
140.28 110.1
5 
Rungta Mines 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
160 Odish
a 
Dholtapahar 
Iron Ore Block 
Iron Ore 16.09.2021 ML 60.51 23.92 126.5
5 
Kashvi Power 
& Steel Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
161 Odish
a 
Gandhalpada 
Iron Ore Block 
Iron Ore 16.09.2021 ML 241.1 314.37 141.2
5 
TATA Steel 
Mining Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
162 Odish
a 
NetrabandhaPa
har (West) 
Iron Ore 16.09.2021 ML 74.37 17.265 139.5 Raga 
Tradecon Pvt. 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 

163 Odish
a 
Pureibahal 
Block 
Iron Ore 04.10.2021 ML 64.33
7 
46.8 124 Rungta Mines 
Limeted 
No  
Non 
Operation
al 
N.A. 
Statutor
y 
clearanc
es yet to 
be 
obtaine
d by the 
lessee 
164 Rajast
han 
3B1- (b) Deh Limestone 22.09.2016 ML 247.8
7 
168.84 60.09 Emami 
Cement 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
165 Rajast
han 
Sindwari, 
Ramakhera, 
Satkhanda Block 
- B 
Limestone 05.01.2017 ML 474.5 174.45 48.05 Dalmia 
(bharat) 
cement 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
Issued, 
EC & 
Grazing 
Land 
NoC are 
due 
166 Rajast
han 
3B1- (a) Deh Limestone 06.01.2017 ML 267.6
3 
126.95 67.94 Emami 
Cement 
Yes Operation
al Yes   
167 Rajast
han 
3D1, Harima-
Pithsar 
Limestone 26.09.2017 ML 357.0
9 
199.154 41.6 JSW Cement  
Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Litigatio
n 
168 Rajast
han 
3B2, Sarasani Limestone 05.02.2018 ML 470 205.537 60.1 JSW Cement 
Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
Issued, 
Grazing 
Land 
NoC are 
due 
169 Rajast
han 
Rata-Mandha-
1A (RM-1A) 
Limestone 25.06.2018 ML 420 209.265 10.4 Shree Cement 
Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A.   
170 Rajast
han 
3D-2, Harima-
Pithasar 
Limestone 26.08.2019 ML 434.0
8 
142.579 24.54 Adani 
Cementation 
No  
Non 
Operation
N.A.   

Ltd al 
171 Rajast
han 
Block No. 13 of 
4GIIA 
Limestone 04.09.2019 ML 16.28 10.40834 25.6 Sigma 
Minerals Ltd 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI 
Issued, 
EC & 
Grazing 
Land 
NoC are 
due 
172 Rajast
han 
Rata-Mandha-
1A(RM-1A) 
Limestone 16.12.2021 ML 420 209.715 15.25 Deccan 
Cements 
Limited 
Deccan 
Chambers 
SomajiGuda, 
No  
Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
173 Rajast
han 
Harima 
PithasarNagaur, 
Blocks 3D2 
Limestone 20.12.2021 ML 424.0
86 
142.579 37 Ambuja 
Cements 
Limited 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
174 Rajast
han 
Gothra-
Parasrampura 
West block 
Limestone 24.01.2022 ML 287.7
54  
163.165  192 ACC Cement 
Ltd 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
175 Rajast
han 
Block- 3C-1 n/v 
Deh-Harima 
Limestone 27.01.2022 ML 300.7
5 
183.258 130.1 JSW Cement 
Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
176 Rajast
han 
Block- 3C-2 n/v 
Deh-Harima  
Limestone 28.01.2022 ML 386.0
2 
150.7603 50.05 JSW Cement 
Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
177 Rajast
han 
Gothra-
Parasrampura 
East block  
Limestone 25.01.2022 ML 460.4 158.39 192.0
5 
Dalmia 
Cement 
Bharat Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
178 Rajast
han 
SindwariChariya 
Block A 
Limestone 16.02.2022 ML 203.5
5 
156.596 130 JK Cements 
Ltd. 
No  
Non 
Operation
N.A. LoI yet 
to be 

al issued 
179 Rajast
han 
4GI-a Nagaur Limestone 11.04.2022 ML 610.8
6 
182.43 45.32 JK Laxmi 
Cement Ltd. 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
LoI yet 
to be 
issued 
180 Uttar 
Prade
sh 
SonraiPhosphor
ite Block V 
Phosphori
te 
08.04.2022 CL     38.48 M/s HSM 
Holdings 
No  Non 
Operation
al N.A. 
Recently 
Auction
ed 
 
 
 

Annexure-II 
Aluminium related projects approved in 51st SSAG Meeting under Science and Technology 
Programme Scheme of Ministry of Mines (2019-20) 
S.No. Project Title Implementing 
Institute  
Duration Project start 
date 
Status 
1 Process Feasibility studies 
for the development of 
High Purity Aluminium 
through segregation 
process 
Nonferrous 
Materials 
Technology 
Development 
Centre 
 
1 Year 
 
8/11/2019 Completed 
2 Production and certification 
of certified reference 
materials (CRMs) for the 
analysis of aluminium alloy. 
Jawaharlal Nehru 
Aluminium Research 
Development and 
Design Centre 
 
2 Years 
 
20/11/2019 Ongoing 
 
(Time 
extension 
upto 
December 
2022) 
3 Optimization of digestion 
efficiency in Bayer process 
by ascertaining the ideal 
size fraction of bauxite 
feed. 
Jawaharlal Nehru 
Aluminium Research 
Development and 
Design Centre 
 
1 Year 
 
22/11/2019 Completed 
4 Utilization of aluminium 
dross to achieve zero waste 
– A bench scale study 
Jawaharlal Nehru 
Aluminium Research 
Development and 
Design Centre, 
Wadi, Nagpur and 
CSIR-National 
Environmental 
Engineering 
Research Institute, 
Nagpur 
 
2 Years 
 
22/11/2019 Ongoing 
 
(Time 
extension 
upto June 
2022) 
5 Value addition of calcined 
bauxite for possible use as 
abrasives in waterjet 
cutting applications 
SSN College  of 
Engineering 
 
18 months 
 
24/1/2020 Completed 
 
Aluminium related projects approved in 52nd SSAG Meeting under Science and Technology 
Programme Scheme of Ministry of Mines (2020-21) 

S.N
o. 
Project Title Implementing Institute  Duration Project start 
date 
Status 
1 Design, analysis and development 
of Rheo gravity diecast Al-15 Mg 
2Si-4.5Si composite based light 
weight Bucket links for Mining 
Excavators 
CSIR Central 
Mechanical 
Engineering Research 
Institute 
 
 
2 years 
20/7/2021 Ongoing 
2 Bio-electro chemical reclamation 
of titaniuman do ther rare earth  
metals from red mud waste using 
a modified microbial fuel cell  
approach 
PSG Institute of 
Advanced Studies 
 
1year 
1/12/2021 Ongoing 
3 Development of Alternative flux 
Material from Red Mud for Steel  
Dephosphorization 
CSIR Central 
Electrochemical 
Research Institute 
 
1year 
7/12/2021 Ongoing 
 
 

ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, 
MINES AND STEEL (2021-22) HELD ON  02 AUGUST, 2022 FROM 1530 HRS TO 
1620 HRS IN HON'BLE CHAIRPERSON'S CHAMBER, ROOM NO. '210', B-BLOCK, 
PHA EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Sunil Kumar Singh - In the Chair 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Kunar Hembram 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4. Shri Saumitra Khan 
5. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
6. Shri S. Muniswamy  
7. Shri Ajay Nishad  
8. Smt. Riti Pathak 
9. Shri S.R. Parthiban 
10. Shri Chunni Lal Sahu 
11. Shri Arun Sao 
12. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14. Dr. Beesetti Venkata Satyavathi 
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri Samir Oraon 
17. Shri Deepak Prakash 
18. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
19. Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J.M. Baisakh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Additional Director 
  
In the absence of Hon'ble Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri Sunil Kumar 
Singh, MP to preside over the sitting of the Committee under rule 258(3) of the 'Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha'.   

2. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the following draft Reports 
without any amendments/changes:- 
(i) ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
(ii) ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
 
(iii) ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 31st Report  (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject "Development of Aluminium and Copper Industries 
in the Country" relating to the Ministry of Mines. 
 
(v) ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
3. ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
4. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalise other 4 Action Taken 
Reports and present/lay  all the five Reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
5. ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
*Not related to the Report. 
 
 

ANNEXURE-IV 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIRST 
REPORT ON THE SUBJECT “DEVELOPMENT OF ALUMINIUM AND COPPER 
INDUSTRIES IN THE COUNTRY ” OF THE MINISTRY OF MINES OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made:      12    
II. Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11 and 12):   
 11        
 Percentage of total                    92% 
  
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies 
(vide Recommendation at Sl. No. Nil):                 00 
Percentage of total                                   0%  
  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. No. Nil):                          00 
Percentage of total                             0%  
     
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government  are still awaited 
 ( vide recommendation at Sl. No. 8):                      01 
 
Percentage of total                             08%  
 
 
 
 
 