27 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal an
“Safety Management and Practices in Steel P
 
 
 
 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2021/AGRAHAYANA, 1943(Saka)
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2021-2022)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Safety Management and Practices in Steel PSUs”
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
TWENTY SEVENTH  REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2021/AGRAHAYANA, 1943(Saka) 
2022) [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the  d Steel (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  s”]  
  

COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2021
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal an
“Safety Management and Practices in Steel P
                 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  
      
                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2021/AGRAHAYANA, 1943(Saka)
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2021-2022) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Safety Management and Practices in Steel PSUs”
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.12.2021 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.12.2021 
   
 
                                                               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
DECEMBER, 2021/AGRAHAYANA, 1943(Saka) 
  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the  d Steel (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  s”] 

i 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page 
Composition of the Committee (ii) 
Introduction (iv) 
Chapter – I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
Chapter – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
Government………………………………………………. 
 
8 
Chapter – III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's 
replies……………………………………………………………………………… 
 
27 
Chapter – IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee………………………………………………………………… 
 
28 
Chapter – V Observations/Recommendations in respect of   which final replies of the 
Government are still 
awaited………………………………………………………………………. 
 
29 
 ANNEXURES  
I Details of number of persons injured/died in reportable and fatal accidents 
in SAIL during 2020 …………… 
30 
II Compensation as per Employees Compensation Act paid  to the families 
of deceased regular employees in fatal accidents occurred during 2019, 
2020 and 2021 (till 30.09.2021)……………………………………………. 
31 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel                  
(2021-2022) held on  16.12.2021 …....................................................... 
32 
IV Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of 
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
……………………………………………… 
34 
 
 

ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2021-2022) 
 
            Chairperson -    Shri Rakesh Singh  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Balubhau Dhanorkar alias Suresh Narayan 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
4. Shri Kunar Hembram 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
6. Shri Saumitra Khan 
7. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
8. Shri S. Muniswamy  
9. Shri Ajay Nishad  
10. Shri Basanta Kumar Panda        
11. Smt. Riti Pathak 
12. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
13. Shri S.R. Parthiban 
14. Shri Komati Reddy Venkat Reddy 
15. Shri Chunni Lal Sahu 
16. Shri Arun Sao 
17. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh  
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh   
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
20. Dr. Beesetti Venkata Satyavathi 
21. Dr. Thirumaavalavan Thol 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
23. Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
24. Shri Prashanta Nanda 
25. Shri Ram Vichar Netam  
26. Shri Samir Oraon 
27. Shir Deepak Prakash 
28. Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu 
29. Shri Shibu Soren 
30. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
31. Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav 
   

iii 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Pawan Kumar   -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arvind Sharma   -  Director  
3. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Vandana Pathania Guleria -  Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel on the subject “Safety Management and Practices in 
Steel PSUs” relating to the Ministry of Steel.  
2.  The Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal and 
Steel was presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2021. Replies of the Government to all the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Report were received on 29.10.2021. 
3. The Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on  16.12.2021.   
4. An analysis on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
is given at Annexure-IV.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
16, December, 2021 
25 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
RAKESH SINGH 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
 
                                                                                                                
                       

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject “Safety Management and 
Practices in Steel PSUs” relating to the Ministry of Steel which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2021 
2. The Report contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Replies have 
been received from the Ministry of Steel in respect of all the 17 observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report on 29.10.2021. These have been categorised as follows:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 17                   Total :  15 
                                         Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government:  
 Serial No. NIL                Total : NIL 
                        Chapter-III  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee:  
Serial  No. 14 & 16                 Total : 02 
                           Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited: 
 Serial  No. NIL                Total : NIL 
                 Chapter-V 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation of the 
Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government.  In case, where it is not 
possible for the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them 
within three months.  
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of 
their observations/recommendations made in the Twenty First Report. 
 
  

2 
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 5 & 6 
Recommendation Sl.No.5 
 
SAFETY INITIATIVES BY THE MINISTRY OF STEEL 
5. The Committee had learnt that the Ministry of Steel had constituted a Working Group 
comprising of experts from the industry and Academia to study various safety practices followed by 
the Iron and Steel industry and evolve comprehensive/common minimum safety guidelines for 
ensuring safety of the workers/employees engaged in the sector. The Committee were happy to 
learn that the efforts of all the stakeholders have borne fruits and 25 Safety Guidelines have been 
formulated for the iron and steel sector to address specific activities/hazards associated with the 
steel industry, for both the large and small players of steel sector. The Committee had appreciated 
that the aforesaid Safety Guidelines are at par with the global standards and are compliant with the 
requirements of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Code of practice on safety in the Iron & 
Steel industry. Inputs in this regard, have also been taken from the World Steel Association’s 
guidance document on “Safety & Health Principles and Definitions”. The Committee, however, 
were of the view that mere formulation of the Safety Guidelines would not serve the purpose unless 
Safety Guidelines are implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee were thus hopeful that these 
Safety Guidelines would serve as a prerequisite for  safe working environment to the employees 
engaged in the Iron and Steel industry and would be implemented with all seriousness to help 
prevent accidents to the extent possible. 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The 25 Safety Guidelines have been implemented and being complied with in all 
seriousness by SAIL and RINL.” 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
7. The Committee found that the adoption of these guidelines by the Steel Sector is voluntary 
as the Ministry of Steel did not have the necessary regulations to make the Safety Guidelines 
mandatory. In fact, the main legislation pertaining to worker safety and health in the manufacturing 
sector in India is under the Factory Act, administered by Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
However, the Committee were pleased to learn that the Ministry of Steel had requested the 
Ministry of Labour in October, 2019 in this regard, which stated that Safety Guidelines have been 
referred for consideration and adoption of the Expert Committee set up for framing standards under 
Section 18 of Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions (OSH&WC) Code and the 
matter shall be considered after enactment of the OSH&WC Code. In view of the foregoing, the 
Committee had desired the Ministry of Steel to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of 
Labour and accordingly apprise them of the progress made in the matter. 
8. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“Ministry of Steel has vigorously taken up the matter with Ministry of Labour& Employment 
to facilitate mandatory adoption of the Safety Guidelines by the Iron & Steel Industry. 
Ministry of Labour& Employment has informed that it is under consideration of the Expert 

3 
 
Committee set up for framing standards under Section 18 of the Occupation Safety Health 
& Working Conditions (OSH&WC) Code 2020.” 
9. Twenty Five (25) Safety Guidelines have been formulated to address specific 
activities/hazards associated with the steel industry and these guidelines are being 
scrupulously complied with by the Steel PSUs, SAIL and RINL. However, the adoption of 
these guidelines by the steel sector is voluntary and there is no mechanism available with 
Ministry of Steel to ensure compulsory adoption of these guidelines, as safety and health 
aspects are covered under Factory Act which is being administered by the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment. Keeping this in mind, the Committee in their Original Report had 
desired the Ministry of Steel to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Labour &  
Employment for making these guidelines as standards on safety for the steel sector. In the 
Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Steel has informed that the matter has been vigorously 
taken up with the Ministry of Labour & Employment and the same is stated to be under 
consideration of an Expert Committee set up for framing standards under Section 18 of the 
Occupation Safety Health & Working Conditions (OSH&WC) Code 2020. Having 
acknowledged the safety of workers as sacrosanct and the paramountcy of the matter, the 
Committee reiterate that the Ministry of Steel must earnestly pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Labour & Employment till the desired objective is achieved. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 
EMPLOYEES HEALTH  
10. The Committee had noted that each plant of SAIL has an Occupational Health Centre 
(OHC) where qualified doctors and technicians sit round the clock for the benefit of 
employees.  SAIL is also running hospitals like Jawaharlal Nehru Hospital & Research Centre, 
Bhilai for Bhilai Steel Plant, DSP Main Hospital, Durgapur for Durgapur Steel Plant & Alloy Steels 
Plant, Ispat General Hospital, Rourkela for Rourkela Steel Plant, Bokaro General Hospital, Bokaro 
for Bokaro Steel Plant, Burnpur Hospital for IISCO Steel Plant, SSP Hospital for Salem Steel Plant 
and VISP Hospital, Bhadravathi  for Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant. The ratio of doctors to 
Workers in these hospitals was 1:71, 1:93, 1:97, 1:63, 1:203, 1:124 and 1:158, respectively. The 
CMD, SAIL admitted to the unsatisfactory ratio of doctors to workers despite lucrative offers and 
attractive incentives. The Committee, however, had noted with satisfaction that in order to increase 
the ratio of Doctors to Workers in the Plant/Unit Hospitals, SAIL Board had sanctioned recruitment 
of 225 Doctors in the Human Resource Plan for 2020-21. It has been decided to give special 
incentives like permission for private practice to both SAIL doctors as well as contract doctors and 
their compensation has also been increased. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the 
latest position of recruitment of doctors at SAIL in this regard and how it has affected Doctors to 
workers ratio in its Plants. 
  
11. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
“The latest position of recruitment of Doctors at SAIL is given below: - 
 
 
 

4 
 
Status of Joining of Doctors (225) -  HRP-2020-21 
Plant Medical Officer Specialists Total 
BSP 4 11 15 
DSP # 4 4 
RSP 3 13 16 
BSL # 5 5 
ISP 12 4 16 
Total 19 37 56 
 # Recruitment is in process.  
 
Recruitment of Medical Officers at DSP, BSL, SRU, Collieries Division, Odisha Group of 
Mines, Jharkhand Group of Mines, ISP (M.O. Dental) is in process.” 
12. Health being the main aspect concerning welfare and safety of workers, the 
Committee note that throughout their duty period the workers are constantly exposed to 
high temperature along with heat and dust generated apart from performing different 
hazardous activities during various operations. The Committee are deeply concerned about 
ensuring that priority care must be given to the well being of workers and providing a safe 
and secure workplace to them. To ensure this, round the clock presence of doctors at such 
places is a must.  
Keeping all this in view, the Committee in their Original Report had noted the low 
ratio of doctors to workers in the Occupational Health Centre (OHC) running at various 
plants of SAIL. The Committee now note from the Action Taken Reply furnished that during 
2020-21, only 56 doctors have joined at various SAIL Plants, which includes 19 Medical 
Officers and 37 Specialists. The recruitment of Medical Officers at DSP, BSL, SRU, Collieries 
Division, Odisha Group of Mines, Jharkhand Group of Mines, ISP (M.O. Dental) has been 
stated to be in process. The Committee desire that this process be expedited and 
completed in a time bound manner and all the 225 sanctioned posts of Doctors are filled up 
so as to improve the ratio of doctors to workers. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 16 
COMPENSATION POLICY  
13. According to their compensation policy guidelines as per the provisions of Employees 
Compensation Act 1923, SAIL provides compassionate employment to one of the eligible 
dependents in case of death or permanent total disablement of employees due to accident in 
course of employment and in cases of Medical invalidation of employees suffering from specified 
debilitating diseases. Further, SAIL also operates an Employee Family Benefit Scheme (EFBS) 
which provides for monthly payment to the dependents till notional date of superannuation of the 
deceased employee concerned in lieu of employment. In case of contract workers, SAIL provides 
employment to eligible dependent in case of death of the contract labourer due to accident in 
course of employment within the work premises. At RINL, regular employees are covered under 
Workman Compensation Act and Group Personal Accident Insurance (GPAI). In case of death of 
the regular employees, option is available to the family to either opt for employment of one 

5 
 
dependent or to avail benefits under Employees Family Benefit Scheme.  Contract workers in RINL 
are covered under GPAI and ESI Act.   The Committee were of the opinion that compensation 
policy will lose its purpose, if the aggrieved family of the employee does not get its due benefits in 
time. Hence, the Committee had urged the Government to ensure that there should not be any 
delay in dealing with matters relating to sanctioning of the compensation package and   desire that 
as soon as the documentation work is complete, the aggrieved family should not be made to run 
from pillar to post for what is eventually due to them.   A nodal officer be appointed and deputed to 
aid the family in handling all the necessary paperwork.  For any dispute in settlement of claims, the 
Committee had been informed that in maximum cases settlement is done within 7-10 days.  While 
appreciating the prevalent compensation practices in Steel PSUs, the Committee had desired to be 
apprised of the cases of settlement of compensation and resolving of disputes by SAIL and RINL 
during the last 3 years. They also desired that the Compensation packages offered should be 
reviewed periodically.  
14. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“Steel Authority of India Ltd.: As recommended by the Hon'ble Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel for appointment of a nodal officer to aid the family in handling 
all the necessary paperwork, “Internal Resource Person” of Plants/Units have been 
appointed for same. The compensation being paid is as per the provisions of the Employee 
Compensation Act/Employee State Insurance Act and amendments thereof from time to 
time as applicable.  Details of Compensation paid of last three years are at Annexure II. 
  RashtriyaIspat Nigam Ltd.: In RINL, to provide necessary help/guidance to the family 
members of deceased employees in handling paper work, a nodal officer has been 
identified. A team is working under the nodal officer and an Exclusive Section has been set-
up. On receipt of the information about the death of an employee, the family members of 
the deceased employees are contacted and provided with the guidance for obtaining and 
filling the necessary documents for final settlement. In case of death of an employee while 
in service, the family is supported by paying them the Last Basic Pay and DA drawn by the 
employee till his/ her notional date of superannuation under the Employees’ Family Benefit 
Scheme(EFBS). The Section is coordinating with the concerned Agencies/Sections and 
ensuring timely payment/release of the benefits to the family members. The Section is 
providing hassle-free services to the separated employees and their family members (as 
the case may be) as a single contact point. This has restricted movement of outsiders 
inside the plant premises besides providing ease of operation and easy services to the 
separated employees. 
In the last three years, data of EFBS application received and processed to reduce the 
financial hardship faced by the family is as under: 
  
Year No. of EFBS 
Applications 
Processed 
2018-19 75 
2019-20 75 
2020-21 96 
2021-22(Till 30.09.2021) 100 

6 
 
15. Having acknowledged the employer’s accountability to compensate the families of 
employees who have lost their lives at workplace, the Committee in their original report had 
desired that besides expeditious settlement of claims there should be a periodic review of 
the Compensation Package offered to the families of the deceased employees. The 
Committee are happy to note from the Action Taken Reply that SAIL, in order to aid the 
deceased person’s family in handling all the necessary paperwork and formalities, has 
started to deploy an “Internal Resource Person” in its each Plant/Unit. It has also been 
informed that the compensation is being paid to the employees as per the provisions of the 
Employee Compensation Act/Employee State Insurance Act and amendments thereof from 
time to time as applicable. Besides this, SAIL has also furnished details of EFBS and 
applications processed for compensation as per Employees Compensation Act paid to the 
families of deceased regular employees in fatal accidents occurred at SAIL plants during 
2019, 2020 and 2021 (Till 30.09.2021).Similarly, at RINL also a nodal officer is identified to 
provide necessary help/guidance to the family members of deceased employees in handling 
paper work. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of compensation 
package being awarded to the employees of RINL on the lines of information provided by 
SAIL. Although, Committee are satisfied at the pace of compensation cases being settled at 
SAIL and RINL, they find that the reply is silent on review of compensation package by Steel 
PSUs.  They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like to be apprised 
of the action taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 17 
CONTRACT WORKERS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
16. The Committee had been informed that accidents are more prevalent in case of contract 
workers. In such a case, the Committee had observed that SAIL, in order to elevate the quality of 
contractors and in a bid to ensure their efficiency, has prepared a draft for a system through which 
the contractors will be reviewed through a Contract Workers Management System where they 
would be given star rating according to their efficacy on the basis of various parameters. As has 
been informed, this draft which would be approved by the Committee on Health, Safety and 
Environment and guidelines made in this regard have also been circulated to the contractors. The 
Committee were of the opinion that review with regard to the efficacy of the contract labourers 
through a Contract Workers Management System would serve as a benchmark for handling 
various hazardous jobs in Steel Plants and had therefore recommended the  SAIL to expedite its 
efforts in this direction. They also desired that if this system yields positive results, it can be 
replicated in other Steel PSUs.  
  
17. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“SAIL management realizes that Contract workers are our partners in growth & prosperity 
and makes all necessary efforts as far as their safety issues are concerned. All contract 
documents necessarily include safety clauses for clear understanding of the contractors’ 
w.r.t safety expectations before start of job. Necessary supervision is ensured by the 
contractor supervisors as well as the executing agency of the contract. Necessary 
arrangements for their safety training & safety talk are made so as to make them fully 

7 
 
aware of the hazards & preventive measures. Site inspections & audits are conducted to 
highlight & make them understand & rectify the mistakes before penalizing.  
  
While agreeing with the committee’s recommendations for finalizing the CSM  standard, it is 
to mention that Considering the importance of this vital issue, provision has been 
envisaged by including Contractor Safety Management (CSM) as a separate element in the 
scope of proposed Safety Management Consulting Assignment in Steel Plants at Bokaro, 
Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur.” 
18. The Committee were informed that in order to increase the efficiency of contract 
workers, SAIL had devised a system whereby the performance of the contractors hired by it 
would be reviewed based on various parameters. The Committee in their Original Report 
had appreciated the Contract Workers Management System and desired that if found 
suitable, this system can be replicated in other Steel PSUs as well. The Ministry in its Action 
Taken Reply has informed that considering the importance and vitality of this matter, the 
Contractor Safety Management (CSM) has been added as a separate element in the scope of  
Safety Management Consulting Assignment which has been prepared in Steel Plants at 
Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur. Having realized the paradigm of safety of contract 
workers and their valuable contribution in economic growth, the Committee are of the 
considered view that all necessary efforts regarding their safety should be given topmost 
priority.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that 
the Ministry should explore options to replicate this system in all Steel Plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
  
INTRODUCTORY 
  
Iron and Steel Industry involves a combination of complex processes and large scale 
operations which are hazardous in nature. Hence, it has been classified as hazardous process 
industry as per the Factories Act, 1948 (Amended in 1987). The hazards mainly emanate from 
extremely high temperature processes involving liquid metal, generation of by-product gases which 
have toxic and explosive constituents, large quantity of material handling/ transporting and 
manpower intensive multi-unit operations, the hazardous chemicals, electricity, steam, working at 
height, working in confined space etc. Acknowledging the potential dangers inherent in the Steel 
and Iron Industry, the Committee feel that a safe and healthy working environment is of paramount 
importance for all employees who work in the Steel Industry. It is, therefore, imperative 
that continuous and sustained efforts are made by all the Stakeholders in the Steel and Iron 
Industry to ensure adherence to optimum safety standards as it would go a long way for elimination 
of fatal accidents and reduction in reportable accidents.  This is the area where Safety 
Management Practices being followed in various Steel PSUs assumes greater significance. The 
Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Steel/Steel PSUs should strive hard to bring 
excellence in all aspects of their operations for safest working environment in all their Steel Plants 
and make “accident free” environment, an achievable goal. 
  
Action Taken 
  
Ministry of Steel/ Steel PSUs is striving hard on continuous and sustainable basis to 
achieve excellence in all aspects of operations of the steel plants and produce accident free steel. 
  
 [Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 SAFETY PERFORMANCE IN STEEL PSUs 
The Committee note that during 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019 and   2020, the number of 
fatal accidents in SAIL were 20, 11, 16, 22, 11 and 7 (upto 5  October, 2020), respectively. The 
Reportable Accidents during these years were 53, 31, 34, 36, 37 and 6 (up to October, 2020), 
respectively. Similarly, in RINL, during 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019 and October, 2020, the 
number of fatal accidents were 4, 6, nil, nil, 3 and 3 (upto 5 October, 2020), respectively. The 
Reportable Accidents during these years were 13, 10, 7, 8, 7 and 3 (up to October, 2020), 
respectively.  

9 
 
While observing that the number of fatal accidents in SAIL, during the last 5 years, either 
reduced or remained almost at the same level except in the year 2018 when it rose to 22 from 16 in 
the year 2017, the Committee find to their satisfaction that in RINL, there were no fatalities for two 
consecutive years i.e. 2017 and 2018. Again, the number of reportable accidents both in SAIL and 
RINL are either reduced or remained at the same level. Emphasizing on safety of each and every 
employee who work in the Steel Plants, the Committee recommend that SAIL and RINL should 
adopt all protective mechanism/Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to ensure eliminating 
accidents altogether while managing working environments with the highest standards of safety 
and health conditions. The Committee would also desire that they may be apprised of the number 
of Reportable accidents and Fatal Accidents in SAIL and RINL during 2020. 
 
Action Taken  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: SAIL Management lays top most priority to safety of its 
employees & other stake holders as well as the assets/property in line with the Company’s Safety 
Policy. All Plants & Units have a well established Safety Management System comprising various 
safety activities which is reviewed for its effectiveness at different levels at regular intervals.  
To bring continual improvement in Safety Standards & Performance, Plants/Units have got 
accreditation to advanced Safety Management System (migrated from OHSAS-18001 to ISO 
45001: 2018 certification) as per the global best practices. Further, benchmarking of safety 
activities is done with World Steel Association as well as other Steel Plants in domestic sectors in 
association with National Safety Council. Also recently a new award scheme titled ‘Safety 
Excellence Award for Integrated Steel Plants’ (i-SEA)’ has been launched which would facilitate 
improvement in Safety Standards & Practices amongst the ISPs through learning & benchmarking 
the good practices of each other. 
Standard Operating & Maintenance Procedures (SOPs & SMPs), an important element of 
Safety Management System, have been meticulously developed for various important activities, 
which are religiously followed in the course of working. Being an important guidance document, the 
SOPs & SMPs are reviewed and updated periodically and made available on the Web Portals of 
Plants/Units for ready reference by the employees/ working personnel.  
Further, to ensure safety of each working employee and achieve highest standards of 
safety, recent thrust has been towards safety culture transformation through systematic approach 
by engagement of reputed consultants in the field of Safety Management. The intervention, which 
has already started at Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP), will shortly begin in other Steel Plants of SAIL. This 
will play a vital role in improving safety culture through involvement & commitment of all level of 
employees. 
The updated figures of ‘Number of Reportable & Fatal Accidents in SAIL during 2020’ is at 
Annexure – I. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: RINL has been committed to eliminate hazards by adopting 
different type of mechanisms like  
a. Monthly Safety inspections by the safety officer and departmental representative.  
b. Reviewing of compliance of safety inspection at department level and at plant level. 
c.  Monthly review of safety by CMD to monitor safety performance, safety points compliance, 
safety initiatives.  

10 
 
d. Special Safety audits.  
e. OHSMS Audits (External and Internal).  
f. Statutory Safety audit by external agency.  
g. Safety training to regular employees and contract workers.  
h. Past accidents presentation to all the employees and contract workers.  
i. Conducting safety day celebrations at department level to improve awareness and 
participation of workers  
j. HAZOP, HAZAN and Risk Management studies in all the process plants and hazardous 
areas to identify all the potential hazards and device the mitigation plan. Accordingly, new 
process controls in the processes are being incorporated in the plant.  
k. Conducting NDT tests and physical inspection of all the gas lines, equipment, oil lines, 
tanks, in order to identify the defective areas.  
l. Pre-startup Safety Review and Risk Assessment for the new units before their 
commissioning.  
m. Installing Online gas detectors in critical areas.  
n. Inspecting high rise structures, chimneys, gas holders by using Drones. 
264 Standard Operating Procedures and 314 Standard Maintenance practices are in place 
for the critical activities in all departments. Periodically controlling officers will appraise about 
SOP’s /SMP’s to the employees/workers.  
In addition to National Safety Day celebrations RINL is conducting safety promotional 
activities such as Steel Safety Day and other safety campaigns to promote safety awareness 
amongst the employees. In which, awareness programmes on SOPs & SMPs Safety Exhibition in 
major departments, Nukkad Natak in township of RINL and in nearby villages, Safety quiz/safety 
essay/ Safety debate/ Drawing competition to School children, employees and contract workers are 
being conducted. 
Number of reportable and fatal accidents of RINL during year 2020: - 
  Reportable Fatal Total 
2020 07 03 10 
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Recommendation No. 3 
  
The Committee find that in SAIL, 35% of the fatal accidents were due to Moving and 
Rotating Machines (Hit, Caught, Pressed) and 21% due to fall from height. Similarly, in RINL, 40% 
of the fatal accidents were due to Slip & Fall and 35% due to burns. The Committee while 
assuming that steel PSUs must have identified the causes of these accidents and taken 
the  remedial measures required  also desire that SAIL and RINL should focus on these hazardous 
activities which are causing more fatalities and take further necessary steps in this direction for 
eliminating/reducing accidents after reviewing the causes of  accidents. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken by the Government. 
 

11 
 
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: Incident investigation is conducted for every lost time 
incident including near miss cases and underlying root cause(s) is found out after detailed analysis. 
The emphasis is on identifying all the various aspects related to Human, Physical & Systematic 
causes.  
The root cause along with recommendations of enquiry reports are shared across all other 
departments of Plant as well as sister Plants of SAIL to implement the learning in the same/similar 
areas for preventing recurrence of similar incidents. Necessary control measures like engineering 
solutions, up-dation of SOPs/SMPs/ HIRAs, organizing training programs, intensifying safety 
inspections, display of do’s & don’ts etc. are taken. 
For preventing accidents due to moving & rotating machines, provision of guards over nip 
points is ensured, all safety devices are provided & maintained and other necessary precautions as 
per MoS guidelines/IPSS Standards are being taken. Similarly, for preventing fall from height 
incidents, system of using IS marked full body harness with double lanyards, issuing height pass 
after medical checkup & safety training, taking PTW (Permit to Work) before start of job etc. is 
followed. 
  Rashtirya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: i) A Fatal Accident Committee headed by ED level executive 
thoroughly investigates all the fatal accidents happened in RINL by 
a)  Visiting the site,  
b)  Enquiring witnesses, controlling officers/ Engineer In-Charge, Section head, Head 
of the department and persons working in that area  
c)  Checking documentation related to the incident etc.  
Root cause for the accident is analyzed and time bound corrective and preventive actions 
are suggested by the committee. Recommendations of the committee are compiled by the 
respective departments. 
Fatal accident committee recommendations are also circulated amongst other departments 
to take necessary corrective and preventive action in their departments to avoid recurrence of 
similar accident. 
ii)  To eliminate hazards during  critical operations/areas like confined space work, 
height works, capital repair works, maintenance jobs etc. job is executed by strict 
adherence to Permit to Work system, protocols, job specific training and also 
surprise checks are conducted for hazardous activities to ensure safety.   
iii)  Around 5500 Hazard Identification and Assessment of Risk and opportunities 
(HIRA’s) are identified for different activities in the plant. HIRA review is done 
periodically. 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
 

12 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
  
The Committee recall the unfortunate accident occurred on 9th October, 2018 at Bhillai 
Steel Plant in which 14 regular employees lost their lives when a protocol job was undertaken for 
de-blanking of a coke oven gas line. After removal of blank plate, when preparation for inserting 
ring packing was going on, sudden flame burst out and employees of EMD and Fire Brigade 
involved in the job got trapped in the fire.   A high level enquiry committee constituted by the 
Ministry of Steel to conduct independent inquiry into the causes of the incident revealed that BSP’s 
practices of working in live gas lines and ignorance of pyrophoric iron sulphide deposits in gas line 
had caused the fire. Further, there were a number of serious lapses like deviation from SOP, 
design defects, lack of focus on training and safety awareness. It was also revealed that the 
accident could have been  avoided, if standards developed for Steel Industry were followed. While 
observing that in 2019 and 2020 (till October, 2020), one fatal accident was again reported in each 
year, the Committee would recommend that identification of the aforesaid lapses in the hazardous 
activities should be  meticulously taken care of and regular monitoring be administered in this 
regard to avoid any fatality.  
 
Action Taken 
  
Subsequent to the major accident on 9th October, 2018 at BSP, in line with 
recommendations of high level enquiry committee as well as internal investigation, series of 
preventive measures have been taken at BSP as well as other Plants of SAIL to prevent re-
occurrence of similar accident. Advanced risk assessment techniques / software (e.g. Bow Tie 
analysis, fire/ explosion modeling, dispersion modeling etc.) are used for assessment of risks 
associated with hazardous processes in Steel Plants and necessary control measures are taken. 
As mentioned earlier, a massive safety cultural turnaround initiative ‘Safety Management 
Consulting Assignment’ has been initiated in Bhilai Steel Plant wherein ‘High Hazard Processes 
(HHP)’ have been covered as an exclusive element in the intervention. In similar manner, in other 
Plants of SAIL also, HHP will be appropriately addressed while implementing the Safety 
Management Consulting Assignment, which is already in pipeline. 
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Recommendation No. 5 
 SAFETY INITIATIVES BY THE MINISTRY OF STEEL 
The Committee learn that the Ministry of Steel had constituted a Working Group comprising 
of experts from the industry and Academia to study various safety practices followed by the Iron 
and Steel industry and evolve comprehensive/common minimum safety guidelines for ensuring 
safety of the workers/employees engaged in the sector. The Committee are happy to learn that the 
efforts of all the stakeholders have borne fruits and 25 Safety Guidelines have been formulated for 
the iron and steel sector to address specific activities/hazards associated with the steel industry, for 
both the large and small players of steel sector. The Committee appreciate that the aforesaid 
Safety Guidelines are at par with the global standards and are compliant with the requirements of 
the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Code of practice on safety in the Iron & Steel industry. 

13 
 
Inputs in this regard, have also been taken from the World Steel Association’s guidance document 
on “Safety & Health Principles and Definitions”. The Committee, however, are of the view that mere 
formulation of the Safety Guidelines would not serve the purpose unless Safety Guidelines are 
implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee, are thus hopeful that these Safety Guidelines 
would serve as a prerequisite for  safe working environment to the employees engaged in the Iron 
and Steel industry and would be implemented with all seriousness to help prevent accidents to the 
extent possible. 
Action Taken  
The 25 Safety Guidelines have been implemented and being complied with in all 
seriousness by SAIL and RINL.  
[Committee of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. Dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 6 
  
The Committee find that the adoption of these guidelines by the Steel Sector is voluntary as 
the Ministry of Steel does not have the necessary regulations to make the Safety Guidelines 
mandatory. In fact, the main legislation pertaining to worker safety and health in the manufacturing 
sector in India  is under the Factory Act, administered by Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
However, the Committee are pleased to learn that the Ministry of Steel had requested the Ministry 
of Labour in October, 2019 in this regard, which stated that Safety Guidelines have been referred 
for consideration and adoption of the Expert Committee set up for framing standards under Section 
18 of Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions (OSH &WC) Code and the matter shall 
be considered after enactment of the OSH&WC Code. In view of the foregoing, the Committee 
would desire the Ministry of Steel to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Labour and 
accordingly apprise them of the progress made in the matter. 
  
Action Taken  
Ministry of Steel has vigorously taken up the matter with Ministry of Labour & Employment 
to facilitate mandatory adoption of the Safety Guidelines by the Iron & Steel Industry. Ministry of 
Labour & Employment has informed that it is under consideration of the Expert Committee set up 
for framing standards under Section 18 of the Occupation Safety Health & Working Conditions 
(OSH&WC) Code 2020.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

14 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 SAFETY MANAGEMENT AND PRACTICES IN SAIL AND RINL 
  
          The Committee note that SAIL has a comprehensive Safety Policy, which underlines the 
commitment of Top management towards the vital issue concerning Human Resource & 
Machineries. Also RINL, has adopted an integrated policy that includes the Safety & Health Policy 
in line with National Safety Policy. Further, in SAIL and RINL, safety engagement for enabling 
structuring monitoring of safety issues is done at Board, Corporate, Plant and Department 
levels.  Though, all these levels are engaged in a common goal of ensuring full proof safety and 
aiming for a zero accident environment, the Committee  are, however, of the considered view that 
reportable accidents and fatalities in SAIL and RINL in the past would have been even lesser, had 
there been better coordination and organised monitoring. It clearly reflects lack of commitment at 
some level.  The Committee strongly feel that safety and health issues in Steel Industry  require 
commitment from everyone and most importantly at all levels of management. The Committee are 
of the strong opinion that safety and health issues should be accorded topmost priority and desire 
that needful be done in best interest of the people working in Steel PSUs. 
  
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: SAIL management is fully committed to provide & ensure a 
safe working conditions in Plants & Units for which a structured system of review & monitoring is in 
place. Safety is given due emphasis amidst other business issues and is discussed as first item in 
various review meetings and all appropriate forums. 
The system of structured review at different levels i.e. Board Sub Committee on Health, 
Safety and Environment (HSE), Corporate level & Plant level and continuous thrust on safety has 
resulted in improved coordination & monitoring leading to improved compliance at site and gradual 
improvement in safety performance [measured in terms of RLTIFR (Reportable lost time injury 
frequency rates)] as given below. 
Year  2018 2019 2020 
Fatal 22 11 8 
Reportable 36 37 12 
RLTIFR 0.16 0.14 0.07 
  
However, scope of further improvement exists in strengthening involvement of all level of 
employees in safety to realize the goal of ‘Accident free Steel’ for which all required measures shall 
be taken. 
  Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: In RINL occupational health and safety is being managed as 
per ISO 45001 system with systematic approach, in which safety commitment is ensured at all 
levels. As per system requirement workers participation in OHSMS matters is being ensured by: 
a. Weekly review of Safety by ED (W) I/c in presence of all departmental Head of the 
Department (HOD)’S during co-ordination meeting.  

15 
 
b. Monthly departmental Safety committee meeting conducted by HOD’s of different 
departments by involving section in-charges, area in-charges and worker representatives.  
c. Departmental QSHE Meeting is conducted by respective HOD along with all Concerned In-
charges to monitor status of QSHE objectives. 
d. Quarterly meeting of Central Safety committee consisting of equal number of management 
&union representatives. 
e. Monthly review of safety by CMD to monitor safety performance, safety points compliance, 
safety initiatives. 
f. Safety review at board level during Board meeting. 
g. Online reporting system for near misses/unsafe conditions etc. has been developed.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
   
Recommendation No. 8 
  
EMPOWERING SAFETY OFFICERS 
The Committee note that at each Plant/Unit of SAIL and at Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant, 
RINL there is a fully equipped Safety Engineering Department (SED) which takes care of the day to 
day safety related aspects of the Plant.  The Departmental Safety Officers (DSOs) and Zonal 
Safety Officers posted at the Plant play a crucial role to promote safety awareness amongst the 
employees as they assist, monitor and facilitate all safety related activities. The Committee feel that 
DSOs should be given a free hand in discharge of their duties as they have a better idea about the 
facts on the ground.  The Committee desire that suggestions received from the DSOs during the 
periodic review meetings should be paid adequate attention as it can prove to be a most crucial link 
in fixing safety issues.  
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: Departmental Safety Officers (DSOs) act as an important 
interface/link between Safety Engineering Department (SED) and individual Department. They play 
an important role of monitoring safety in the Department level. Important observations by DSO are 
discussed and highlighted in daily meetings of HOD and necessary corrective measures including 
temporary suspension of work, if required, is done based on the severity & consequence of the 
reported hazard.  
  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: In RINL Safety officer is assigned for every department and 
also one person from department is nominated as a safety representative to coordinate and 
monitor safety issues in that department. 
Safety officer prepare an annual inspection plan of various areas, equipment and contract 
agencies. As per plan he inspect the area along with area in-charge and prepare a safety 
inspection report. 
Theme Based Safety Inspection are also conducted every month like Earth pit, Gas 
cutting & Welding sets, Illumination, Control rooms, Walkway, platforms &staircase, Behavior 

16 
 
based safety etc. Points raised during inspections are discussed in departmental daily and safety 
review meetings. Action plan is made for early compliance of safety points.  
Every safety officer is empowered to stop any activity which has a threat of imminent 
danger.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
 Recommendation No. 9 
  
MONITORING/INSPECTIONS  
The Committee have been informed that the Annual Performance Plan (APP) for Safety 
and Fire Services are formulated for each Steel Plant of SAIL.  All major repairs and shutdown jobs 
are also closely monitored round the clock to ensure safe working environment. Findings of internal 
and external Safety Audits and inspections are being implemented for compliance. Meetings of 
Heads of Safety and Fire Services of Plants/Units are being organized to monitor & review safety 
status and compliance of various guidelines including sharing and learning from good safety 
practices. At RINL too Occupational Health and Safety System (OHSMS) is reviewed 
regularly.   All the risks related to commissioning are assessed and mitigation plans are 
prepared.  The unsafe points identified or the non-conformances noticed are communicated to the 
concerned Head of Department for liquidation. Compliance of the same is monitored by the Zonal 
Safety Officers.   The Committee believe that besides keeping a check, routine inspections can 
also be a forum to get feedback from workers.  Though, unsafe acts, points and conditions are 
identified during regular monitoring, there is a need for thorough follow up mechanism to ensure 
that they are  liquidated at the earliest. The Committee desire that recommendations/suggestions 
made during inspections should be implemented without fail.  
  
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: Safety Inspections are an important tool for improving safety 
management system. Checklists have been developed for different equipment/processes (e.g. 
crane, conveyor, cable gallery, locos, rail-road crossings etc.) and periodic inspections are 
conducted by line managers/safety officers/senior management etc. 
 
The observations are informed to concerned HOD for necessary compliance as per given 
time frame. One Plant (Bhilai Steel Plant) also has a system of on line logging of observations in 
their safety portal. After compliance, the individual DSO informs the SED about the remedial action 
taken along with photograph/s (before & after the corrective action). This is followed by physical 
verification by the SED representative, who on being satisfied closes the inspection point. Review 
of pending points (if any) is conducted at HOD as well as ED (Works) level. 
  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: During Safety inspections/Shop floor visits, safety officers 
observe factswith detailed checklist and also interact with the workers to identify inherent hazards. 
Based on their feedback and observation, reports are generated and forwardedto the department 
for compliance. Compliance of these points is checked through follow-up inspections, safety review 
by CMD/ Head of works/ Head of department and safety audits.  
 [Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 

17 
 
  
Recommendation No. 10  
AUDITING 
  
The Committee are happy to note that there exist a 3 tier system of Safety Audit in SAIL 
which includes Internal Audit by Plant Safety Engineering Department, Audit by SAIL Safety 
Organisation (SSO) and External Safety Audits in Plants once in every 2 years through 
independent third parties like National Safety Council, Regional Labour Institutes etc.   At RINL, 
Safety Audit is being conducted once in six months by the respective Zonal Safety Officers in all 
the major departments. Occupational Health and Safety System (OHSMS) Internal Audits are also 
conducted once in a quarter in all major departments to improve the safety performance.  The 
Committee do appreciate the existing provision in SAIL whereby the Internal Auditors can report 
directly to CMD and can take direct orders/guidelines from him. The Committee are hopeful that 
findings of all the audit reports are taken care of by fixing the responsibilities and taking adequate 
corrective measures.  
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority India Ltd. : Safety Audits are an integral part of safety management. The 
safety audits are conducted periodically by internal cross-functional teams, SSO as well as external 
agencies such as National Safety Council, DGFASLI (Directorate General Factories Advice Service 
and Labour Institutes) etc. 
 
As compliance mechanism, time-bound action plan with time frame and responsibility is 
drawn at the individual Department level. The status of compliance is monitored by DSO, SED and 
reviewed by SSO. The status is also reviewed periodically in the meetings of BSC on HSE. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.:  Internal Safety Audit is being conducted once in six months 
by the respective Zonal Safety Officer along with section in-charges in major departments. Special 
safety audits are also conducted by Safety officers along with departmental representatives in 
major departments. External Safety Audit is conducted by third party external experts once in a 
year as a part of the legal requirement. Audit report is sent to the department for early compliance. 
Department fix the responsibility and time period for early compliance of points.  
 
As per conformance to ISO 45001 system, OHSMS Internal Audits are conducted once in a 
quarter in all major departments to improve the safety performance. External Audits are being 
conducted once in six months by an external certifying agency to assess the functioning of the 
safety system in various departments in plant. NCR’s raised and Opportunity for improvement are 
communicated to all departments to take necessary corrective action within 3 months’ time to clear 
NCR’s.  Corrective action effectiveness is checked and confirmed by the internal/external auditor in 
the next cycle of audit. 
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  

18 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
  
TRAINING/AWARENESS 
 
The Committee note that SAIL and RINL have been conducting Safety Training 
Programmes at their steel plants from time to time, for regular employees as well as contract 
workers to inculcate safety awareness amongst them. According to the information provided to the 
Committee, quite a few regular employees and contact workers were trained under these 
programmes in different Steel Plants of SAIL and RINL during the last three years. Special Training 
Programmes by external safety experts on various topics for addressing key risk areas are also 
being conducted. SAIL imparts safety induction training of  three days duration for newly inducted 
regular employees and of two days duration for the Contract Workers.  Besides, in order to bring 
cultural transformation in safety, a Behaviour Based Safety (BBS) programme is being imparted at 
Bhilai Steel Plant and  Bokaro Steel Plant.  Measures like Roko-Toko are taken to inculcate safety 
in everyday behaviour of the employees. At RINL, refresher safety training is imparted to all the 
contract workers and their safety passes are renewed only after such training. Only those Workers 
are permitted to work at site who have undergone Job Specific and Site Specific Safety Training. 
RINL also imparts awareness training to its employees on Behaviour Based Safety Management 
(BBSM).   
           
The Committee appreciate that both SAIL and RINL have taken ample measures to provide 
a safe working environment to all its regular employees and contract workers at Plants. However, 
the Committee would earnestly desire that SAIL and RINL should impart safety trainings to more 
and more regular as well as contractual workers. Moreover, when new methods, technologies  or 
processes are introduced in  Steel Plants, it becomes a necessity to retrain the staff accustomed 
with the older methods, technologies  or processes and safety training programmes should be 
devised accordingly. The Committee further find that induction training for regular as well as 
contract workers is of a very short duration and therefore desire that the time period for such 
training programmes should be suitably increased. Besides, refresher safety training programmes 
should be organised more frequently and the training curriculum should be revised in conforming to 
the updated risk assessment and hazard identification.  The Committee are of the opinion that in 
view of the operational risk involved in the working of Iron and Steel Industry, cultural 
transformation of staff is the need of the day. Hence, the Committee recommend that Behaviour 
Based Safety (BBS) training programme, the one being carried out by SAIL and Behaviour Based 
Safety Management (BBSM) training programme, the one being imparted by RINL  should 
invariably be extended to all the workers in Steel Plants of SAIL and RINL and should be held more 
frequently to establish a safer working environment. 
  
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: Education is one of the vital element of the 3 E’s of Safety 
Management, the other being Engineering & Enforcement. Realizing the importance of training & 
awareness as one of the key element, series of routine as well as customized training programmes 
are organized for regular employees as well as contractual workers.  
Every Plant has a Centre for Human Resource Development (CHRD) where safety training 
programs are organized round the year on different modules for target participants covering 

19 
 
hazards & risks associated with their jobs. For contract workers, system of two days induction 
training (from earlier 1 day) has been introduced before issue of gate passes. This is followed by 
half a day on-the-job safety training at site before start of job. Refresher training programs are also 
organized for contract workers periodically. In addition, employees are also exposed to various 
training & workshops organized through external faculties as well as by SSO. Retraining of 
employees is done whenever there is any change in process/ plant/ technology that may introduce 
new hazards. In this way, a comprehensive coverage is ensured for imparting safety training for all 
level of employees including contract workers. 
Behaviour Based Safety (BBS) is a very important tool for improving the safety culture in 
any organization and training on BBS is imparted in all Plants with in-house/ expert faculties. 
Further, in the ongoing Safety Consulting Assignment at Bhilai Steel Plant, the Behaviour 
Intervention process has already been started in a structured manner by imparting awareness 
training, developing resource persons & BBS observers, logging the observations in safety portal 
developed for this purpose and taking control measures. Similar strategy shall be adopted in other 
Plants where the consulting assignment is expected to start very shortly.  
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: Regular Safety Training Programmes and Special Safety 
Workshops are being conducted for regular employees as well as contract workers to inculcate 
safety awareness amongst them. 
 
 Special Training Programmes by external safety experts on various topics are also being 
conducted in co-ordination with Management Development Centre and Technical Training 
Instituteof RINL. In view of COVID pandemic, safety webinar programmes are alsoarranged 
to regular employees. 
 Refresher safety training is imparted to all the contractor workers every year and also to 
discuss root causes and corrective measures of past accidents. 
 Before start of work contract workers are given Job Specific and Site Specific Safety 
Training by the Engineer In-charge and safety officer to discuss about process, technology 
and hazards associated with that specific area and activity. 
 Training programmes are being arranged at Shop Floor Learning and Development Centre 
to regular employees about technological process andchanges.  
 Height test is conducted for the workers to work at heights and Safety precautions to be 
taken during painting and roof sheeting jobs etc. are also imparted from time to time. 
 Awareness training on Behavior Based Safety Management (BBSM) is being imparted to 
bring attitudinal change towards safety and to inculcate improved safety culture in the 
employees.   
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
OVERCOMING CHALLENGES 
          
The Committee note that Steel PSUs are grappling with many challenges in implementation 
of safety related initiatives. Major challenges include depletion of skilled manpower, aging 
workforce, slow rate of behaviour transformation, hesitancy in adoption of new technologies 

20 
 
etc.  The Committee understand that safety related initiatives by the Steel PSUs would get the 
desired impetus once the Steel Industry gets over with the above challenges being faced by it. The 
Committee expect that the administrative mechanisms/systems available both at the level of the 
Ministry and Steel PSUs for tackling the challenges before them would be addressed by taking 
appropriate measures.    
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd : Challenges are addressed by adopting appropriate 
measures, such as deploying state-of-the art & intrinsically safe technologies during project 
modernization & capital repairs, recruitment / redeployment of manpower and undertaking 
behavioral interventional programs. 
  
Rashtirya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: RINL is overcoming major challenges like depletion of skilled 
manpower, aging workforce, slow rate of behavior transformation, hesitance in adoption of new 
technologies etc.  by implementing safety initiatives like trainings to the worker to perform the job 
safely ensuring that workers understand the hazards and risks of the job, displaying of safety 
signage’s, developing and implementing Safe operating procedures/Safe maintenance practices, 
reducing man machine interface, job rotation of workers, behavior based safety training 
programmes, good housekeeping practices,preparing and training for emergency response for 
incidents etc. 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Recommendation No. 13 
  
USING TECHNOLOGY FOR SAFETY 
  
The Committee are pleased to note that use of process interlocks and technology tools 
have resulted not only in substantial reduction of risk level but has strengthened safety standards 
across the Plants.  Further, new techniques have improved shop floor work environment and have 
led to reduction of manual intervention, reduced environmental emission of suspended particles, 
lessened exposure to heat radiation and explosion hazards. The Committee are of the considered 
view that among the various initiatives being taken by the Steel Industry to provide a safe working 
environment, there is no denying the fact that use of technology takes the priority. However, with 
the advent of technology in operations of the iron and steel industry, requirement of technological 
discipline among the staff working in Steel Plants has grown manifolds. Needless to say, 
compliance to technological discipline assumes more importance when most of the operations in 
Steel Plants are hazardous in nature. Therefore, The Ministry of Steel/ Steel PSUs should gear 
themselves up to meet these challenges.  The Committee feel that making all the employees to 
strictly comply with the technological discipline in their area of working would be an uphill task. At 
the same time, they trust that Ministry of Steel/Steel PSUs would take all corrective measures  to 
improvise their safety measures and practices, to achieve goals of safety and production. 
  
  

21 
 
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: Technological discipline plays a very important role in 
achieving overall process performance as well as controlling the risks associated with hazardous 
processes. Following measures are in vogue in SAIL plants for strengthening technological 
discipline as well ensuring its compliance: 
1. Process manual, standard procedures & work instructions for the processes are available. 
2. Awareness programs for employees/ operators are organized on Operational Control 
Procedures wherein the importance of compliance with technological discipline is also 
emphasized. 
3. Proper upkeep of plant & equipment through system of Planned Preventive Maintenance. 
4. Continuous monitoring of process parameters & maintaining the records along with 
analysis of reasons of deviations, if any. 
5. Active communication channels covering the entire process including preceding & 
succeeding processes for use in abnormal / emergency situations as per an approved 
emergency plan. 
6. Maintaining a safe working environment through proper housekeeping, illumination & dust 
free atmosphere. 
  
Rashtirya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: RINL has made standard procedures and work instructions 
for its processes. While preparing the standard procedures and work instructions, the requirements 
of technological discipline are embedded in the standard procedures and work instructions and get 
well reflected in them. Awareness and training imparted to employees for following the instructions 
and operating the processes. 
Technological discipline is being ensured through employees commitment, employees 
awareness about its importance and employees are to have knowledge about Process manual, 
standard procedure, and work instructions.  
RINL  with sound technological discipline has the characterized with  (i) availability of 
sufficient resources for the process, (ii) leadership is by example, (iii) enforcement of rules and 
procedures without accepting any deviations, (iv) up to date operational manuals, procedures, and 
work instructions, (v) working practices are consistent with the up to date documents, (vi) 
continuous monitoring of the required process parameters and maintenance of proper records, (vii) 
simultaneous continuous analysis of the process parameters for determining the deviations of the 
parameters for timely corrective actions, (viii) absence of shortcuts and ‘at risk’ behaviors of the 
process operator, (ix) strong sense of teamwork amongst the process operators is to be available 
at the workplace, (x) active lines of communication are available covering the entire process, its 
sub processes and also preceding and succeeding processes (xi) operators with high level of 
training , they have to practice important skills, and their proficiency is to be demonstrated during 
the process operation, and (xii) existence of excellent cleanliness and housekeeping at the 
workplace.  
  
 

22 
 
Corrective measures taken to ensure safety: 
a. ISO 45001:2018 system in RINL ensures Preventive Safety Management practices that 
covers: 
 Hazard Identification and Assessment of Risk and opportunities (HIRA) - More than 5500 
HIRA’s are in place ensuring the Risk Control Measures. 
 As per ISO 45001:2018 Audits by external experts once in a 6 months are being conducted 
and the compliance is being ensured. Regular Review of the system through periodic 
meetings by the top management.  
 Conformance to the Legal and other requirements.   
 As a part of the OHSMS, Standard Work Procedures which include Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs), Standard Maintenance Procedures (SMPs) and Safe Working 
Instructions (SWIs) have been prepared for all the major and minor departments of the 
plant and implemented meticulously in each department.  
b. Regular Safety Inspections/Audits are being conducted by Safety Officers along with the 
line managers and compliance of the inspections is being ensured. 
c. Permit-to-work systems and protocols are being strictly followed. 
d. Color coding of all the gas and utilities lines is being strictly followed. 
e. Awareness training programs are being conducted on process safety for all the line 
managers 
f. All the lifting equipments, pressure vessels, etc., are being tested with the competent 
person. 
g. Do’s and Don’ts instructions and signage boards are displayed at all the critical areas. 
h. Pre-startup Safety Review and Risk Assessment is being conducted for the new units 
before their commissioning. 
i. Online gas detectors have been installed in critical areas. 
j. Round the clock gas leak is being monitored in all gas prone areas with portable gas 
monitors. 
k. Safety interlocks have been provided for all the critical processes. 
l. Mock drills are being conducted at departmental level, Plant level (Onsite& Offsite) to check 
the preparedness. 
m. Mutual aid with nearby industries like M/s NTPC and M/s Hinduja National Power 
Corporation Limited. 
n. All departments identified the hazardous materials stored and / or used in their 
departments. The material safety data sheets (MSDSs) indicating the material’s potential 
for incidents and measures to be taken are prepared. 
o. All the buildings and structures are being inspected periodically and strengthening is being 
done as per the requirement. 
p. Ensuring healthiness of all the roof sheeting. 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
  

23 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
  
Further, RINL is registered under Factories Act and as per Rule 61(SC)B(c)(i) of The AP 
Factories Rules,1950 and accordingly, RINL is having one doctor for every 160 employees. It also 
provides for an Occupational Health Services and Research Centre (OHS&RC) with state-of-the-
art equipment for carrying out activities like periodical medical examination, industrial hygiene 
surveys etc. Two first-aid stations are located in the plant, with qualified doctors, paramedical staff 
and Ambulances. Supporting facilities are also available at the 150 bedded Visakha Steel General 
Hospital (VSGH) located in Ukku Nagaram Township. The Committee are glad to note that in 
RINL, no worker has been identified with any occupational disease during last 3 years.  
  
The Committee further note that employees engaged in hazardous areas at SAIL Plants 
undergo health check-up once in a year as per the provisions of the Factories Act,  whereas in 
RINL, periodicity of health check up of employees varies from half yearly to once in 5 years 
according to the Department they are posted at.  The Committee feel that the periodicity of health 
check up at both PSUs needs to be reviewed to ensure that health check up of all employees 
posted in hazardous zones is done more frequently.   
  
Action Taken 
  
Steel Authority of India Ltd.: The recommendation has been noted for compliance. 
  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: As per the Recommendations of the Standing Committee on 
Coal and Steel 2020-2021, Periodicity for Health Checkup for employees working in various areas 
has been revised & scheduled as given below: 
Revised schedule for periodical medical examination of employees at RINL 
Departments / areas Revised periodicity 
All workers exposed to Benzene and other 
by-products of Coal Chemical plant – 
Hazardous Area. 
Half-yearly 
All  Departments  of  Works  Area    Once in every year 
All Departments of  Non- Works  Area Once in every 3 years  
All Canteen (Contract) Workers once in every year  
  
 Earlier employees exposed to other by products of Coal Chemical Plant ( i.e. other than 
Benzene -Half yearly) were medically examined once in a year will now be examined half 
yearly.  
 Similarly, earlier employees of some high risk Depts. under works used to be examined 
once in a year & employees from low risk Depts. (under works) once in 3 years. Now all 
employees from all departments under works area will be examined once in a year 
uniformly. 
 All employees of Non Works Area, earlier used to be examined once in 5years, will now be 
examined once in 3 yrs. 

24 
 
 The Canteen (contract) employees continued to be examined once a year as earlier. 
 [Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Recommendation No. 17 
  
CONTRACTOR WORKERS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
  
The Committee have been informed that accidents are more prevalent in case of contract 
workers. In such a case, the Committee observe that SAIL, in order to elevate the quality of 
contractors and in a bid to ensure their efficiency, has prepared a draft for a system through which 
the contractors will be reviewed through a Contract Workers Management System where they 
would be given star rating according to their efficacy on the basis of various parameters. As has 
been informed, this draft which would be approved by the Committee on Health, Safety and 
Environment and guidelines made in this regard have also been circulated to the contractors. The 
Committee are of the opinion that review with regard to the efficacy of the contract labourers 
through a Contract Workers Management System would serve as a benchmark for handling 
various hazardous jobs in Steel Plants and would therefore recommend the  SAIL to expedite its 
efforts in this direction. They also desire that if this system yields positive results, it can be 
replicated in other Steel PSUs.  
 
Action Taken 
  
SAIL management realizes that Contract workers are our partners in growth & prosperity 
and makes all necessary efforts as far as their safety issues are concerned. All contract documents 
necessarily include safety clauses for clear understanding of the contractors’ w.r.t safety 
expectations before start of job. Necessary supervision is ensured by the contractor supervisors as 
well as the executing agency of the contract. Necessary arrangements for their safety training & 
safety talk are made so as to make them fully aware of the hazards & preventive measures. Site 
inspections & audits are conducted to highlight & make them understand & rectify the mistakes 
before penalizing.  
  
While agreeing with the committee’s recommendations for finalizing the CSM  standard, it is 
to mention that Considering the importance of this vital issue, provision has been envisaged by 
including Contractor Safety Management (CSM) as a separate element in the scope of proposed 
Safety Management Consulting Assignment in Steel Plants at Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & 
Burnpur.  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 EMPLOYEES HEALTH 
  
The Committee note that each Plant of SAIL has an Occupational Health Centre (OHC) 
where qualified doctors and technicians sit round the clock for the benefit of employees.  SAIL is 
also running hospitals like Jawaharlal Nehru  Hospital & Research Centre, Bhilai for Bhilai Steel 
Plant, DSP Main Hospital, Durgapur for Durgapur Steel Plant & Alloy Steels Plant, Ispat General 
Hospital, Rourkela for Rourkela Steel Plant, Bokaro General Hospital, Bokaro for Bokaro Steel 
Plant, Burnpur Hospital for IISCO Steel Plant, SSP Hospital for Salem Steel Plant and VISP 
Hospital, Bhadravathi  for Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant. The ratio of doctors to Workers in these 
hospitals are 1:71, 1:93, 1:97, 1:63, 1:203, 1:124 and 1:158, respectively. The CMD, SAIL admitted 
to the unsatisfactory ratio of doctors to workers despite lucrative offers and attractive incentives. 
The Committee, however, note with satisfaction that in order to increase the ratio of Doctors to 
Workers in the Plant/Unit Hospitals, SAIL Board has sanctioned recruitment of 225 Doctors in the 
Human Resource Plan for 2020-21. It has been decided to give special incentives like permission 
for private practice to both SAIL doctors as well as contract doctors and their compensation has 
also been increased. The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position of recruitment 
of doctors at SAIL in this regard and how it has affected Doctors to workers ratio in its Plants.  
 
Action Taken 
  
The latest position of recruitment of Doctors at SAIL is given below: - 
 
Status of Joining of Doctors (225) -  HRP-2020-21 
Plant Medical Officer Specialists Total 
BSP 4 11 15 
DSP # 4 4 
RSP 3 13 16 
BSL # 5 5 
ISP 12 4 16 
Total 19 37 56 
    # Recruitment is in process.  
 
Recruitment of Medical Officers at DSP, BSL, SRU, Collieries Division, Odisha Group of 
Mines, Jharkhand Group of Mines, ISP (M.O. Dental) is in process. 
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

27 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
  
COMPENSATION POLICY 
  
According to their compensation policy guidelines as per the provisions of Employees 
Compensation Act 1923, SAIL provides compassionate employment to one of the eligible 
dependents in case of death or permanent total disablement of employees due to accident in 
course of employment and in cases of Medical invalidation of employees suffering from specified 
debilitating diseases. Further, SAIL also operates an Employee Family Benefit Scheme (EFBS) 
which provides for monthly payment to the dependents till notional date of superannuation of the 
deceased employee concerned in lieu of employment. In case of contract workers, SAIL provides 
employment to eligible dependent in case of death of the contract labourer due to accident in 
course of employment within the work premises. At RINL, regular employees are covered under 
Workman Compensation Act and Group Personal Accident Insurance (GPAI). In case of death of 
the regular employees, option is available to the family to either opt for employment of one 
dependent or to avail benefits under Employees Family Benefit Scheme.  Contract workers in RINL 
are covered under GPAI and ESI Act.   The Committee are of the opinion that compensation policy 
will lose its purpose, if the aggrieved  family of the employee does not get its due benefits in time. 
Hence, the Committee urge the Government to ensure  that there should not be any delay in 
dealing with matters relating to sanctioning of the compensation package and   desire that as soon 
as the documentation work is complete, the aggrieved family should not be made to run from pillar 
to post for what is eventually due to them.   A  nodal officer be appointed and deputed to aid the 
family in handling all the necessary paperwork.  For any dispute in settlement of  claims, the 
Committee have been informed that in maximum cases settlement is done within 7-10 days.  While 
appreciating the prevalent compensation practices in Steel PSUs,  the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the cases of  settlement of compensation  and resolving of disputes by SAIL and RINL 
during the last 3 years. They also desire that the Compensation packages offered should  be 
reviewed periodically. 
 
Action Taken 
  Steel Authority of India Ltd.: As recommended by the Hon'ble Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Coal and Steel for appointment of a nodal officer to aid the family in handling all the 
necessary paperwork, “Internal Resource Person” of Plants/Units have been appointed for same. 
The compensation being paid is as per the provisions of the Employee Compensation 
Act/Employee State Insurance Act and amendments thereof from time to time as 
applicable.  Details of Compensation paid of last three years are at Annexure II. 
  Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.: In RINL, to provide necessary help/guidance to the family 
members of deceased employees in handling paper work, a nodal officer has been identified. A 
team is working under the nodal officer and an Exclusive Section has been set-up. On receipt of 
the information about the death of an employee, the family members of the deceased employees 
are contacted and provided with the guidance for obtaining and filling the necessary documents for 
final settlement. In case of death of an employee while in service, the family is supported by paying 
them the Last Basic Pay and DA drawn by the employee till his/ her notional date of 
superannuation under the Employees’ Family Benefit Scheme(EFBS). The Section is coordinating 
with the concerned Agencies/Sections and ensuring timely payment/release of the benefits to the 
family members. The Section is providing hassle-free services to the separated employees and 

28 
 
their family members (as the case may be) as a single contact point. This has restricted movement 
of outsiders inside the plant premises besides providing ease of operation and easy services to the 
separated employees. 
In the last three years, data of EFBS application received and processed to reduce the 
financial hardship faced by the family is as under: 
  
Year No. of EFBS 
Applications 
Processed 
2018-19 75 
2019-20 75 
2020-21 96 
2021-22(Till 30.09.2021) 100 
  
[Ministry of Steel O.M. No.11013(20)/2021-Parl. dated 29.10.2021] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
16, December, 2021 
25 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
RAKESH SINGH 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
  

30 
 
Annexure- I 
  
Number of Persons injured/ died 
Year No. of persons 
Injured (Reportable) Died (Fatal) 
Regular 
Employee 
Contract 
Worker 
Total Regular 
Employee 
Contract 
Worker 
Total 
2020 4 8 12 2 6 8 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   

31 
 
Annexure-II 
Plants/ 
Units 
Compensation as per Employees Compensation Act paid  to the families of deceased regular employees in 
fatal accidents occurred during 
2019 2020 2021 (Till 01.10.2021) 
Date of 
accident 
Compensation  (in 
Rs.) 
Date of 
accident 
Compensation (in 
Rs.) 
Date of 
accident 
Compensation (in 
Rs.) 
BSP         10/01/21 
 (Late Ram 
Kumar), 
Operator 
An amount of  Rs 
11,22,525/- (Rupees 
Eleven lakhs Twenty 
Two Thousand Five 
Hundred and Twenty 
Five only) was paid. 
  
  
    07/04/2021 
Late Ramdeo, 
 Sr. Tech 
(Death on 
08.05.2021) 
An amount of  Rs 
9,89,625 /- (Rupees 
Nine lakhs Eighty Nine 
Thousand Six Hundred 
and Twenty Five only) 
was paid. 
DSP 12/3/19 
(Late Chandra 
Bhooshan 
Kumar ), 
Manager 
An amount of Rs. 
7,78,560/- (Rupees 
Seven Lakh 
Seventy Eight 
Thousand Five 
Hundred Sixty only) 
        
12/3/19 
 (Late Utpal 
Kumar 
Mandal),  Sr. 
Tech. 
An amount of Rs. 
5,98,680/- (Rupees 
Five lakhs Ninety 
Eight Thousand Six 
Hundred and Eighty 
only) was paid  
        
RSP     08/06/20 
(Late Jenga),  
Sr. Tech 
An amount of  Rs. 
9,62,475/- (Rupees 
Nine lakhs Sixty Two 
Thousand Four 
Hundred and Seventy 
Five only) was paid. 
    
BSL 03/07/19 
(Late Krishna 
Ram),  
Multi-skilled 
Tech. 
  
An amount of Rs 
4,86,000/-(Rupees 
For Lakhs Eighty 
Six thousand) was 
paid  
    30/12/20 
Late Abul 
Ansari’, 
Multi-skilled 
Operator 
 (Death on 
02/01/21) 
An amount of  Rs 
9,89,625 /- (Rupees 
Nine lakhs Eighty Nine 
Thousand Six Hundred 
and Twenty Five only) 
was paid. 
RMD 
(MIOM ) 
    24/06/20  
Late Prahlad 
Pan, 
Mining 
Equipment 
Operator 
 (Death on 
25.06.2020) 
  
An amount of  Rs 
11,27,525/- (Rupees 
Eleven lakhs Twenty 
Seven Thousand Five 
Hundred and Twenty 
Five only) was paid. 
    
  
  

32 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, 
MINES AND STEEL (2021-2022) HELD  ON THURSDAY, THE 16TH DECEMBER, 
2021 FROM 1530 HRS. TO 1600 HRS. IN HON'BLE CHAIRPERSON'S CHAMBER, 
ROOM NO. '210',  B-BLOCK, PHA EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI. 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Rakesh Singh - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Balubhau Dhanorkar alias Suresh Narayan 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
4. Shri Kunar Hembram 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
6. Shri Saumitra Khan 
7. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
8. Shri Ajay Nishad 
9. Smt. Riti Pathak 
10. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
11. Shri S.R. Parthiban 
12. Shri Chunni Lal Sahu 
13. Shri Arun Sao 
14. Shri Pashupati Nath Singh 
15. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh 
16. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
17. Dr. Beesetti Venkata Satyavathi 
18. Dr. Thirumaavalavan Thol 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19. Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
20. Shri Prashanta Nanda 
21. Shri Samir Oraon 
22. Shir Deepak Prakash 
23. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Arvind Sharma   - Director 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Additional Director 
 3. Smt. Savita Bhatia   - Deputy Secretary 
  
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee thereafter considered and adopted the draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report of the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel (Seventeenth                    
Lok Sabha) on “Safety Management and Practices in Steel PSUs” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Steel. 
 
2. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report and present/lay 
the same in both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
3.   ***   ***   *** 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
  

34 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
(Vide Para IV of Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL AND STEEL 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations made: 17 
II. Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government  
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 
and 17): 
 
 
15 
 Percentage of total 88.24% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government's replies 
(NIL) 
 
 
00 
 Percentage of total 00% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 14 & 16): 
 
 
02 
 Percentage of total 11.76% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government  are still awaited 
(NIL) 
 
 
00 
 Percentage of total 00% 
 
 
 
 