i 
 
 
26 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the  
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Mines] 
                 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2026 /ASHADHA, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 

ii 
 
 
  TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
 
      (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
       MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Mines] 
                 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2026 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2026 
   
                                                               
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
JULY, 2026/ASHADHA, 1948(Saka) 


iii 
 
CM&S No.  208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (___ Edition) and printed by 
_________ 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
                                                                                                Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) v 
INTRODUCTION vi 
Chapter – I Report  1 
Chapter – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by Government. 
6 
Chapter – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government's replies. 
20 
Chapter – IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
21 
Chapter – V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
22 
 
ANNEXURES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
(2025-26) held on 20.07.2026. 
 
23 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 19th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel (Eighteenth Lok Sabha).  
24 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL           
(2025-2026) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal 
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5.  Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7.  Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol 
8.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M. 
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
17.  Shri Kali Charan Singh 
18.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
21.  Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
23.  Smt. Mahua Maji 
24.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
25.  Shri Aditya Prasad 
26.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
27.  Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
28.  Shri Milind Murli Deora* 
29.  Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo# 
30.  Dr.Sasmit Patra@  
31.  Vacant 
 
*nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025  
# nominated w.e.f. 05.12.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3767 dated 08.12.2025  
@ nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
 
                                          SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sachin Kumar Saini Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel (2025-26) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty 
Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Mines.  
 
2.  The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.03.2026. Replies of the 
Government to all the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 09.06.2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting held 
on 20.07.2026. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee has been given at Annexure -I to 
the Report. 
4. An analysis on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
20 July, 2026 Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 
 

1  
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on the subject ‘Demands for Grants 
(2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Mines which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 12.03.2026. 
2. The Report contained 13 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Replies 
have been received from the Ministry of Mines in respect of all the 13 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report on 09.06.2026. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 
Total : 13 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Government 
 
NIL 
Total : 0 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
NIL  
Total : 0 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited : 
 
NIL  
Total: 0 
Chapter-V 

1 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance may be accorded to the implementation 
of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. In case, where it is 
not feasible for the Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any 
reason, the matter may be reported to the Committee along with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
recommendations made in the Report. 
 
 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
5. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Geological Survey of India (GSI) is given an allocation 
of Rs. 1587.64 crore. The Committee also note that the GSI has been nearly fully utilising 
the funds allocated under RE from FY2021-22 to FY2024-25 and hope that it will continue 
to fully utilise the funds allocated for FY2025-26 and FY2026-27. The Committee are 
informed that to keep pace with increased focus on exploration, the GSI has introduced 
latest technologies like Magneto-Telluric surveys, National Aero-geophysical Mapping 
Programme (NAGMP), drone based magnetic surveys, marine surveys and AI-ML 
technologies in the mining sector. The Committee further note that the GSI proposes to 
initiate more than 300 projects concerning critical minerals during FY2026-27 and has 
handed over 16 blocks of rare-earth elements through NMEDT. The Committee desire that 
these physical and financial targets may be well ensured and tangible outcomes in terms of 
conversion of identified anomalies into auctionable blocks may be achieved. The 
Committee are also informed about the GSI facing personnel deficit. The Committee 
recommends that an assessment as per needs of the day may be done in this regard and 
the Committee may be apprised of the same”. 
 
6. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Mines had 
stated as under: 
“Geological Survey of India is leveraging advanced technologies such as 
satellite-based remote sensing, aero-geophysical surveys and AI/ML-based 

2 
 
mineral targeting in collaboration with Indian Space Research Organisation 
for exploration of critical minerals, including REE and Gold. 
GSI has also established the National Geoscience Data Repository (NGDR) 
portal under the aegis of the Ministry of Mines, providing centralized access 
to geoscience and exploration data for government and private stakeholders, 
including bidders under the Composite Licence and Exploration Licence 
regimes. Further, the Data Processing, Interpretation and Integration Centre 
(DPIIC) is being set up at Bengaluru for AI/ML-assisted integration and 
interpretation of multidisciplinary geoscientific data. 
 
To address manpower gaps, vacant posts are being regularly reported to 
recruiting agencies such as Union Public Service Commission and Staff 
Selection Commission for timely filling of vacancies”. 
 
7. The Committee in their original report noted that Geological Survey of India (GSI)  
has introduced latest technologies, National Aero-geophysical Mapping Programme 
(NAGMP), drone based magnetic surveys, marine surveys and AI-ML technologies in 
the mining sector. GSI also proposes to initiate more than 300 projects concerning 
critical minerals during FY 2026-27. The Committee had also recommended for an 
assessment of shortage of man powers. 
 The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated that GSI is using advanced 
technologies in collaboration with Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) for 
exploration of critical minerals. GSI has also established National Geoscience Data 
Repository (NGDR) to provide centralized access of geoscience and exploration data 
to Government and private stakeholders and other crucial agencies. To address 
manpower gaps, the Ministry has replied that vacant posts are being regularly 
reported to recruiting agencies like UPSC & SSC for timely filling of vacancies.  
 The Committee while appreciating the initiative by both Ministry of Mines and GSI 
to launch projects would like to be apprised of the number of projects initiated during the 
first quarter of 2026 concerning critical minerals alongwith their targets. The Committee may 
also be apprised of the assessment made for shortage of personnel in the GSI.  
 
Policy Reforms and State Cooperation 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
8. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that under the Union Budget 2025-26, Ministry of Mines has 
released the State Mining Readiness Index (SMRI) and State rankings, which is a 
significant step to encourage mining sector reforms in States. The purpose of the SMRI is 

3 
 
to capture a State’s relative contribution in developing the country’s mining sector, assess 
effectiveness in mining regulation & administration and instill competitive spirit among 
States. The Committee note that the SMRI framework already incorporates outcome-
oriented metrics such as number of blocks auctioned and operationalized, time taken for 
grant of Composite Licence, and execution of Mining Lease Deeds. The Committee are 
informed that lower-ranked States have initiated reform actions such as introduction of 
waste utilization policies, operationalization of environmental mitigation frameworks, and 
uploading of geo-science data on the National Geoscience Data Repository (NGDR). The 
Committee further note that policy measures have been announced in the Budget 2026-27 
for elimination of customs duty on scrap of copper, brass, lead, zinc and certain critical 
minerals, cobalt powder and lithium-ion battery scrap to strengthen domestic recycling and 
critical mineral availability. The Ministry has also taken steps to coordinate with the 
Ministry of Railways to align rail corridors with the PM Gati Shakti portal in consultation 
with States to facilitate mineral evacuation. The Committee, while appreciating these 
initiatives aimed at strengthening sectoral reforms, logistics planning and resource 
efficiency, recommend that such coordinated and reform-oriented measures be continued 
and further escalated to enhance the overall growth and competitiveness of the mining 
sector.” 
9. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Mines had 
stated as under: 
“The Ministry of Mines has noted the Committee’s recommendation 
regarding the need to continue the coordinated and reform-oriented 
measures and it is stated that to further encourage mining reforms and 
competitiveness for better performance by States, State Mining Readiness 
Index (SMRI) is incorporated as one of the three components under Part-V 
(Mining Sector Reforms) of the Scheme for Special Assistance to States for 
Capital Investment (SASCI) for FY 2026-27 notified by the Department of 
Expenditure. The index is linked with the incentive mechanism for the States 
and a provision for an incentive of ₹100 crore, ₹75 crore & ₹50 crore to the 
State ranked 1st, 2nd and 3rd respectively in each of the three categories (A, 
B and C) has been made under the SASCI 2026-27. The other two 
components under Part-V of SASCI 2026-27 are ‘Implementation of Mining 
Reforms’ and ‘Mine Operationalization’. 
Ministry of Mines implements various reforms through amendment in the 
MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder from time to time on the basis of 
recommendations received from State Governments, industry stakeholders 
and Committees constituted on policy matters”. 
 

4 
 
10. The Committee noted in their original report that the Ministry of Mines has 
released the State Mining Readiness Index (SMRI) and State rankings to encourage 
mining sector reforms in State and recommended that the ongoing reforms needs to 
be further escalated to enhance overall growth and competitiveness of the mining 
sector. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that SMRI is incorporated 
as one of the three components under Part V (Mining Sector Reforms) of the Scheme 
for Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment (SASCI) for FY 2026-27 of the 
Department of Expenditure, the other two components being ‘Implementation of 
Mining Reforms’ and ‘Mine Operationalization’. The Committee appreciates the 
implementation of various reforms and wish to be apprised of the details regarding 
the timelines and outcomes of these reforms and their impact on the 
operationalisation of mines and overall growth for a robust coordination mechanism 
between the Ministry of Mines and concerned stakeholders for faster 
operationalisation of mines and enhanced competitiveness of the mining sector. 
 
Performance and Outcomes 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
11. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that in FY 2024-25, the total value of mineral production, 
excluding atomic, fuel and minor minerals, was Rs.1.48 lakh crore, representing a growth of 
4.4% over FY 2023-24. Odisha was the leading producer of minerals by value in 2024-25 
with Rs. 64,785 crore, accounting for around 44% of the total mineral production value. The 
Committee further note that the first tranche of auction of 13 off shore blocks launched on 
28.11.2024 for grant of composite license beyond territorial waters had to be annulled due to 
inadequate response from bidders, primarily owing to high capital investment and extraction 
costs. While appreciating an year-on-year growth of 4.4% in production of minerals, the 
Committee suggest that the Ministry may work towards making offshore mining 
commercially viable through appropriate fiscal incentives, technology partnerships, and risk-
sharing mechanisms to attract private sector participation and augment India's mineral 
resource base from offshore areas in line with the Blue Economy vision”. 
 

5 
 
12. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Mines had stated 
as under: 
“Ministry of Mines has amended the Offshore Areas Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2024 to 
allow consideration of the net worth of the holding company of the subsidiary company 
for the purpose of net worth criteria for participating in auction of mineral blocks 
irrespective of whether the holding company is incorporated in India or outside India. 
The reform shall increase participation of private sector in the auction of offshore 
blocks and promote ease of doing business”.  
 
13. The Committee had appreciated growth of 4.4% in production of minerals in FY 
2024-25 over that of FY 2023-24 and had suggested that the Ministry may work towards 
making offshore mining commercially viable and augment India's mineral resource 
base from offshore areas. From the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry, the 
Committee note that the Offshore Areas Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2024 has been 
amended to include certain reforms which shall increase participation of private sector 
in the auction of offshore blocks and promote ease of doing business. 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Budget Allocation for FY 2026-27 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that the annual plan outlay of the Ministry of Mines at BE 2026-27 is 
Rs.3806.45 crore, with a Revenue component of Rs.3642.80 crore and Rs.163.65 crore for 
Capital expenditure, reflecting a substantial increase over the BE 2025-26 of Rs.3038.00 
crore. The Committee also note that of the total net allocation, Rs.1234.13 crore is earmarked 
for Establishment expenditure, Rs.440.00 crore under Central Sector Schemes and Rs. 
2,132.32 crore for Other Central Sector Expenditure. The Committee also note that the 
National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM) is allocated Rs.440 crore. The Committee 
appreciates the enhanced allocation and call upon the Ministry to take concrete steps to fully 
utilize the allocated funds during the year in order to achieve the desired objectives in the 
mining sector, particularly given the strategic importance of critical minerals for India's energy 
transition and advanced manufacturing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the committee is duly noted for compliance and ministry will make 
concerted efforts to optimally utilize the allocated funds during FY 26-27. 
 
The NCMM is being implemented for a period of seven years (FY 2024–25 to 2030–31), with 
overall targets to be achieved in a phased manner. In FY 2026–27, NCMM has been 
allocated ₹ 440 crore. With the operationalization of the incentive scheme for recycling of 
critical minerals and release of first installment for processing parks, the allocated funds will 
be utilized. 
 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
                                                 
Utilization of Budget Allocation 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
The Committee note that during FY 2025-26, the annual plan outlay of the Ministry of Mines 
was Rs. 3038.00 crore at BE, which was enhanced to Rs. 3165.14 crore at RE stage. The 
actual expenditure as on 16.01.2026, stood at Rs. 2010.72 crore representing 63.53% of the 

7 
 
RE allocation. The Committee further note that from FY 2021-22 onwards, the Ministry is 
consistently achieving near-full utilization (over 99%) of funds at the RE stage. The 
Committee, while appreciating the consistent budget utilization performance, call upon the 
Ministry to take adequate measures to utilize the remaining 36.47% of RE allocation by the 
end of the FY 2025-26.  
Reply of the Government 
 During FY 2025–26, the Ministry incurred an expenditure of approximately Rs.2,893 crore 
against a Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs.3,165.14 crore, representing about 91.40% utilization 
of the allocated budget. In previous years, the Ministry has consistently achieved near-full 
budget utilization, exceeding 99%. The relatively lower expenditure in the current financial 
year is primarily due to the recent launch of NCMM. As the Ministry of Mines is in the process 
of finalizing the modalities of its various components, expenditure under this initiative is 
expected to commence from FY 2026–27. 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
  
Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the Geological Survey of India (GSI) is given an allocation of Rs. 
1587.64 crore. The Committee also note that the GSI has been nearly fully utilising the funds 
allocated under RE from FY2021-22 to FY2024-25 and hope that it will continue to fully utilise 
the funds allocated for FY2025-26 and FY2026-27. The Committee are informed that to keep 
pace with increased focus on exploration, the GSI has introduced latest technologies like 
Magneto-Telluric surveys, National Aero-geophysical Mapping Programme (NAGMP), drone 
based magnetic surveys, marine surveys and AI-ML technologies in the mining sector. The 
Committee further note that the GSI proposes to initiate more than 300 projects concerning 
critical minerals during FY2026-27 and has handed over 16 blocks of rare-earth elements 
through NMEDT. The Committee desire that these physical and financial targets may be well 
ensured and tangible outcomes in terms of conversion of identified anomalies into 
auctionable blocks may be achieved.  The Committee are also informed about the GSI facing 
personnel deficit. The Committee recommends that an assessment as per needs of the day 
may be done in this regard and the Committee may be apprised of the same.   
 

8 
 
Reply of the Government 
Geological Survey of India is leveraging advanced technologies such as satellite-based 
remote sensing, aero-geophysical surveys and AI/ML-based mineral targeting in collaboration 
with Indian Space Research Organisation for exploration of critical minerals, including REE 
and Gold. 
GSI has also established the National Geoscience Data Repository (NGDR) portal under the 
aegis of the Ministry of Mines, providing centralized access to geoscience and exploration 
data for government and private stakeholders, including bidders under the Composite 
Licence and Exploration Licence regimes. Further, the Data Processing, Interpretation and 
Integration Centre (DPIIC) is being set up at Bengaluru for AI/ML-assisted integration and 
interpretation of multidisciplinary geoscientific data.  
To address manpower gaps, vacant posts are being regularly reported to recruiting agencies 
such as Union Public Service Commission and Staff Selection Commission for timely filling of 
vacancies. 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 7 of Chapter 1) 
 
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
The Committee note that the Indian Bureau of Mines is allocated Rs. 148.00 crore in BE 
2026-27.  The Committee also note that the utilisation of funds by the IBM during the last five 
years from RE of FY2021-22 to FY 2025-26 has achieved financial targets of 87.37%, 
91.02%, 94.58%, 92.52% and 80.60% (up to 16.1.2026) respectively and hope that it will 
ensure full utilisation of the Budget of FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27.  The Committee also note 
that a deficit of personnel is reported in IBM. The Committee recommend that an assessment 
as per needs of the day may be done in this regard and the Committee may be apprised of 
the same.  
Reply of the Government 
Utilisation of funds by IBM: 
1. Indian Bureau of Mines was allocated Rs.135.00 crore in BE for FY 2025–26, which 
was reduced to Rs.132.66 crore at the RE stage due to re-appropriation of 
Development Action Plan for Scheduled Castes (DAPSC) and Development Action 

9 
 
Plan for Scheduled Tribes (DAPST) funds amounting to Rs.2.34 Crore to Geological 
Survey of India (GSI). Against the RE, IBM has incurred an expenditure of Rs.129.99 
crore (97.99% against RE and 98.24% against the Final Grant). 
2. For FY 2026–27, necessary steps have been taken to ensure maximum expenditure 
and utilization of funds. Further, directions have also been issued to concerned 
divisions/offices of IBM to ensure maximum and timely utilization of funds under 
various object heads. Also, expenditure is being monitored on a regular basis and 
suitable periodic reviews will be undertaken to assess the progress of 
utilization/expenditure during the FY 2026-27. 
  Personnel/Manpower requirement in IBM: 
1. As on 01.05.2026, out of 1,477 sanctioned posts, 859 posts are filled up. The present 
strength has improved to 859 officials against the sanctioned strength of 1,477 posts, 
reflecting an improvement in the overall filled strength from around 50% in earlier 
years to approximately 58% at present. 
2. Further, an assessment of manpower requirement in IBM has been undertaken 
keeping in view the present functional needs, increased workload, and emerging 
responsibilities. Based on this assessment, efforts are being made to address the 
existing gaps in manpower through a combination of direct recruitment and 
promotions. 
3. The enhancement in manpower position has been achieved through continuous and 
concerted efforts undertaken to fill vacancies by way of both direct recruitment and 
promotions. These measures have directly contributed to strengthening the manpower 
position and enhancing the functional capacity of IBM. 
4. Further, during 2026–27, it is tentatively proposed to fill approximately 192 posts 
through direct recruitment, subject to timely completion of recruitment processes by 
the concerned agencies. The vacancies under promotion quota are also being filled up 
as per availability of eligible officers. 
5. IBM is continuing to rigorously pursue timely recruitment and promotion processes, 
including close follow-up with recruiting agencies like the Union Public Service 
Commission and the Staff Selection Commission, expediting verification procedures 
and convening Departmental Promotion Committees as per the Model Calendar, so as 
to further improve the manpower position and ensure uninterrupted discharge of its 
statutory and regulatory responsibilities. 

10 
 
6. Regarding HR issues, it is observed that a number of newly recruited candidates have 
resigned for better career progression. Efforts are being made to promptly fill up such 
resultant vacancies by sending requisitions to the recruiting agencies. Continuous 
efforts are also being made to further strengthen manpower and align it with present 
and future requirements. 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM) 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM) was approved by the Union Cabinet on January 29, 
2025, to ensure a sustainable supply of critical minerals in India. The mission aims to create 
a strategy for self-reliance in critical minerals. The Committee note that NCMM is allocated an 
outlay of Rs.16,300 crore for the scheme for the period FY 2024-25 to FY 2030-31, including 
Rs.2,600 crore as budgetary support.  In addition, Rs.18,000 crore of investment is expected 
from PSUs, etc.  The Committee also note that an allocation of Rs. 410 crore at BE stage in 
FY 2025-26 was reduced to Rs.90 crore at RE stage, but no expenditure was incurred till 
16.01.2026 as the Ministry were formulating the Scheme Incentive Guidelines under the 
NCMM. The Committee are informed that the Incentive Scheme for Promotion of Critical 
Minerals Recycling was rolled out on 02.10.2025 with applications open till 01.04.2026, and 
29 applications have been received as on 20.02.2026. The Committee appreciate that the 
preparatory groundwork including finalization of guidelines and institutional mechanisms has 
been completed and recommend that the Ministry ensure time-bound operationalisation of 
various components of National Critical Mineral Mission during FY 2026-27, so that the 
enhanced allocation is fully utilised and tangible milestones towards the Mission's seven-year 
targets are achieved. The Committee may be kept apprised of the quarterly progress of 
NCMM in terms of key outputs such as exploration projects sanctioned, overseas mine 
acquisitions, recycling capacity created, processing parks established, and skill development 
undertaken. 
Reply of the Government 
The Hon'ble Committee will be apprised regularly on progress of NCMM in terms of key 
outputs of the NCMM. 
 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 

11 
 
Bharat Gold Mines Limited 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
The Committee note that the Bharat Gold Mines Limited (BGML) is a PSU under the Ministry 
of Mines which has remained closed since 2001. During FY 2026-27, a budget provision of 
Rs. 8.75 crore is made for meeting the expenses on maintenance of Bharat Gold Mines 
Limited. The Committee are informed that approximately 33 million tonnes of tailings dumps 
at KGF, Karnataka, containing recoverable quantities of gold and other precious metals, have 
been identified for monetisation and the Ministry are moving ahead in the process of 
monetization. The Committee recommend that the process of monetisation of tailing dumps 
be expedited by appointing a Project Manager and Mine Developer-cum-Operator, so that 
monetisation can be completed at the earliest and the valuable mineral resources can be 
recovered. The Committee may be apprised of the latest developments in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
Presently, all assets of BGML are in custody of the company court of Karnataka for 
liquidation. Therefore, whenever any property of BGML is disposed/transferred, the 
permission of the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka (Company Court) is taken and the 
proceeds deposited in the company Court. A meeting with Sr. Government Counsel was held 
and it was suggested to take opinion from Department of Legal Affairs (DLA). DLA forwarded 
the suggestion of Attorney General of India (20.01.2026), asking this Ministry to move an 
appropriate application before the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka placing the proposed 
monetisation plan on record and seeking permission to proceed. 
  
As opined by Ld. Attorney General of India, this Ministry has filed Company Application 
(24.03.2026) before the HC of Karnataka and prayed to “permit the applicant to sell the tailing 
dumps and deposit sale proceeds in a dedicated special account of GoI, to be individually 
maintained and any disbursements made towards any admissible dues/claims as and when 
directed by this Hon’ble Court, interest of justice and equity.” 
  
The Ministry is awaiting permission from the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka. After the 
receipt of Court’s approval, the Ministry will take necessary action for monetization of tailing 
dumps.  
     (Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
  

12 
 
National Institute of Rock Mechanics (NIRM) 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
The Committee note that the National Institute of Rock Mechanics is an Institute set up under 
the Ministry of Mines with a vision to become a self-sustaining Centre of Excellence of 
International Standard in the areas of rock mechanics, rock engineering and allied fields for 
the development of mining, construction, petroleum, power and infrastructure sectors. The 
Committee are informed that the NIRM has effectively utilized the Ministry of Mines capital 
grant funded instruments (procured during 2022-23 to 2024-25) to deliver high-impact 
geotechnical, geophysical, blasting and numerical modelling services across mining, 
hydropower, nuclear power, ports, mining, urban infrastructure and environmental projects 
directly supporting national infrastructure creation while also strengthening NIRM’s service 
portfolio and revenue generation capability. While appreciating the full utilization of funds by 
NIRM during FY 2025-26 much before the end of the financial year, the Committee observe 
that increased allocation to NIRM in future would provide further impetus to the critical 
services offered by the Institute which inter-alia include high-impact geotechnical, 
geophysical, blasting and numerical modelling services across mining, hydropower, nuclear 
power, ports, mining, urban infrastructure and environmental projects. 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee is apprised that for FY 2026–27, NIRM has been allocated a budget of 
Rs.4.50 crore, reflecting an increase of approximately 28.5% over the previous year’s 
allocation of Rs.3.50 crore. This enhancement has been provided to support the upgradation 
of NIRM’s scientific infrastructure to enhance its technical excellence. Further, the 
observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been duly noted.  
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
Exploration Activities under NMEDT 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
The Committee note that The National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust (NMEDT) 
has been allocated Rs.910 crore at BE 2026-27 to meet the anticipated expenditure upon its 
activities through the programme component of Rs. 410 crore as well as NCMM activities 
funded through the NMEDT Fund of Rs. 500 crore. The Committee also note that NMEDT 
sanctioned 62 projects for critical mineral exploration during FY 2024-25 and 60 projects till 
31.01.2026, during FY 2025-26. The Committee further note that NMEDT provides funding 

13 
 
support for various activities such as exploration of minerals, including critical minerals, 
baseline surveys, research and innovation, and capacity building of the State agencies 
involved in mineral exploration. The Committee observe that in FY 2025-26, the allocation of 
Rs. 500 crore was reduced to Rs. 350 crore at RE stage and the actual utilization was 
Rs.213 crore i.e. about 60.86 % (up to 16.1.2026) of RE allocation. The Committee note the 
reasons provided by the Ministry for lower utilization, including above-average rainfall, delays 
in obtaining forest permissions, time taken in administrative approvals by State Governments, 
local agitations, and procurement-related delays. While appreciating the almost full utilization 
of revised budget estimates during FY 2021-22 to FY 2024-25, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry may work in close coordination with State Governments and other 
stakeholders to address the systemic bottlenecks and ensure optimum utilization of the 
allocated funds during FY 2026-27. The Committee also desire that with NMEDT now 
empowered to support exploration activities abroad, adequate risk management frameworks 
may be put in place for overseas investments. While appreciating almost full utilization of the 
revised budget estimates during the last three years, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
continue with optimum utilization of the allocated funds. 
Reply of the Government 
The National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust (NMEDT), Ministry of Mines is 
working in close coordination with State Governments and other stakeholders in the following 
ways to address the systemic bottlenecks and ensure optimum utilization of the allocated 
fund during FY 2026-27: 
 Dedicated nodal officer assigned  for each State and exploration agency.  
 Launched a dedicated portal namely 'NMEDT-Connect' to maintain a real-time 
dashboard for tracking the physical progress of project proposals across all 
stakeholders. 
 Weekly meetings of the Technical-cum-Cost Committees and monthly meeting of 
Project Sanctioning Committee are being convened to expedite decision making for 
mineral exploration proposals, effectively review ongoing projects and early detection 
and resolution of project related issues, if any.  
 Fund State Governments to organise workshops to enhance the capacity of officers 
and other Stakeholders engaged in the field of mineral exploration.  
 Have funded National level and State-level workshops and training programmes for 
State Governments and Notified Private Exploration Agencies. 

14 
 
 Policy reforms to expedite the mineral exploration. Recently, the Governing Body of 
NMEDT approved  enhancement in the scope of guidelines issued for release of 
financial assistance for procurement of machinery / equipment / chemical analysis 
instruments etc. by extending financial support to all Central Government 
organizations engaged in mineral exploration, PSUs of the Ministry of Mines, Central 
Government institutes, Central Government autonomous bodies, etc. The State 
Governments were already included in the guidelines. 
 The Committee’s recommendation regarding support for exploration activities abroad, along 
with the need to put in place adequate risk management frameworks for overseas 
investments has been noted. 
 (Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
Policy Reforms and State Cooperation 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
The Committee note that under the Union Budget 2025-26, Ministry of Mines has released 
the State Mining Readiness Index (SMRI) and State rankings, which is a significant step to 
encourage mining sector reforms in States. The purpose of the SMRI is to capture a State’s 
relative contribution in developing the country’s mining sector, assess effectiveness in mining 
regulation & administration and instill competitive spirit among States. The Committee note 
that the SMRI framework already incorporates outcome-oriented metrics such as number of 
blocks auctioned and operationalized, time taken for grant of Composite Licence, and 
execution of Mining Lease Deeds. The Committee are informed that lower-ranked States 
have initiated reform actions such as introduction of waste utilization policies, 
operationalization of environmental mitigation frameworks, and uploading of geo-science 
data on the National Geoscience Data Repository (NGDR). The Committee further note that 
policy measures have been announced in the Budget 2026-27 for elimination of customs duty 
on scrap of copper, brass, lead, zinc and certain critical minerals, cobalt powder and lithium-
ion battery scrap to strengthen domestic recycling and critical mineral availability.  The 
Ministry has also taken steps to coordinate with the Ministry of Railways to align rail corridors 
with the PM GatiShakti portal in consultation with States to facilitate mineral evacuation. The 
Committee, while appreciating these initiatives aimed at strengthening sectoral reforms, 
logistics planning and resource efficiency, recommend that such coordinated and reform-
oriented measures be continued and further escalated to enhance the overall growth and 
competitiveness of the mining sector. 

15 
 
Reply of the Government  
The Ministry of Mines has noted the Committee’s recommendation regarding the need to 
continue the coordinated and reform-oriented measures and it is stated that to further 
encourage mining reforms and competitiveness for better performance by States, State 
Mining Readiness Index (SMRI) is incorporated as one of the three components under Part-V 
(Mining Sector Reforms) of the Scheme for Special Assistance to States for Capital 
Investment (SASCI) for FY 2026-27 notified by the Department of Expenditure. The index is 
linked with the incentive mechanism for the States and a provision for an incentive of ₹100 
crore, ₹75 crore & ₹50 crore to the State ranked 1st, 2nd and 3rd  respectively in each of the 
three categories (A, B and C) has been made under the SASCI 2026-27. The other two 
components under Part-V of SASCI 2026-27 are ‘Implementation of Mining Reforms’ and 
‘Mine Operationalization’. 
 
Ministry of Mines implements various reforms through amendment in the MMDR Act and 
Rules made thereunder from time to time on the basis of recommendations received from 
State Governments, industry stakeholders and Committees constituted on policy matters. 
 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 10 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
The Committee note that several Ministries including the Ministry of Coal and the Ministry of 
Steel have adopted the Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) developed by NITI 
Aayog to enable systematic tracking of measurable targets and outcomes of schemes and 
programmes in alignment with the Government's outcome-oriented governance approach. 
The Committee observe that while the Ministry of Mines regularly communicates its 
performance to the Cabinet Secretariat through monthly letters from the Secretary (Mines) 
outlining key performance indicators such as number of mines operationalized, blocks 
auctioned, mineral production levels, and expenditure under DMF and NMET funds, a formal 
Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework document does not appear to have been published 
by the Ministry of Mines. The Committee are of the view that adoption of a structured OOMF 
would enhance transparency, accountability and evidence-based policy-making by clearly 
defining output and outcome indicators, baseline values, annual targets, and means of 
verification for each scheme of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 

16 
 
Ministry may consider developing and publishing a comprehensive Output-Outcome 
Monitoring Framework for the Ministry of Mines from now onwards, in consultation with NITI 
Aayog, to enable systematic tracking of outputs and outcomes. 
Reply of the Government 
The mechanism of Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) is for monitoring of 
government schemes. The ₹1,500 crore incentive scheme for critical mineral recycling under 
National Critical Mineral Mission, approved by the Union Cabinet in September 2025, is the 
first scheme of the Ministry of Mines. The detailed scheme guidelines were issued and the 
scheme rolled out on 02.10.2025. The last date for submission of application under the 
scheme was 01.04.2026. All the applications received have been processed by 30.04.2026 
and 58 recycling entities have been declared eligible with around 850 KTPA pledged capacity 
against 270 KTPA targeted under the scheme. Incentive will be disbursed on commencement 
of production, which is likely to pick up only in 2027-28, after which only indicators for output/ 
outcome can be realistically measured. Hence, OOMF for FY 2026-27 is not feasible. The 
Ministry will consult NITI Aayog with respect to suggestion of the Committee. 
 (Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
District Mineral Foundation (DMF) And PMKKKY 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
  
The Committee note that the PMKKKY Guidelines 2024 mandate that at least 70% of DMF 
funds shall be utilized under high priority sectors such as health care, drinking water supply, 
environment preservation, education, welfare of women & children, and skill development & 
livelihood generation. The Committee further note that DMF accounts are required to be 
audited annually by Chartered Accountants empanelled by the CAG and are also subject to 
CAG audit. The Committee recommend that the Ministry, in consultation with State 
Governments, may facilitate capacity building of District-level functionaries, encourage 
baseline surveys for evidence-based planning, and ensure effective functioning of State Level 
Monitoring Committees to improve the pace and quality of DMF fund utilization. The 
Committee also desire that the National Departmental Summit scheduled for 23-24 March 
2026 may evolve a framework for systematic impact assessment of DMF expenditure on 
human development indicators and environmental outcomes in mining-affected districts, and 
the findings may be shared with the Committee in due course. 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Mines remains committed to honoring the faith reposed by the Hon’ble 
Committee and ensuring completion of all requisite activities as outlined. The PMKKKY 
Guidelines, 2024 stipulate that up to 5% of the annual receipts of the District Mineral 
Foundation (DMF) may be utilized for administrative, supervisory and overhead expenses. 
Further, to enhance institutional capacity and ensure effective utilization of DMF funds, the 
Guidelines mandate the establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) in DMFs having 
annual collections exceeding ₹50 crore, with the expenditure to be met from administrative 
costs. 
 
The PMKKKY Guidelines, 2024 also require DMF districts to prepare five-year Perspective 
Plans based on baseline surveys to ensure systematic and time-bound coverage of 
mining-affected people and areas. Such surveys may be conducted through academic 
institutions, reputed Organisations, or specialized agencies, with support from Gram Sabhas 
and Local Bodies. Existing baseline surveys undertaken by other departments may also be 
utilized to facilitate evidence-based planning. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that during the National DMF Summit held on 23rd and 24th March, 
2026 at New Delhi, a dedicated session on “Baseline Survey and Impact Assessment” was 
orgainsed. Selected DMF districts presented their approaches, methodologies, and 
innovative practices adopted for conducting baseline surveys and impact assessments in 
mining-affected areas. The presentations emphasized data-driven planning, community 
participation, and institutional coordination for preparation of evidence-based Perspective 
Plans. The session also facilitated sharing of best practices and peer learning among 
districts, with a focus on improving planning quality, monitoring outcomes, and ensuring 
effective utilization of DMF funds for achieving saturation of flagship schemes in 
mining-affected areas. All DMF districts were advised to undertake baseline surveys at the 
earliest and prepare evidence-based Perspective Plans for effective and targeted utilization 
of DMF funds for the benefit of mining-affected communities. 
 
Further, the PMKKKY Guidelines, 2024 mandate the constitution of a State Level Monitoring 
Committee under the Chairpersonship of the Chief Secretary to monitor DMF performance, 
compliance with audit and transparency norms, and utilization of funds. The Committee is 
required to meet at least twice a year to ensure effective oversight and implementation. 
 (Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 

18 
 
Performance and Outcomes 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
The Committee note that in FY 2024-25, the total value of mineral production, excluding 
atomic, fuel and minor minerals, was Rs.1.48 lakh crore, representing a growth of 4.4% over 
FY 2023-24. Odisha was the leading producer of minerals by value in 2024-25 with Rs. 
64,785 crore, accounting for around 44% of the total mineral production value. The 
Committee further note that the first tranche of auction of 13 off shore blocks launched on 
28.11.2024 for grant of composite license beyond territorial waters had to be annulled due to 
inadequate response from bidders, primarily owing to high capital investment and extraction 
costs. While appreciating an year-on-year growth of 4.4% in production of minerals, the 
Committee suggest that the Ministry may work towards making offshore mining commercially 
viable through appropriate fiscal incentives, technology partnerships, and risk-sharing 
mechanisms to attract private sector participation and augment India's mineral resource base 
from offshore areas in line with the Blue Economy vision.  
 Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Mines has amended the Offshore Areas Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2024 to allow 
consideration of the net worth of the holding company of the subsidiary company for the 
purpose of net worth criteria for participating in auction of mineral blocks irrespective of 
whether the holding company is incorporated in India or outside India. The reform shall 
increase participation of private sector in the auction of offshore blocks and promote ease of 
doing business. 
 (Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 13 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Research & Development and Innovation 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
The Committee note that under the Science & Technology Programme, 87 R&D projects 
have been supported across themes such as beneficiation, circular economy, critical minerals 
and mine safety, with significant outcomes including 21 patents granted and at least 16 
technologies adopted or adoptable by industry. The Committee also note that JNARDDC 
(Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Research Development and Design Centre) has achieved 28 
patents filed (21 granted) and has become self-sustaining with no salary support since 2024-
25, with revenue generation of Rs.15.91 crore, Rs.23.69 crore and Rs.21.44 crore in FY 

19 
 
2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 respectively. The Committee further note the encouraging 
progress under the S&T-PRISM (Promotion of Research and Innovation in Startups and 
MSMEs) scheme, with successful commercialization by entities such as Ashvini Magnets 
(Nd-Pr production), Saru Smelting (Pb-Li alloy), and PG Tech (Nd-Pr magnets), along with 
advanced-stage projects in battery recycling and critical mineral recovery. The Committee 
appreciate these outcomes and recommend that the Ministry may continue to prioritize 
outcome-linked funding, technology transfer, and industry partnerships in R&D initiatives, with 
particular focus on critical mineral processing, recycling technologies, and mine safety 
innovations. The Committee also suggest that the Ministry may consider providing enhanced 
support to autonomous bodies and R&D institutions for creating state-of-the-art testing and 
certification infrastructure that can serve as a reference facility for industry. 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s suggestion to provide enhanced support to autonomous bodies and R&D 
institutions for creating state-of-the-art testing and certification infrastructure, which can serve 
as a reference facility for industry, is duly noted. 
(Ministry of Mines OM No.05/01/2026-IF (601) dated 08.06.2026) 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
20 July, 2026 Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 
 

23 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, 
MINES AND STEEL (2025-26) HELD ON  20 JULY, 2026 FROM 1700 HRS TO 1730 HRS 
IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 1, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION BUILDING, 
NEW DELHI 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
3. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
4. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
5. Shri Ananta Nayak 
6. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
7. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
8. Smt. Mahua Maji 
9. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
10. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
 Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the following draft Reports without any 
amendments:- 
 
(i) ‘Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel 
Production’ pertaining to the Ministry of Steel; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2026-2027) pertaining to Ministry of Coal; 
  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2026-2027) pertaining to the Ministry of Mines. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

24 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
 
Total No. of Recommendations made:                                                                                  13 
 
Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government   
SI. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 &13 
   13 
Percentage of Total: 100% 
 
Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies      
NIL 
 
 
Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee 
NIL 
 
Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still  
awaited   
NIL 
 
Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
 
 
 