i 
 
25 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on Demands for Grants        
(2026-27) of the Ministry of Coal] 
                 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2026/ ASHADHA, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 

ii 
 
  TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
 
 
      (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
       MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Coal] 
                 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2026 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on  22.07.2026 
   
                                                               
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
JULY, 2026/ASHADHA, 1948(Saka) 
 


iii 
 
 
CM&S No.  208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (___ Edition) and printed by 
_________ 

iv 
 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
                                                                                                         Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) v 
INTRODUCTION vi 
Chapter – I Report  1 
Chapter – II 
 
Observations / Recommendations which 
have been accepted by Government. 
11 
Chapter – III 
 
Observations / Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies. 
35 
Chapter – IV 
 
Observations / Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
36 
Chapter – V 
 
Observations / Recommendations in 
respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
37 
 
ANNEXURES 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
(2025-26) held on 20.07.2026. 
 
38 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 18th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and 
Steel (Eighteenth Lok Sabha).  
39 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL           
(2025-2026) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal 
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5.  Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7.  Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol 
8.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M. 
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
17.  Shri Kali Charan Singh 
18.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
21.  Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
23.  Smt. Mahua Maji 
24.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
25.  Shri Aditya Prasad 
26.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
27.  Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
28.  Shri Milind Murli Deora* 
29.  Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo# 
30.  Dr.Sasmit Patra@  
31.  Vacant 
 
*nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025  
# nominated w.e.f. 05.12.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3767 dated 08.12.2025  
@ nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
 
                                                SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sachin Kumar Saini Senior Secretariat Assistant 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel (2025-26) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Coal.  
 
2.  The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 11.03.2026. Replies of 
the Government to all the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 05.06.2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 20.07.2026. The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee has been given at 
Annexure -I to the Report. 
4. An analysis on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
20 July, 2026 Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 

1   
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2026-27)’ relating to the Ministry of Coal which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 11.03.2026. 
2. The Report contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Replies have been received from the Ministry of Coal in respect of all the   
11 observations/ recommendations contained in the Report on 05.06.2026. These have 
been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
SI. Nos.   1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 & 11 
Total:11 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies: 
NIL 
Total: 0 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
NIL 
Total: 0 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited: 
NIL 
Total: 0 
Chapter-V 
 

2   
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be accorded to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case, where it is not feasible for the Ministry to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter may be 
reported to the Committee along with reasons for non-implementation. The 
Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on a 
recommendation made in the Report. 
 
R&D and Safety in the Coal Sector  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the allocation for Research and Development under 
the Ministry of Coal in BE 2026-27 is Rs. 21 crore, as against the Ministry's own 
demand of Rs. 40 crore. The Committee observe that the Scheme for Conservation, 
Safety and Infrastructure Development in Coal Mines has been dropped this year which 
was allocated Rs. 92.50 crore last year. The Committee note the Ministry’s 
submission in this regard of a guideline of Department of Expenditure stating that 
wherever sufficient resources are available with PSUs, considering the limited fiscal 
space, Ministries may restrict the Scheme. The Committee are informed that coal 
companies themselves have invested approximately ₹300 crore in R&D during the 
current financial year. The Committee is further informed that coal companies having 
sufficient financial resources of their own and investing around Rs. 2,000 crore this 
year and Rs. 3,000 crore last year in coal conservation, safety and infrastructure. The 
Committee suggest that R&D being an important component for development, 
modernisation, environment protection and safety in coal mines, the Ministry should 
pursue to get enhanced allocation under the R&D and also monitor the progress of 
R&D done by coal companies.” 
 

3   
6. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Coal stated 
as under: 
“The Ministry recognizes the critical importance of Research & Development 
for technological advancement, safety, environmental sustainability, and 
modernisation of the coal sector. 
Accordingly, the Ministry has approved continuation of the Central Sector R&D 
Scheme with an outlay of ₹150 crore for FY 2026–31. Efforts will continue 
to seek enhanced allocations in line with emerging technological requirements. 
In addition to budgetary support, significant R&D investments are being 
undertaken by coal PSUs. Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries are funding 
advanced-stage projects Technology Readiness Level (TRL-4 and above), 
particularly those requiring higher capital investment and demonstrating 
commercial potential.” 
 
7. With regard to the allocation for Research and Development, the Committee 
in their original report had observed that in BE 2026-27, only Rs. 21 crore were 
allocated against the Ministry of Coal own demand of Rs. 40 crore. The 
Committee also observed that the Scheme for Conservation, Safety and 
Infrastructure Development in Coal Mines has been dropped this year which was 
allocated Rs. 92.50 crore last year. T he Committee were a l s o  informed that 
Coal Companies have invested Rs. 300 crore in R&D projects and Rs. 2,000 crore 
in conservation, safety and infrastructure during the current financial year. The 
Committee also suggested that the Ministry may pursue for enhanced allocation 
under the Research & Development and also monitor the progress done by Coal 
Companies in this regard. 
 
  The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that it has approved the 
continuation of Central sector R&D Scheme with an outlay of Rs. 150 crore for FY 
2026-31 and will continue with its efforts to seek enhanced allocations in line with 
emerging technological requirements, while significant R&D investments are being 
undertaken by the coal PSUs. 
 
The Committee hope that since R&D serves as backbone for the industry 
which help strengthen domestic technology and capabilities, the Ministry will be 
able to succeed in its efforts to seek enhanced allocations. T he Committee a l s o  
wish to be apprised of the present status of efforts being pursued by the Ministry 
in this regard. 
 

4   
Coal Evacuation 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
8. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Coal sector contribute to about 55 per cent of India’s rail 
freight revenue in which coal is transported through All Rail Route and the Rail-sea route. The 
Committee also note that the freight of Rail-Sea Route is costlier than the All Rail Route for 
which the Ministry wish to pursue the matter with the Railways. The Committee observe that 
coal evacuation through inland waterways is more economical, environment-friendly and 
energy-efficient as compared to other modes of transport, considering the announcement made 
in the Union Budget 2026-27 regarding operationalisation of 20 new National Waterways over 
the next five years, starting with National Waterway-5 (NW-5) in Odisha, to connect mineral-rich 
areas of Talcher and Angul and industrial centres like Kalinga Nagar to the ports of Paradeep 
and Dhamra. The Committee also note the announcement of the Coastal Cargo Promotion 
Scheme to incentivise modal shift from rail and road to waterways, aiming to increase the share 
of inland waterways and coastal shipping from 6% to 12% by 2047. The Committee, therefore, 
suggest that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of coal evacuation through NW-5 and other 
suitable national waterways in a time-bound manner. The Committee further urge the Ministry 
to explore developing multimodal terminals and cargo aggregation infrastructure at 
strategic locations near coal mines and undertake a detailed feasibility study for evacuation of 
coal through inland waterways from other major coal-producing States. The Committee may be 
apprised of the quantity of coal evacuation done through Inland Waterways, All Rail Route and 
Rail-Sea Route for the last five years, along with comparative cost analysis”. 
 
9. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Coal stated as under: 
“The dispatch made through All Rail Route and Rail-Sea-Route in the last 5 
years is as under:  
(in Million tonnes)  
 
 
Year All Rail Route Rail-Sea-
Rail route 
FY 2025 649 59 
FY 2024 588 54 
FY 2023 538 40 
FY 2022 541 28 
FY 2021 486 20 

5   
 
The supply of coal to consumers, particularly through the Rail-Sea Route 
(RSR), is dependent on multiple cost components such as rail freight (first leg 
and second leg), ocean freight, port handling charges, and last-mile 
transportation (through conveyor belt/rail/road). All these components are 
dynamic in nature and vary from one consumer to another. Accordingly, the 
landed cost of coal varies for each consumer. Therefore, the cost of 
transportation through the Rail-Sea Route (RSR) is inherently flexible and 
subject to variation, and a direct comparison between RSR and All Rail Route 
(ARR) on a uniform basis is not feasible. However, as received from the 
APGENCO, the indicative landed cost for plants such as Dr. N. Tata Rao TPS 
and Rayalaseema TPS, sourcing coal from MCL through RSR and ARR, is as 
under:  
(in Rs/tonne)  
Name of Plant ARR 
Mode 
RSR Mode 
Dr N Tata Rao 3451.71 4123.98 
Rayaseema 
TPS 
4193.72 4024.06 
 
Further, MCL has undertaken a comprehensive feasibility study for evacuation 
of coal through National Waterway-5 (NW-5) on 31.3.2026, covering all 
relevant aspect and the detailed feasibility report along with actionable 
recommendations to be submitted within a period of three (03) months”. 
 
10. The Committee observed that coal evacuation through inland waterways is 
more economical, environment-friendly and energy-efficient as compared to other 
modes of transport, considering the announcement made in the Union Budget 
2026-27 regarding operationalisation of 20 new National Waterways over the next 
five years, starting with National Waterway-5 (NW-5) in Odisha. The Committee, 
therefore, suggested that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of coal 
evacuation through NW-5 and other suitable national waterways in a time-bound 
manner. The Committee may be apprised of the quantity of coal evacuation done 
through Inland Waterways, All Rail Route and Rail-Sea Route for the last five 
years. In its Action taken reply, Ministry of Coal submitted that the dispatch made 
through All Rail Route and Rail-Sea-Route in the last 5 years. Further, MCL has 
undertaken a comprehensive feasibility study for evacuation of coal through 
National Waterway-5 (NW-5) on 31.03.2026, covering all relevant aspects and the 
detailed feasibility report along with actionable recommendations to be submitted 

6   
within a period of three (03) months. The Committee may therefore be apprised of 
the recommendations made in the feasibility report.  
 
Coal/Lignite Gasification Scheme 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
11. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the allocation under the Scheme for Promotion of 
Coal/Lignite Gasification was reduced from Rs.300 crore at BE 2025–26 to Rs. 
285 crore at RE stage on actual milestone-based requirement. The Committee note 
that no expenditure is incurred for most of the financial year, with even a single 
eligible project awaiting fulfilment of reimbursement formalities. The Committee 
further note that against a Revised Estimate of Rs.285 crore in FY 2025–26, the 
Budget Estimate for FY 2026–27 is enhanced to Rs.3,525 crore. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry adopt a time bound expenditure projection 
framework, supported by quarterly milestone verification and independent financial 
closure certification. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry encourage 
use of indigenous high-ash gasification technology in line with NITI Aayog 
recommendations, particularly through Category-III projects designed for 
demonstration and scale-up of indigenous technologies. The Committee also suggest 
the Ministry to explore the feasibility of using Indian high-ash, low-grade coal for 
gasification projects and provide measurable import substitution for methanol, 
ammonia, fertilisers, SNG, etc.” 
 
12. In its Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Coal 
stated as under: 
“The Budget Estimate (BE) allocation of ₹3,525 crore for FY 2026–27 under 
the Coal Gasification Financial Incentive Scheme was initially envisaged as 
part of the overall scheme outlay of ₹8,500 crore. As of date, seven coal 
gasification projects are under implementation, for which a total 
financial incentive of ₹6,133.06 crore has been earmarked. 
 
Against the Revised Estimate of ₹285 crore in FY 2025–26, an amount of 

7   
₹235.52 crore has been released as part payment of first instalment to M/s 
Jindal Steel Limited for their Coal Gasification Project at Angul on 
31.03.2026. The 
balance amount is expected to be disbursed in the first quarter of FY 2026–27 
upon completion of the remaining reimbursement formalities. 
Considering the present stage of project implementation (Annexure-I), financial 
closure timelines, and expected milestone achievements for eligibility of 
incentive disbursement, the annual requirement for FY 2026–27 has been 
rationalized to approximately ₹1,481 crore. 
Accordingly, the expenditure is proposed to be phased in a time-bound manner 
across the financial year, aligned with milestone-based verification and 
progress of project execution. The quarterly expenditure framework under 
the BE allocation of ₹ 3525 crore for FY 2026–27 is as follows: 
 
Fig in ₹ Cr 
BE 
allocation 
for FY 26- 
27 
 
(Sum of 
Q1–Q4) 
Quarter-wise Expenditure Plan 
 
 
Q1 
 
 
Q2 
 
 
Q3 
 
 
Q4 
Total 
3525.00 49.01 - 207.01 1225.00  1481.01 
Indian coal is predominantly high-ash and low-grade in nature, which 
necessitates the development of suitable gasification technologies tailored to 
Indian geological conditions. In this regard, several research, development, 
and pilot-scale initiatives are currently underway for the advancement of coal 
gasification technologies in the country. These indigenous gasifier 
development programmes include: 
1) CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad: 0.5 TPD Air-Blown Pressurized Fluidized bed 
gasification (PFBG) Pilot Plant Installed in Mar, 2009. 
2) CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad: 1.5 TPD Oxygen Enriched Pressurized 
Fluidized Bed Gasification (PFBG) Pilot Plant Installed in Dec, 2020. 
3) EIL (R&D) Gurgaon: Fluidized Bed Gasifier. 
a. BHEL, R&D Hyderabad: Fluidized Bed Gasifier. 

8   
b. BHEL, R&D Trichy: Fluidized Bed Gasifier. 
c. Thermax, Pune: 1 TPD fluidized bed coal gasification pilot plant 
Established in 2014. 
d. Thermax, Pune: 6 TPD fluidized bed coal gasification pilot plant. 
e. Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL): An R&D pilot project on Underground 
Coal Gasification (UCG) to establish UCG technology in Indian geological 
conditions at Kasta (West) Block (ECL) is under implementation where 
CMPDI & ECL are Principal Implementing Agency and M/s Ergo Exergy, 
Canada is the sub-Implementing Agency. 
 
In addition to the above, Category-III projects under the Scheme have been 
envisaged as dedicated demonstration and scale-up platforms for 
indigenous and emerging coal gasification technologies. These projects are 
intended to promote gradual indigenization of technology while retaining 
flexibility for selection of appropriate gasification routes based on project-
specific viability, feedstock characteristics, and end-use requirements. 
The Ministry remains committed to continuously promoting coal gasification 
through a balanced approach of technology agnostic, indigenous capability 
development, and efficient utilisation of domestic coal resources, while 
ensuring measurable outcomes through structured monitoring mechanisms. 
Annexure 1 
 
 
 
 
Particula
r 
Category I Category II Categor
y III 
TOTAL 
Bharat 
Coal 
Gasificati
on and 
Chemical
s 
Ltd. 
Coal 
Gas 
India 
Limited 
Coal 
India 
Limited 
Jindal 
Steel and 
Power 
Ltd. 
Greta 
Energy 
and Metal 
Pvt. Ltd. 
New Era 
Cleantech 
Solution 
Pvt. Ltd. 
New Era 
Cleantech 
Solution 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Location MCL, 
Jharsugu
da 
(Odisha) 
ECL, 
Burdwan 
(WB) 
Bhadra
wati, 
Chandra
pur 
(MH) 
Angul, 
Odisha 
Bhadrawat
i, 
Chandrap
ur (MH) 
Bhadraw
ati, 
Chandrap
ur (MH) 
Bhadrawati
, 
Chandrapu
r (MH) 
 
End 
Product(
s) 
Ammoniu
m Nitrate 
Synthetic 
Natural 
Gas 
Syntheti
c 
Natural 
Gas 
Direct 
Reduced 
Iron 
Direct 
Reduced 
Iron 
Ammoniu
m 
Nitrate 
and 
Hydrogen 
Ethanol  
Plant 
Capacity 
0.66 
MMTPA 
633.6 
million 
633.6 
million 
2 
MMTPA 
0.5 MTPA 0.33 
MTPA 
and 0.1 
18 KTPA  

9   
 
 
 
 
 
Particular 
Category I Category II Catego
ry III 
TOTAL 
Bharat 
Coal 
Gasificati
on and 
Chemical
s 
Ltd. 
Coal 
Gas 
India 
Limited 
Coal 
India 
Limited 
Jindal 
Steel and 
Power 
Ltd. 
Greta 
Energy 
and Metal 
Pvt. Ltd. 
New Era 
Cleantech 
Solution 
Pvt. Ltd. 
New Era 
Cleantech 
Solution 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 
  NM3 NM3   MTPA 
resp. 
  
Project 
Agreement 
Signing 
Date 
12 Mar 
2025 
11 Apr 
2025 
12 Mar 
2025 
8 May 
2025 
8 May 2025 8 May 
2025 
12 Mar 
2025 
 
Financial 
Incentive 
Earmarked 
₹1350 
crores 
₹1350 
crores 
₹1350 
crores 
₹569.05 
crores 
₹414.01 
crores 
₹1000 
crores 
₹100 
crores 
₹6133.06 
crores 
Project 
Cost (as 
per 
PFR/DFR) 
~₹25016 
crores 
~₹13053 
crores 
~₹12215 
crores 
~₹3882 
crores 
~₹2763 
crores 
~₹6976 
crores 
~₹6
67 
cror
es 
~₹64,572 
crores 
Ground- 
breaking 
(expected) 
Subject 
to HPM’s 
availability 
30-Sep- 
26 
31-Dec-
26 
01-Aug- 
25 
14-Mar-26 14-Mar-
26 
14-Mar-
26 
 
Financial 
Closure 
(within 2 
years from 
agreement 
signing) 
30 Jun 
2026 
31-Mar- 
27 
12-Mar-
27 
22 Sep 
2025 
30 Jun 
2026 
30 Jun 
2026 
30 Jun 
2026 
 
 
 
13. The Committee in their original Report had noted a reduction in allocation under 
the Scheme for Promotion of Coal/Lignite Gasification during FY 2025-26 from BE of Rs. 
300 crore to RE of Rs. 285 crore, which was enhanced to Rs. 3525 crore in BE 2026-27 
and inter alia recommended that the Ministry adopt a time bound expenditure projection 
framework.  The Committee also suggested the Ministry to encourage use of indigenous 
high-ash gasification technology, particularly through Category III projects designed for 
demonstration and scale-up of indigenous technologies.  
In its action taken reply the Ministry has stated that the BE allocation of Rs. 
3525 crore was initially envisaged as part of the overall scheme outlay of Rs. 8500 
crore, and considering the present state of implementation, timelines and 
expected milestones, the annual requirement of FY 2026-27 has been rationalized 
to Rs. 1481 crore (approx).  The Committee desire the Ministry of Coal to adhere 
to the stipulated Quarter-wise Plan/timelines for expenditure of Rs. 1481 crore 

10  
during the current financial year with stringent monitoring mechanisms. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the reasons of less number of Category III 
projects as compared to Category I & II. 
 
 

11  
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Overview of Coal Sector 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that the coal sector remains central to India’s energy security and 
industrial growth with production exceeding 1 billion tonnes and contributing over 72% 
of the country’s electricity generation. The Committee also note that over the past year, 
the Ministry has focused on strategic priorities like energy security and self-reliance, 
structural reforms and sustainable transformation. The Committee further note that the 
Ministry is unlocking value in coal PSUs by listing of companies as per the policy of the 
Government. The Committee while appreciating the achievements of the Ministry and 
its efforts in diversification towards coal gasification, use of technology and digital 
transformation across all aspects of mining suggest that the Ministry strategically move 
ahead to achieve the target of 100 MT of coal gasification by the year 2030 to fulfil the 
objective of self-reliance and achieving the goals of Viksit Bharat and Net Zero target. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Coal has undertaken a series of policy, financial, and institutional measures 
to advance the target of achieving 100 MT of coal gasification by 2030. The key 
initiatives are as follows: 
a) Policy and auction incentives: 
i. On 24.11.2021 for commercial coal block auctions, provision has been made for 
50% rebate in revenue share for the coal used for gasification purpose provided 
the coal quantity used for gasification is at least 10% of total coal production. 
ii. On 20.05.2022, a new Sub-sector “Production of Syngas leading to coal 
gasification” under the NRS linkage auctions was created. 
iii. On 23.04.2025, Additional incentives such as 2% Floor Price (reduced from 4%), 
100% upfront payment waiver, and 50% rebate on Performance Bank Guarantee 

12  
(introduced for UG mining) have been made applicable to Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG).  
iv. On 29.10.2025, 21 coal mines suitable for UCG have been launched (for the 1st 
time) under 14th tranche of commercial coal auction. 
 
b) Financial assistance: 
 
I. On 24.01.2024, Government approved an outlay of ₹8,500 crore as financial 
assistance for promoting coal/lignite gasification projects. 
II. RFPs for 1st round issued on 15.05.2024; seven projects under implementation, 
expected commissioning by FY2030. 
III. Second-round RFPs for the remaining ₹2,366.94 crore under Category II & III 
published on 30.09.2025. One (01) proposal has been received under Category 
III, and the LoA was issued on 29.04.2026. 
 
c) Coal supply facilitation: 
I. On 16.12.2024, coal supply enabled for gasification projects under Non-
Reserved Sector (NRS)`` auction with floor price at notified price of regulated 
sector, for coal gasification projects commissioning within the next 7 years 
II. Eligibility in NRS coal linkage auction allowed to meet the balance coal 
requirement (beyond the capacity of the allocated mine) for the gasification 
projects.  
 
d) Supportive institutional measures: 
 
I. A framework has been established for granting a waiver from registration at 
DPIIT for Transfer of Technology (ToT) from land-border-sharing countries, on a 
case-by-case basis, with the first waiver granted to M/s Dev Technofab Ltd. on 
13.12.2024. 
II. On 09.10.2025, DPIIT granted registration to M/s Zhongshi Chemical 
Engineering Construction Co. Ltd. (1st ever such registration), enabling its 
participation as a technology licensor and EPC contractor. 

13  
On 22.01.2026, DoE granted limited exemption (6 category of items) from restrictions 
under Rule 144(xi) of GFRs, to all 7 coal gasification projects under the Financial 
Incentive Scheme, for a period of 2 years. 
 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
Budgetary Allocations and Utilization 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
The Committee note that the Demands for Grants (2026–27) of the Ministry of Coal 
reflect a net budget allocation of Rs.3635.32 crore, marking an increase over the 
previous year. Out of the total budget provision, Rs. 3546 crore are earmarked for 
Central Sector Schemes under which Rs. 3525 crore have been provided for Promotion 
of Coal/Lignite Gasification scheme. For the scheme of Exploration of Coal & Lignite, 
Rs.755 crore have been provided and Rs.21 crore have been provided for Research & 
Development. The Committee also take note of the Ministry’s submission that the 
Ministry is hopeful of full utilization of the allocated budget in the Central Sector 
Schemes. The Committee further taking note of the submission of the Ministry that there 
will be no rush of expenditure in the last quarter and last month of FY 2025–26, hope 
that the Ministry will ensure full utilization of all funds to achieve substantial results. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to strengthen its internal projection mechanisms and 
coordination with implementing agencies to avoid re-appropriation for foreseeable 
expenditures and ensure realistic budgeting at the BE stage itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Against allocated fund of ₹750 crore for FY 2025–26, fund amount to Rs. 717.87 
Cr. i.e 95.71% has been utilized the FY 2025-26. The detailed utilisation pattern 
indicates that while Promotional Exploration achieved 100% utilisation across all 
components, Detailed Drilling in Non-CIL blocks recorded savings of ₹32.13 crore under 
the NER component due to limited availability of suitable blocks and law & order 
constraints. 
Exploration programmes are formulated based on BE provisions; however, re-
appropriation becomes necessary in certain cases due to unforeseen factors such as 
delays in Forest Clearances and local law & order issues. In order to streamline 
implementation and optimise resource utilisation, it has been proposed to merge 

14  
Promotional and Detailed Exploration into a unified scheme framework, enabling greater 
flexibility in fund allocation and reducing the need for re-appropriation. Also, under R&D 
Scheme, against RE of ₹20 crore, an expenditure of ₹19.9981 crore has been incurred 
during FY 2025–26, achieving near 100% utilisation. 
Overall, the Ministry has taken steps to improve realistic budgeting, better expenditure 
forecasting, and avoidance of last-quarter expenditure pressures, through enhanced 
coordination with implementing agencies and strengthened internal monitoring systems. 
 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
R&D and Safety in the Coal Sector 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
The Committee note that the allocation for Research and Development under the Ministry 
of Coal in BE 2026-27 is Rs. 21 crore, as against the Ministry's own demand of Rs. 40 
crore. The Committee observe that the Scheme for Conservation, Safety and 
Infrastructure Development in Coal Mines has been dropped this year which was 
allocated Rs. 92.50 crore last year. The Committee note the Ministry’s submission in 
this regard of a guideline of Department of Expenditure stating that wherever sufficient 
resources are available with PSUs, considering the limited fiscal space, Ministries may 
restrict the Scheme. The Committee are informed that coal companies themselves have 
invested approximately ₹300 crore in R&D during the current financial year. The 
Committee is further informed that coal companies having sufficient financial resources 
of their own and investing around Rs. 2,000 crore this year and Rs. 3,000 crore last 
year in coal conservation, safety and infrastructure. The Committee suggest that R&D 
being an important component for development, modernisation, environment protection 
and safety in coal mines, the Ministry should pursue to get enhanced allocation under the 
R&D and also monitor the progress of R&D done by coal companies. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry recognizes the critical importance of Research & Development for 
technological advancement, safety, environmental sustainability, and modernisation of 
the coal sector. 
 

15  
Accordingly, the Ministry has approved continuation of the Central Sector R&D 
Scheme with an outlay of ₹150 crore for FY 2026–31. Efforts will continue to seek 
enhanced allocations in line with emerging technological requirements. 
 
In addition to budgetary support, significant R&D investments are being undertaken by 
coal PSUs. Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries are funding advanced-stage projects 
Technology Readiness Level (TRL-4 and above), particularly those requiring higher 
capital investment and demonstrating commercial potential.  
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 7 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Output–outcome framework and deployment of R&D outcomes 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
The Committee have examined the baseline performance furnished by the Ministry 
under the Output–Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) and note that, during the 
last three years, the Ministry has reported achievement of most annual targets relating 
to sanction of new research projects, completion of ongoing projects, adoption of 
technological solutions, publication of research papers and registration of patents. The 
data indicate that in several instances, achievements have exceeded targets, 
particularly in sanction of new projects and completion of ongoing projects. While 
appreciating the quantitative achievements reported under OOMF indicators, the 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry establish a technology deployment roadmap 
linking R&D outputs to mandatory pilot implementation in selected mines, followed by 
defined timelines for scale-up across coal PSUs. The Committee also suggest that the 
Ministry may explore setting up a mechanism similar to the National Centre for Clean 
Coal Research and Development (NaCCER) to take R&D projects from Technology 
Readiness Level (TRL) 3-5 to TRL 7-8 for commercial viability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OOMF target is consistently being achieved during the last three years (FY 2022-25). 
Further, National Centre for Coal and Energy Research (NaCCER) has been 

16  
established and it is functional at CMPDI, Ranchi in its Phase-I. Several research 
initiatives are being undertaken by the centre to address the challenges faced by the 
coal and energy sector. In order to strategically scale up the lower TRL project, a 
collaborative model is being utilised where Coal mining companies, research institutes, 
start-ups and NaCCER are working jointly to scale up the previously undertaken 
research project with TRL 3 to 4. However, each R&D project scale up presents unique 
considerations, a fixed and uniform timeline for scale-up is difficult to define and must 
be determined on the basis of proposals received to advance towards commercial 
viability (TRL 7–8).  
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
Exploration strategy for Coal & Lignite 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that Rs.755 crore have been provided in BE 2026-27 for 
Exploration of Coal & Lignite, in which Rs.200 crore are for Regional Exploration and 
Rs.555 crore are for Detailed Drilling, which will be met entirely from the NMEDT funds. 
While utilization in recent years has improved and physical targets have been achieved, 
the Committee observe that since Regional Exploration is the foundational stage of 
identification of reserves through surface mapping and remote sensing, and detailed 
drilling is important for converting the findings to proved category, the Ministry may give 
continued focus to these schemes. The Committee also suggest adoption of advanced 
technologies such as collaboration with ISRO for satellite-based remote sensing, drone-
based surveys for mapping of inaccessible areas and increased engagement with the 
44 private exploration agencies notified by the Ministry to expedite exploration activities. 
Lignite being an important resource with significant deposits in several States, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry and the 
roadmap for addressing the pace of exploration of lignite in the lignite-bearing States. 
Reply of the Government 
The advanced technology of hyperspectral studies through drone technology is being 
studied for mineral exploration in association with ISRO. A pilot project was taken up by 
CMPDI in the mineral blocks in guidance of GSI & ISRO for study of REE in the 
Rajasthan. Multispectral and Hyperspectral Satellite Imagery was used for identifying 

17  
zones of Mineralization. But as major part of allocated block area was sand body 
covered, which was constantly changing, unique signature of minerals could not be 
identified. But towards southern part of the block where Granitic Terrain was exposed 
some mineralization was identified. Hence, it may be inferred that Satellite Remote 
sensing for mineral exploration is useful for areas where rock exposure is clear and 
without any vegetation/dense forest. 
Drone survey is being carried out by CMPDI in topographical survey, volume 
measurement etc. for the different clients. Drone survey is to be taken up for topography 
survey in inaccessible areas of NER, J&K, etc. 
During 2025-26, CMPDI executed 25% of the total achievements through private 
players till Feb’26.  The participation of 44 notified private accredited exploration 
agencies is likely to be increased from next financial year in exploration of coal & lignite 
to meet proposed target. 
Both regional & detailed exploration is being carried out in lignite blocks through Central 
Sector Scheme fund since commencement of the scheme. Detailed exploration is 
undergoing in 8 lignite blocks during FY 2025-26. Detailed Exploration will continue 
during FY 2026-27 in five Lignite blocks in Rajasthan & 1 block in J&K which are 
undergoing from FY 2025-26 and one new block has been identified in Tamil Nadu for 
Regional Exploration during FY 2026-27. At present, priority is being given to the 
exploration of coking coal, high-grade non-coking coal, and other potential non-coking 
coal in line with the HLC-VB recommendations for import substitution, however, lignite 
exploration remains an important focus area and additional lignite blocks will be included 
in future exploration programs. 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
Modernisation of Coal Washeries 
 
(Recommendation SI. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that India is the world's second largest producer of coal. The 
Committee also note that the limitation of Indian coal both in coking coal and non-coking 
coal is its high ash content due to which coal washing has to be performed before being 
exported or for use in blast furnaces. The Committee are informed that our exports in 

18  
washed coal are nil and many coal washeries which were installed about 35 years ago, 
are running at low efficiency. The Committee therefore call upon the Ministry to explore 
the feasibility of getting a separate budget for modernisation and renovation of coal 
washeries for optimal beneficiation of coal in order to provide washed coal for domestic 
blast furnaces at competitive prices, thereby reducing imports and also thereby 
encouraging export of washed coal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited is modernising / renovating four number of old coking coal washeries 
by investing more than of 500Crs (approximately) for efficient and optimal utilization of 
the washeries. With modernization of these washeries, production of washed coking 
coal suitable for steel sector can be increased thereby reducing the imports. 
 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
 
Coal Evacuation 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
The Committee note that the Coal sector contribute to about 55 per cent of India’s rail 
freight revenue in which coal is transported through All Rail Route and the Rail-sea 
route. The Committee also note that the freight of Rail-Sea Route is costlier than the All 
Rail Route for which the Ministry wish to pursue the matter with the Railways. The 
Committee observe that coal evacuation through inland waterways is more economical, 
environment-friendly and energy-efficient as compared to other modes of transport, 
considering the announcement made in the Union Budget 2026-27 regarding 
operationalisation of 20 new National Waterways over the next five years, starting with 
National Waterway-5 (NW-5) in Odisha, to connect mineral-rich areas of Talcher and 
Angul and industrial centres like Kalinga Nagar to the ports of Paradeep and Dhamra. 
The Committee also note the announcement of the Coastal Cargo Promotion Scheme 
to incentivise modal shift from rail and road to waterways, aiming to increase the share 
of inland waterways and coastal shipping from 6% to 12% by 2047. The Committee, 
therefore, suggest that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of coal evacuation 
through NW-5 and other suitable national waterways in a time-bound manner. The 
Committee further urge the Ministry to explore developing multimodal terminals 
and cargo aggregation infrastructure at strategic locations near coal mines and 

19  
undertake a detailed feasibility study for evacuation of coal through inland waterways 
from other major coal-producing States. The Committee may be apprised of the quantity 
of coal evacuation done through Inland Waterways, All Rail Route and Rail-Sea Route 
for the last five years, along with comparative cost analysis.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The dispatch made through All Rail Route and Rail-Sea-Route in the last 5 years is as 
under:  
(in Million tonnes)  
 
The supply of coal to consumers, particularly through the Rail-Sea Route (RSR), is 
dependent on multiple cost components such as rail freight (first leg and second leg), 
ocean freight, port handling charges, and last-mile transportation (through conveyor 
belt/rail/road). All these components are dynamic in nature and vary from one consumer 
to another. Accordingly, the landed cost of coal varies for each consumer. Therefore, 
the cost of transportation through the Rail-Sea Route (RSR) is inherently flexible and 
subject to variation, and a direct comparison between RSR and All Rail Route (ARR) on 
a uniform basis is not feasible. However, as received from the APGENCO, the indicative 
landed cost for plants such as Dr. N. Tata Rao TPS and Rayalaseema TPS, sourcing 
coal from MCL through RSR and ARR, is as under:  
(in Rs/tonne)  
Name of Plant ARR Mode RSR Mode 
Dr N Tata Rao 3451.71 4123.98 
Rayaseema TPS 4193.72 4024.06 
 
Year All Rail Route Rail-Sea-Rail route 
FY 2025 649 59 
FY 2024 588 54 
FY 2023 538 40 
FY 2022 541 28 
FY 2021 486 20 

20  
Further, MCL has undertaken a comprehensive feasibility study for evacuation of coal 
through National Waterway-5 (NW-5) on 31.3.2026, covering all relevant aspect and the 
detailed feasibility report along with actionable recommendations to be submitted within 
a period of three (03) months.  
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
 
  (For Comments of the Committee, please see para 10 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Utilisation of Funds under DAPSC, DAPST and NER Components 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has fully utilised the outlay under DAPSC 
AND DAPST during the financial years 2023-24, 2024-25 and for the FY 2025-26 (up to 
31.1.2026) utilised 80.13% in DAPSC and 92.78% in DAPST. The Committee note that 
utilisation under NER allocations have fallen short of Budget Estimates, with actual 
expenditure of Rs.45.29 crore, Rs.41.38 crore, and Rs.46.98 crore as on 31.01.2026, 
against BEs of Rs.56.35 crore, Rs.84.35 crore, and Rs.87.25 crore during 2023–24, 
2024–25, and 2025–26 respectively. The Committee hope that the Ministry will identify 
the bottlenecks and work out an action plan to ensure full utilisation of allocations under 
the NER component in FY 2025-26 and FY-2026-27.  
Reply of the Government 
100% of the allocated funds under DAPSC (₹62.26 crore) and DAPST (₹64.50 crore) 
were utilised for Promotional Exploration and Non-CIL Detailed Exploration during FY 
2025–26. 
 
Under the NER component, 100% utilisation of the allocated fund (₹40 crore) was 
achieved for Promotional Exploration during FY 2025–26. However, under Non-CIL 
Detailed Exploration, expenditure amounted to ₹25.19 crore against the allocated 
allocation of ₹57.32 crore, resulting in under-utilisation. 
 
The under-utilisation was primarily due to the limited availability of potential areas for 
undertaking detailed exploration and the non-commencement of work in the Northern 
Khar Block of Nagaland owing to the non-availability of consent from the village council. 
Further, despite efforts to undertake detailed exploration in the identified blocks, 

21  
exploration activities were significantly affected by adverse law and order conditions in 
the region.  
To scale up exploration, in NER region, Periodic meeting, seminar, workshops are 
being organised to motivate and sensitize the recent advancement in the exploration to 
the officials of DGMS/DMRs and private exploration agencies engaged in the NER 
region. Due to such efforts, the footprint of coal Exploration is going to increase from 4 
states to 6 states in NER region. 
 
 Research & Development 
During the financial year 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26, 100% funds towards NER 
component in Research and Development (S&T) of Central Sector Scheme have been 
utilised. Continuous efforts are being made to promote research and development 
(R&D) activities in the Coal Sector under North Eastern Region (NER) of the country 
and ensure full utilisation of allocations under the NER component. 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
Mine Safety, Digitalisation and Illegal Mining Surveillance 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
The Committee note that various initiatives are undertaken with the launch of CMSMS 
and the Khanan Prahari App, centralized dashboards, etc. for mine safety digitalisation 
and surveillance to curb illegal mining. These measures represent important steps 
toward technology driven safety and enforcement. The Committee also note the 
deployment of advanced safety systems including Proximity Warning Devices (PWD), 
Automatic Fire Detection and Suppression Systems (AFDSS), fatigue monitoring 
systems, GPS-based Vehicle Tracking Systems (GPS-VTS), and real-time monitoring 
through the National Coal Mines Safety Report Portal launched in December 2024. 
These measures represent important steps toward technology-driven safety and 
enforcement. The Committee hope that the deployment of advanced IoT and proximity 
safety systems will add to safety measures and digital platforms for reporting 
illegal mining. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry adopt a time-
bound plan for scaling digital safety systems, particularly IoT-enabled real-time 
monitoring of environmental conditions, gases like CO, CO2, CH4, O2 across all 

22  
underground mines, and institute a transparent monitoring framework for CMSMS and 
related platforms with periodic public reporting. The Committee also call upon the 
feasibility to look at strengthening the Coal Mine Pithead Security Plan for all 
abandoned/discontinued mines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
CIL: CMSMS (Coal Mine Surveillance and Management System) is a system designed 
to monitor any illegal coal mine mining in the coal sector. 
Through the mobile app ‘Khanan Prahari’, any person/ group/ organization with a smart 
phone can lodge a complaint about unauthorized/ illegal coal mining activities in the 
coal field right from the spot of incident. This mobile app is available for both Android 
and iOS supported smart phones. 
On the complaint lodged, a reference number is generated, which can be kept by the 
complainant to reference or track the complaint on the CMSMS portal/ Khanan Prahari 
mobile app. 
The reports of illegal coal mining made by public participation, through the Khanan 
Prahari App, reach the concerned Nodal Officer (CIL/Non-CIL (State Governments)) for 
verification. Once the reported incident is verified as true by the nodal officer, he 
initiates appropriate action as per law. 
The action taken report by the Nodal Officer is uploaded on the CMSMS platform, which 
can also be viewed on the Khanan Prahari Mobile App. 
Since the inception of the CMSMS system (2018), the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited 
have been actively processing the complaints received through the Khanan Prahari 
App. 
All the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited are advertising the Khanan Prahari App 
through posters, social media, hoardings at prominent places to spread awareness 
amongst the citizens. 
Due to the continuous guidance of the Coal Ministry, nodal officers of the State 
Governments are also now actively taking cognizance of the illegal activity reported in 

23  
their area and taking appropriate actions, which are duly recorded in the portal. The 
persons can see the action taken on their complaint on the Khanan Prahari Mobile App, 
through the Reference Number generated at the time of his/ her complaint. 
Real-Time Monitoring of Environmental Conditions 
 Underground Mines (UG): Operating UG mines of subsidiaries of CIL are 
equipped with Environmental Tele-Monitoring Systems (ETMS). These systems 
are installed in all UG mines with fiery seams and in degree-3 gassy mines to 
provide continuous monitoring of the below-ground mine environment. The 
ETMS is integrated with a surface-level computer unit, which generates real-time 
alerts to enable timely detection and response to hazardous conditions. ETMS 
functions as an additional safeguard over and above the multi-gas detectors 
already provided in UG mines for detecting noxious and inflammable gases. In 
certain underground mines, localized methane detectors (LMD) are also 
deployed to further strengthen environmental monitoring and safety in UG mines. 
 
 Open-Cast Mines (OC): Continuous Ambient Air Quality Measurement Systems 
(CAAQMS) are installed at OC mines to enable uninterrupted monitoring of air 
quality parameters. 
Monitoring through CMSMS (Coal Mine Surveillance and Management System) is being 
carried out.  
In all the subsidiaries, Integrated Control & Command Centre with IoT Camera installed 
& GPS enables vehicle tracking system installed in existing mines. 
Regular physical patrolling through security department carried out, illegal activities 
being reported to law enforcing agencies regularly. 
Specific report of ECL, BCCL & CCL are given below where most of the abandoned 
mines exists: 
ECL: ECL has undertaken several measures to strengthen the Coal Mine Pithead 
Security Plan for its discontinued mines with the objective of preventing unauthorized 
entry, illegal mining activities, and ensuring safety in such areas. In this regard: 

24  
(a) Discontinued mines are being sealed off to restrict unauthorized access & prevent 
inadvertent human intervention. In locations where sealing is not technically 
feasible, adequate fencing arrangements are being provided to secure the mine 
premises and vulnerable access points 
 
(b) Miking and Public Awareness Campaigns are being conducted in nearby residential 
colonies and adjoining habitations to sensitize local residents regarding the dangers 
associated with entering discontinued mines and to caution them about the potential 
threats and hazards present in such workings 
(c) Cautionary signboards have been installed at vulnerable and restricted locations to 
alert the public regarding danger zones and restrictions on unauthorized entry 
(d) Security personnel have been deployed at strategic locations for continuous 
monitoring and surveillance 
(e) Regular patrolling and Joint Inspection raids are being conducted by CISF 
personnel and ECL Security personnel to maintain vigilance and deter illegal 
activities in and around discontinued mine areas 
(f) Additionally, continuous coordination is maintained with the District Administration, 
Local Police, and CISF to strengthen surveillance, access control, and protection of 
sensitive and vulnerable locations 
(g) CCTV Surveillance systems are being progressively installed to strengthen 
monitoring and improve security coverage in and around its discontinued mine 
areas. 
 
Along with, the complaints received through the Khanan Prahari portal are attended 
promptly by the concerned authorities. Based on the reported latitude and longitude, 
field inspection and verification are carried out. In cases found to be genuine, immediate 
necessary actions such as joint raids, lodging of Police Complaints/FIRs, and filling of 
illegal pits/rat holes are undertaken without delay. 
Since the launch of Khanan Prahari/CMSMS, 374 complaints have been received, 
including 292 in West Bengal and 82 in Jharkhand. Of these, 107 complaints in West 
Bengal and 54 in Jharkhand were found genuine, while 185 and 28 respectively were 
found false. 

25  
During FY 2024-25, 107 complaints were received, out of which illegal activities were 
detected in 91 cases and 16 were found false. During FY 2025-26, 10 complaints were 
received and, upon verification, no illegal activity was detected. Necessary actions, 
including lodging of Police Complaints and joint raids, are undertaken in coordination 
with local law enforcement agencies, as and when required. 
A GPS-based Vehicle Tracking System for coal transportation has been successfully 
implemented across Eastern Coalfields Limited. At present, a total of 1,213 active 
tracking devices have been installed and are functioning efficiently across 13 
operational Areas of ECL. 
To ensure effective supervision and real-time monitoring of coal transportation activities, 
Vehicle Tracking Monitoring (VTM) Control Rooms have been established at both the 
Area level and the Headquarters (HQ) level. These control rooms are equipped to 
provide continuous monitoring of vehicle movement, route compliance, operational 
status, and transportation efficiency. 
The system enables real-time tracking of coal transportation vehicles, thereby improving 
transparency, operational control, safety, and accountability in transportation activities. 
Constant monitoring through the VTM network has significantly strengthened the 
management and oversight of coal dispatch operations throughout ECL. 
BCCL: 
In addition to physical surveillance, continuous monitoring and supervision are being 
carried out by CISF to prevent illegal mining activities. 
A satellite-driven surveillance system has also been developed for detection of illegal 
mining activities. A mobile application named “Khanan Prahari” was launched on 
04.07.2018. Further, a Coal Mine Surveillance and Management System (CMSMS) has 
been developed by Central Mine Planning and Design Institute in association 
with Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics under the 
directives of the Ministry of Coal. Through the “Khan Prahari” mobile application, any 
individual can report incidents of illegal mining, upon which compliance and necessary 
action are taken by BCCL. 

26  
Details of complaints received through the Khanan Prahari portal for the period from 
07.07.2018 to 20.05.2026 are as follows: 
 Total complaints generated on the Khanan Prahari web portal: 234 
 Total complaints verified: 234 
 Complaints found true: 55 
 Complaints found false: 179 
 Action taken for closure of sites in cases of true complaints: 55 
CCL:  
The following steps have been taken by the CCL Management to prevent illegal mining 
in leasehold Areas of CCL:- 
I. The Ministry of Coal has launched an app named “Khanan Prahari”, through 
which any citizen can report cases of illegal mining activity to the management. If 
illegal mining activity takes place within the leasehold area of CCL, the CCL 
Management takes necessary steps to close such illegal mines. If such activity 
takes place outside the leasehold area of CCL, the CCL Management informs 
the State authorities to take appropriate action to stop the illegal mining. 
II. A Drone-based Surveillance System has recently been introduced by CCL for 
enhanced monitoring of illegal mining sites. This system helps identify locations 
of illegal mining, whether within the command area or in adjoining areas. Upon 
detection, raids are conducted by the Security team in coordination with the 
district police force to prevent illegal coal mining or theft of coal. 
III. The Secretary, Department of Home, Government of Jharkhand, vide letter No. 
6/Nigarani 7-701/2003/6087, Ranchi dated 4 August 2004, constituted a 
Monitoring Committee and Task Force at both the State Headquarters level and 
the Divisional level. Meetings are held by the district authorities in which CCL 
representatives are also present. 
IV. The Task Force reviews the implementation of measures undertaken with the 
active involvement of Project/Area Management. 
V. Continuous liaison and interaction are maintained by officials of the Project, Area 
and Headquarters of CCL with the State authorities. 

27  
VI. Monthly review meetings are conducted by the State Administration regarding 
the prevention of illegal mining and theft of coal. The Deputy 
Commissioner/Commissioner and Police officials, along with Area GMs and 
Security Officers, attend these meetings. 
VII. Frequent surprise checks and raids are conducted periodically by the Security 
team in coordination with the district police force. 
VIII. 24×7 patrolling and constant vigilance are maintained by security personnel to 
detect and prevent incidents of illegal coal mining and theft of coal. 
IX. IT-based initiatives, such as RFID, GPS, CCTV cameras and electronically 
operated boom barriers, have been installed in CCL command areas (including 
coal stocks, check posts, weighbridges, railway sidings, etc.) for monitoring and 
prevention of coal theft. 
X. Check posts have been established at vulnerable locations. 
XI. CCL has deployed four types of security agencies for watch and ward duties in 
its command areas: Departmental Security, CISF, SISF & Jharkhand Home 
Guards. 
XII. FIRs are lodged by CCL in cases of coal theft or illegal mining and such illegal 
rat-hole mines are dozed off in the presence of State officials. 
XIII. Trenches are dug around the periphery of mining areas to prevent unauthorized 
entry of vehicles and personnel into the mines. 
XIV. A Centralized Integrated Command & Control Centre (ICCC) and Quick 
Response Team have been established to monitor illegal activities and take 
necessary action. 
XV. Coal stocks and railway sidings are protected with concertina fencing to prevent 
coal theft. 
XVI. Announcements are regularly made in nearby villages to create awareness 
among the local population about the legal implications of illegal coal mining and 
to request them not to engage in any such unlawful activities.  
XVII. Letters are periodically issued to public representatives such as Mukhiyas, 
Sarpanches, etc., with copies endorsed to the concerned Thana In-charges and 
Circle Officers, requesting them to sensitize local residents, restrict unauthorized 
entry into mine premises, and discourage any involvement in illegal mining 
activities. 

28  
 SCCL:  
Advanced safety systems are already in use in company-owned HEMM to enhance 
safety. 
Important steps toward technology-driven safety and enforcement: GPS-based Vehicle 
Tracking Systems (GPS-VTS) were implemented in SCCL, and real-time monitoring of 
accident analysis of SCCL is being maintained through the National Coal Mines Safety 
Report Portal. 
SCCL has adopted a digital safety system, particularly IoT-enabled real-time monitoring 
of environmental conditions, gases like CO, CO2, CH4, and O2 in PVK 5 and ALP 
underground mines. 
 The Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) is implementing a structured 
security plan for all abandoned and discontinued mines, aligning with the Ministry of 
Coal's guidelines. The primary focus of the security plan is to prevent unauthorised 
access, ensure safety and mitigate environmental damage. 
 NLCIL:  
 The following steps are taken to implement digitalisation in Mines Safety at NLCIL. 
 Blast free Mining: Blast-free lignite mining system with state-of-the-art technology 
bucket wheel excavator with belt conveyor and spreader is being used in all 
Neyveli mines. All the conveyor Systems are equipped with modern safety 
features such as Pull chord switches, Sequence Control system, Belt Slip 
Monitor, etc. Blast-free mining is also being practised in Barsingsar mines for 
both OB and Lignite, and at Talabira II & III OCP, blast-free mining is done in 
case of extraction of coal by the use of a surface miner. 
 Safety Features in HEMM: The HEMMs deployed in the Mines have been fitted 
with AFDSS (Automatic Fire Detection and Suppression System), Rear vision 
camera, Seat belt with reminder, Reverse AVA, Rear View Mirror, Tramming 
Alarm, Turbo Charger guard, and fatigue sensors. 
 Conduct of Scientific Study: Scientific Study of all mines of NLCIL conducted 
regarding pit slope, dump slope and monitoring of slope stability under regulation 

29  
106(2) of CMR, 2017; based on recommendations, Slope stability is being 
monitored and implemented. 
 Group Vocational Training Centre (GVTC) has been provided with a state-of-the-
art simulator for imparting training to equipment operators for Bucket Wheel 
Excavators, Dozers, Backhoes, and pipe layers. 
 NLCIL Aran launched for reporting of unsafe observations and near misses for 
needful compliance. 
 Ambient air Quality Monitoring System has been provided in NLCIL Mines for 
continuous Monitoring of Air Quality with real-time data transfer connectivity 
established with the SPCB server. 
 NLCIL's Talabira II & III OCP is equipped with Geo Fencing Technology and 
RFID Technology for loading and unloading of Coal, utilising Unmanned Weigh 
Bridges for measurement of the quantity of Coal produced. 
 CCTV cameras are being installed in Strategic Locations in all the Mines of 
NLCIL for the safety and Security of men and equipment. Further, boundary 
fencing is provided in all NLCIL Mines to prevent unauthorised entry of Mine 
planning is being done using modern software like AutoCAD, Minex and Surfac 
for ensuring Safety in mine design, and Drone Survey is being conducted for 
proper monitoring. 
 Safety and Health Management system audit is being conducted for all mines of 
NLCIL as per MoC Guidelines; all such reports with ATR are being uploaded in 
the Digital Platform in the NCMSR Portal. 
 A biometric system is implemented in all mines of NLCIL for the monitoring of 
Attendance of persons. 
 Banning of mobile phones in the mining working area and usage of Walkies-
Talkies for communication inside the mining working area is enforced, along with 
Pep talk and toolbox talk before starting work. 
 CISF is deployed in Neyveli Lignite mines and Barsingsar Mine of NLCIL for the 
security of men and material, while at Talabira II & III OCP, OISF is being 
deployed for Security. 
 As per Regulation 104 of Coal Mines Regulations 2017, SMP for all NLCIL Mines 
have been prepared based on Hazard identification and Risk assessment and 
put into implementation. This is reviewed every 6 months. 

30  
 Prior to employment, all persons, including those by contractors, are provided 
with an Initial Medical Examination (IME) at NLC India General Hospital. 
Similarly, all such persons are subjected to Periodical Medical Examinations 
(PME) once every 3 years. The medical officers were also trained on the ILO 
classification of chest x-rays to detect early onset of dust-related diseases in the 
lungs. 
 Valid entry passes are issued by the Manager after valid IME/PME certification, 
valid Initial/Refresher Training and satisfactory verification of all documentation. 
Such Entry passes are checked every working shift at the mine entrance by CISF 
personnel. 
 30 Water sprinklers and 6 Fog cannons are being deployed in NLCIL Mines to 
suppress dust, and respirable dust monitoring is conducted in all NLCIL Mines for 
free silica assessment under Regulation 143(14) of CMR, 2017, read with GSR 
978(E) of 01/10/2018. 
Provision of facilities onsite in respect of rest shelters, drinking water & first-aid, and 
supply of PPEs (under regulation 241 & 242 of CMR, 2017) has been ensured. 
 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
 
Coal/Lignite Gasification Scheme 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
The Committee note that the allocation under the Scheme for Promotion of Coal/Lignite 
Gasification was reduced from Rs.300 crore at BE 2025–26 to Rs. 285 crore at RE 
stage on actual milestone-based requirement. The Committee note that no expenditure 
is incurred for most of the financial year, with even a single eligible project awaiting 
fulfilment of reimbursement formalities. The Committee further note that against a 
Revised Estimate of Rs.285 crore in FY 2025–26, the Budget Estimate for FY 2026–27 
is enhanced to Rs.3,525 crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
adopt a time bound expenditure projection framework, supported by quarterly milestone 
verification and independent financial closure certification. The Committee further 
recommend that the Ministry encourage use of indigenous high-ash gasification 
technology in line with NITI Aayog recommendations, particularly through Category-III 
projects designed for demonstration and scale-up of indigenous technologies. The 

31  
Committee also suggest the Ministry to explore the feasibility of using Indian high-ash, 
low-grade coal for gasification projects and provide measurable import substitution for 
methanol, ammonia, fertilisers, SNG, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
The Budget Estimate (BE) allocation of ₹3,525 crore for FY 2026–27 under the Coal 
Gasification Financial Incentive Scheme was initially envisaged as part of the overall 
scheme outlay of ₹8,500 crore. As of date, seven coal gasification projects are under 
implementation, for which a total financial incentive of ₹6,133.06 crore has been 
earmarked. 
Against the Revised Estimate of ₹285 crore in FY 2025–26, an amount of ₹235.52 crore 
has been released as part payment of first instalment to M/s Jindal Steel Limited for 
their Coal Gasification Project at Angul on 31.03.2026. The balance amount is expected 
to be disbursed in the first quarter of FY 2026–27 upon completion of the remaining 
reimbursement formalities. 
Considering the present stage of project implementation (Annexure-I), financial closure 
timelines, and expected milestone achievements for eligibility of incentive disbursement, 
the annual requirement for FY 2026–27 has been rationalized to approximately ₹1,481 
crore. 
Accordingly, the expenditure is proposed to be phased in a time-bound manner across 
the financial year, aligned with milestone-based verification and progress of project 
execution. The quarterly expenditure framework under the BE allocation of ₹ 3525 crore 
for FY 2026–27 is as follows: 
Fig in ₹ Cr 
BE allocation for 
FY 26-27  
(Sum of Q1–Q4) 
Quarter-wise Expenditure Plan  
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Total 
3525.00 49.01  - 207.01 1225.00  1481.01 

32  
Indian coal is predominantly high-ash and low-grade in nature, which necessitates the 
development of suitable gasification technologies tailored to Indian geological 
conditions. In this regard, several research, development, and pilot-scale initiatives are 
currently underway for the advancement of coal gasification technologies in the country. 
These indigenous gasifier development programmes include: 
1) CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad: 0.5 TPD Air-Blown Pressurized Fluidized bed 
gasification (PFBG) Pilot Plant Installed in Mar, 2009. 
2) CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad: 1.5 TPD Oxygen Enriched Pressurized Fluidized Bed 
Gasification (PFBG) Pilot Plant Installed in Dec, 2020. 
3) EIL (R&D) Gurgaon: Fluidized Bed Gasifier. 
4) BHEL, R&D Hyderabad: Fluidized Bed Gasifier. 
5) BHEL, R&D Trichy: Fluidized Bed Gasifier. 
6) Thermax, Pune: 1 TPD fluidized bed coal gasification pilot plant Established in 
2014. 
7) Thermax, Pune: 6 TPD fluidized bed coal gasification pilot plant. 
8) Eastern Coalfields Limited (ECL): An R&D pilot project on Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) to establish UCG technology in Indian geological conditions 
at Kasta (West) Block (ECL) is under implementation where CMPDI & ECL are 
Principal Implementing Agency and M/s Ergo Exergy, Canada is the sub-
Implementing Agency. 
In addition to the above, Category-III projects under the Scheme have been envisaged 
as dedicated demonstration and scale-up platforms for indigenous and emerging coal 
gasification technologies. These projects are intended to promote gradual indigenization 
of technology while retaining flexibility for selection of appropriate gasification routes 
based on project-specific viability, feedstock characteristics, and end-use requirements. 
The Ministry remains committed to continuously promoting coal gasification through a 
balanced approach of technology agnostic, indigenous capability development, and 
efficient utilisation of domestic coal resources, while ensuring measurable outcomes 
through structured monitoring mechanisms. 
 
 

33  
Annexure 1 
Particular 
Category I Category II Category 
III 
TOTAL 
Bharat 
Coal 
Gasificatio
n and 
Chemicals 
Ltd. 
Coal 
Gas 
India 
Limited 
Coal India 
Limited 
Jindal 
Steel 
and 
Power 
Ltd. 
Greta 
Energy 
and Metal 
Pvt. Ltd. 
New Era 
Cleantech 
Solution 
Pvt. Ltd. 
New Era 
Cleantech 
Solution 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 
Location MCL, 
Jharsuguda 
(Odisha) 
ECL, 
Burdwan 
(WB) 
Bhadrawati
, 
Chandrapur 
(MH) 
Angul, 
Odisha 
Bhadrawati
, 
Chandrapur 
(MH) 
Bhadrawati
, 
Chandrapur 
(MH) 
Bhadrawati
, 
Chandrapur 
(MH) 
 
End 
Product(s) 
Ammonium 
Nitrate 
Syntheti
c Natural 
Gas 
Synthetic 
Natural Gas 
Direct 
Reduced 
Iron 
Direct 
Reduced 
Iron 
Ammoniu
m Nitrate 
and 
Hydrogen 
Ethanol  
Plant 
Capacity 
0.66 
MMTPA 
633.6 
million 
NM3 
633.6 
million 
NM3 
2 
MMTP
A 
0.5 MTPA 0.33 MTPA 
and 0.1 
MTPA 
resp. 
18 KTPA  
Project 
Agreement 
Signing 
Date 
12 Mar 
2025 
11 Apr 
2025 
12 Mar 
2025 
8 May 
2025 
8 May 
2025 
8 May 
2025 
12 Mar 
2025 
 
Financial 
Incentive 
Earmarke
d 
₹1350 
crores   
₹1350 
crores   
₹1350 
crores   
₹569.05 
crores   
₹414.01 
crores   
₹1000 
crores   
₹100 crores   ₹6133.0
6 crores 
Project 
Cost (as per 
PFR/DFR) 
~₹25016 
crores   
~₹13053 
crores   
~₹12215 
crores   
~₹3882 
crores 
~₹2763 
crores 
~₹6976 
crores 
~₹667 
crores 
~₹64,57
2 crores 
Ground-
breaking 
(expected) 
Subject to 
HPM’s 
availability 
30-Sep-
26 
31-Dec-26 01-Aug-
25 
14-Mar-26 14-Mar-26 14-Mar-26  
Financial 
Closure 
(within 2 
years from 
agreement 
signing) 
30 Jun 2026 31-Mar-
27 
12-Mar-27 22 Sep 
2025 
30 Jun 
2026 
30 Jun 
2026 
30 Jun 
2026 
  
 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please see para 13 of Chapter 1) 
 

34  
CIL's Profitability and Production Targets 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that Coal India Limited, despite remaining the largest coal-
producing company in the world, has recorded a decline in Profit Before Tax from 
Rs.48,813 crore in FY 2023-24 to Rs.46,966 crore in FY 2024-25, and a decline in Profit 
After Tax from Rs.37,369 crore to Rs.35,302 crore over the same period. The 
Committee also note that CIL is short of achieving the annual coal production targets 
over the last five years, with actual production of 781.06 MT against a target of 838.20 
MT in FY 2024-25. The Ministry has attributed this shortfall to delays in land acquisition, 
forest and environmental clearance bottlenecks, evacuation and logistics constraints 
etc. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the Ministry of Coal may take up 
the matter in coordination with concerned Ministries and State Governments, to 
eliminate these bottlenecks to complete its physical targets. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Coal India Limited (CIL) and its subsidiaries identify critical projects requiring 
Environmental Clearance (EC) and Forest Clearance (FC) at the beginning of each 
financial year to ensure continuity of production. These projects are closely monitored 
through regular internal reviews and follow-ups for timely approvals. Key issues 
pertaining to EC and FC are taken with Concerned Authority for expeditious resolution. 
   
To further streamline the process, coordination mechanisms with Central Ministries and 
State Governments have been strengthened through the designation of nodal officers, 
adoption of digital monitoring systems, capacity building initiatives, and structured 
review frameworks. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has 
instituted an Inter-Ministerial Coordination and Monitoring Committee (ICMC), which 
meets at regular intervals to review and resolve EC and FC issues.    
 
The Ministry of Coal is continuously engaging with all stakeholders under a cooperative 
federal framework to address bottlenecks related to Environmental Clearances. These 
efforts have led to improved efficiency in the processing of approvals while ensuring 
adherence to environmental safeguards. 
 
(Ministry of Coal O.M. No. IFD-20011/4/2026-IFD dated 05.06.2026) 

35  
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

36  
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 

37  
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
20 July, 2026 Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka) 
 
Standing Committee on Coal, 
Mines and Steel 
 
 
 
 

38  
ANNEXURE-I 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-26) HELD ON  20 JULY, 2026 FROM 1700 HRS TO 
1730 HRS IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 1, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE 
EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI 
 
PRESENT 
                   Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
3. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
4. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
5. Shri Ananta Nayak 
6. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
7. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
8. Smt. Mahua Maji 
9. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
10. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the following draft 
Reports without any amendments:- 
 
(i) ‘Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel 
Production’ pertaining to the Ministry of Steel; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2026-2027) pertaining to Ministry of Coal; 
  
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2026-2027) pertaining to the Ministry of Mines. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

39  
ANNEXURE-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
 
  Total No. of Recommendations made:                                                                     11 
  
  Observations / Recommendations  that have been accepted by the Government   
 SI. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, 10 & 11 
 11 
 Percentage of Total: 100% 
 
  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies      
NIL 
 
  
 Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
  Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 NIL 
  
 Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
  Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government  are still  awaited   
NIL 
 
  
 Percentage of Total : 0% 
 
 