i 
 
                               
15 STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
 
 
‘EXPEDITING AND SIMPLIFYING THE 
ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST CLEARANCE 
PROCESS FOR COAL MINING PROJECTS’ 
                
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2025/AGRAHAYANA 1947 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 
 
‘EXPEDITING AND SIMPLIFYING THE 
ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST CLEARANCE 
PROCESS FOR COAL MINING PROJECTS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2025 
 
 
 
                                                               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2025/AGRAHAYANA 1947 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
CM&S No. 201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat Published under Rule 382 of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (___ 
Edition) and printed by _________ 
  

iv 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)  vi 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) vii 
INTRODUCTION viii 
PART I 
CHAPTER I COAL AND LIGNITE SECTOR IN INDIA’S ENERGY 
SECURITY 
1 
 A. Overview 1 
 B. Production And Projection 2 
 C. Geographical Distribution of Coal in The Country 3 
 D. Import of Coal 5 
 E. Sustainable Production and Responsible Mining 6 
CHAPTER II REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR VARIOUS 
CLEARANCES 
9 
 A. Environment Clearance 11 
 B. Forest Clearance 16 
 C. Other Statutory Clearances 21 
CHAPTER III INTER-MINISTERIAL DIGITAL INTEGRATION: THE 
PARIVESH 2.0 AND SWCS MECHANISM 
23 
 A. PARIVESH Portal and Mining Clearances 24 
 B. Single Window Clearance System (SWCS) Portal 27 
 C. Status of Projects since the Integration of 
PARIVESH 2.0 and SWCS 
28 
CHAPTER IV INITIATIVES/ REFORMS UNDERTAKEN TO 
EXPEDITE COAL MINING PROPOSALS 
32 
 A. Initiatives taken to expedite the Environment 
Clearance in coal projects 
32 
 B. Initiatives taken to expedite the Forest Clearance in 
coal projects 
33 
 C. Initiatives to improve capacity building and maintain 
expertise 
35 
 D. PARIVESH Helpdesk 36 
CHAPTER V REGULATORY AND IMPLEMENTATION 
CHALLENGES IN THE COAL SECTOR CLEARANCE 
MECHANISM 
37 
 A. Availability and Cost Hurdles in Compensatory 
Afforestation for Coal Mining Projects 
37 
 B. Challenges in Formalizing Compensatory 
Afforestation Land Banks Across States 
39 
 C. State-Level Bottlenecks in Forest Land Transfer and 
Tree Cutting Permissions 
40 

v 
 
 D. Issues at the stage of Gram Sabha and Public 
Hearing 
41 
 E. Concern over mandatory Fly Ash Utilization 43 
 F. Repeated EDS/ADS Queries in Clearance 
Applications 
45 
 G. Blanket Clearance for Special and Clean Coal 
Projects 
46 
 H. Non-invitation of Project Proponent in the meetings 
of FAC for grant of FC 
48 
CHAPTER VI STATUS OF VARIOUS COAL MINING PROJECTS 51 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 53 
ANNEXURES 
ANNEXURE I CLEARANCES/APPROVALS/PERMISSIONS TO BE 
PROCESSED 
69 
ANNEXURE II MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND 
STEEL (2024-2025) HELD ON 20.08.2025 
72 
ANNEXURE III MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND 
STEEL (2024-2025) HELD ON 08.09.2025 
75 
ANNEXURE IV MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND 
STEEL (2025-2026) HELD ON 08.12.2025 
78 
 
  

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
(2024-2025) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat  
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal  
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5.  Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7.  Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol  
8.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M.  
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
17.  Shri Kali Charan Singh  
18.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
21.  Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Shri Subrata Bakshi 
23.  Smt. Mahua Maji  
24.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
25.  Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
26.  Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
27.  Shri Deepak Prakash 
28.  Shri Aditya Prasad 
29.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
30.  Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
31.  Dr. Fauzia Khan# 
 
#nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2024 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 862 dated 11.10.2024   

vii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
(2025-2026) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat  
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal  
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5.  Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7.  Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol  
8.  Shri Selvaganapathi T.M.  
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
17.  Shri Kali Charan Singh  
18.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
21.  Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
 
Rajya Sabha  
22. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad  
23. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
24. Smt. Mahua Maji  
25. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
26. Shri Deepak Prakash 
27. Shri Aditya Prasad 
28. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
29. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
30. Shri Milind Murli Deora* 
31. Vacant 
 
*nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist   -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  -  Director  
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Tulika Narayan   - Assistant Executive Officer 

viii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel  
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and Forest Clearance 
Process for Coal Mining Projects’ relating to the Ministry of Coal. 
2. The Committee selected the subject for detailed examination during 
2024-25.  The Committee was briefed by the representatives of the Ministry 
of Coal on 20.08.2025.  The Committee, thereafter, undertook oral evidence 
of the Ministry of Coal and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change on 08.09.2025. Based on the oral and written testimonies 
submitted to the Committee, a report on the subject was prepared. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 08.12.2025.  The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 
are appended to the Report. 
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of Coal 
and the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for placing 
material information as well as tendering evidence and views before the 
Committee. 
5.  The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the 
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in              
Part-II of the Report.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
       08 December, 2025                                                     Chairperson 
    17 Agrahayana, 1947(Saka)                        Standing Committee on 
Coal, Mines and Steel 
 

1 
 
PART - I 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
COAL AND LIGNITE SECTOR IN INDIA’S ENERGY SECURITY 
A. Overview 
1.1. Coal plays a pivotal role in India's energy security and economy, serving as a 
cornerstone of the nation's energy mix. With India being one of the world's fastest-
growing economies and a rapidly expanding population, the demand for energy is 
consistently on the rise. Coal remains the primary source of commercial energy in the 
country, catering to nearly half of India's total energy consumption. Its abundance 
within India's borders ensures a reliable and steady energy supply, crucial for 
sustaining industrial growth, powering urbanization, and meeting the needs of a 
burgeoning population.  
1.2. Additionally, coal-fired power plants provide a stable base-load electricity 
supply, essential for maintaining grid stability and meeting the growing energy 
demands of industries, businesses, and households across the nation. Coal also 
stokes many non-power industries like steel, cement, fertilizers, sponge iron, 
aluminium and a host of other industries. 
1.3. As per Press Information Bureau release dated 04.04.2025, India has the 
world’s fifth-largest coal reserves and as the second-largest consumer, coal remains 
crucial, contributing 55% to the national energy needs and fuelling over 74% of total 
power generation. India's energy mix is diverse, yet dominated by coal, and fuels a 
significant portion of the country's electricity generation. 
 

2 
 
1.4. During the briefing on the subject, the representative of the Ministry of Coal 
informed the Committee as under: 
“…the overall growth story of coal indicates that it has grown by 10 per cent 
over the past five years. In the past ten years, coal ranks third among the eight 
core infrastructure sectors in the industry. Cement is at number one, electricity 
at number two, and steel at number four, with coal contributing the most to 
these three sectors.” 
 
B. Production and Projection 
1.5. With the growing demand for energy driven by industrial expansion and 
infrastructure development, the need to enhance and accelerate domestic coal 
production has become more urgent than ever. The overall demand for coal for 2023-
24 was 1233.86 MT. 
1.6. The Coal PSUs under the Ministry of Coal have surpassed a historic coal 
production, which refers to the extraction of coal from mines, of 1 billion tonnes of coal 
in FY 2024-25 and aim to achieve a domestic coal production target of about 1.5 billion 
tonnes annual production by 2029-2030 to cater to the energy requirements of the 
country in line with India’s vision of Aatmanirbhar Bharat for energy security. Coal 
dispatch has also crossed the 1 billion tonne milestone, with total dispatch reaching 
1024.99 MT (Provisional) in FY 2024-25, up 5.34% from 973.01 MT in FY 2023-24. 
While briefing the Committee on the subject, the Secretary of the Ministry of Coal 
stated as below: 
“…domestic coal production crossed a historic milestone of one billion tonnes 
in the last financial year. Not only the production, the total supplies of coal 
despatches also crossed one billion tonnes.” 
Coal production refers to the extraction of coal from mines whereas coal dispatch 
refers to the process of transporting and distributing that coal to various consumers, 
including power plants and industrial facilities. 

3 
 
1.7. The country has witnessed the highest ever coal production in the year 2024-
25. The all-India coal production in FY 2024-25 was 1047.52 MT. As compared to 
997.83 MT during FY 2023-24, there is a growth of about 4.98% in FY 2024-25. CIL 
produced 781.06 MT while SCCL produced 69.01 MT of coal during 2024-25. 
C. Geographical Distribution of Coal in the Country 
1.8. As per the Annual Report 2024-25 of the Ministry of Coal, the inventory of 
Geological Resources of Indian Coal as on 01.04.2024 and up to a depth of 1200 m 
prepared by the Geological Survey of India on the basis of resources estimated by 
CMPDI, MECL, GSI, SCCL and others is 389421.34 MT. The resources have been 
found mainly in Odisha, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, 
Telangana and Maharashtra. Similarly, the Lignite reserves in the country are 
estimated at around 47295.61 million Tonne (as on 01.04.2024). The major deposits 
are located in the State of Tamil Nadu, followed by Rajasthan, Gujarat, Union Territory 
of Puducherry, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Odisha, and West Bengal.  


4 
 
1.9. In a written reply, the Ministry of Coal stated that projects have been duly 
identified to facilitate the achievement of 1.5 BT coal production by 2030. State-wise 
tentative production projects for FY 2030 are given below: 
State wise expected production by FY 2030 
State Expected Production (in MT) 
Odisha 494 
Chhattisgarh 434 
Jharkhand and West Bengal 298 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh 137 
Telangana 100 
Maharashtra 70 
Total 1533 
 
 
1.10. It may be observed that the coal bearing areas of the country are located in 
forest rich geographical areas. For instance, as per the ‘India State of Forest Report 
2023 (ISFR 2023)’ released by the Ministry for Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh are among the top three States having 
largest forest cover area wise. Similarly, top four States showing maximum increase in 


5 
 
forest and tree cover are Chhattisgarh followed by Uttar Pradesh, Odisha and 
Rajasthan. 
1.11. As per the ‘Report of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Just Transition from 
Coal under the India-US Sustainable Growth Pillar of the Strategic Clean Energy 
Partnership’ released by the NITI Aayog, “the coal economy has significant impacts on 
natural resources such as land, water, and air. Coal mining, particularly the nationally 
predominant opencast mining, changes the land form by creating large pits and 
overburden mounds. Loss of forests and biodiversity is also seen with coal-related 
projects. Redressal of these impacts on the local environment is a challenge that must 
be dealt with as part of coal mine closure. Additionally, in some cases, it may be 
possible to repurpose the natural and physical assets to aid in the area’s 
redevelopment. Such options should be explored, while also addressing issues 
regarding the ownership of such assets.” 
D. Import of Coal  
1.12. Out of the total coal demand of the country, about 20-25% of the demand is met 
from import. Import of coal mainly consists of high-quality coking coal and high GCV 
coal as their domestic production is limited due to either scarce reserves or non-
availability. Power sector imports coal for imported coal-based (ICB) power plants 
setup in coastal region (as they have been specially designed to use imported coal 
only) and for domestic coal-based (DCB) power plants for blending purpose. Coal 
being under Open General License (OGL), traders and end-users (Industries) directly 
import coal on commercial and logistic considerations.  
1.13. During 2023-2024, the import of coal was 264.53 Million Tonnes (MT) 
(comprising 58.81 MT Coking Coal and 205.72 MT Non-Coking Coal) as compared to 

6 
 
237.67 MT (comprising 56.05 MT Coking Coal and 181.62 MT Non-Coking Coal) in 
the corresponding period of 2022-23, showing a positive growth of 11.30%. 
1.14. In the backdrop of coal imports falling by 7.90% in FY25 compared to the 
corresponding period of the previous year, the Committee desired to know how the 
Ministry is balancing the imperative to increase domestic coal output with 
environmental safeguards. The Ministry of Coal, in a written format, replied that several 
major steps have been taken to increase coal production and reduce imports, including 
commercial mining, policy reforms, infrastructure development, and increased coal 
production. The Ministry has set an ambitious target of 1.5 billion tonnes of coal 
production by FY 2029-30 to ensure energy security and self-reliance. Additional coal 
projects are being identified under greenfield and brownfield projects as per the 
production programme, and advance actions are being taken for obtaining EC & FC of 
such projects. For every fresh and expansion project, detailed Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) is conducted and the Environment Management Plan (EMP) is 
implemented, incorporating community concerns. Control measures are taken to 
minimize environmental impact. Regular meetings of the Expert Appraisal Committee 
(EAC) are held to examine proposals and grant clearance. The Ministry promotes 
environmental sustainability through various measures such as plantation, mine water 
utilization, eco-park development, and mechanized coal evacuation, aiming to reduce 
carbon footprints and enhance community benefits. 
E.  Sustainable Production and Responsible Mining 
1.15. Sustainable development has been defined by the United Nations as 
development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. Coal has an important role to play in India’s 
sustainable development. With the advancement of technology and growing 

7 
 
awareness of sustainability issues, the question of how to make mining sustainable 
has come to the forefront. 
 1.16. Out of various dimensions, sustainability in mining involves environmental 
dimension that places a focus on the natural environment’s sustainability and the 
availability of resources. Commitment to care for environment while mining coal with 
adequate mitigation practices has to be the guiding principle of inclusive growth while 
undertaking business operations. 
1.17. The Ministry of Coal in its background note on the subject state that in India, 
coal mining projects must navigate a multi-tiered statutory clearance process designed 
to ensure that energy development proceeds in an environmentally sustainable, legally 
compliant, and socially responsible manner. 
1.18. Various statutory provisions such as the approval of Mining Plan and Mine 
Closure Plan, Grant of Mining Lease, Environment and Forest Clearances, Consent to 
Establish, Consent to Operate, Wildlife Clearance, Permission for Explosive and 
Safety Organization (PESO) for the storage of Explosive, Land Acquisition Module, 
Safety Management Plan (with DGMS), Central Ground Water clearance, etc., are 
prerequisites for starting a coal mine. These clearances are granted by various Central 
Ministries and State Government departments/agencies. 
1.19. Globally, in most of the developed countries (EU, USA, Canada, Australia), the 
EC is processed through Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), while FC is 
treated under land-use, biodiversity conservation, or natural habitat protection laws. 
1.20. The Global South (including India, SE Asia, Africa and Latin America) has 
fragmented multi-agency clearance systems. The EC and FC process in Indian context 

8 
 
is robust and contains scoping exercise, identification of impacts and their 
management, public consultation, settlement of rights associated with forest land. 

9 
 
CHAPTER II 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR VARIOUS CLEARANCES 
 
2.1. In India, coal mining projects requires multi-tiered statutory clearance process 
for ensuring environmentally sustainable, legally compliant, and socially responsible 
energy development proceeds.  
2.2. While briefing the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal stated as under:  
“There are two types of permissions associated with coal-mining.  Out of these, 
there are 21 permissions at the central government level and 17 permissions at 
the State government level.  Almost all of these permissions are mandatory, except 
for one or two which are site specific. In the ecosystem of mining, it is done in a 
highly regulated and in a manner which is closely monitored both by the Central 
Government as well as the State Governments. Out of these 39 clearances, there 
are certain major clearances. Environment Clearance (EC) and Forest Clearance 
(FC) both are considered as major clearances.” 
2.3. Environment Clearance (EC) focuses on environmental impact assessment and 
mitigation; whereas Forest Clearance (FC) ensures responsible and compensated use 
of forest resources. The EC and FC are the two core clearances, forming the backbone 
of environmental governance for coal mining. Without these, mining operations cannot 
legally begin, regardless of lease status or mining plan approval. 
The key clearances and approvals are attached as Annexure I.  
2.4. While briefing the Committee on the subject, the representative of the Ministry 
of Coal navigated the Committee through the clearances required for obtaining 
necessary approvals for coal mining projects. From the moment the Project Proponent 
gets the prospecting license, whether it is a government company or a private 
company, the approval of the geological report is the first work for the State 
Government which contains information on all its substrata factors, depth, reserves 
etc. Lease execution gives the project proponent the legal right to mine, but operational 
work cannot begin until statutory clearances are secured. 

10 
 
2.5. After the approval of the mining plan, the Project Proponent has to move 
towards environmental clearance and forest clearance parallelly, and then to various 
other clearances. In case, part of the coal block involves forest land, then Forest 
Clearance (FC) under Forest Conservation Act, 1980 (and amended in 2023) has to 
be obtained before operationalization. Stringent guidelines, norms and higher 
benchmarks are mandated for compliance before any approvals are given. 
2.6. Once EC, FC are obtained, Mining Lease is granted and minimum required land 
is acquired, the Mine Opening Permission (MOP) is sought from the Coal Controller’s 
Organization (CCO) under the Colliery Control Rules, 2004, and is intimated to the 
Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) under the Coal Mines Regulations. The mine 
opening/ seam opening permission is designed to streamline and expedite the process 
of obtaining permission for starting new coal mines or opening new coal seams. It is 
processed on the SWCS (Single Window Clearance System) portal and is granted by 
the CCO.  
Process to Obtain Mine Opening Permission 
 
  


11 
 
Statutory Clearances Before Mine Opening 
A. Environment Clearance 
2.7. The formal basis for environmental clearance began with the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, which empowered the Central Government to protect 
environmental quality. Under the provisions of Environmental Protection Act 1986, the 
Government has issued the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification vide 
S.O. 1533 (E), dated 14/09/2006.  As per the extant provisions of EIA Notification, 
2006, Coal mines are listed at item 1(a) – Mining of minerals to the Schedule of the 
EIA Notification, 2006 and requires Environmental Clearance (EC) from the concerned 
Competent Authority. 
2.8. Coal mining projects with mining lease area more than 500 Hectare fall under 
Category A and are appraised at the Central Level in the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change in consultation with the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC). 
Coal mining projects with mining lease area of 500 Hectare and below fall under 
Category B and are appraised at the State level i.e., State Level Environment Impact 
Assessment Authorities (SEIAAs) and State Expert Appraisal Committees (SEACs).  
2.9. When asked about the noticeable disparities in processing speed or conditions 
imposed for projects near the 500-ha threshold, it was replied as under:  
“As per MoEF&CC S.O. 1886(E), Dated - 20.04.2022, it was deliberated that 
coal mining projects having area more than 500 ha shall be appraised as at 
central level as category-A projects and projects having area less than 500 ha 
shall be appraised at State level. 
The EC process is more or less the same for both Category A & B proposals 
with the only difference being that the Category A projects are appraised by 
MoEF&CC Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) whereas Category B projects are 
appraised by State Expert Appraisal Committee (SEAC). This has been 
primarily done to decentralize and expedite the EC for projects”. 
2.10. When asked the number of project applications with lease area less than 500 
Ha are submitted for clearance from SEIAA, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 

12 
 
Climate Change in a written reply stated that since 22.04.2022, a total of 12 ECs have 
been granted. 
2.11. The Environment Clearance process for projects comprises of four stages 
namely screening, scoping, public consultation and appraisal. Environment 
Clearances to coal mines are granted by the MoEF&CC after the appraisal and 
recommendation by the Expert Appraisal Committee. In order to facilitate expeditious 
appraisal and grant of Environment Clearance, MoEF&CC has implemented the online 
Portal namely PARIVESH.  
The process of EC for Coal Mining Projects is as under:  
 
2.12. The process of obtaining Environmental Clearance (EC) for coal mining projects 
in India is carried out in a structured sequence, with tasks falling primarily on three 
stakeholders — the project proponent, State-level Authorities and the MoEF&CC. 
2.13. Across all three levels of responsibility, the PARIVESH portal functions as the 
single-window workflow system, hosting all proposal documents, details of Terms of 
Reference (ToR), public hearing records, and clearance orders. 


13 
 
i. At the Project Proponent (PP) level 
 The Project Proponent (PP) prepares the Pre-Feasibility Report (PFR) and 
completes the application form, containing essential project details, location 
maps, and statutory information about the project.  The PP uploads the proposal 
on the PARIVESH portal. 
 The PP then makes an initial presentation for grant of Terms of Reference (ToR) 
to the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) for Category ‘A’ projects or to the State 
Expert Appraisal Committee (SEAC) for Category ‘B’. 
 Following the presentation, the Terms of Reference (ToR) with standard and 
specific conditions for the project are issued. The PP is responsible for 
conducting the baseline environmental monitoring in line with the ToR — 
covering air quality, water quality, noise levels, land use, biodiversity (flora and 
fauna), and socio-economic parameters. Further, the PP is responsible to 
comply with all the conditions laid out in the ToR. 
 The PP prepares the Draft Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) on the basis the ToR and submits to 
the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) for conduct of the public hearing.  
 With the support of the District Administration and active involvement of the PP, 
the public hearing is conducted. The PP actively supports the hearing process 
by providing clarifications to the community and ensuring that their feedback is 

14 
 
properly recorded. Suggestions/objections from the public hearing are 
incorporated into the Final EIA/EMP by the PP . 
 The PP submits the final EIA/EMP on the PARIVESH Portal.  
 Throughout the appraisal, the user agency must respond promptly to any 
Essential Details Sought (EDS) or Additional Details Sought (ADS).  
 Once clearance is granted, the PP is obligated to comply fully with all stipulated 
conditions and submit periodic compliance reports. 
ii. At the State Level 
 For Category ‘B’ projects, the State Expert Appraisal Committee (SEAC) 
undertakes the technical appraisal, and the State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA) takes the clearance decision, mirroring the 
central process for Category ‘A’ proposals. 
 The State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) plays a crucial role in organizing the 
public hearing within the time period from the submission of the Draft EIA report. 
The hearing is chaired by the District Magistrate (DM) or Additional District 
Magistrate, as mentioned in the notification dated 09.05.2022 issued by 
MoEF&CC, who ensures that local community concerns are heard, 
documented, and forwarded to the appraisal body. The District Administration 
plays a crucial role in the safe and efficient conduct of the public hearing. 
 The SPCB compiles the minutes of the public hearing, validates them, and 
uploads them on their web portal for use in final appraisal. The State also 
provides localized environmental inputs, verifies data, and participates in 

15 
 
monitoring compliance with EC conditions, especially in coordination with the 
MoEF&CC Regional Offices. 
iii. At the MoEF&CC level 
 At the Central level, the MoEF&CC receives and performs an initial scrutiny of 
the proposal submitted on PARIVESH. For Category ‘A’ coal mining projects 
(≥500 ha or otherwise specified in EIA Notification, 2006), the Ministry assigns 
the file to the relevant Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) and schedules the 
ToR meeting. 
 Once the user agency completes ToR requirements and submits the final 
application, the Ministry coordinates the appraisal process, ensuring that the 
EAC evaluates the adequacy of baseline data, EIA/EMP quality, and the 
robustness of proposed mitigation measures. If any gaps are detected, the 
MoEF&CC seeks clarifications from the project proponent through the portal’s 
EDS/ADS system. 
 After examining all documents, the EAC makes a recommendation to approve, 
reject, or request modification of the proposal upon which the final decision is 
taken by the Ministry (at the Central level)/ SEIAA (at the State level). The 
Ministry then issues the EC letter with detailed environmental management 
conditions, uploads it on PARIVESH for public view, and informs the PP and 
concerned agencies. MoEF&CC is further responsible for post-clearance 
monitoring, carried out through its Regional Offices, examining compliance 
reports, and conducting site inspections. 
2.14. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Coal summarized during a sitting of the 
Committee that after the submission of Form-1 and pre-feasibility report on the 
PARIVESH portal, scoping and Terms of Reference (ToR) are decided by Expert 

16 
 
Appraisal Committee (EAC) that evaluates proposals approximately once in every 15 
days. Followed by this process is the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) studies, including public consultation and 
hearing. Based on the appraisal by EAC/ SEIAA, Environment Clearance is granted 
with stipulated safeguards. 
2.15. One being asked if there has been timely submission of compliance 
documentation on PARIVESH portal, the Ministry of Coal replied:  
“EC compliance reports are submitted every six months post grant of EC and 
the certified compliance reports on the existing EC for the expansion proposals 
are being submitted as per the extant rules, which is ensured by MoEF&CC.” 
 
B. Forest Clearance 
2.16. Forest Clearance (FC) is required under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 
for diversion of forest land for non-forest use, the application process for which is 
entirely online via PARIVESH 2.0 portal. Under Section 2 of the Act, this approval 
became mandatory for the de-reservation of reserved forests and the use of forest 
land for purposes other than forestry.  
2.17. The Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 2023 sought to address 
multiple issues and modernize the law. A Preamble was inserted to reflect the 
broadened objective, expanding the focus from “Sanrakshan” (protection) to 
“Sanrakshan and Samvardhan” (conservation and augmentation). This included 
encouraging the growth of trees outside forests, enhancing forest productivity, 
maintaining ecological stability, and meeting both economic and livelihood needs of 
the people.  
2.18. The approval process for diversion of forest land for coal mining involves two 
stages: 

17 
 
Stage-I (In-Principle approval): Conditional approval for diversion of forest land after 
review by Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) which involves CA land identification, Net 
Present Value payments, and other mitigation plans. 
 Stage-II (Final approval): Granted upon compliance of conditions of Stage-I 
approval including the payments and verification. 
An outline of Stage-I and Stage-II of FC is as under:  
Aspect Stage-I  
(In-principle Approval) 
Stage-II  
(Final Approval) 
Purpose In principle approval to divert 
forest land for non-forest use 
Formal prior approvals of Central 
Government for use of forest 
land for non-forestry purpose 
Key 
Conditions 
Imposed 
 Identification of CA lands and 
funds for raising compensatory 
afforestation 
 Stipulation of realization of Net 
Present Value (NPV) and other 
financial requirements etc  
 Confirmation of compliance with 
conditions stipulated at Stage-I 
along with statutory payments. 
 Verification of compensatory 
afforestation raised etc 
 
2.19. Before uploading the proposal on the PARIVESH portal, the User Agency 
(project proponent) undertakes preparatory work which includes: 
 Conducting detailed site surveys, preparing necessary maps (revenue maps, 
forest management maps), and conduct of DGPS surveys. 
 Preparing the complete Forest Diversion proposal (FDP), including the approved 
mining plan, reclamation plan and supporting documents such as: 
 NOC for Revenue Forest Land involved in the project, NOC for historical 
places, if any, etc. 
 Geo-referenced maps of the forest area proposed for diversion. 
 Any required clearances such as from National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) if 
the area falls within protected wildlife zones. 

18 
 
 Preparing the Compensatory Afforestation (CA) plan for compensating forest land 
diversion, including identification, suitability and approval of CA land by the 
Divisional/District Forest Officer (DFO). 
a) Stage-I (In-Principle Approval)- Steps Involved 
- Upon submission of application on PARIVESH portal for diversion of Forest 
Land, the proposal goes through initial scrutiny and acceptance by the Project 
Screening Committee-I (PSC-I) at the State level, which ensures the 
application is complete and complies with prescribed norms. 
- The proponent is required to obtain various NOCs from State and Central 
Authorities such as NHAI, Water Resource Diversion for Road/Nalla 
Diversions, if applicable. 
- The DFO verifies tree enumeration, afforestation requirements, and estimates 
for compensatory levies (like Net Present Value (NPV), CA charges). 
- Site inspections are carried out by DFO, Chief Forest Conservator (CF), and 
nodal officer based on the extent of forest area to assess the ground realities. 
- The proposal then advances to Project Screening Committee-II (PSC-II) for 
appraisal and recommendations. 
- The State Nodal Officer and State Government review the proposal and 
forward to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) or its respective Regional Office, where the Forest Advisory 
Committee (FAC) evaluates the proposal. 

19 
 
- Recommendations from FAC lead to an In-Principle clearance (Stage-I) is 
approved by MoEF&CC. 
2.20. When the Committee asked how often does the FAC meet, the Ministry of Coal 
in a written reply to the List of Points stated as below: - 
“Generally, the FAC meets on monthly basis wherein FC proposals (including 
coal mining) submitted at MoEF&CC level are discussed and the project is 
explained to the Committee by IG (Inspector General), Forest as well as Nodal 
Officer of the State Forest Department.  Recommendations from FAC lead to 
drafting an in-principle clearance (Stage-I) which is reviewed by Designated 
Officers and ultimately approved by MoEF&CC.” 
 
 
b) Stage-II (Final Approval)- Process Involved  
The Stage-II process confirms fulfillment of conditions stipulated at Stage-I and 
includes: 
 Submission of compliance reports by the User Agency documenting actions 
such as payment of funds to Compensatory Afforestation fund Management 
and Planning Authority (CAMPA) and transfer and mutation of CA land to the 
Forest Department. 
 The DFO scrutinize the compliance documentation and forward their 
observations and recommendations. 
 The Nodal Officer and State Secretary verify and approve the compliance 
reports. 


20 
 
 The State Government transmits the verified compliance report to the 
MoEF&CC or its Regional Office. 
 The Officer at Forest Conservation Division, MoEF&CC verifies compliance 
and prepares the draft Final Clearance (Stage-II). 
 The order for final forest clearance is reviewed, updated, and finally approved 
by MoEF&CC. 
 The Stage-II clearance letter is issued to the State Government and User 
Agency and is uploaded on PARIVESH. 
2.21. After the grant of Stage-II approval by MoEF&CC, the following actions are 
required for commencement of mining operations- 
 The letter of final diversion order is issued by State Government to the Project 
Proponent. 
 The DFO raises the Demand Note for numbering, cutting & logging of trees 
and transportation of logs. 
 The Project Proponent makes the payment for the Demand raised by DFO. 
 The regulatory formalities for tree felling are completed by the Project 
Proponent. 
 After completion of tree felling and all regulatory formalities, DFO issues 
possession letters and hands over the parcel of forest land to the User Agency 


21 
 
2.22. When the Ministry of Coal was asked to provide a comparative chart showing 
approvals granted /time taken for EC & FC clearances in the case of public sector 
companies and private sector, and whether process of obtaining clearances is faster 
for private sector as compared to the public sector, the Ministry of Coal while negating 
the same presented the following table in a written reply: 
Time taken by CPSU vs Private Companies 
Category Time taken for EC  Time taken for FC 
CPSUs ~15–18 months ~24–30 months 
Commercial Coal Blocks (Private Sector) ~26 months ~34 months 
 
C. Other Statutory Clearances 
a)  National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) 
2.23. The Ministry of Coal apprised the Committee that Wildlife Clearance is required 
to be applied separately independently of Forest Clearance, approval for which is 
granted under Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and is granted by National Board of Wildlife 
(NBWL). 
2.24. Similarly, in case, the forest land proposed for diversion is located within the 
duly notified eco-sensitive zone around boundary of a protected area, EIA of the project 
needs to be placed before the Standing Committee of NBWL. In case Eco-sensitive 
zone has not been notified, 10 km distance from the boundary of such protected area 
shall be treated as eco-sensitive zone. 
b) Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)/ State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) 
2.25. CPCB and SPCBs function under the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, and the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Their role complements the MoEF&CC in 
implementing and enforcing pollution control measures for mining and industrial 

22 
 
operations. Whereas the CPCB sets national standards for air, water, and noise 
pollution and issues technical guidelines for pollution control in mining and industrial 
projects, the SPCBs implement these standards at the State level by conducting public 
hearings, granting Consent to Establish (CTE) before project construction, and 
Consent to Operate (CTO) before mining begins. 
2.26. They monitor compliance with environmental clearance (EC) conditions through 
site inspections and review of six-monthly reports from project proponents. Together, 
CPCB and SPCBs act as the key regulatory bodies ensuring pollution prevention and 
environmental compliance throughout the mine development and operation cycle.  
c) Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS) 
2.27. The DGMS grants permission under the Coal Mines Regulations, 2017 for 
approval of safety and technical plans, after ensuring compliance with safety codes, 
availability of EC and FC, and readiness of mining infrastructure and manpower. 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER III  
INTER-MINISTERIAL DIGITAL INTEGRATION: THE PARIVESH 2.0 AND SWCS 
MECHANISM 
 
3.1. In pursuance of the spirit of Minimum Government and Maximum Governance, 
a Single-Window named PARIVESH (Pro-Active and Responsive facilitation by 
Interactive, Virtuous, and Environmental Single Window Hub) was launched in 2018 
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change through National 
Informatics Centre.  
3.2. PARIVESH is a single window platform for Environmental, Forest, Wildlife and 
Coastal Regulation Zone Clearances to streamline and automate the process of 
granting green clearances, enhancing both efficiency and transparency.  
3.3. The scope of the same has been further expanded in 2022-23 onwards to 
incorporate advanced technologies, significantly transforming green governance in 
India.  
3.4. By integrating all major green clearances EC, FC, WL, and CRZ on a single 
platform in true sense, PARIVESH has completely transformed green governance in 
India.  The transformation brought about by PARIVESH and its successor PARIVESH 
2.0, has ensured that development projects proceed with robust environmental 
safeguards, contributing to sustainable development by reducing the time taken for 
clearances, streamlining processes, enhancing transparency and accountability at 
every stage.  
3.5 PARIVESH 2.0, besides providing an enabling ecosystem for regulatory 
authority to make a fast and effective decisions, also facilitates in the compliance 

24 
 
reporting and improving ease of doing business. During a sitting of the Committee, a 
representative of the MoEF&CC added: 
“It is an online portal through which all green clearances - environment 
clearance, forest clearance, wildlife clearance, Coastal Regulation Zone 
clearance are processed. It is an end-to-end portal right from the application to 
different stages of appraisal. The entire process is paperless and entire 
uploading of documentation, the minutes, finalisation, everything is done 
through this”. 
3.6. On the other hand, Single Window Clearance System (SWCS) is the innovative 
endeavour of the Ministry of Coal to create a platform to obtain various clearances for 
the operationalization of coal mines in the country. This Single Window Platform is 
proposed to facilitate project proponent to apply for various clearances through a 
unified user registration to various Central Ministries as well as to State Government 
departments/agencies with a feature of auto-fetch provision of data from preceding 
clearances/approvals. 
3.7. Integration of the SWCS and the PARIVESH portal have improved transparency 
and efficiency by enabling tracking, and monitoring of coal mining clearances. The 
integration is further helping reduce duplication and improve coordination. These steps 
are aimed at ensuring that the ambitious coal production and energy security targets 
envisioned by the Hon’ble Prime Minister can be achieved without compromising 
environmental safeguards. 
A. PARIVESH Portal and Mining Clearances 
3.8. All the proposals for Environment Clearance, Forest Clearance and Wildlife 
Clearance for Coal mining projects are now processed through PARIVESH 2.0 Portal. 
All coal PSUs and the project proponents seeking these clearances are registered on 
PARIVESH portal.  
In a written reply the Ministry of Coal elaborated as under: 

25 
 
“PARIVESH 1.0 (launched 2018) was a single-window hub for processing EC, 
FC and WLC. PARIVESH 2.0 (launched in 2022-23) incorporates further 
advancements like Know Your Customer (KYC), Dashboard, MIS & Analytics, 
Common Application Form (CAF), Auto Communication & Alerts, fully paperless 
management, compliance monitoring, and integration framework. It provides 
ecosystem for faster decisions, better compliance, and ease of doing business.” 
3.9. Further, the revamped PARIVESH 2.0 includes, among others, Geographical 
Information System (GIS)/Management Information System (MIS) based Know Your 
Approval (KYA) tool, GIS-based Decision Support System (DSS), Colour coding to the 
project proposals with investment more than 500 Cr for fast-track processing and 
monitoring. The transition from the pre-PARIVESH stage in 2014 to the roll of new 
functionalities may be seen as under: 
 
3.10. Mining like any other developmental activity, does have an impact on 
Environment. However, such impact in case of mining is generally contained within the 
project area itself. The impact of mining on the environment is assessed during EIA 
process, on a project-to-project basis. The prior Environmental Clearance granted for 
mining projects shall be valid for the project life as laid down in the mining plan 


26 
 
approved and renewed by Competent Authority, from time to time, subject to a 
maximum of thirty years, whichever is earlier. 
3.11. It is mandatory for the project proponent to submit half-yearly compliance 
reports in respect of the stipulated prior EC terms and conditions through PARIVESH. 
Compliance & Monitoring Division (C&MD) Division established in the MoEF&CC for 
monitoring and compliance of stipulated EC conditions imposed on the 
projects/activities while granting EC. C&MD is supported by Eleven (11) Regional 
Offices (ROs) and Nine (9) Sub Regional Offices (SROs) of the Ministry. ROs/SROs 
are responsible for ensuring compliance to the prescribed EC conditions and 
submission of factual status of the project on the basis on site inspection and other 
detailed ground level review of the project. Action against observed non-conformities 
with respect to Category A projects to be taken by the Ministry at Central level. Action 
against observed non-conformities with respect to Category B projects to be taken by 
the SEIAA at State level. 
3.12. Reforms in clearance management under the PARIVESH portal have 
significantly streamlined the regulatory process by transforming it into an efficient, 
transparent, and fully digitized single- window system. With the launch in August 2018 
(at the Centre) and August 2019 (at the State level) in line with the ‘Digital India’ vision 
and further its continuous upgradation in 2022 onwards (PARIVESH 2.0) ensures 
sustainable development alongside of economic growth of India, transforming green 
governance in India. 
3.13. The entire work flow from submission of application to the grant of the clearance 
and further submission of compliances is automated in the PARIVESH portal without 
any manual intervention and is being auto updated on real time basis. 

27 
 
In this context, when the Committee asked the Ministry of Coal whether the Portals 
suffer from technical glitches, in a written reply, it was submitted as under: 
“For instance, name of the Project Proponent can be changed by using updated 
e-KYC option. However, e-KYC facility may also be allowed through the OTP via 
mail (at present OTP is being received only on mobile). Though the size of 
uploading of the additional document has been increased from 5 MB to 20 MB, it 
needs to be further increased to at least 100 MB.” 
 
B. Single Window Clearance System (SWCS) Portal 
3.14. A Single Window Clearance System has been conceptualized by the Ministry 
of Coal that facilitates obtaining clearances and approvals required for the smooth 
operationalization of coal mines in India through a single gateway, including approval 
of mining plans and mine closure plans in a time-bound manner and its integration with 
the National Single Window Clearance System (NSWCS). The portal is designed not 
only to map the relevant application formats but also to map the process flow for the 
grant of approvals/clearances and integrate with online portals through Application 
Programming Interface (APIs). 
Modules Within the SWCS Portal  
i) PRIMS Module 
3.15. A module named PRIMS (Project Information Management System) has been 
made operational, in which basic information related to coal blocks is stored, such as 
the act under which the mine is allocated, the time allocated for completion of all 
milestones, method of mining, type of coal, the status of the coal block (explored, 
unexplored), details of reserves, peak rated capacity, life of the mines, along with the 
date of operationalization. It displays a list of milestones with the due and actual 
completion dates, which are needed to be completed by the bidders in order to get the 
coal mine operational. It also tracks the coal production of each mine on a daily and 

28 
 
monthly basis, helping the Ministry monitor coal production and further expeditious 
implementation of coal mines. Additionally, it tracks the details of coal dispatch from 
the mines. 
ii) Mine Opening Permission and Exploration Modules 
3.16. When enquired of the number of projects that have utilized the Mine Opening 
Permission and Exploration Modules within SWCS to avoid manual delays, in a written 
reply, the Ministry of Coal apprised the Committee as under: 
 “The Mine Opening Permission module was made live on 07.11.2024. Since 
then, a total of 37 proposals have been received, out of which 23 have been 
approved, 7 rejected, and 7 are under process. 
The Exploration Module was launched on 04.07.2025, and as of now, 4 
proposals have been received, all of which are currently under process.” 
  
C. Status of Projects since the Integration of PARIVESH 2.0 and SWCS 
a) Status of proposals submitted through SWCS to the PARIVESH portal 
3.17. When asked about the status of proposals that have been submitted to the 
Ministry of Coal through SWCS to the PARIVESH portal, the Ministry of Coal in its 
written reply stated that: - 
“With the integration of SWCS with the PARIVESH portal, the proponent is 
redirected from the SWCS to the PARIVESH portal, where they register and log-
in and submit proposals for EC, FC, and WL clearances. The actual submission 
and processing of proposals take place entirely on PARIVESH, while only the 
relevant common data fields captured in SWCS are auto-fetched to PARIVESH 
to avoid duplication.” 
 
In a written reply to the List of Points, the Ministry of Coal has stated that: - 
“Since the launch of PARIVESH 2.0 portal by MoEF&CC in 2022, no EC-FC 
proposals of coal companies have not been rejected and process efficiency has 
increased. According to information received from MoEF&CC, the total number 
of Environment Clearance (EC) and Forest Clearance (FC) proposals for coal 
mining projects submitted, rejected, pending and cleared, on the PARIVESH 2.0 
portal from April 1, 2023, to September 16, 2025 is given in below tables: - 

29 
 
Status of proposals for EC and FC of Coal Mining projects submitted through 
PARIVESH portal 
Environment Clearance (EC): 
Financial 
Year 
Total No. of 
Proposals 
Received 
Pending 
with Project 
Proponent  
Under 
Consideration 
at MoEF&CC 
Granted 
FY 2023-24 40 13 Nil 27 
FY 2024-25 23 5 Nil 18 
FY 2025-26 18 2 4 12 
Grand Total 78 25 4 49 
Forest Clearance (FC): 
S. No. Financial 
Year 
Total No. of 
Proposals 
Received 
Granted 
Stage-I 
Approvals & 
Pending for 
Stage-II 
approvals 
Granted 
Stage-II 
Approvals 
(FY 2022 
to 2026) 
Under 
Consideration 
1 2023-2024 1 0 1 0 
2 2024-2025 10 5 3 2 
3 2025-2026 19 4 0 15 
Grand Total 30 9 4 17 
  
b) Projects requiring other clearances 
3.18. Citing an example of a case where highway diversion is needed for a mining 
project requiring an overlap of clearance from National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI) and forest department, it was enquired whether there a single framework or 
cell that manages all these clearances together and in cases requiring approvals from 
multiple agencies, how the Ministry coordinate to prevent conflicts or duplications. To 
this, the Ministry of Coal in a written reply stated as under: 
  “Presently, clearances related to Environmental, Forest, and Wildlife are 
aligned and secured through the centralized PARIVESH portal, which 
streamlines approvals, minimizes duplication, and eases conflict resolution for 
overlapping requirements like those between NHAI and forest diversion for 
mining projects. 
  A Single Window Clearance System (SWCS) has also been launched. 
This digital platform ensures that project proponents can track, and manage all 
related applications in one place, reducing delays and creating clear 
accountability for each step. 

30 
 
  In contrast, approvals such as DGMS permissions and NOCs from other 
agencies like the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) and Water Resources 
Department are handled through separate, individual processes outside 
PARIVESH. 
  In addition to above, approval of Mine Plan & Mine Closure Plan and 
Geological Report are processed and granted through SWCS.” 
 
c) Coal Subsidiary Company-wise status of Projects 
3.19. On the issue of stage-wise delays in clearance of EC and FC, the Ministry of 
Coal in a written reply stated that: - 
“Obtaining Environment Clearance is faster as compared to Forest 
clearance and usually does not cause undue delay. Forest Clearance generally 
requires the longest time for approval due to multi-agency work flow, non-
availability of authenticated land schedules in some States, Compensatory 
Afforestation (CA) land finalization, resistance from local villagers for NoC under 
Forest (Rights) Act 2006 etc. 
Reason for delay is usually extraneous and not in control of either Project 
Proponent or Ministry and issue is mainly related to State government, 
authenticated land schedule, NoC under FRA 2006 etc. In Last 5 years the time 
taken for securing Forest Clearance for the proposals of coal companies varied 
from State-to-State averaging around 2.5 Years for Stage-I FC and around 10 
months for Stage-II FC. 
Average time taken in FC for CIL mining projects submitted on PARIVESH 
Subsidiary Time taken for 
Stage-I (Days) 
Time taken for 
Stage-II (Days) 
Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) 1444 111 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL) 906 62 
Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL) 665 577 
South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL) 1050 311 
Western Coalfields Limited (WCL) 690 678 
Overall Average Time taken 996 319 
  
d) Status of reduction in clearance delay 
3.20. When asked whether there has been the actual reduction in the clearance delay 
since the introduction of SWCS and PARIVESH portal, the Ministry of Coal in a written 
reply stated the following: -  

31 
 
 “End to end processing for the approval of Mining Plan, grant of Mine 
Opening Permission and approval of Geological report are being done online 
through Single Window Clearance System (SWCS).  The average time of 
approval of Mining Plan processed through SWCS in last 4 years is 4 ½ Months 
whereas the average time taken for the same before SWCS was 9-12 Months. 
Similarly, the average time in grant of Mine Opening Permission processed 
through SWCS is 15-17 days where as the average time taken for the same 
before SWCS was about 1 Month. The module for approval of Geological report 
has been introduced recently in July, 2025. 
Process efficiency got improved through PARIVESH portal and according 
to MoEF&CC, the average of processing time of Environment Clearance (EC) 
proposals of coal mining on PARIVESH portal is reduced to 63 (FY 2024-25) days 
from 83 days 2021-22).” 
 
3.21. When the MoEF&CC was queried that whereas the official data shows that 
PARIVESH 2.0 has cut down average EC time from 83 days in FY2021-22 to 63 days 
in FY2024-25), industry often cites 15–18 months for EC, the Ministry clarified that: 
“As per extant provisions of EIA Notification 2006, the prescribed 
timelines for appraisal process for grant of Environmental Clearance (EC) is 105 
days from the date of receipt of the complete application by the project 
proponent. The said timeframe is excluding the time frame involved in public 
hearing or additional information submission by the project proponent. The 
MoEF&CC further stated that the Ministry has undertaken various systemic 
reforms through amendment in Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
Notification, 2006 and issuance of Office Memorandums in order to streamline 
the Environment Clearance process by taking into account the imperative need 
for development while balancing the same with due environmental safeguards 
in line with the concept of sustainable development. Due to these initiatives, the 
average number of days taken for grant of Environmental Clearance are within 
the stipulated timeline of 105 days.” 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
INITIATIVES/ REFORMS UNDERTAKEN TO EXPEDITE COAL MINING 
PROPOSALS 
 
4.1. The Ministry of Coal, in coordination with MoEF&CC, has undertaken several 
measures to ensure that the processes of Environmental Clearance and Forest 
Clearance are expedited to manage the rising workload and remain responsive to the 
sector’s growing requirements. 
4.2. During the Oral Evidence on the subject, the representative of the MoEF&CC 
said: 
“The Terms of Reference (ToR) validity has also been increased from 
three to four years. The project proponents are given the flexibility to do the 
baseline studies even before the grant of ToR. We have also standardised the 
Terms of Reference. The Terms of Reference can be auto-generated through 
the Parivesh Portal. For underground coal mining, standard Terms of Reference 
have been issued. Then, we have also reformed the public hearing process and 
the timeline for the reschedule of public hearing has been reduced from 30 to 
15 days. The SDMs are authorised to chair the public hearing committees 
especially when it is from local sub-division.  
For the coal, dispensation of expansion was given for 40-50 per cent 
expansion. We allowed it without any revision of EIA, EMP report which could 
be submitted subsequently. Then, we have also simplified the procedure for 
grant of certified compliance reports for the purpose of expansion. The ToRs 
and the ECs have been fast tracked, particularly for critical and strategic 
minerals and many of them are being allowed on out of turn consideration. 
The timeline, within which we are processing these applications, is in the 
range of 70 to 80 days for each EC. The average timeline is 70 to 80 days as 
against the statutory timeline of 105 days. So, we have really brought it down 
particularly for the coal mining sector. Again, for non-coal mining sector, there 
are 114 ECs which have been granted and about 472 MTPA capacity has been 
approved. The timelines in this sector are also coming down.” 
 
A. Initiatives taken to expedite the Environment Clearance in coal projects 
4.3 The Ministry of Coal regularly reviews the progress to expedite the process of 
obtaining Environmental Clearances and actively engages with State Governments 

33 
 
and the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to streamline the grant 
of such approvals.  
4.4. The MoEF&CC in consultation with Ministry of Coal has undertaken several 
measures as under to streamline and accelerate project approvals- 
i) Provisions have been introduced to allow capacity expansion of up to 50% 
without the need for a fresh public hearing.  
ii) Decentralized and delegated powers to State Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA) for dealing with coal mining projects less than 500 hectares. 
iii) Enhancement of the validity of EC of coal projects, making it co-terminus with 
the Mining Lease of the project.  
iv) The Consent to Establish (CTE) has been integrated with the Environmental 
Clearance (EC) approvals. 
v) To promote underground (UG) mining and reduce EC approval time, MoEF&CC 
issued an OM to consider UG mining proposals on an out-of-turn basis in 
addition to standardization of ToR and EC conditions for UG mining.  
vi) To facilitate faster clearances, the Single Window Clearance System (SWCS) 
portal which is enabled for the online approval of Mining Plans, grant of Mine 
Opening Permissions, and approval of Geological Reports, is integrated with 
the PARIVESH portal. 
B.  Initiatives taken to expedite the Forest Clearance in coal projects  
 4.5. Reforms introduced recently by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC) have eased and streamlined the forest clearance process for 
coal sector projects. 

34 
 
i) Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Rules, 2023 introduced several 
procedural reforms by establishing Project Screening Committees at the State 
level, redefined the delegation of powers to Regional Offices, and promoted 
conservation principles in Compensatory Afforestation (CA).  
ii) Stage-II clearance can now be granted without insisting for the notification of 
CA land as Reserved Forest and the notification is mandated for handing over 
of the forest land. This will save 4 to 6 months of time in operationalization of 
mines.  
iii) Reintroduced the option of allowing degraded forest land double in extent 
(DDFL) of forest land being diverted in lieu of non-forest land as Compensatory 
Afforestation (CA), for Central PSUs and for the captive coal blocks of State 
PSUs.  
iv) General Approval under Section 2(2)(iii) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 
continues to apply for forest land located within the safety zone—provided it will 
not be used for mining—where CA and NPV have already been paid by the user 
agency.  
v) Exploration activities in forest areas, including pitting and trenching, are now 
permitted without the requirement of NPV or CA. The NOC process for 
conducting the permitted exploration activities in forest land has been simplified. 
vi) The validity of forest clearances for land acquired under the Coal Bearing Areas 
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 has also been extended, making it co-
terminus with the validity of Mining Lease.  
vii) Initiatives such as auto forwarding the EDS/ADS raised and the submission of 
compliance was introduced in PARIVESH 2.0 for saving time in processing. 

35 
 
C. Initiatives to improve capacity building and maintain expertise 
4.6. Some of the major initiatives taken for capacity building are as under: 
i) Regular training programs and workshop are conducted for executives 
involved in environment related activities 
ii) Recruitment of environmental professionals and GIS experts. 
iii) Strengthening of Sustainable Development Cells with adequate manpower 
across CIL Subsidiaries 
iv) Association with expert agencies (ICFRE, NEERI etc) and academic 
institutions (IITs, IIMs etc) for regular training and capacity building. 
v) Engagement of Functional Area Expert in Ecology & Biodiversity in CMPDIL 
for strengthening of EB related studies 
vi) Review of EIA/EMP proposals at CMPDIL & subsidiary level prior to 
submission to EAC for appraisal. Training of personnel through iGOT 
Karmayogi portal launched by Government of India. 
4.7. On the question of capacity building, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal submitted 
during a sitting of the Committee that the programmes for capacity building are being 
undertaken periodically and the Ministry of Environment Forests & Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) is also involved in some of the programmes. 
4.8. When the Committee enquired about the manner in which the MoEF&CC 
ensures that EAC/SEAC members maintain updated expertise in rapidly evolving 
mining technologies, superior alternatives to check/inspect a site, etc., the MoEF&CC 
in a written reply informed the Committee as under:  
“The Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC)/State Expert Appraisal Committee 
(SEAC) is a multi-disciplinary sectoral appraisal committee comprising of 
various subject matter experts in the following fields: 
• Environment Quality: Experts in measurement, monitoring, analysis and 
interpretation of data in relation to environmental quality 
• Sectoral Project Management: Experts in Project Management or 
Management of Process or Operations or Facilities in the relevant sectors. 

36 
 
• Environmental Impact Assessment Process: Experts in conducting and 
carrying out Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and preparation of 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and other Management plans and 
who have wide expertise and knowledge of predictive techniques and tools 
used in the EIA process 
• Risk Assessment 
• Life Science (Floral and Faunal Management) 
• Forestry and Wildlife 
• Environmental Economics with experience in project appraisal 
• Public Administration or Management covering various developmental 
sectors and environmental issues. 
As part of the due diligence, during reconstitution of EACs/SEACs, no-conflict 
of interest certificates are also obtained from the expert members based on their 
expertise in relevant field. The Ministry also conducts quarterly review meetings 
with SEIAAs and SEACs to monitor performance, discuss emerging 
technologies, and address procedural bottlenecks.” 
D. PARIVESH Helpdesk 
4.9. On being asked whether the MoEF&CC is considering a central helpdesk or 
periodic directive to standardize interpretation and reduce delays stemming from 
State-level ambiguity, the Ministry in a written reply stated as below: - 
“To facilitate smooth functioning and enhance user support, a dedicated Help 
Desk has been established in the Ministry. The Help Desk serves as a single-
point contact for addressing queries and grievances of user agencies related to 
the approval process as well as the functioning of the PARIVESH portal. This 
initiative has significantly improved accessibility, responsiveness, and 
confidence among stakeholders. 
Further, to ensure uniformity and transparency, the Ministry proactively 
addresses issues of divergent interpretation by issuing comprehensive 
clarifications, advisories, and guidelines. These measures not only resolve 
operational challenges but also strengthen compliance, streamline processes, 
and foster greater trust between the Ministry, State Governments, and user 
agencies.” 
 

37 
 
CHAPTER V 
REGULATORY AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES IN THE COAL SECTOR 
CLEARANCE MECHANISM 
5.1. Several initiatives and reforms have been made by the MoEF&CC in 
consultation with the Ministry of Coal for expediting and simplifying the grant of 
Environment Clearance and Forest Clearance process for coal mining projects. 
However, a few areas of concern are being faced for the timely operationalization of 
coal mines to meet the growing energy needs of the country towards ‘Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat’. Some of these issues are summarized as below: 
A. Availability and Cost Hurdles in Compensatory Afforestation for Coal 
Mining Projects 
5.2. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 (CAF Act) provides the legal 
framework for compensating the loss of forest and ecosystem services due to diversion 
of forest land for non-forestry purposes as per provisions of the Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980. The CAMPA funds, including Net Present Value (NPV), are received from 
various user agencies as compensatory levies in lieu of diversion of forest land and 
are project specific. 
5.3. The Committee have been informed that the identification of Compensatory 
Afforestation (CA) land is a critical and time-consuming activity, and absence of land 
banks by State Governments cause delay in facilitating timely CA implementation. 
5.4. On being asked about the concerns in this context during the oral evidence, the 
representatives of the Ministry of Coal brought the following challenges around CA 
land to the notice of the Committee: - 

38 
 
a. Non-consideration for the void for CA land: - The representative of the Ministry 
of Coal, among other issues, highlighted that:  
“…the third thing is consideration of the void for CA land. ….. So far, the 
State government was taking the forest diversion, which is remaining. Now 
I feel that they are not taking the void for our Goleti OC. They are saying 
that the void will differentiate. Being wide will increase the resistance of 
the forest area and it will be a positive thing for the eco system and 
biodiversity. There is a void in the middle of the entire forest area and it is 
filled with water, not taking it does not seem right. We have requested to 
make a void.” 
It is inferred that mine voids, including those filled with water, are not 
allowed to be used as compensatory afforestation land, which otherwise would 
be a positive step for the ecosystem and biodiversity. 
b. Non-availability of non-forest land: - An instance was highlighted in the oral 
evidence meeting that in the initial days in Jharkhand, coal mining was mainly 
done by diverting forest land. In exchange of the forest land that was diverted 
initially, and after that the void created in the mine was filled and afforestation 
was done again. However today, afforestation in Accredited Compensatory 
Afforestation (ACA) is not being able to be used again due to the abundance 
of forest land in Jharkhand. Similarly, Himachal Pradesh, which is barren land, 
but on paper it is written as forest land. Hence, compensatory afforestation 
funds are not able to get utilized. 
c. Varying cost of CA per hectare of land: - The Committee note that the CA land 
cost is not standardized as in some States the user agencies are being 
charged Rs 9 lakh and others, they are being charged as high as Rs 22 lakh. 

39 
 
B. Challenges in Formalizing Compensatory Afforestation Land Banks Across 
States 
5.5. When asked whether any State has reported progress in identifying and 
reserving CA land for future coal projects, the Ministry of Coal in a written reply  stated 
that as per the guidelines, ‘a State Government or Union territory Administration as the 
case may be, for the purpose of compensatory afforestation, may create a land bank 
under the administrative control of the Department of Forest’ and also provided that, 
land under Accredited Compensatory Afforestation (ACA) can also be included in the 
land bank. 
5.6. The Ministry of Coal further apprised the Committee in a written reply as under: 
“MoEF&CC has facilitated to raise ACA over non-forest land acquired 
under Coal Bearing Area (CBA) Act, 1957. MoEF&CC has introduced proactive 
mechanism for ACA (Accredited Compensatory Afforestation) which allows 
practice of proactive afforestation over non-forest land to be used for obtaining 
FC. Clauses 7(ii) and 7(iii) encourage participation in ACA mechanism outlined 
by MoEF&CC.  These provide 'State/UT shall make available in public domain, 
the model scheme for raising afforestation for different agro-climatic zone, the 
use by the aspiring persons/agencies to prepare their afforestation scheme for 
5 years and schemes for existing afforestation for the same proposed 
afforestation, as the case may be. 
Any person or agency keen to register in the ACA Scheme may submit 
viz. maps, authenticated copies of non-forest land and/or existing afforestation 
scheme and/or composition of existing afforestation, prepared on the basis of 
model scheme of the concerned State/UT.” 
5.7. The Ministry of Coal further stated that information related to land bank is 
available with the State Forest department, and that creation of land banks by State 
Governments would be very helpful in enhancing the efficiency of the Forest Clearance 
process. Handing over of forest land is carried out by State government after final 
forest approval and obtaining NOC under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. Process of handing over 
forest land, tree felling and possession is carried out in parts and vary from State to 

40 
 
State. At present, in lieu of diversion of forest land, CA is being raised over non-forest 
and/ or degraded forest land provided by State government as per availability. 
5.8. While briefing of the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal, said: 
  “Among the various approvals required at the Central and State levels, 
the most time-consuming has historically been the Forest Clearance (FC) 
process. This is primarily because it involves multiple steps such as 
identification and notification of compensatory afforestation (CA) land, tree 
enumeration, preparation of land schedules that match with DGPS survey 
maps, and settlement of rights under the Forest Rights Act (FRA).” 
 
C. State-Level Bottlenecks in Forest Land Transfer and Tree Cutting 
Permissions 
5.9. After the grant of final approval, i.e., FC-II, the Central Government grants its 
prior approval under the Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980. State 
Governments, after obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government, hand over 
the land to the user agency. 
5.10. In a written reply MoEF&CC has stated as below: 
“Land, being the State Subject, the discretion of handing over the forest land, 
after obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government, vests with the 
State Government concerned.  Raising of demand note, tree cutting permission, 
disposal of trees etc. are governed in accordance with the provisions of the 
State specific tree felling Act, rules or laws.” 
5.11. In a meeting, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal submitted: 
 “In addition, delays often occur at the State level in issuing diversion orders 
and handing over of land even after Stage-II FC is granted.” 
5.12. In this context, it was further submitted by a representative of the Ministry of 
Coal expressing the following concern: 
“After environmental clearance, FC-1 and FC-2, the actual work starts when 
the project land is handed over, and that there is no timeline in that. Currently, 
the process that is done with the State government for handing over forest land 
has more than 12 steps. Most of the steps are already complied with while 
taking FC-2. It gets repeated and because there is no timeline set from there, 
there is a delay in mining." 

41 
 
5.13. It was suggested before the Committee that there should be a timeline for 
handing over forest land and tree cutting, so that the forest land is handed over within 
that timeline and the project starts. 
5.14. It was further informed as under: 
"In the recent amendment in the FC Act, 1980, it was said that all the State 
governments should update the records of the year 1980. A case is going on in 
the Supreme Court, in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has also said that the 
States should update the forest records. If the State government updates its 
records in it, then whatever records are updated in the context of the 1980 Act, 
only that will be considered forest. A list of deemed forests is also being 
prepared in it” 
5.15. In order to update the records in the Jamabandi, it was informed to the 
Committee that the representatives of the Ministry have also held continuous meetings 
with the State governments and are persuading them to update the records. They are 
hopeful that once the records are updated, then everything will be clear as to which is 
forest land, where diversion will be applicable and where it will not be applicable. 
D. Issues at the stage of Gram Sabha and Public Hearing 
5.16. The Gram Sabha plays a crucial role in granting consent for land acquisition 
and diversion of forest land under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006, ensuring that the 
rights of local and tribal communities are recognised before mining begins. Its approval 
is recorded through resolutions and public consultations and is a mandatory step at 
the public hearing stage of Environmental Clearance and Stage-I of Forest Clearance. 
The State Government must certify settlement of community rights under FRA 
ensuring that local participation cannot be bypassed. 
5.17. In a meeting with the Ministries of Coal and MoEF&CC, it was highlighted that 
much time is taken at the Gram Sabha stage. A representative of the Ministry of Coal 
stated that: 
“Sir, the Gram Sabha itself takes a little more time. What you are saying is 
of two years, any big project, sometimes comes in two districts also. Like Kotre-
Basantpur example. It comes in Ramgarh and Bokaro districts. If there are five-
seven villages here and there in two districts, then sometimes there is initial 

42 
 
objection. Managing that and dedicating time to DC at both the places takes five 
to six months. The rest of the one and a half years to two and a half years that 
is being talked about, this includes EC, FC stage one, FC stage two. But initial 
public consultation, in Gram Sabha, is a time taking process. Many times, 
different things keep happening in the district also. There is a local election, 
somewhere there is assembly election, somewhere there is parliamentary 
election. At that time DC also takes one or two months. It is not like we will go 
today and do it tomorrow. We have to coordinate with both the State Pollution 
Control Board. But we have received tremendous help over the last three 
years.” 
5.18. Public consultation remains a statutory requirement under the EIA Notification, 
2006 (and amendments) for all Category ‘A’ and Category ‘B1’ projects. This ensures 
both site-level public hearings and written feedback from stakeholders. 
5.19. As regards reforms at this stage, in a written reply, the Ministry of Coal apprised 
the Committee of an initiative of the MoEF&CC that allows expansion of production 
capacity up to 50% without requiring a new public hearing. They further stated as 
under: - 
“The Ministry issued an OM dated 11.04.2022 for expansion in production 
capacity, within existing land, up to 50% without requirement of public hearing. 
As per the said OM, proposals are submitted with Environment Management 
Plan for 50% enhanced capacity EC along with certified compliance report by 
Regional Offices (MoEF&CC). EC proposal is scrutinized at MoEF&CC and 
detailed appraisal is done by EAC. Post recommendation of EAC, EC is granted. 
Also, EC is granted in three phases (20%, 20% and 10%) for enhanced capacity 
with EAC deliberation and review of environmental safeguard conditions in every 
phase for which compliance report are submitted to MoEF&CC regularly. 
Additionally, public consultation through written communication is also done for 
the last 10% expansion, through State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) and raised 
concern are addressed. 
Besides, provision has been made for exemption from fresh public hearing 
for legacy revalidation cases and inclusion of view of public through consultation 
only. Among the nine stages of EC, public hearing is the major time-consuming 
stage.” 
  

43 
 
 
Steps involved in EC process Average durations for each step of the EC 
process for coal mining projects 
Issuance of ToR 90 Days 
Draft EIA/EMP submission 90 Days (Considering Baseline data is 
available. In case of baseline data 
generation, data is to be generated for 3 
months of non-monsoon season) 
Public Hearing 90 Days 
Final EIA/EMP submission 60 Days 
Appraisal and grant of EC 90 Days 
 
E. Concern over mandatory Fly Ash Utilization 
5.20. The Fly Ash Notification S.O. 5481(E), dated 31st December 2021, made it 
obligatory for coal mines within 300 km of a Thermal Power Plant (TPP) to undertake 
backfilling or mixing of fly ash with overburden (OB) under Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) and to ensure 25% ash-overburden (OB) mixing. However, the 
Ministry of Coal states that the provision is inconsistent with the Polluter Pays Principle 
since fly ash is generated at TPPs and not at coal mines. 
5.21. Polluter Pays Principle is environmental law concept that holds that those who 
cause pollution should be financially responsible for its management and for the costs 
of remediating any resulting environmental damage. Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) is an environmental policy approach where the producers, 
importers, and brand owners (PIBOs) are made responsible for the entire lifecycle of 
their products, especially for their post-consumer waste management. 
5.22. The Ministry of Coal submitted that scientific studies by reputed institutions 
indicate that mixing of 25 % fly ash with OB reduces the Factor of Safety, creating risks 
of slope instability and dump failure. From an environmental perspective, transporting 
fly ash up to 300 km for disposal in mines only shifts the problem from TPPs, while 

44 
 
generating carbon emissions. Managing fly ash at source within TPP premises is more 
sustainable and avoids unnecessary transport-related pollution. 
5.23. Mixing ash with OB increases dump volume and land requirements, which 
already pose challenges due to limited land availability and costly rehabilitation and 
resettlement obligations. The financial burden of complying with the current provisions 
is extremely high, running into tens of thousands of crores annually, diverting 
resources away from mine reclamation and core operations. 
5.24. The Committee was apprised that in order to address these issues, the Ministry 
of Coal constituted a Central Level Working Group (CLWG) with MoEF&CC, Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA), CPCB, and DGMS to identify suitable voids for ash 
backfilling. The CLWG recommended using abandoned or closed mines instead of 
active OB dumps. Therefore, the Ministry of Coal has requested MoEF&CC to amend 
the notification to remove coal companies from EPR obligations and the mandatory 
25% mixing clause. 
5.25. When the MoEF&CC was queried on this topic, the Ministry in a written reply 
stated that a meeting was held with the Ministry of Coal to review the matter on 
25.07.2025 and has been requested to share the studies conducted in mines bringing 
out safety and operational challenges, if any. 
5.26. On being further asked upon the status of implementation of fly ash utilization 
in construction across India and whether any assessment has been done to gauge or 
scale up its success implementation, the Ministry of Coal replied that the 
implementation with regard to utilization of fly ash comes under the purview of Ministry 
of Power. They further provided the status of implementation of fly ash utilization in 
construction across India during FY 24-25 and in FY 25-26 is tabulated below as per 
the information received from Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of Power: - 

45 
 
Fly Ash Utilization 
FY 
Total Ash Generation (LMT) In Making of Fly Ash based/Brick/Blo cks /Tiles etc. (LMT) In Manufacture of portland pozzolana cement (LMT) In Construction of Highways & Roads including flyovers (LMT) Part replacement of cement in concrete (LMT) In Hydro power sector in RCC Dam construction (LMT) Total utilisation in construction sector (LMT) 
2024-
25 3420.54 478.92 926.00 1074.84 70.51 3.04 2553 
01.04.2
025- 
12.09.2
025 
1193.65 151.70 334.68 347.36 24.64 0.00 858 
 
F. Repeated EDS/ADS Queries in Clearance Applications 
5.27. The Essential Details Sought (EDS) and Additional Details Sought (ADS) 
mechanisms are meant to ensure that proposals submitted for environmental 
clearance are complete and accurate. An EDS is generally raised only once, at the 
stage when shortcomings or gaps are noticed in the application, while ADS pertains to 
project-specific clarifications that may be needed later based on technical or contextual 
factors. 
5.28. It was further informed by the representatives of MoEF&CC that Member 
Secretaries, who are scientists, have been advised to avoid raising multiple rounds of 
EDS or ADS so as to prevent procedural delays. 
5.29. When asked the reason behind issuing piecemeal EDS/ ADS instead of a 
comprehensive set at first appraisal, the Ministry in a written response stated that 
instructions have been issued to all Regional Offices and processing authorities to 
raise a comprehensive set of queries in one instance and subsequent EDS, if any, 

46 
 
emanates from the incomplete information furnished in reply to the comprehensive 
EDS. 
G. Blanket Clearance for Special and Clean Coal Projects 
5.30. There are certain special projects like Underground mines (UG) and 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) projects and Clean Coal technology-based 
pilot-scale projects. Underground coal mining offers several advantages, particularly 
from environmental, land-use, and social perspectives. Since underground mining 
causes minimal disturbance to surface features, it results in reduced damage to 
infrastructure, agricultural land, forests, and habitation areas. This method of mining 
leads to lower land reclamation and rehabilitation costs after mining activities cease. 
Underground mining leaves comparatively less surface footprint, thereby contributing 
to lower indirect greenhouse gas emissions associated with land degradation and loss 
of vegetation. It is also well-suited for extracting deep-seated coal reserves, which are 
often of higher quality. Underground mine operations are generally less susceptible to 
adverse weather conditions, which can disrupt surface mining operations. This makes 
underground mining more feasible throughout the year under varying climatic 
conditions. 
5.31. The Ministry of Coal informed the Committee that MoEF&CC vide OM dt: 17-
03-2025 has directed that UG projects shall be considered on an out of turn basis and 
clearances shall be issued expeditiously. Further, MoEF&CC vide OM dt: 25-07-2025 
has issued a standard term of reference (ToR) and standard EC for UG mines. As on 
08.09.2025, UG mining proposal of CIL are yet to be taken up on the basis of 
aforementioned OMs. 

47 
 
5.32. In view of the relatively low environmental impact associated with underground 
coal mining, the standard ToR has been introduced and these proposals are being 
considered on out of turn basis for expeditious processing of EC. 
5.33. In a meeting, the Secretary, Ministry of Coal acknowledged the suggestion of 
the Committee on a standard ToRs, SOPs and single window of clearance for open 
cast mining in line with UG mines. 
5.34. Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) has been recognized as an emerging 
clean coal technology with potential for minimal surface disturbance and lower 
environmental footprint. It is a method that extracts energy from deep coal seams 
without conventional mining. The Committee is informed that at present, a pilot UCG 
project is under implementation in Kasta Coal Block, Jharkhand, under the research 
and development framework. 
5.35. The Ministry of Coal stated that in case of UCG, exemption is sought from 
obtaining EC for coal gasification pilot project to understand the behaviour of geo-
mining characteristics/parameters for UCG.  This is required for establishing the 
commercial feasibility of UCG production and associated environment impact. 
5.36. When asked the reason behind not categorizing such projects under the B2 
category, the Ministry of Coal stated that UCG is still at a pilot and experimental stage 
in India and has not yet been commercially proven under Indian geo-mining conditions. 
The environmental and operational impacts, such as groundwater contamination, land 
subsidence, and potential gas leakage, are not fully understood at this stage. In the 
absence of adequate baseline data and practical experience, it would not be advisable 
to classify UCG as a low-risk (B2) category project. Categorizing the projects is under 
the scope of MoEF&CC. 

48 
 
5.37. The Committee asked the MoEF&CC on the prevailing system at present for 
giving EC for such projects and whether the Ministry will consider placing UCG under 
Category B2, with simplified and faster conditional EC for pilots and full EC at 
commercial stage. The Ministry replied that UCG as a technology has not been 
extensively used globally and remains unproven under Indian conditions, particularly 
due to the high ash content in coal and other environmental concerns. Since the actual 
development of UCG and production of syngas through pilot projects is yet to be 
demonstrated, this matter requires detailed deliberation in the EAC (Industry-II). 
Accordingly, the issue has been included as an additional agenda item in the upcoming 
EAC meeting. The same has been communicated to the Ministry of Coal, with a 
request to depute an expert with technical expertise in UCG to provide inputs and 
clarifications before the Committee. This will enable the EAC to take an informed 
decision. 
H. Non-invitation of Project Proponent in the meetings of FAC for grant of FC 
5.38. The Coal Ministry apprised the Committee that their participation in the EC and 
FC approval processes of coal projects can ensure better coordination and faster 
resolution of issues. 
5.39. As the presence of project proponent in the Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) 
meetings will promptly address concerns of committee, coal company representatives 
should be allowed to be present in the FAC meetings for grant of FC of the respective 
project. Further, MoEF&CC, as a collaborative approach has allowed presence of 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways officials in appraisal of their EC-FC proposals 
and vice versa, to properly understand and address issues. The Ministry of Coal further 
informed that MoEF&CC has been requested to allow their participation in the FAC 
and EAC meeting of the coal mining projects. 

49 
 
5.40. When the MoEF&CC was asked whether project proponents or Ministry of Coal 
officials are allowed to attend FAC meetings to clarify issues, the MoEF&CC in a written 
reply stated that as per provisions contained under EIA, 2006, project proponent is 
invited for participation in the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) meetings. Further, as 
per EIA, 2006, Chairman of EAC can co-opt an expert as a Member in a relevant field 
for a particular meeting of the Committee. Accordingly, representatives from Coal 
Ministry participated in the EAC meetings for Underground Coal Mining Standard ToR 
finalization. Hence, representative from Coal ministry can participate in the EAC 
meetings for Environment Clearance. 
5.41. As for the Forest Clearance, the Ministry of Coal stated that generally, the FAC 
meets on monthly basis wherein FC proposals (including coal mining) submitted at 
MoEF&CC level are discussed and the project is explained to the committee by IG 
(Inspector General), Forest as well as Nodal Officer of the State Forest Department. 
Although, Project Proponents or Ministry of Coal officials are not allowed to attend FAC 
meetings but, as per Clause 5(6) of Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Rules, 
2023, it has been provided that “the user agency may be allowed to attend the meeting 
of the Advisory Committee for such duration as may be necessary to furnish such 
information or clarify any issue which may pertain to it.” 
5.42. Further, the MoEF&CC furnished that ‘Land’ is a State Subject and accordingly, 
the proposal seeking prior approval of the Central Government under the Adhiniyam, 
1980 is submitted by the State Government. Designated Nodal Officer for the purpose 
makes all correspondences with the Central Government and communication on 
behalf of State Government and attends the meeting of the Advisory Committee. The 
Advisory Committee examines or appraises the proposal from ecological perspectives. 
Various ecological parameters viz. vegetation density, land proposed for compensatory 

50 
 
land proposed proposals, optimum requirement of forest land, alternatives explored 
etc. are appraised by the Committee. To ensure proper assessment of various 
ecological considerations, the Nodal Officer of the State dealing with the forest 
conservation matters and Regional Office of the Ministry assist the Committee in the 
appraisal process. User Agency is also allowed to make presentation of their proposals 
and specific issues pertaining to them, whenever, the Advisory Committee desires 
such presentation from the user agency. 

51 
 
CHAPTER VI 
STATUS OF VARIOUS COAL MINING PROJECTS 
 
6.1. As informed by the Ministry of Coal, time required for securing forest clearance 
vary from State to State generally taking around 24–30 months. Sometimes FC may 
take longer time due to site specific issues. After grant of FC, handover and physical 
possession of forest land also sometimes delay the operationalization of mines. 
Present status of some of the coal mining projects are as under: - 
A. Chitra Opencast Project (ECL, Jharkhand) 
6.2. The Chitra Opencast Project in Jharkhand falls under the Eastern Coalfields 
Limited (ECL), a subsidiary of Coal India Limited. Stage-II FC for Chitra OC           
(124.28 Ha) was accorded on 10.07.2019. Whereas handover first issued for 79.10 Ha 
on 17.10.2022. As on 08.09.2025, handover of 24.16 Ha forest land is awaited 
approval from State government of Jharkhand. 
B. Kotre Basantpur Pachmo Opencast Project (CCL, Jharkhand) 
6.3. The Kotre Basantpur Pachmo project in Jharkhand falls under the Central 
Coalfields Limited (CCL), a subsidiary of Coal India Limited. The proposal involving 
855.17 Ha of forest land was first submitted to DFO on 01.07.2019. Stage-I Forest 
Clearance was granted on 27.02.2023, followed by Stage-II Forest Clearance on 
14.03.2024, taking an overall period of approximately 4.5 years. 
C. Chandragupta Opencast Project (CCL, Jharkhand) 
6.4. The proposal of Chandragupta OCP involving 699.38 Ha of forest land was 
submitted to DFO on 03.12.2021. Stage-I Forest Clearance was granted on 

52 
 
27.05.2024, followed by Stage-II Forest Clearance on 23.04.2025, taking an overall 
period of approximately 3 years. 
D. Durgapur Deep Extension Opencast Project (WCL, Maharashtra) 
6.5. Stage-II FC for 121.58 Ha of Durgapur Deep Extn. OC of WCL was issued by 
MoEF&CC on 22.12.2021. Possession/ Diversion Order was issued by the 
Maharashtra Government on 26.09.2023. Tree felling activity is held-up due to ongoing 
Public Interest Litigation (PIL) in Hon’ble Bombay High Court. 
  

53 
 
PART-II 
 OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. Energy security in tandem with environmental responsibility 
Coal continues to be the backbone of India’s energy security and 
industrial growth contributing approximately 55 per cent to the national energy 
needs and fuelling about 74 per cent of total power generation through thermal 
coal. Coal mining in India is permitted with a statutory clearance process which 
have a structured mechanism for various clearances including the 
Environmental Clearance and the Forest Clearance which are granted by the 
various Central Ministries and State Government departments/agencies to 
ensure that energy development proceeds in an environmentally sustainable, 
legally compliant and socially responsible manner. The Committee note that the 
country has achieved a historic milestone of one billion tonne of coal production 
in FY 2024-25 and the Ministry has set a target of 1.5 billion tonnes of coal 
production by the year 2030. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts 
undertaken by the Ministry of Coal to enhance domestic coal production and 
reduce import dependence, also note that steps are being taken to reduce 
carbon emissions from coal mines by creating carbon sinks through 
plantations, adoption of clean coal technologies like coal gasification and 
diversifying in renewable energy projects including solar, wind and geo-thermal 
energy and emphasize on environmental protection and community welfare. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
 

54 
 
2. Environmental Clearance for coal mining projects 
The Committee note that Environmental Clearance (EC) for coal mining 
projects is a statutory prerequisite mandated under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
Notification, 2006. The Notification classifies coal mining under “Mining of 
Minerals,” requiring prior EC from the competent authority depending on the 
size of the lease area. Projects with mining lease area exceeding 500 hectares 
are categorized as Category-A and appraised at the Central level by the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) through its Expert 
Appraisal Committee (EAC), while those of 500 hectares or less fall under 
Category-B and are appraised by the respective State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authorities (SEIAA) and State Expert Appraisal Committees 
(SEAC).  This bifurcation between Category-A and B was introduced to expedite 
clearances. The Committee observe that since the notification came into effect 
from 22.04.2022, a total of only 12 environmental clearances have been granted 
for projects below 500 hectares. The Committee may therefore be apprised of 
the number of applications received for environmental clearances for projects 
below 500 hectares and the number of applications rejected and the reasons 
thereof.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
3. Process of Environment Clearance for Coal Mining Projects 
The Committee note that the EC process comprises four key stages—
screening, scoping, public consultation, and appraisal. The process comprises 
the Project Proponent (PP), State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs), District 

55 
 
Administration, EAC, MoEF&CC, SEAC, SEIAA. The entire EC workflow has been 
digitized through the PARIVESH Portal functioning as a single-window online 
system integrating proposal submission, public hearing records, expert 
committee appraisal, and final clearance orders. The Committee commend this 
initiative as a step towards transparency, traceability, and efficiency in the EC 
process. The Committee note that the State Pollution Control Boards facilitates 
the public hearing with support of the District Administration. The Committee 
also note that the EAC meets once in 15 days to review proposals, based on 
which ECs are granted by the MoEF&CC with stipulated safeguards. The 
Committee desire that any bottlenecks in the process may be identified to 
resolve them in order to speed up the process of environmental clearances. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
4. Process of Forest Clearance for Coal Mining Projects 
The Committee note that Forest Clearance (FC) is a mandatory statutory 
requirement under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for diversion of forest 
land for non-forest use, including coal mining operations. With the enactment of 
the Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 2023, the focus of forest 
governance has been widened from mere protection (Sanrakshan) to both 
protection and promotion (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan), underscoring a 
progressive and holistic approach towards sustainable forest management. The 
Committee further note that the FC process is bifurcated into two stages: Stage-
I (In-Principle Approval) and Stage-II (Final Approval). Stage-I represents the 
preliminary acceptance of diversion proposals subject to conditions such as 
identification of Compensatory Afforestation (CA) land and payment of Net 

56 
 
Present Value (NPV), while Stage-II clearance is accorded after verification of 
compliance with all Stage-I conditions. The Committee find that this two-tier 
process ensures environmental safeguards and accountability involving 
multiple layers of scrutiny at both the State and Central levels. The Committee 
further note that the appraisal process involves several tiers of examination 
from the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) and Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) 
through the State Project Screening Committees to the Forest Advisory 
Committee (FAC) in the MoEF&CC. The FAC generally meets once every month 
to examine proposals. While appreciating this institutional structure, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to look into the aspect of increasing the frequency 
of meetings of FAC so as to speed up the project approvals. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
5. Time Taken for Environment Clearance and Forest Clearance 
The Committee are informed that the average time taken for EC for Central 
Public Sector Undertakings is roughly 15 to 18 months and the same for 
commercial coal blocks of private sector is around 26 months, whereas, the 
average time taken for FC approvals ranges from 24–30 months for Central 
Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) and up to 34 months for commercial coal 
blocks of private sector. The Committee therefore may be apprised of the 
reasons for this difference in average time taken and are of the view that efforts 
may be made to reduce the average time taken for environment and forest 
clearances for public and private sectors. The Committee are also of the view 
that a system to coordinate between the stakeholders like project proponent, 

57 
 
state level environment authority, Ministry of Forest, Environment and Climate 
Change and others may be explored to expedite the clearances.  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
6. Transformation of Green Governance through PARIVESH 
The Committee observe that the launch of the PARIVESH portal in 2018 
mark a significant reform in the environmental clearance regime by providing a 
single-window online platform for processing Environment, Forest, Wildlife, and 
Coastal Regulation Zone clearances. The Committee view this as a step towards 
the vision of the Government in improving e-Governance and enhancing ease of 
doing business. The Committee are happy to note the successful upgradation 
of PARIVESH 1.0 to PARIVESH 2.0, thereby expanding its scope and leveraging 
on technological advancements such as Geographical Information System 
(GIS)/ Management Information System (MIS) based Know Your Approval (KYA) 
tool, GIS-based Decision Support System (DSS), Advance Data Analytics, etc.  
The Committee also note that PARIVESH 2.0 has introduced a comprehensive 
automation of the clearance process — covering the entire workflow from 
submission of applications to grant of clearances and post-clearance 
compliance monitoring — without manual intervention, with real-time updating. 
The Committee appreciate that the platform has made clearance processes 
more efficient, transparent, and paperless, in alignment with the Government’s 
vision of “Minimum Government, Maximum Governance”. The Committee are of 
the view that suggestions by Project Proponents regarding more technical 
features to be incorporated in PARIVESH 2.0 may also be looked into for better  
 

58 
 
project documentation. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
7. Single Window Clearance System of the Ministry of Coal 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Coal has conceptualized a Single 
Window Clearance System (SWCS) to streamline the process of obtaining 
various statutory clearances and approvals necessary for the operationalization 
of coal mines in the country. The system aims to act as a unified gateway 
encompassing approvals such as mining plans, mine closure plans, and other 
statutory permissions in a time bound manner. The Committee appreciate that 
the portal has been designed with a modern digital framework capable of 
mapping the application formats and also the process flow of clearances 
through Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) with existing online 
systems of concerned Ministries and Departments. The Committee further note 
that the integration of Single Window Clearance System of the Ministry of Coal 
with PARIVESH 2.0 is a progressive step towards inter-ministerial digital 
coordination which enables seamless tracking, monitoring, and auto-fetching of 
data across clearances, thereby reducing duplication and enhancing 
transparency. The Committee also appreciate the operationalization of the 
Project Information Management System (PRIMS) module under the Single 
Window Clearance System which serves as a centralized digital repository of 
data pertaining to project specific information relating to coal blocks. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 

59 
 
8. Permissions Processed Outside PARIVESH and SWCS 
The Committee note that in addition to the integrated clearance system 
offered by PARIVESH and SWCS, several other permissions continue to be 
processed independently and separately. These include approvals from 
agencies such as the Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS), Central 
Ground Water Authority (CGWA), and Water Resources Department, which 
remain outside the ambit of the integrated digital framework. The Committee are 
of the view that in complex cases involving inter-sectoral overlaps, a single 
harmonized coordination mechanism may lead to non-duplication, 
accountability and timely clearance and execution of projects. Although SWCS 
offers a platform for submission and tracking of applications, its integration with 
external agencies beyond the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change is still limited.  Hence, the Committee recommend that permissions and 
NOCs from other agencies like the DGMS, CGWA and Water Resources 
Department etc. that are currently being handled through separate, individual 
processes outside the integrated system of PARIVESH and SWCS may be 
brought under a single window. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
9. Initiatives to expedite Forest Clearance in Coal Projects 
The Committee note that the recent reforms under the Van (Sanrakshan 
Evam Samvardhan) Rules, 2023 were introduced for decentralisation and 
simplification of the forest clearance process. The establishment of Project 
Screening Committees at the State level and the delegation of powers to 

60 
 
Regional Offices have contributed to faster decision-making while ensuring 
oversight. The Committee also observe that permitting Stage-II clearance prior 
to the notification of CA land as Reserved Forest has significantly reduced 
delays, cutting operationalisation time by nearly six months. Similarly, the 
reintroduction of the option of degraded double forest land (DDFL) as CA for 
Central and State PSUs has provided flexibility in land management, particularly 
in coal-bearing areas with limited availability of non-forest land. Further, it has 
been observed that the exploration activities in forest land are now permitted 
without payment of NPV or CA, thus promoting preliminary geological 
assessment without procedural burdens. The automatic forwarding of EDS/ADS 
queries and the digital submission of compliance reports under PARIVESH 2.0 
have also contributed to procedural efficiency. At the same time, the Committee 
note that certain challenges persist in identification and transfer of CA lands, 
reconciliation of forest area records between States and user agencies, and in 
uniform interpretation of delegation of powers at regional levels. The Committee 
hope that adequate efforts will be taken to streamline the above towards 
timebound final approval and Coal mine operationalisation. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
10. Initiatives to Improve Capacity Building and Update Expertise 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Coal has undertaken several 
initiatives for capacity building to enhance the institutional and technical 
capabilities of personnel involved in environmental management and clearance-
related functions. Regular training programmes and workshops are conducted 
for executives engaged in environment-related activities, with the participation 

61 
 
of the MoEF&CC.  The Committee note with appreciation the initiatives taken for 
enrolment of environmental professionals, GIS experts, experts in Ecology and 
Biodiversity, etc. and are of the view that the members of the EACs and SEACs 
maintain updated expertise in rapidly evolving mining technologies and 
environmental management tools. While acknowledging these measures, the 
Committee observe that continuous professional development of EAC/SEAC 
members will maintain the quality of environmental appraisals. The Committee 
are also of the view that the scale and frequency of such trainings and capacity-
building initiatives may be enhanced across subsidiaries and States. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
11. Cost of Compensatory Afforestation per hectare across States 
The Committee observe that the cost of CA per hectare varies significantly 
across States, from ₹9 lakh to ₹22 lakh. Such inconsistent costs across the 
States not only leads to uncertainty for user agencies but also results in 
disputes and delays in project execution. The Committee may therefore be 
apprised of the reasons of this disparity and proposed action to minimise this. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
12. Creation of State-level Land Bank 
The Committee observe that since the identification of Compensatory 
Afforestation land is a critical and time-consuming activity towards grant of 
Forest Clearance for coal mining projects, the creation of land banks by State 
Governments will be beneficial in timely CA implementation.  Since there are 
guidelines from MoEF&CC permitting the creation of land banks under the 

62 
 
administrative control of State Forest Departments, the Committee recommend 
that the MoEF&CC and the Ministry of Coal should pursue the matter with the 
States for pre-identified land banks of degraded forest land and non-forest land 
suitable for compensatory afforestation. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
13. Timely Issuance of No Objection Certificates at State Level 
The Committee observe that in view of the importance of protection of 
forest rights, there is a pressing need to harmonize administrative processes for 
issuing of NOCs under the provisions of the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. The 
Committee are therefore of the view that issuance of No Objection Certificates 
(NOCs) may be ensured in a time bound manner in order to save time and cost 
overruns.  In order to strengthen state-level engagement, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry of Coal may communicate with the States to address forest 
clearance bottlenecks by reducing delays in the process. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
14. Digitization of State Land Records  
The Committee note that ‘Land’ being a state subject, all matters 
pertaining to forest land and related data come under the purview of respective 
State governments. The process for issuing diversion orders and tree felling 
permissions is discretionary and governed by variable State-specific laws, 
leading to significant and unpredictable delays. The Committee observe that 
updated and accurate State Forest records are a prerequisite for expediting 

63 
 
environment and forest clearances. This in turn requires close coordination 
among coal bearing States resolution of outdated and conflicting forest records 
that frequently hinder timely commencement of projects. The Committee 
emphasise that handing over of forest land to the coal companies after grant of 
Stage II Forest Clearance by the MoEF&CC along with issuance of demand note, 
tree cutting permissions, disposal of felled timber etc. need to be prioritised and 
done in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Coal and MoEF&CC should pursue States to publish digitized 
Jamabandi/ Khesra maps clearly distinguishing between recorded forest, 
deemed forest and non-forest land. In the light of the recent directions of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the Committee recommend issuing directive to 
all States and Union Territories to finalize the identification of forest areas and 
compile a consolidated digital record of forest lands, including those 
 
categorized as unclassed or deemed community forests. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
15. Streamlining and Standardizing Gram Sabha Consultation 
The Committee recognize the important role of Gram Sabha in land 
acquisition and forest diversion under the Forest Rights Act, 2006, protecting 
the rights of local and tribal communities before mining projects begin. This 
approval of Gram Sabha, obtained through resolutions and public 
consultations, is a mandatory step for securing Environment and Forest 
Clearances for coal mining projects. However, the Committee note that delay in 
getting clearance by Gram Sabhas under the Forest Rights Act, 2006 is one of 

64 
 
the most cited causes of delay in Forest Clearance. These delays are primarily 
due to the complexities of coordination across multiple districts and 
management of local objections, aggravated often by local elections or the need 
to align schedules of various authorities such as the Deputy Commissioner (DC) 
and the State Pollution Control Board. In this context, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Coal, in consultation with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 
develop a standardized protocol for Gram Sabha resolutions and verification 
procedures under the Forest Rights Act, 2006 across all coal-bearing States. The 
Ministry of Coal and MoEF&CC may also jointly develop standardized digital 
templates for Gram Sabha certification and make them available on the 
PARIVESH portal to enable uniform online submissions and verifications. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
16. Optimizing Public Hearings and Addressing Local Issues 
The Committee are cognizant of the significance of Public Hearing stage 
in the process of obtaining environment and forest clearances as it provides a 
platform for local communities to express their concerns and for project 
proponents to ensure transparency and accountability. At the same time, the 
Committee note that repeated or lengthy Public Hearings delay projects. This 
lengthy process has led to reforms allowing up to 50% expansion in production 
capacity without the requirement of a fresh public hearing. The Committee are 
of the considered view that the process can be further streamlined by allowing 
hybrid modes of public consultation with online hearings to reduce redundancy  
  

65 
 
and procedural delays, while ensuring genuine participation. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
17. Support Desk for Project Proponents to Address EDS/ADS Requirements 
The Committee note that the Essential Details Sought (EDS) and 
Additional Details Sought (ADS) mechanisms aim to ensure that proposals 
submitted for environmental clearance are complete and accurate. However, 
issuing multiple rounds of piecemeal EDS/ADS requests instead of one 
comprehensive query has caused procedural delays. In this regard, the 
Committee welcome the initiative taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, in instructing officials to avoid raising successive queries 
on incomplete responses. The Committee observe that delays also arise due to 
project proponents not submitting complete responses to EDS/ADS. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry of Coal may explore the 
possibility of a technical help desk to help PSUs and private players in 
responding comprehensively to EDS/ADS queries. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
18. Policy Simplification for Underground Mine Projects 
The Committee note that Underground Mines (UG), Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) projects and Clean Coal Technology-based pilot projects 
represent special categories of coal sector initiatives that offer significant 
environmental and operational advantages. Underground coal 
mining minimizes surface disturbance, thereby preserving land, forests, and 
infrastructure while reducing land reclamation costs and indirect greenhouse 

66 
 
gas emissions. This method also allows access to high-quality, deep-seated 
reserves and ensures year-round operations regardless of weather conditions.  
However, the Committee note that despite low environmental impact, several UG 
projects undergo the same clearance and documentation processes as in the 
case for large open-cast coal mines, thereby reportedly facing delays. The 
Committee, therefore, emphasize the need for policy simplification and 
standardized protocols for UG coal mining practices in India. The Committee 
also desire to explore the feasibility of placing standard ToRs, SOPs on the 
single window clearance system for open cast mining in line with UG mines. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
19. Policy Support for Underground Coal Gasification Projects 
The Committee observe that Underground Coal Gasification is another 
emerging clean coal technology, that promotes cleaner fuel alternatives and 
supports India’s transition towards sustainable energy. While UCG holds 
promise for enhancing the country’s energy security, this driving innovation is 
currently working under a pilot mode. In order to accelerate deployment of 
innovative technologies such as UCG pilot projects, R&D initiatives and clean 
coal technology demonstration with significantly lower environmental footprint 
and risk profile, the Ministry of Coal may explore the feasibility of establishing a 
Joint Sub Committee along with MoEF&CC and Directorate General of Mines 
Safety to vet such projects through a single appraisal process. Further, 
integrated guidelines on emerging coal technologies may also be framed 
defining the clearance route and environmental safeguards in accordance with 
the carbon impact they tend to make.  A dedicated Standard Operating 

67 
 
Procedure (SOP) for UCG could help streamline approvals by defining site-
specific study requirements, risk assessment protocols, and compliance 
monitoring mechanisms. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
deliberation in the EAC (Industry-II) Committee meeting on the feasibility of 
classifying such projects under B2 category containing projects having minimal 
environmental impact. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
20. Participation of Project Proponent in Forest Advisory Committee 
Meetings 
The Committee note the that the participation of the Ministry of Coal and 
Project Proponents in the Forest Advisory Committee meetings can facilitate 
better coordination and faster resolution of project-related issues. While the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has stated that user 
agencies may be invited on a need-basis as per Clause 5(6) of Van (Sanrakshan 
Evam Samvardhan) Rules, 2023, the Committee desire that the participation of 
Coal Ministry representatives and project proponents may be institutionalized 
in FAC meetings to enable explanations in real-time on issues and ensure 
expeditious disposal of forest clearance proposals. 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
21. Rationalization of Fly Ash Utilization Provisions 
The Committee note that under the Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR), coal mines have to ensure 25% fly ash mixing with overburden (OB) as 
per norms. The Committee also note the Ministry of Coal’s view regarding 
provision to be made according to the Polluter Pays Principle since fly ash is 

68 
 
generated by thermal power plants. The Committee are apprised of the alternate 
avenues for fly ash utilization, such as manufacture of cement, bricks, blocks, 
tiles, etc. The Committee further note that both the Ministry of Coal and the 
MoEF&CC are in consultation on the issue of fly ash utilization. The Committee 
may, therefore, be apprised of the updated information in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                      ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
08 December, 2025                                                     Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(Saka)                          Standing Committee on  
Coal, Mines and Steel 
 
  

69 
 
ANNEXURES 
Annexure I 
Clearances/approvals/permissions to be processed at Central Government 
Level 
SN. Name of Clearances Approving Authority Act/Rules/Guidelines/Reg
ulations 
1 Notification u/s Sec. 4 of CBA 
Act 1957 as applicable Ministry of Coal (MoC) CBA Act, 1957 
2 NOC for prospecting if >2.5 
BH per sq km RO, MoEF&CC 
Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam 
Act, 1980 
3 Approval of Geological Report MoC MMDR Act, 1957 
4 Mining Plan Approval MoC Mineral Concession 
Rules, 1960 
5 Forest Clearance  MoEF&CC 
Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam 
Act, 1980 
6 Environmental Clearances  MoEF&CC  Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 
7 Permission to draw water, if 
any 
Central Ground Water 
Authority 
Environment Protection 
Act, 1986 
8 Wildlife Clearances 
National Board for 
Wildlife/State Board for 
Wildlife 
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 
1972 
9 Notification u/s Sec. 11 as per 
CBA Act MoC CBA Act, 1957 
10 
Approval for use of Explosive 
& License for storage of 
Petroleum 
Petroleum and Explosives 
Safety Organization 
(Ministry of Petroleum) 
Indian Explosive Act, 1884 
11 Magazine License 
Petroleum and Explosives 
Safety Organization 
(PESO) 
Indian Explosive Act, 1884 
12 Mine Opening Permission Coal Controller, MoC Mines Act/ MCR, 1960 
13 DGMS Permissions  Director General Mines & 
Safety 
Mineral Concession 
Rules, 1960 
14 Approval for Diversion of 
Power line (Transmission line) 
Central Electrical Authority, 
Ministry of Power 
- 
15 Approval for Diversion of 
National Highway NHAI National Highway Act, 
1956 
16 
Permission for use of Radio 
Frequency communication 
system 
Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting/Ministry of 
Communication 
Indian Wireless 
Telegraphy Act, 1933 
17 Labour related Permission Ministry of Labour & 
Employment 
Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) 
Act, 1970 

70 
 
18 Seam Opening Permission Coal Controller, MoC Mineral Concession 
Rules, 1960 
19 Grade Declaration Coal Controller, MoC Mineral Concession 
Rules, 1960 
20 Control Blasting Permission Director General of Mines 
& Safety(DGMS) 
Indian Explosive Act,1884 
21 NOC from Airports Authority of 
India DGCA National Highway Act, 
1956 
 
Clearances/approvals/permissions to be processed at State Government Level 
SN. Name of Clearances Approving Authority Act/Rules/Guidelines/Reg
ulations 
1 Prospecting License by State 
Govt. State Government MMDR Act, 1957 
2 NOC if <2.5 BH per sq km Divisional Forest Officer 
Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam 
Act, 1980 
3 NOC Under FRA, 2006 Collector, DFO  
Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam 
Act, 1980 
4 Schedule Area approval 
Under PESA Act District Collector  PESA Act, 1996 
5 NOC for Revenue Forest 
Land(Deemed Forest) District Collector  
Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam 
Act, 1980 
6 
Certificate from DFO 
regarding  
i. distance of notified Forest  
ii. National Park, Sanctuary 
and Bio Diversity within 10 
KM  
iii. Eco Sensitive Zone. 
iv. No Mining Zone 
Divisional Forest Officer  - 
7 Grant  & Execution of Mining 
Lease by State Government State Govt. MMDR Act, 1957 
8 Award of Land Acquisition 
under LARR Act, 2013 
District Collector RCFTLARR, 2013 
9 Acquisition of land u/s 247(4) 
of  Surface Right 
District Collector Relevant State Land 
Revenue Codes & 
Regulations 
10 Acquisition of land under 
Direct Purchase 
District Collector RCFTLARR, 2013 
11 Consent to Establish State Pollution Control 
Board 
Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974/ Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 
1981 

71 
 
12 Consent to Operate State Pollution Control 
Board 
Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974/ Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 
1981 
13 Tree-cutting permission in 
case of forest land  Divisional Forest Officer  
Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam 
Act, 1980 
14 Weight and Measures for 
Weighbridge and Petrol pump 
Department of Legal 
Metrology Legal Metrology Act, 2009 
15 Approval for Nallah/River 
Diversion 
 Water Resource 
Department  - 
16 Approval for Diversion of other 
than NH Public Works Department - 
17 Permission for Draw 
Power/Sub-Station State Electricity Board  - 
 
  

72 
 
Annexure II 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2024-2025) HELD ON 20.08.2025 FROM 1500 HRS. 
TO 1645 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘B’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
4. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
5. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol 
6. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
7. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
8. Shri Ananta Nayak 
9. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
10. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
11. Shri Kali Charan Singh 
12. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
 
Rajya Sabha  
13. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
14. Shri Deepak Prakash 
15. Shri Aditya Prasad 
16. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jagriti Tewatia   - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
1. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Secretary 
2. Smt Rupinder Brar, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sanoj Kumar Jha, Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Bhabani Prasad Pati, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri N Sajeesh Kumar, CCO 
6. Shri Asheesh Kumar, OSD 
 
COAL PSUs 
 
1. Shri P M Prasad, Chairman, Coal India Limited 
2. Shri Prasanna Kumar Motupalli, NLCIL 

73 
 
3. Shri N. Balram, CMD, SCCL 
4. Shri Uday A Kaole, CMD, MCL 
5. Shri Harish Duhan, CMD, SECL 
6. Shri Nilendu Kumar Singh, CMD, CCL 
7. Shri B. Sairam, CMD, NCL 
8. Shri Satish Jha, CMD, ECL 
9. Shri Samiran Dutta, CMD, BCCL 
10. Shri Jai Prakash Dwivedi, CMD, WCL 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary and other 
representatives of the Ministry of Coal and its Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
to the sitting of the Committee convened to have a briefing by the representatives 
of the Ministry of Coal on the subject ‘Expediting and Simplifying the Environment 
and Forest Clearance Process for Mining Projects’. The Chairperson then drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, he directed the representatives to 
introduce themselves. 
3. After customary introduction, the Secretary briefed the Committee on the recent 
achievements of the Ministry of Coal in terms of coal production growth. The 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Coal gave a PowerPoint Presentation, elaborating 
therein about various clearances/ approvals/ permissions required from the Central 
and State level by the Coal PSUs for operationalizing coal mines, which may be 
both general as well as site/mine-specific. She further apprised the Committee on 
the Stage I and Stage II process of forest clearance, and various initiatives taken by 
the Ministry for expediting and simplifying both the environment and forest 
clearances. The functioning of Ministry of Coal Single Window Clearance System 
(SWCS) and its integration with the PARIVESH portal, various studies and reports 
required for environment clearance and dual stages of forest clearance were also 
summarized. 

74 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, sought further clarifications on the environment and 
forest processes explained by the Ministry of Coal, sequential process of 
Environmental Clearance (EC) followed by Forest Clearance (FC) instead of parallel 
clearance and issues around the PARIVESH portal. They also sought the rationale 
behind the suggested way forward for expediting EC and FC by the Ministry of Coal in 
consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) 
viz.  modification of fly ash notification for “removing coal companies from Extended 
Product Responsibility obligations for fly ash management”; and increase in duration 
of tree felling permission and possession of land from 1 year to 5 years. The Committee 
further sought to know the time taken for obtaining EC and FC by public sector 
companies vis-à-vis private companies and the global average in this regard, 
coordination mechanism available between Central government, State government 
and MoEF&CC and other issues/problems being faced by the Ministry of Coal in 
obtaining environment and forest clearances within reasonable time period. 
5.  The representatives of the Ministry of Coal replied to some of the queries of the 
Members. The Chairperson then directed them to furnish written replies to the queries 
raised by the Members which remained unanswered during the Sitting of the 
Committee. 
6. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Members of the Committee and Officials of 
the Ministry and Coal PSUs for their active participation in the Sitting of the Committee. 
 A copy of verbatim record of the Sitting of the Committee has been kept 
separately. 
  The Committee then adjourned.  
 

75 
 
Annexure III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2024-2025) HELD ON 08.09.2025 FROM 1000 HRS. TO 
1245 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. ‘2’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE 
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
4. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
5. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol 
6. Shri Selvaganapathi T.M. 
7. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
8. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
9. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
10. Shri Ananta Nayak 
11. Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
12. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
13. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
14. Shri Kali Charan Singh 
15. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
16. Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
17. Shri S Venkatesan 
18. Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
19. Smt. Mahua Maji 
20. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
21. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
22. Shri Deepak Prakash 
23. Shri Aditya Prasad 
24. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
25. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
26. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jagriti Tewatia   - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
1. Shri Tanmay Kumar, Secretary 
2. Dr Amandeep Garg, Additional Secretary 

76 
 
3. Shri R. Raghu Prasad, Inspector General of Forest (Forest Conservation) 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
7. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Secretary 
8. SmtRupinder Brar, Additional Secretary 
9. Shri Sanoj Kumar Jha, Additional Secretary 
10. Shri Bhabani Prasad Pati, Joint Secretary 
 
COAL PSUs 
 
11. Shri P M Prasad, Chairman, Coal India Limited 
12. Shri Prasanna Kumar Motupalli, NLCIL 
13. Shri N. Balram, CMD, SCCL 
14. Shri Uday A Kaole, CMD, MCL 
15. Shri Harish Duhan, CMD, SECL 
16. Shri Nilendu Kumar Singh, CMD, CCL 
17. Shri B. Sairam, CMD, NCL 
18. Shri Satish Jha, CMD, ECL 
19. Shri Samiran Dutta, CMD, BCCL 
20. Shri Jai Prakash Dwivedi, CMD, WCL 
21. Shri Niladri Roy, Director (Technical), BCCL 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretaries and other 
representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC), Ministry of Coal and its Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) to the sitting 
of the Committee convened to have oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Changeand Ministry of Coal on the subject 
‘Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and Forest Clearance Process for Mining 
Projects’. The Chairperson then drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, he 
directed the representatives to introduce themselves. 
3. After customary introduction, the representative of the MoEF&CC gave a brief 
power point presentation before the Committee elaborating therein about the 
Environment Clearances (EC) process under Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) 
notification, 2006, and the Forest Clearance (FC) process under Van (Sanrakshan 
Evam Sanvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980, stages and safeguards for sustainable mining 
and transforming green governance in India, systemic EC and FC reforms brought 
about over a period of time including e-Governance in EC/FC through PARIVESH 1.0 
and 2.0 Portal was also outlined.  

77 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, sought further clarifications related to various stages 
involved for granting the EC and FC and issues related thereto both at Central and 
State level, transition of data from PARIVESH 1.0 to PARIVESH 2.0 and modalities 
involved for granting approval during the transition period, modification of fly ash 
notification for “removing coal companies from Extended Product Responsibility 
obligations for fly ash management”, definition of forest and compensatory 
afforestation, provisions of eco sensitive zones, creation of Land Banks by the State 
Governments, etc. The Committee further sought to know the prescribed time line and 
time taken for obtaining EC and possible way to reduce the time taken for public 
consultation to expedite EC and FC, coordination mechanism available between 
Central and State governments, especially in obtaining forest clearance for coal and 
lignite mining projects. The EC and FC related issues as raised by the Ministry of Coal 
and its PSUs were also answered by the representatives of MoEF&CC. 
5.  The representatives of both the Ministries replied to some of the queries raised 
by the Members. The Chairperson then directed them to furnish written replies to the 
queries raised by the Members that remained unanswered during the Sitting of the 
Committee. 
6. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Members of the Committee and Officials of 
the MoEF&CC, Coal and Coal PSUs for their active participation in the Sitting of the 
Committee. 
 The witness then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the Sitting of the Committee has been kept 
separately. 
  The Committee then adjourned.  
 
  

78 
 
Annexure IV 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, 
MINES AND STEEL (2025-26) HELD ON  08th DECEMBER, 2025 FROM 1845 HRS 
TO 1915 HRS IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. '1’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE 
EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
PRESENT 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat  
3. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
5. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
6. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol  
7. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
8. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
9. Shri Ananta Nayak 
10. Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
11. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
12. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
13. Shri Kali Charan Singh  
14. Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
 
Rajya Sabha  
15. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad  
16. Smt. Mahua Maji  
17. Shri Deepak Prakash 
18. Shri Aditya Prasad 
19. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
20. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee - Deputy Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. 

79 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up the consideration of the Draft Report on the 
subject ‘Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and Forest Clearance Process for 
Coal Mining Projects’ pertaining to the Ministry of Coal. 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any 
modification. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report in light 
of the factual verification received from the Ministry of Coal and Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, and present and lay the same in the Lok 
Sabha and Rajya Sabha respectively. 
.  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 