1 
 
                                   
24 STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and 
Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel 
Production 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2026/ASHADHA 1948 (Saka) 
  


2 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL  
 
 
Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and 
Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel 
Production 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2026 
                                                               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2026/ASHADHA 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  


3 
 
CM&S No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (___ Edition) and printed by 
_________

4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PART-I 
                 
CHAPTER I 
 
A Domestic Steel Industry 1 
B Steel Sector Capacity 10 
 
D Key challenges in Indian Steel Sector 12 
  
Chapter II 
 
 
 Roadmap for Made in India Steel Production 13 
 
A Augmenting Demand & Supply 
 
13 
B Infrastructure Development & Logistics 
 
22 
C Raw Material Security 
 
31 
D Sustainability 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations       59 
      
ANNEXURES 
 
I Minutes of the Fifth sitting held on 24.11.2025    72 
II Minutes of the Ninth sitting held on 15.12.2025    74 
III Minutes of the Tenth sitting held on 15.12.2025    76 
IV Minutes of the Twenty sixth sitting on 20.7.2026   78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-
2026) 
Chairperson – Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
3.  Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal 
4.  Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
6.  Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
7. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol 
8. Shri Selvaganapathi T.M. 
9.  Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
10.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
11.  Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
12.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
13.  Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
14. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
15.  Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
16.  Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan 
17. Shri Kali Charan Singh 
18. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
19.  Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh 
20. Shri S. Venkatesan 
21. Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
23. Smt. Mahua Maji 
24. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
25. Shri Aditya Prasad 
26.  Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
27. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
28. Shri Milind Murli Deora* 
29. Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo# 
30.  Dr. Sasmit Patra@ 
 
*nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025  
# nominated w.e.f. 05.12.2025 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 3767 dated 08.12.2025  
@ nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin – Part-II, Para No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist   -   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  -  Director  
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Huma Iqbal    -  Under Secretary 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel  (2025-26) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel Production’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Steel. 
2. The Committee selected the subject for detailed examination during 2025-26.  
The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Indian Steel 
Association(ISA) on 24.11.2025, Ministry of Steel and AIIFA Sustainable Steel 
Manufacturers Association(AIIFA) on 15.12.2025.  Based on the oral and written 
testimonies submitted to the Committee, a report on the subject was prepared. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 20.7.2026.  The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the 
Report.  
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of Steel, Indian 
Steel Association(ISA) and AIIFA Sustainable Steel Manufacturers 
Association(AIIFA) for placing material information as well as tendering evidence 
and views before the Committee. 
5.  The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee.  
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in  Part-II of 
the Report.   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
       …20.. July, 2026                                                             Chairperson 
       29 Ashadha, 1948(Saka)                              Standing Committee on Coal,  
                                                                        Mines and Steel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTORY 
A. Domestic Steel Industry  
India is the world's second largest crude steel producer. The domestic steel industry is 
a major economic driver, contributing about 2% to the GDP , and is fuelled by robust 
infrastructure growth, the Atmanirbhar Bharat (self-reliance) initiative, and booming  
urbanization. Over the past decade, the Indian steel sector has experienced robust growth 
in both capacity and production, with steelmaking capacity registering a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of 11.46% over the last two years. India’s steel sector is a key “sunrise 
sector” with strong and steady growth. It became the world’s second-largest steel producer 
in 2018 and has since retained this position. At the same time, steel consumption has more 
than doubled over the past 12 years. As demand increased, exports rose while imports 
declined, improving self-reliance. To support this growth, the government ensured raw 
material availability and reduced production costs. It also improved access to global markets 
for Indian steel producers.  
1.2 The iron & steel sector serves as an indicator to national development and is crucial 
for economic development during the nation building phase. The steel capacity of the 
country has increased from 109.85 MTPA to 200.33 MTPA during 2014-15 to 2024-25. Crude 
steel capacity needs to grow at a CAGR of 7.0% to reach 300 MT, CAGR of the last three 
years is 9.1%.  
1.3 At present, according to ‘World Steel’, the world's total production of crude steel for 
the period of January to December 2024 was 1884.6 MT. During the same period, India 
produced 149.4 MT, which is a 6.2% increase compared to the production of January to 
December 2023.[BN pg 1-Ministry]. Crude Steel production expanded from 103.545 Million 
Tonnes (MT) in 2020-21 to 152.180 Million Tonnes (MT) in 2024-25. Crude steel production 
in 2024-25 registered a growth of 5.4% over 144.299 MT in 2023-24.  
Strategic importance of achieving Aatmanirbharta in steel 
1.4 Steel plays an important role in a country’s economy. It supports sustainable 
economic growth because it can be recycled and helps complete projects faster. Using more 
steel in construction and infrastructure projects allows work to be finished more quickly and 
results in stronger and longer-lasting structures, as steel has high strength compared to its 
weight and is very durable. Since steel is 100% recyclable, it also helps improve 

8 
 
environmental performance throughout its entire life cycle. Steel consumption is closely 
linked with a country’s GDP, especially during the early stages of nation-building. The 
National Steel Policy, 2017 aims to make India self-reliant in all types of steel and to make 
the Indian iron and steel industry globally competitive.  
1.5 The major end use segments, where Aatamnirbharta, in steel is critical are Defence 
and Space, Railways and Automobiles, Renewable Energy sector for reaching net zero goal 
by 2070 and  infrastructure.  Lack of domestic capability in these areas can make India 
vulnerable. Major Steel Players are deploying advanced technology to meet these advanced 
grade steel. 
 Growth in Domestic Steel Demand 
1.6 As informed by the Ministry of Steel, the growth in consumption of steel in India 
during the last five years is given below:- 
  
1.7 India is recognized as the only large economy showing robust, consistent growth in 
steel consumption, with demand growing in double digits for several of the past three years. 
The per capita consumption for 2023-24 and 2024-25 is 97.7 kg and 108.0 kg respectively. In 
India, steel is primarily consumed in growth driving sectors such as Housing and Construction 
(43%), Infrastructure development (25%), Engineering and Packaging (22%), Automotives 
(9%) and Defence (1%).   During the financial year FY 2025, the total steel consumption in 
the country was 152.13 Million Tonnes. However, India’s annual per capita steel consumption 
is 108.0 kg per annum. There is large scope to improve the steel usages in various sectors.  


9 
 
1.8 The rapid pace of growth of the industry and the observed market trends called for 
certain guidelines and framework. Thus, the concept of the National Steel Policy was evolved 
with aim to provide a roadmap of growth and development for the Indian steel industry.  
National Steel Policy-2017 
1.9 The National Steel Policy (NSP) was announced in November 2005 as a basic 
blueprint for the growth of a self-reliant and globally competitive steel sector. The long-term 
objective of the National Steel Policy 2005 was to ensure that India has a modern and efficient 
steel industry of world standards, catering to diversified steel demand. The focus of the policy 
was to attain levels of global competitiveness in terms of global benchmarks of efficiency and 
productivity. With passage of time and continued growth in the domestic steel industry, it was 
felt that the NSP 2005 needs to be in sync with changing times. Accordingly, after a detailed 
review, the Government has released the National Steel Policy 2017, which has laid down 
the broad roadmap for encouraging long term growth for the Indian steel industry, both on 
demand and supply sides, by 2030-31, with a vision to create a technologically advanced and 
globally competitive steel industry that promotes economic growth.  The outcome indicators 
of NSP 2017 are as follows :- 
S.No.  Parameter Projections (2030-31) 
1 Total crude steel capacity (in MTPA) 300 
2 Total crude steel demand/production (in MTPA) 255 
3 Total finished steel demand/production (in MTPA) 230 
4 Sponge iron demand/production (in MTPA) 80 
5 Pig iron demand/production (in MTPA) 17 
6 Per Capita Finished Steel Consumption (in Kg) 158 
(BN pg 1) 
Domestically Manufactured Iron and Steel Product (DMI&SP) Policy 
1.10 At the same time, as a facilitator in the present day de-regulated, liberalized 
economic/market scenario, the Government has also announced a policy viz. Domestically 
Manufactured Iron and Steel Product (DMI&SP) for providing preference to domestically 
manufactured iron and steel products in Government procurement. This policy seeks to 
accomplish ‘Make in India’ with the objective of nation building and to encourage domestic 
manufacturing and is applicable on all Government tenders.  

10 
 
Steel Sector Capacity 
1.11  Steel is a deregulated sector  and the Ministry of Steel functions primarily as a facilitator 
by creating a conducive policy environment for the development of steel sector in the country.. 
Decisions related to creation of capacity are taken by the industry based on techno-commercial 
considerations such as availability of raw materials, distance from ports, logistics, market 
conditions etc. 
1.12 India emerged as the world’s second-largest steel producer in 2018 and has since 
maintained this position. It remains the only major economy to have recorded consistent growth 
in both steel production and consumption, achieving a compounded annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 6% between FY 2015-16 and FY 2024-25, significantly higher than other major 
economies. 
1.13 The Ministry has further informed that Government of India’s policies have played a 
pivotal role in driving this growth. Major infrastructure initiatives such as the Gati Shakti Master 
Plan, National Infrastructure Pipeline, National High-Speed Rail Corridor, and the Smart Cities 
Mission have boosted creation of infrastructure and domestic steel demand significantly. 
1.14 The existing capacities of PSU and Private Sector Integrated Steel Producers (ISPs) 
are 31 MT and 75 MT respectively. Planned capacity additions by PSU and Private Integrated 
Steel Producers by 2030-31 stand at 14.4 MT and 93 MT respectively. Secondary producers 
are also expected to enhance their capacities through increased output of downstream and 
value-added steel products. This will lead to a total steel production capacity of 333.6 MT in 
the next 5 years. 
 
Growth of Steel in India vis a vis other countries 
1.15 Regarding growth of steel sector in India as compared to the global scenario, the 
representatives of the Ministry of Steel briefed the Committee as under:- 
“India is the only large economy where we are still growing capacity, production, steel use. 
It has gone up by 37 per cent in 2024 over 2019, whereas China, USA, Japan, South 
Korea, all are negative”. 
Further, the Ministry has informed that the steel production in India as compared to global 
economies is as under: 

11 
 
 India had the fastest growth in steel consumption over the last decade while consumption 
across major economies have either declined or grew marginally 
 Indias steel consumption has shown an  increase of 7% over the last decade 
 China’s steel consumption has shown increase over last decade but during last 5 years, 
it has declined at the rate of -1.2%  
 World’s steel consumption has shown increase over last decade, but it has declined over 
past 5 years at the rate of -0.4%. 
 South Korea, USA and Japan have seen negative growth during the last decad 
 


12 
 
B. Key Challenges in Indian Steel Sector 
1.16 The Ministry of Steel have apprised that the key challenges in the steel 
sector in the country are as under: 
“Iron Ore:  Regulatory delays, uncertainty in auction processes, and high 
bidding premiums hinder timely operationalization of iron ore mines, disrupting 
long-term raw material security for the steel sector -especially for CPSEs. 
Additionally, limited domestic utilization of low-grade iron ore fines without 
beneficiation reduces resource efficiency and further constrains domestic ore 
availability. 
Coke:  High ash content and inconsistent domestic coking coal quality, coupled 
with low washery efficiency, limit availability of steel-grade coal. Heavy 
dependence on Australian imports persists due to challenges in diversifying 
supply. Meanwhile, slow adoption of stamp-charge battery technology -due to 
high costs and integration difficulties - constrains efforts to reduce import 
reliance. 
Railways:  Rail congestion, manpower shortages, and operational delays, 
combined with poor connectivity to ports and waterways, hinder timely 
dispatch and limit multimodal logistics efficiency. 
Roadways:  Insufficient lane capacity and bottlenecks on major mining and 
industrial corridors, along with poor last-mile road connectivity to steel and raw 
material units, cause delays, higher transport costs, and inefficient evacuation 
and delivery. 
Slurry Pipelines:  Land acquisition and clearance delays, water availability 
constraints, and high capital costs with long gestation periods slow down 
pipeline development and implementation. 
Shipping / Coastal & Inland Waterways:  Limited mechanized port 
infrastructure, poor rail connectivity, and slow development of National 
Waterways hinder efficient cargo handling and evacuation. 
India’s specialty steel ecosystem:  India faces a shortage of specialty steel 
capacity vital for defence, space, energy, and automotive sectors. Over a 
quarter of the country’s FY25 steel imports were specialty and value-added 
grades, creating strategic supply vulnerabilities. Domestic producers operate 
at a 5–10% cost disadvantage due to limited indigenous technology, financing 
challenges, logistical issues, and high-power costs. Heavy dependence on 
imported equipment and foreign expertise further restrains the growth of 
India’s own advanced steel manufacturing capabilities”.[Ministry BN Page 4] 
 

13 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
ROADMAP FOR MADE IN INDIA STEEL PRODUCTION 
 
2.1 The Government through various enablers has taken several 
initiatives for steel sector growth  which is encompassed  by the following 
broad key areas:- 
A. Augmenting demand and supply 
 National Steel Policy, 2017 
 Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Specialty Steel 
 Preference to Domestically Manufactured Iron & Steel (DMI&SP) 
B. Infrastructure Development and logistics 
 Rail and Road Infrastructure 
 Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
 Sagar Mala Project for port connectivity 
 Slurry pipelines for transportation 
 Logistics cost reduction 
C. Raw Material Security 
 Iron Ore  
 Coking Coal  
 Impact of Global Trade Restrictions on domestic steel 
D. Sustainability 
 Green Steel Taxonomy 
 National Green Hydrogen Mission 
 Steel Scrap Recycling Policy 2019 
 
A. Augmenting Demand and Supply 
(i)   National Steel Policy (NSP), 2017 Projections vis-à-vis 
Current status of the steel sector  
2.2 As informed by the Ministry of Steel, the capacity target of 
300 MT was envisaged in the National Steel Policy (NSP), 2017, which 

14 
 
provides policy direction to the steel sector in India with the objective of 
creating a technologically advanced and globally competitive steel 
industry that supports economic growth.  
 
The current status of the steel 
sector vis-a vis projections in 
National Steel Policy (NSP), 2017, 
is given below:Parameter 
Projections till 
2030-31 as 
per NSP 2017 
Current Status (2025-26) 
(as on 31st March 2026) 
Total crude steel capacity(Million 
Tons) 300 220.3 
Total crude steel demand/ 
production (Million Tons)  
255 
 
169.2 
Total finished steel demand/ 
production(Million Tons) 
 
230 
 
161.7 
Per Capita Finished Steel 
Consumption (in kgs)  
158 
 
115.5 
                                                                    
 
2.3 Regarding the target of achieving 300 MTPA crude steel capacity by 
2030-31 as laid down in the National Steel Policy, 2017 against the current 
capacity of 200.27 MTPA (FY 2024-25), and the specific interventions and 
timelines implemented by the Ministry to bridge the gap of 99.73 MTPA in the 
next 6 years, the Ministry replied as under: 
“……The current installed capacity stands at 220.3 MTPA up 
to March 2026….. Based on announced expansion plans of 
major steel producers, crude steel capacity is expected to 
increase progressively from the current level to around 235 
MTPA in FY 2026-27 and reach or exceed 300 MTPA by FY 
2030-31. These figures are indicative in nature, as actual 
capacity creation depends on investment decisions taken by 
the industry. 
 
Capacity addition over the past three years has recorded a 
CAGR of approximately 9percent, which is higher than the 
about 7 percent CAGR required to achieve the 300 MTPA 
target by 2030-31. This growth rate is considered broadly 
sustainable in the medium term, supported by strong 
domestic demand, ongoing brownfield expansions by major 
producers, policy stability, and continued public investment in 
infrastructure. However, beyond FY 2025-26, the pace of 
capacity expansion may be influenced by the availability and 

15 
 
cost of iron ore and coking coal, capital intensity of large steel 
projects, financing conditions, logistics and evacuation 
infrastructure in certain regions, environmental clearances, 
land acquisition timelines, and volatility in global steel prices. 
The Ministry is actively engaging with stakeholders to 
anticipate and mitigate these challenges”.  
 
 
 
(ii) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Speciality Steel 
 
2.4 Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Specialty Steel was 
approved by the Union Cabinet with a financial outlay of ₹6,322 crore. The 
scheme was approved to promote the manufacturing of “Specialty Steel” 
within the country by attracting capital investment, generate employment and 
promote technology up-gradation in the steel sector.  The scheme was notified 
on 29th July 2021, and the implementation guidelines were published on 20th 
October 2021. 
 
2.5 The scheme covers five broad product categories, Coated/Plated 
Steel Products, High Strength/Wear Resistant Steel, Specialty Rails, Alloy 
Steel Products & Steel Wires and Electrical Steel. 
 
2.6 Two rounds of applications have been concluded so far in which 44 
projects from 19 participating companies (under PLI scheme 1.0) and 42 
projects from 25 participating companies (under PLI scheme 1.1) have been 
received in the first and second rounds, respectively. Major Integrated Steel 
Producers (ISPs) and secondary producers have participated in both the 
rounds. 
 
2.7 Each participating company has signed a project-wise memoranda 
of understanding (MoU) with the Ministry of Steel. A MoU contains the terms 
of participation, yearly investment and production commitments. The scheme 
offers incentives within a tenure of five years on fulfilling investment and 
production commitments evaluated at the time of submission of incentive 
claims by the company. 
 
2.8 During the scheme tenure of first round, an investment of Rs. 27,106 

16 
 
Crores, generation of 14,760 direct employment opportunities and production 
of about 7.9 million tonnes of specialty steel have been committed. 
 
2.9 The second round of the PLI scheme was launched on 06th January 
2025. Under PLI 1.1, an investment of Rs.17,000 Crores, generation of 
16,000 direct employment opportunities and achieving production of about 
6.4 million tonnes of specialty steel are expected. 
The details of key performance indicators for PLI Scheme for Specialty Steel 
till Sep’25 is as below: 
 
Status of PLI Scheme for Specialty Steel 
 
Cumulative 
Investment (INR Crores.) 
Cumulative 
Production (in tonnes) 
Cumulative Employment 
22,973 2,308,000 13,284 
 
 
2.10 Regarding capacity addition and ‘Made in India’ targets under 
Speciality Steel, the Indian Steel Association (ISA) in a written response  
to  the Committee during the examination of the subject, informed as 
under:- 
“The scheme has helped attract investment and has 
encouraged Indian companies to start making high-value 
specialty steel that was imported. Since India imported around 
4 million tons of specialty steel worth about ₹300 billion in 
2020–21, when the PLI scheme was brought in for new 
categories of specialty steel and also to increase the exiting 
specialty steel capacity for import substitution. Most projects 
are still under implementation, and full results will be visible 
only over the next few years because specialty steel plants 
need long time, complex technology, technology transfer 
agreements and high capital investment. 
 
The scheme has succeeded in creating intent and 
commitment for domestic production of specialty steels such 
as automotive steel, electrical steel, coated steel, and alloy 
steels. Some import dependence has started reducing in 
selected segments, but India still relies on imports for many 
high-end grades. Therefore, while the direction of the PLI 
scheme is correct, its impact on imports is gradual rather than 
immediate. 

17 
 
 
Companies implementing PLI projects face several 
challenges. These include delays in acquiring advanced 
technology, high capital and energy costs, shortage of skilled 
manpower, slow regulatory and environmental clearances, 
and uncertainty in raw material prices. In some cases, meeting 
the strict timelines and production thresholds under the 
scheme has also been difficult, especially for complex 
specialty steel grades that require trial runs and customer 
approvals. 
 
To improve the effectiveness of the PLI scheme in future, we 
suggest the incentive that are being provided should not have 
complex eligibility and stringent criteria as maximum cap for 
each company is not more than 200 crores under PLI, this 
includes group companies which is meagre in comparison to 
the investments being made. 
 
Allowing more flexible timelines, providing stronger support for R&D 
and technology transfer, faster clearances, assured 
government and PSU procurement of specialty steel, export 
support, and continued policy stability will help companies 
scale up production and make India a competitive hub for 
specialty steel. With these improvements, the PLI scheme 
can play a much bigger role in for absolute Aatmanirbharta 
in Steel and building an export-oriented specialty steel 
industry and the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India- 
Make in India-Make for the World”.  
 
Gap between commitments and achievements under PLI 
 
2.11 During the examination of the subject,  the Committee had observed the 
following  gap between commitments and achievements under PLI:-   
 a) PLI 1.0 and PLI 1.1 combined have attracted investment commitments of 
₹44,106 crores with estimated production of 14.3 MT specialty steel. As of 
October 2025, actual investment is ₹22,973 crores (52% of commitment) and 
production is 2.308 MT (16% of target), the factors causing this significant gap 
between commitments and achievements ;   
 b) PLI 1.0 targets 7.94 MT incremental production but has achieved only 2.329 
MT (till October 2025) with a FY 2025-26 target of 1.255 MT, whether the Ministry 
is confident that the remaining 5.6 MT will be achieved before scheme completion 
and the key bottlenecks ;    
c) The third round PLI 1.2 launched on 31st October 2025 focuses on super alloys, 

18 
 
CRGO, stainless steel, and titanium alloys. 
On being asked about the possibility of PLI 1.2 achieving its aims, given that PLI 
1.0 and 1.1 have underperformed.  the Ministry of Steel furnished the following 
written reply: 
 
“The apparent gap between investment and production 
commitments and the achievements as of October 2025 is 
primarily attributable to the phased and long-gestation nature 
of steel projects, rather than any withdrawal of commitments. 
The PLI Scheme for Specialty Steel is applicable for a five-
year production period, with FY 2023-24 being the first year of 
production and FY 2024-25 the first year of incentive 
disbursement. The final year of production under the original 
timeline is FY 2027-28, with incentive disbursement continuing 
up to FY 2028-29. Further, for companies that have been 
granted deferment due to changes in business or project 
timelines, production is permitted up to FY 2029-30 and 
incentive disbursement up to FY 2030-31. 
 
As of October 2025, actual investment of ₹22,973 crore 
represents 52% of the total committed investment of ₹44,106 
crore, while the remaining ₹21,133 crore is expected to be 
invested progressively up to FY 2029-30. Accordingly, the 
investment trajectory remains aligned with the approved 
timelines, and there is no material dilution of committed 
investments. Production levels are currently lower because a 
significant number of projects are still under construction or 
commissioning and are yet to commence commercial 
production. 
 
Achievability of remaining PLI 1.0 production target 
 
Under PLI 1.0, the target incremental production is 7.94 MT, 
against which 2.329 MT has been achieved up to October 
2025, with a target of 1.255 MT for FY 2025-26. The Ministry 
remains confident of achieving the balance production within 
the scheme period, as most participating companies have 
already made substantial capital investments and are at 
advanced stages of project execution. 
 
The slower production ramp-up is attributable to project-
related bottlenecks such as delays in procurement of 
specialised machinery, civil construction timelines, 
commissioning challenges, and global supply-chain 
uncertainties. Additionally, 18 MoUs under PLI 1.0 have 
availed a one-year deferment in production, which has shifted 

19 
 
output to subsequent years without affecting the overall 
committed capacity. The steel sector’s exposure to market 
volatility, including fluctuations in input costs and output prices, 
has also influenced the pacing of commissioning decisions. 
 
PLI 1.2 
 
PLI 1.2, launched on 04.11.2025, has been designed after 
incorporating lessons learnt from PLI 1.0 and 1.1. The focus 
areas – super alloys, CRGO steel, stainless steel and titanium alloys – are strategic, high-value segments with 
strong and sustained domestic demand, import dependence, 
and clear downstream linkages. 
 
The Ministry has provided greater clarity on timelines, 
eligibility conditions, and monitoring mechanisms under PLI 
1.2, while also engaging closely with industry to ensure 
realistic capacity planning. The Ministry will continue close 
monitoring and stakeholder engagement to ensure timely 
execution and course correction wherever required “ .  
 
2.12 Regarding the five PLI product categories, (Coated Steel, High 
Strength/Wear Resistant, Specialty Rails, Alloy Steel, Electrical Steel), the 
Committee desired to be apprised about those categories that are 
underperforming along with the reasons. To this, the Ministry replied as 
under:- 
 
“Categories of Alloy steel, coated steel and high 
strength/wear resistant steel have received significant 
commitments. Steel projects are highly capital intensive and 
involves co-ordination with many stakeholders. Availability of 
critical equipment required for these projects is affected by 
uncertainties in global supply chain. Steel sector being 
deregulated, is exposed to market dynamics which includes 
volatility in input costs and fluctuation in output prices” .  
 
2.13 The Committee further examined regarding the sectoral breakdown 
of investments (new capacity vs. capacity expansion vs. technology 
upgrades to which the Ministry replied as under:- 
“Approximately 95% investments have been committed for 
new capacities in specialty steel. About 5% investments have 
been committed for capacity expansion/augmentation”.  

20 
 
Quality Control under PLI 
 
2.14 The Committee observed that the Ministry has suspended QCOs on 42 BIS 
standards for three years and 13 specialty steel standards under PLI 1.2 for one 
year (effective 20th November 2025). The High Level Committee on NFRR on 
Non-Financial Regulatory Reforms (HLC-NFRR) recommended retaining QCOs 
on 37 BIS standards for safety, small producers, unfair trade practices, national 
security, and PLI adequacy.  The Committee desired to be apprised as to how the 
Ministry will ensure that QCO removal for 107 products does not result in 
compromising safety. In this regard, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
“As per the recommendations of the Report of High-Level 
Committee on Non-Financial Regulatory Reforms regarding 
Quality Control Orders on Steel Products, the Ministry of Steel 
has issued the Steel and Steel Products (Quality Control) 
Amendment Order, 2025. Through the said Order, the Ministry 
has adopted a calibrated approach and suspended QCO 
enforcement for 55 standards (42 standards for three years 
and 13 standards relating to specialty steel under PLI 1.2 
for one year). The remaining 96 standards have been 
retained on grounds of health & Safety, support to small steel 
producers, preventing unfair trade practices, upholding 
national security etc. as detailed below: - 
 
 
(i) Health/Safety: BIS standards/steel products, 
which are related to safety and health considerations 
have been retained. 
 
(ii) Small Steel Producers: About 2356 Small Steel 
Producers contribute 47% of India's Steel production. 
They are already in financial stress due to low steel 
prices and units of 181 small producers have either 
already closed down or running at less than 10% 
capacity. There is a great possibility of cheap 
Chinese steel flooding into market, if QCO related to 
these products are suspended. Hence, such steel 
products being produced by Small Steel Producers 
are being retained. 
 
(iii) Unfair trade practices: Steel Sector is a Strategic 
Sector and complete dependence of sourcing it from 
other countries may not be the right approach 
especially on price consideration, where only relevant 
source is China/ ASEAN countries and unfair trade 

21 
 
practices lead to lower price of steel. Such over 
dependence on unified source may create a supply 
chain issue based on geopolitical factors, as is being 
faced in the case of rare earth metal. There are steel 
products which can come in bulk quantities from 
China and adversely impact the domestic steel 
players, due to unfair pricing and can also create over 
dependence on China. There is criterion in the BIS 
Act for implementation of QCO for prevention of unfair 
trade practices. Hence, BIS standards/steel products 
are being retained on the basis of unfair trade 
practices criterion. 
 
(iv) National Security: Under the criteria of National 
Security under the BIS Act, Steel products related to 
Defence, Atomic Energy etc. are being retained on 
National Security ground. 
 
Adequate capacity in Specialty Steel and included in 
PLI: Ministry of Steel has launched Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for incentivizing production of 
Specialty Steel in the country with allocation of 
Rs.6,322 crore in the year 2021. Three rounds of PLI 
have been launched respectively in the year 2021, 
January 2025 and November 2025. Ministry has 
agreed for suspension of QCOs for Specialty Steel in 
which very little or nil capacity exists in the country 
and it will take some time to create the capacity 
 
(iii) Preference to Domestically Manufactured Iron and Steel 
Products(DMI &SP)  
 
2.15 The government introduced the DMI&SP Policy to provide 
preference to domestically produced iron & steel material in Government 
tenders. The policy seeks to accomplish ‘Make in India’ with the objective 
to encourage domestic manufacturing. Features of the amended DMI&SP 
policy, 2025 are as follows: 
 
i. All government ministries, departments, public sector units 
(PSUs), and entities under their control must source iron and steel 
products domestically. 
ii. The policy covers procurement of iron and steel for projects 
under centrally sponsored and central sector schemes, for items 
valued above ₹5 lakh. 

22 
 
iii. For capital goods packages used in steelmaking domestic value 
addition in the range of 30-95% is mandated. Alongside, products 
that can be imported are also indicated. 
iv. The Ministry of Steel may grant waivers if specific grades or 
quantities of steel cannot be sourced within India, but only upon 
demonstration of non-availability. 
v. Suppliers from countries that restrict Indian companies from 
bidding in their public procurement tenders are barred from bidding 
for Indian government steel contracts, unless specifically allowed 
by the Ministry. 
vi. To promote self-reliance in technologies used in the Indian iron and 
steel sector by incentivizing the adoption of indigenous 
technologies across all stages of steel manufacturing 
B. Infrastructure Development and Logistics 
2.18 Logistics and Infrastructure are one of the key challenges faced by the 
Indian Steel Sector.  During an interactive session with the Indian Steel 
Association (ISA), the representative of ISA briefed the Committee as 
follows:- 
“All the steel companies right now are investing heavily into 
infrastructure steel because that is going to be the future in very short 
time. The moment the policy makers understand, solution lies in 
urbanization and vertical movement, it will happen. Earlier we used 
to think that steel is more expensive than cement. But we have seen 
the live cases. It gives more space within a building. A steel building 
has more space. There are a number of advantages. Normal 
construction takes five years. This takes only one-and-a-half years 
or one year. There is less pollution, less time taken, and quick 
delivery for the policy makers.” 
                                                            
 
2.19 The Key logistical challenges impacting the steel sector as informed by 
the Ministry of Steel are as under : 
Railways 
 High rail congestion and limited rake/wagon availability affecting timely 
dispatch 
 Inadequate manpower and operational delays at loading/unloading points 

23 
 
 Inadequate rail connectivity to ports and waterways, limiting multimodal 
logistics efficiency 
 
Roadways 
 Congestion on key mining and industrial corridors due to insufficient lane 
capacity and bottlenecks 
 Last-mile road connectivity to many steel and raw material units remains 
inadequate, with narrow feeder roads, congestion, and poor infrastructure 
causing delays, higher transport costs, and inefficiencies in evacuation 
and delivery. 
 
Slurry Pipelines 
 Land acquisition and Right-of-Way (RoW) delays for pipeline corridors 
 Multiple statutory clearances (EC, forest, RoW), leading to long 
implementation timelines 
 Water availability constraints and limited arrangements for reuse/recycling 
 High upfront capital expenditure and long gestation period 
Shipping / Coastal & Inland Waterways 
 Infrastructure deficiencies at ports and terminals, including limited 
mechanized handling capacity 
 Inadequate rail connectivity to ports restricting seamless evacuation 
 Limited operationalization of National Waterways; most are still in early 
development stages 
(i) Rail and Road Infrastructure  
 
2.20 Rail congestion and wagon/rake unavailability are critical 
bottlenecks. The Committee desired to be informed regarding the current 
average rake turnaround time for steel movements, and the target for FY 
2030-31 and also the Ministry of Steel’s coordination with the Ministry of 
Railways on dedicated rake allocations for steel. Since Last-mile road 
connectivity remains inadequate with narrow feeder roads and congestion 
the Committee desired the Ministry to outline the strategy to integrate state 
highways and rural roads serving steel and mining clusters with the national 
logistics grid. To this, the Ministry replied as under  :- .[updated replies 

24 
 
Ministry question 7] 
 
“Rail congestion and wagon/rake unavailability are 
recognised as critical constraints affecting the cost 
competitiveness, reliability and sustainability of steel sector 
logistics. The Ministry of Steel has been engaging closely with 
the Ministry of Railways and other concerned Ministries to 
address these bottlenecks in a coordinated and time-bound 
manner.  
 
Current Rake Turnaround Time and Target for FY 2030–31 
 
Analysis undertaken under the Sectoral Plan for Efficient 
Logistics (SPEL) for Iron and Steel Sector indicates that the 
current average rake turnaround time (TAT) for iron ore and 
steel movements is about 5–6 days. This is primarily 
attributable to congestion, mineral-dense corridors, 
inadequate line capacity and yard infrastructure, limited 
mechanisation at sidings and terminals, and 
wagon/manpower constraints on peak routes. Elevated rake 
TAT reduces effective rail capacity and leads to diversion of 
traffic to roads, increasing logistics costs and emissions. In 
alignment with the National Steel Policy 2017, PM GatiShakti, 
National Master Plan, and capacity augmentation under the 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) programme, the Ministry of 
Steel, in coordination with the Ministry of Railways, is targeting 
a reduction in average rake turnaround time to about 3 days 
by FY 2030–31. This improvement is expected through 
progressive commissioning of Eastern and Western DFCs to 
decongest existing trunk routes, expansion and 
modernisation of steel-plant rail sidings with mechanised 
loading/unloading and longer loop lines, and adoption of 
higher-capacity wagons supported by operational reforms 
such as electronic train management systems and real-time 
rake tracking. 
Coordination with Ministry of Railways on Rake Availability 
 
The Ministry of Steel has been coordinating the progress 
closely with the Ministry of Railways through structured inter-
ministerial mechanisms, including Logistics committee review 
meetings chaired by Secretary (Steel), dedicated discussions 
with Railway authorities, and identification of priority rail 
infrastructure projects critical for steel logistics, including 
doubling, tripling, quadrupling and new line projects in 
mineral-intensive corridors. 
While Indian Railways does not earmark rakes on a sector-

25 
 
exclusive basis, these coordinated interventions are aimed at 
ensuring predictable and adequate rail capacity for steel and 
raw material movements, supported by policy measures like 
promotion of high-capacity wagons for bulk traffic, and 
aggregation-based rail services for smaller steel units. 
Last-Mile Road Connectivity and Integration with National Logistics 
Grid 
 
The Ministry recognises that inadequate last-mile road 
connectivity—particularly narrow feeder roads linking mines, 
steel plants and logistics nodes to National and State 
Highways—remains a significant bottleneck. Sectoral Plan for 
Efficient Logistics(SPEL) assessment indicates that a large 
number of steel and iron ore units are located 2–7 km away 
from NH/SH networks, connected by narrow roads passing 
through habitations, resulting in congestion, delays and higher 
logistics costs. Approximately 1,000 km of first-and last-mile 
road infrastructure across key steel-producing states has 
been identified for upgradation”  
 
(ii) Gati Shakti National Master Plan  
 
2.21 In alignment with the National Steel Policy 2017, PM 
GatiShakti,`National Master Plan, and capacity augmentation under the Dedicated 
Freight Corridor (DFC) programme, the Ministry of Steel, in coordination with the 
Ministry of Railways, is targeting a reduction in average rake turnaround time to 
about 3 days by FY 2030–31.To address the issue of logistics and Infrastructure, 
the Ministry of Steel is pursuing a multi-pronged strategy in coordination with the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, State Governments and other 
stakeholders, which includes: - 
 
 Integration of steel and mining clusters into the PM 
GatiShakti digital platform to identify last-mile gaps and 
prioritise connectivity projects, 
 Promotion of Multi-Modal Logistics Parks (MMLPs) 
near major steel clusters to enable efficient modal shifts 
and reduce dependence on congested urban road 
networks.[lop question 7] 
the development of Multi-Modal Logistics Parks 
(MMLPs) under PM Gati Shakti, along with port-linked 

26 
 
and hinterland warehousing hubs at locations such as 
Haldia/Kolkata, Vizag and Raipur–Raigarh, aims to 
reduce handling, inventory and aggregation costs while 
improving access to organised logistics.  
Sagar Mala Project for port connectivity 
2.22 The Committee desired the Ministry to furnish details regarding the 
Sagar Mala Project which aims to improve port connectivity and the 
percentage of India's iron ore and finished steel export/import traffic that is 
expected to be handled through improved port infrastructure by FY 2030-
31 ; the current status of coastal and inland waterway operationalization 
for steel movement ; and also, the time required for the National 
Waterways Program for steel logistics to become operationalized. To this, 
the Ministry submitted as under:- 
 
“The Ministry of Steel has undertaken an assessment of 
sectoral logistics for the iron and steel sector. The findings in 
the draft report of the assessment indicates that, under the 
Sagarmala Project, with port modernization and enhanced 
hinterland connectivity around 15% of India’s iron ore and 
approx. 3% of steel movement is expected to be handled 
through this improved port infrastructure by FY 2030–31, 
At present, coastal shipping for steel movement has been 
partially operationalized, with limited but gradually increasing 
movement along the eastern and western coasts. Inland 
waterway transportation of steel remains at early development 
and pilot stage, restricted to select stretches such as National 
Waterway-1 [Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River system (1620 
Km)] and National Waterway-2 [Brahmaputra River system 
(891 Km)] “. 
  
 
(iii) Slurry pipelines for  transportation 
 
2.23 Slurry pipelines are used to transport fine particulate solids, such as iron 
ore, coal, or mining waste over long distances. Slurry pipelines for iron ore 
transport are seen to face land acquisition and Right of Way (RoW) delays. When 
the Committee desired to be apprised about the o slurry pipelines currently 
serving major steel clusters; and water availability constraints, the Ministry 

27 
 
informed as under:- 
“ Iron ore slurry pipelines are a globally established mode for 
bulk transportation of minerals, offering significant 
advantages in terms of lower logistics cost, reduced carbon 
emissions, minimal land footprint and lower dependence on 
rail and road networks. 
 
In India, despite large iron ore production and proximity of 
mines to steel and pellet plants, the share of slurry pipelines 
in iron ore transportation remains limited. This is primarily due 
to Right of Way (RoW) constraints, land acquisition 
challenges, multiple regulatory clearances and concerns 
related to water availability. 
 
Present Operational Slurry Pipelines: At present, only 34 
MTPA of iron ore slurry pipeline capacity is operational in 
India, constituting approximately 6% of total iron ore 
movement. 
 
Existing operational pipelines primarily serve coastal steel 
and pellet clusters such as Paradip, Kalinganagar and 
Visakhapatnam, linking them with iron ore mining belts in 
Odisha, Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra 
 
Water Availability Concerns & Water Sourcing Strategies 
 
Water constraints are real and material, particularly in Odisha 
and Chhattisgarh. Slurry pipelines are water-intensive. For 
instance, a 30 MTPA, 300 km pipeline requires 87,840 
m³/day of water. 
Return water pipelines, closed-loop recycling, and 
desalination form the core water management strategy, 
ensuring slurry pipelines remain both economically viable 
and environmentally sustainable.  
 
Return Water Pipelines (RWP): 
 Return water pipelines are emerging as the primary mitigation strategy. 
 RWPs allow 85% of water to be recovered and reused, reducing 
freshwater withdrawal drastically. 
Closed-loop Recycling Systems: 
 Slurry pipelines are designed as zero-discharge systems, 
where water recovered at pellet or steel plants is pumped back 
to the mine end. 

28 
 
 This reduces environmental discharge risks and dependence 
on continuous freshwater abstraction. 
Desalination for Coastal Units: 
 For coastal steel clusters (Paradip, Visakhapatnam, Angul), 
desalination plants are being evaluated either for make-up water 
or full water sourcing. 
 This approach reduces dependence on river systems and 
enhances long-term sustainability” . 
 2.24 Regarding slurry pipelines, the Indian Steel Association (ISA) 
representatives informed the Committee a s  u n d e r :- 
 
“………slurry pipeline is the solution for decarbonisation as we will 
reduce that much of movement. We also need slurry pipeline 
approvals which have not been coming very easily in many of the 
States. , we want natural gas and petroleum products under GST. 
Then, electricity duty varies from State to State. If we have to 
transport RE power from one State to another State, we must look 
at how it should not become very expensive because it is not 
possible that everywhere solar energy is generated. So, wherever 
it is possible, we capture the wind energy, solar energy, and the 
likewise. The transfer charges need to be rationalised which will 
help India to grow with more renewable energy. The only way is 
decarbonise, especially for steel and we will need support because 
almost ranging from 220 kg of reduction in carbon to more than 
300 kg reduction in carbon for those who are in the electric arc 
furnace can take place only through renewable conversion to 
more of renewable energy”. 
 
(iv) Logistics Cost Reduction 
 
2.25 For every one ton of finished steel, four tons of freight movement is 
undertaken. Within India, road and rail freight both are very high, making 
Indian steel industry becoming uncompetitive outside the factory gate. As per 
Niti Ayog report, outside the factory gate, there are cost disadvantages for 
Indian steel industry given in the following chart: 
 
 
 

29 
 
USD/Ton 
Logistics and 
Infrastructure 
25–30 
Power 8–12 
Import duty on 
Coal 
5–7 
Clean Energy 
Cess 
2–4 
Taxes and duties on iron ore 8–12 
Finance 30–35 
Total cost 80-100 
 
2.26 Regarding reduction in cost of logistics including 
rationalisation of freight classification for iron ore and coal, 
development of warehousing hubs, and multimodal steel logistics 
corridors, the Ministry informed  the Committee as under:- 
 
“The sectoral logistics analysis done by this Ministry 
suggests that the estimated logistics disadvantage of USD 
80–100 per tonne is directionally correct but represents an 
upper-end scenario rather than an all-India average. Mode-
wise cost assessments show that dependence on road 
transport, first- and last-mile rail gaps, port handling charges, higher rail freight classifications and surcharges can add ₹600–1,200 per tonne per leg, which compounds across multiple movements of iron ore, coal and finished steel. When combined with indirect factors such as idle 
freight due to wagon constraints, longer turnaround times, 
power costs, royalties and taxes, the cumulative 
disadvantage for inland steel plants and MSMEs, especially those distant from mines or ports, can plausibly approach USD 80–100 per tonne, whereas coastal or corridor-connected plants experience a much lower penalty. Thus, while the figure may overstate the average, it is credible for high-logistics-intensity producers, underscoring the importance of the reforms proposed by this Ministry. 
  

30 
 
 
 
 
Indicative logistics cost by mode of transportation: 
  
Mode of 
transport 
Typical 
distance 
suitability 
Logistics 
cost 
(₹/tonne-km) 
Total cost 
example* 
(₹/tonne) 
Key remarks 
Road <300 km, 
last-mile ~3.5 ~2,830–2,930 
(780 km case) 
High flexibility, but 
costly and congestion-
prone 
Rail 300–1,000 
km, bulk ~2.3 ~1,620–1,720 
(650 km case) 
Most economical for 
steel if surcharges are 
rationalised 
Inland 
waterways 
(NW-1) 
>1,000 km, 
bulk ~1.06 
~1,805–1,905 
(Haldia–
Varanasi) 
Low cost, but 
port/handling adds 
₹300–400/tonne 
Slurry 
pipeline (iron 
ore) 
100–500 km, 
high volume ~0.86 Lowest among 
modes 
Very low operating 
cost; high upfront 
capex 
     
 
 
2.27 The said logistics disadvantage is sought to be addressed 
through a combination of rail freight rationalisation, creation of 
warehousing and logistics hubs, and development of multimodal steel 
logistics corridors. Key proposed reforms include reclassification of iron 
ore freight from Class 165 to Class 145, aligning it with other bulk raw 
materials, and reversal of the enhanced special classification for 
coal/coke from Class 145A to Class 145, which together would 
significantly lower the landed cost of key inputs. In addition, withdrawal 
of the 15% Busy Season Surcharge, restoration of long-lead freight 
concessions for steel, and review of short-lead concessions for iron ore 
and coal have been recommended to directly reduce rail freight burden, 
particularly for MSMEs”.  
 
2.28 Regarding logistics costs incurred by Indian steel producers and the 
global bests the Ministry replied as under:- 
“Indian steel producers presently incur logistics costs of about 
16–18% of revenue, compared to the global benchmark of 10–12%. The Ministry expects a substantial reduction in this gap by FY 2028–29, aligned  with  the  commissioning  of  major  rail infrastructure projects under 
the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan. 
 

31 
 
By FY 2028–29, over 14,000 km of rail infrastructure is 
expected to be operational, including ~2,840 km of Dedicated 
Freight Corridors (Eastern and Western DFCs), ~3,000 km of 
feeder and last-mile connectivity, and ~7,000 km of capacity 
augmentation works such as doubling and tripling on high-
density steel routes. These projects will enable segregation of 
freight traffic, higher axle loads, longer trains and improved 
turnaround time. 
 
The commissioning of this rail network is expected to facilitate 
a significant modal shift of steel and raw material movement 
from road to rail, improve the reliability of bulk logistics and 
progressively bring down logistics costs of the steel sector 
towards global benchmarks”  
 
C. Raw Material Security 
 
2.29 India’s main advantage lies in the availability of iron ore. For long term 
survival and availability of right quality of iron ore specially for 
decarbonization which requires high FE content iron ore, beneficiation will 
play a key role. The present royalty scheme makes this unviable.[BN -ISA-
page 5].  The key challenges faced by the steel sector regarding raw 
material security (iron ore, coking coal etc ) can be outlined as follows:- 
(i) Iron Ore 
 Regulatory and environmental approvals delay mining 
operationalization and expansion, indirectly affecting ore security. 
 Auction or reallocation of cancelled/expired iron ore leases creates 
uncertainty and delays in securing operational mines, resulting in 
disrupted iron ore availability and impacting long-term supply planning 
for the steel sector. 
 Auction of iron ore leases poses a challenge for CPSEs, as high 
bidding premiums and aggressive auction conditions make it difficult 
for them to compete and subsequently operationalize the mines, 
underscoring the need for a reservation route to ensure timely and 
secure raw material supply. 
 Low-grade iron ore fines (45–55% Fe) have limited domestic use and 
without beneficiation, large quantities remain underutilized or 
exported, challenging resource efficiency and domestic ore 
availability.[PPT-Ministry] 

32 
 
Iron Ore Mining and Availability 
 
2.30 The Committee noted that the Ministry identifies regulatory delays, 
auction uncertainty, and high bidding premiums as key challenges in iron ore 
mine operationalization. The Committee desired the Ministry to identify t h e  
n u m b e r  o f  iron ore mining leases which remained operationalized versus 
cancelled/expired as of December 2025 ; the average time taken for 
operationalization post-auction and  low-grade iron ore fines (45-55% Fe) that 
remain largely underutilized without beneficiation ; the current beneficiation 
capacity in India, and the investment that has been committed to scale this 
up  ; the specific number of beneficiation plants being commissioned in FY 
2025-26 and FY 2026-27 and whether the Ministry has considered 
establishing a dedicated mine allocation route for PSUs (similar to coal sector 
practices) rather than competing in open auctions. To this, the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
“After the auction of an iron ore mining lease in India, the time 
required to operationalize the mine typically ranges from 24 to 
60 months, depending on the mine’s prior status and the 
readiness of statutory approvals. For re-auctioned (previously 
operational) mines, successful bidders generally require 18–
30 months to recommence production, as baseline geological 
data, land acquisition, and infrastructure (haul roads, 
beneficiation linkages, rail sidings) often already exist. In 
contrast, virgin or greenfield leases usually take 30–60 
months, as they must sequentially secure approvals such as 
Mining Plan approval, Environmental Clearance (EC), Forest 
Clearance (FC) where applicable, land acquisition, Consent 
to Establish/Operate, and development of mining and 
evacuation infrastructure. Delays are most commonly driven 
by EC/FC timelines, land access issues, and last-mile rail or 
port connectivity rather than mining readiness. 
From a regulatory standpoint, the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR Act)—as 
amended and prescribes defined milestones and timelines for 
operationalisation after auction. Typically, the successful 
bidder must obtain all statutory clearances within 2 years of 
grant of the mining lease (extendable in limited circumstances 
where delays are attributable to the Government). Failure to 
meet prescribed milestones triggers progressive penalties: 
i. Forfeiture of a portion or the entirety of the performance security, 
ii. Levy of additional charges or interest, and, in 

33 
 
prolonged non-compliance 
iii. Termination of the mining lease with re-auction of the block. 
 
 
2.31 The performance security quantum is substantial 
(linked to lease area and notified rates), making non-
operationalisation economically punitive. These provisions 
were tightened to curb speculative bidding and ensure that 
auctioned iron ore resources are brought into production 
within a predictable timeframe, supporting domestic steel 
sector raw material security 
Low-grade iron ore fines containing 45–55% Fe are generally 
rendered suitable for the iron and steel industry either through 
beneficiation or by blending with higher-grade ores. Fines in 
the 1–10 mm size fraction are typically utilised as feed for 
sinter production, even at lower iron grades. However, ultra-
fines <1 mm are suitable only for pelletisation, for which a 
minimum iron content ≥61% Fe is required. Consequently, 
iron ore fines of <1 mm size and <61% Fe must necessarily 
undergo beneficiation to upgrade the iron content, followed by 
pellet making, or be blended with high-grade ores to achieve 
an average grade of ≥61% Fe. In the absence of beneficiation 
processing or blending, these low-grade ultra-fines are 
typically diverted to export markets. 
 
India’s installed iron ore beneficiation capacity currently stands at 
114.15 million tonnes (MT), with capacity utilisation during 
FY25 in the range of 65–71%. The beneficiation capacities is 
concentrated in Odisha, Karnataka, and Chhattisgarh, 
reflecting the geographic distribution of iron ore reserves and 
associated steelmaking ecosystems. 
The steel sector in India is deregulated, and decisions relating 
to creation of capacity are taken by industry players based on 
techno-commercial considerations such as availability of raw 
materials, access to logistics and ports, market conditions, 
financing environment and demand outlook. 
The reservation route for iron ore mines under Section 17A of 
the MMDR Act provides for the allocation of iron ore mining 
leases to steel CPSEs and is done by the Ministry of Mines. 
 
In order to ensure raw material availability to the steel sector 
the Ministry has recommended allocation of mines to Ministry 
of Mines on nomination basis to CPSEs”.  
Iron Ore Grade and Quality 
2.32 The Committee desired to be apprised regarding the grade profile of 
India's iron ore reserves (% of Fe content by category), its comparison to 

34 
 
global benchmarks ; the impact of declining ore grades on mining 
productivity and beneficiation requirements ; the processes that are 
underway to upgrade ore grades through beneficiation or sourcing from 
high-grade deposits.  In this regard, the Ministry replied as under: 
“India is endowed with substantial iron ore resources, 
comprising both hematite and magnetite ores. As per Indian 
Bureau of Mines (IBM), the total iron ore resources are 
estimated at about 25.36 billion tonnes, of which 6.41 billion 
tonnes are reserves and the balance are remaining 
resources. Hematite accounts for the dominant share, with 
around 24.06 billion tonnes, largely located in Odisha, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and adjoining regions, while 
magnetite resources of about 1.31 billion tonnes are mainly 
concentrated in Karnataka and southern States. A grade-
wise analysis of hematite reserves indicates that medium-
grade ore (58–62% Fe) constitutes the largest share, 
followed by low-grade (<58% Fe) ore, while high-grade 
(>62% Fe) reserves form a comparatively smaller 
proportion. This distribution underscores the long-term shift 
towards greater reliance on beneficiation for effective 
utilisation of domestic resources. 
 
Iron Ore Resources in India (in Million Tonnes) 
Type Reserves Remaining Resources Total 
Resources 
Hematite 6,209.0 17,848.8 24,057.8 
Magnetite 202.8 1,102.4 1,305.2 
Total 6,411.8 18,951.2 25,363.0 
(Source: IBM, Indian Mineral Yearbook) 
 
Grade-wise Hematite Reserves (in Million Tonnes) 
Grade Category Fe Content Reserves 
High Grade >62% Fe 1,450.0 
Medium Grade 58–62% Fe 2,596.7 
Low Grade <58% Fe 1,532.6 
Total  6,209.0 
 
The progressive decline in average ore grades has a direct 
bearing on mining productivity and downstream processing. 
Lower-grade ores result in higher stripping ratios, increased 
material handling, greater generation of fines, and reduced 
yield per tonne of ROM ore. Consequently, mining costs rise 
and the proportion of ore requiring beneficiation increases. 
Production data indicate a steady rise in low-grade (<58% 
Fe) output, which has more than doubled over the last few 
years, reinforcing the structural need for beneficiation and 

35 
 
pelletisation to sustain steel production. 
Beneficiation improves Fe content, reduces alumina and 
silica, and enhances sinter and pellet quality. However, 
increased beneficiation requirements also entail higher 
capital expenditure, energy consumption, water usage and 
operating costs. This trend is reflected in the current 
utilisation of beneficiation capacity, where installed capacity 
of about 114.2 MT supports beneficiation of 70–80 MT, 
yielding 51–59 MT of upgraded ore.  
In terms of cost competitiveness, Indian steel production 
costs are estimated to be about 5–10 percent higher than 
global benchmarks, primarily due to the heavy dependence 
on imported coking coal. Coking coal constitutes 35–40 
percent of the cost of hot metal production through the blast 
furnace route. India imports the bulk of its metallurgical coal, 
exposing domestic steelmakers to global price volatility and 
supply risks. While iron ore availability is adequate 
domestically, the combined effect of declining ore grades 
and high priced imported coking coal increases the overall 
cost of steelmaking vis-à-vis countries with access to high-
grade ore and domestic coking coal reserves. 
 
Recognising these challenges, initiatives are underway to 
upgrade ore grades through large-scale beneficiation, 
including encouragement to pelletisation, optimal utilisation of 
low-grade fines, and policy measures facilitating sale of 
surplus ore by captive miners. These measures aim to 
improve raw material efficiency, reduce waste, and partially 
offset the cost disadvantages arising from declining grades 
and imported coking coal dependence. Collectively, sustained 
beneficiation and pelletisation, along with diversification of 
coking coal sources and improved mining productivity, are 
central to maintaining the long-term competitiveness and self-
reliance of the Indian steel sector”.  
 
(ii) Coking Coal  
 
2.33 India is dependent on coking coal imports. However, to reduce the 
risks, it has diversified its coking coal procurement to various countries. 
During the sitting of the Committee to hear the views of  ISA and AIIFA , 
the Industry pointed out that India is still 80–85% dependent on a single 
geography for coking coal imports and cited rising coal costs and import 
duty burdens. 
2.34 In this context, the Committee desired to know the diversification 
strategy adopted to reduce India’s coking coal dependence and about 

36 
 
the  long-term sourcing diversification roadmap  being prepared. To this 
the Ministry replied as under :- 
“India is largely dependent on imports of coking coal due to 
limited availability of high-quality, low-ash coking coal within 
the country vis-à-vis domestic demand, particularly from 
integrated steel producers. Industry has highlighted concerns 
regarding concentration of imports from a single geography. 
 
Based on import data available with the Ministry, Australia 
continues to be the largest source of India’s coking coal 
imports. However, imports are not exclusively confined to a 
single geography, as India also sources coking coal from 
other countries as well. Accordingly, while dependence on 
Australia remains significant, the industry projection of 80–
85% dependence on a single geography appears on the 
higher side when viewed against aggregated import data, 
though it may reflect short-term or company-specific 
procurement patterns. 
In order to reduce supply concentration risks, the Ministry has 
been encouraging diversification of coking coal sourcing. 
Accordingly, Steel CPSEs has been procuring coking coal 
from a diversified group of countries mainly Australia, United 
States, Indonesia, Mozambique etc. The import of coking coal 
from Russia has also increased after signing the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on 14.10.2021 with 
Russia on procurement of coking coal which is used in steel 
making. The import of coking coal in the last two years is as 
under:  
Country wise Coking Coal Import (in million 
tonnes) 
S. 
No. 
Country 2023-
24 
2024-
25 
Apr-Sep 
2025 
 
1 AUSTRALIA 29.599 24.544 14.636  
2 CANADA 3.170 1.747 0.870  
3 COLOMBIA 0.012 0.082   
4 INDONESIA 2.101 2.069 1.108  
5 MOROCCO 0.000 0.017   
6 MOZAMBIQ
UE 
2.240 3.429 2.343  
7 NETHERLAN
D 
0.085    
8 NEW 
ZEALAND 
0.221 0.264 0.145  

37 
 
9 POLAND 0.011    
10 RUSSIA 5.257 7.747 4.484  
11 SINGAPORE 5.389 5.698 3.295  
12 SWITZERLA
ND 
0.824 0.849 0.494  
13 U ARAB 
EMTS 
0.626 2.032 1.664  
14 U K 0.054 0.120   
15 U S A 8.451 8.474 4.308  
16 UKRAINE 0.079    
Total 58.118  57.070 33.346  
Source: Ministry of Commerce & Industry  “ 
 
 
2.35 During the examination of the subject, the Committee had observed 
that India's steel sector faces critical raw material challenges, particularly with 
coking coal, where import dependence stands at approximately 85-90%, with 
around 54% of imports coming from Australia alone in 2024-25. The sector 
imported approximately 58 million tonnes of coking coal in FY 2023-24, 
costing approximately Rs 1.5 lakh crore. The government has launched 
Mission Coking Coal under the Aatmanirbhar Coal Mission, targeting 140 MT 
of domestic raw coking coal production by 2030, 105 MT from Coal India 
Limited and 35 MT from private allocations, while aiming to increase blending 
of domestic coal from 10% to 30% in steelmaking.   
2.36 Keping this in view, during the interaction with ISA , the Committee 
desired to be apprised about the strategic impacting the competitiveness of 
Indian steel and the diversification strategies which ISA has undertaken or 
recommended. To this ISA furnished a written reply as under:- 
“Coal remains central to India’s energy mix as India is world’s 
second-largest consumer of coal. Despite being home to the 
fifth-largest global coal reserves, India faces a domestic 
shortage of high-grade coking coal, necessitating imports. 
Limited availability and quality of domestic coking coal 
India’s geological endowment of prime coking coal is limited. 
The bulk of domestic coking coal is of high ash content, which 
is unsuitable for high-efficiency blast furnace operations 
without extensive washing and blending. Existing beneficiation 

38 
 
capacity is not adequate to upgrade domestic coal to the 
metallurgical grade required by integrated steel plants. 
Structural demand–supply gap 
India’s steel industry uses the BF-BOF route, which requires 
high-grade hard coking coal. Domestic supply meets only 
~10–15% of the total coking coal requirement of the steel 
sector; the rest must be imported. With rising crude steel 
production, this gap is widening. 
Concentration of global export supply 
Globally, high-quality hard coking coal is concentrated in a 
few countries. Australia accounts for over 50% of 
internationally traded coking coal, due to its high-quality 
reserves, stable mining ecosystem, and efficient logistics. 
Other producing regions—USA, Canada, Russia, 
Mozambique—have smaller, more volatile export capacities. 
India’s dependence on one primary source (Australia) 
Indian blast furnaces need consistent quality of coking coal 
for stable operations; Australian coal offers predictable 
characteristics (Coke Strength after reaction (CSR), Ash 
content). 
Long-term supply contracts, reliable logistics, and existing 
technical benchmarks favour sourcing from Australia. 
Some alternative sources face issues: infrastructure 
constraints (Mozambique), sanctions/geo-political risks 
(Russia), or higher landed cost/quality variability 
(USA/Canada). 
Efforts towards diversification 
Increasing imports from USA, Canada, Russia, and 
Mozambique to reduce concentration risk. 
Participation in overseas coal block development (e.g., in 
Mozambique, Indian Steel Producers like Jindal Steel, SAIL 
have stakes) to have secured long-term supply. 
• Promoting washeries and beneficiation to 
maximise utilisation of domestic coking coal. 
• Encouraging research into coal blending 
technologies to allow use of higher shares of 
Indian coking coal. 
 
Summarizing, Steel Producers are diversifying coking coal 
risk as it was too much dependent on Australia. In 2019, 73 
percent imports of Coking Coal were coming from Australia. 
That is now reduced to 58 percent. There is an increase in 

39 
 
case of Russia from 0.62% to 8.15%. Similarly, imports from 
US have gone up from 8% to 17% now. Imports from 
Mozambique, has gone up from 4% to 7.31 percent. Indonesia 
has gone up from 2.46% to 4%. We have diversified to the 
extent possible. There are certain categories of hard coking 
coal, for which we have to depend on Australia and 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (CEPA), New 
Government of Australia and Queensland, where the Coal 
Mines are located are cooperative. Coal is a part of the FTA. 
Therefore, we consider India’s heavy dependence on 
imported coking coal to be a major strategic weakness for the 
steel industry. With nearly 85–90% dependence on imported 
coking coal, any reduction in global supply—such as recent 
signals from Australian coal miners about reduction in future 
investments, emphasis on reduction in carbon footprint, 
increase in Royalty—creates serious risks for India. Australia 
is India’s largest supplier, so reduced production or policy 
shifts there can directly affect coal availability and prices for 
Indian steel producers. 
Geopolitical tensions, supply chain disruptions, and global 
market shocks have a direct and immediate impact on Indian 
steel competitiveness. Events such as Wars, Conflicts, trade 
restrictions, port disruptions, or changes in environmental 
policies in exporting countries often lead to sharp price 
volatility in international coal markets. Since coking coal is a 
key input for steelmaking, higher coal prices quickly increase 
production costs, reduce profit margins, and make Indian 
steel less competitive in both domestic and export markets. 
To reduce this risk, ISA has  recommended diversification of 
coking coal sources so that India is not dependent on a single 
country. Member companies are being encouraged to engage 
with alternative suppliers which are- 
 Apart from Australia, Russia, and the USA are highly 
recommended countries for import of coking coal. 
Mozambique and Mongolia can be other preferred options. 
 India imports high-grade metallurgical coke from Colombia, 
although it is not a traditional partner. Other minerals include 
copper and iron ore. 
 Poland, Japan, Indonesia, Russia, Australia, and the USA 
are preferred Low Ash Metallurgical (LAM) coke suppliers 
as domestic capacities of coke oven plants are insufficient 
and the merchant cookeries will be unable to meet future 
demand of high-volume blast furnaces. 
 
Price volatility of imported coking coal has been a cause of 
concern for the domestic Industry, so much so the price went 
skyrocketing to 690 USD in Feb-March 2022, when it was in 

40 
 
the range of USD 120-130 during April 2021. This led to cost 
of steel production to increase by 35-40%. ISA at its level 
engaged with Price reporting agencies such as Platts as 
Coking Coal import prices are indexed to Platts indices. 
Continuous engagement helped to bring in changes in Platts 
methodology and ISA is ensuring this.” 
 
 
 
Mission Coking Coal 
 
2.37 The Mission Coking Coal aims to reduce import dependence 
from the current 85% to below 80% by 2030 through enhanced 
domestic production and beneficiation. However, domestic coking 
coal often has high ash content and lower quality compared to 
imported coking coal. The Committee desired ISA to furnish details 
regarding the technical and economic challenges in utilizing domestic 
coking coal in existing blast furnaces and stamp-charged coke oven 
batteries ; the level of investment in coal washeries and beneficiation 
infrastructure that is required to make domestic coking coal suitable 
for steelmaking and the policy support, including capital subsidies 
for washeries, technology support for beneficiation, or assured coal 
linkages, that is needed to achieve the Mission Coking Coal targets.  
To this, ISA ,inter -alia, submitted as under: 
 
“India has ~35 billion tons of Coking Coal reserves out of 
which more than 50% is of the high ash variety (35-50% ash 
content) and has difficult washability characteristics. In order 
to make it usage for steel making, coking coal is washed to 
reduce the ash percentage and Indian Prime Coking Coal and 
Medium Coking Coal (<18% ash) is blended with imported 
coking coal (<9% ash). 
As per National Steel Policy 2017, the targeted steel 
production by FY2030-31 is 300 Mnt of which 181 Mnt would 
be through Blast Furnace route i.e. nearly 3-fold increase is 
targeted in the blast furnace route steel-making capacity. 
BCCL produced 40.50 million Tons (Mnt) of Raw Coal and 
also produced 1.65 Mnt of Washed Coking Coal in 2024-25 
against 1.46 Mnt in 2023-24 – a growth of 13.02% over the 
previous year. 

41 
 
Washeries Capacity in India- 
Similarly, current installed coking coal washery capacity in the 
country is ~36 MTPA (input feed capacity) but the actual 
operating capacity of these washeries is just about ~23 
MTPA. 
BCCL alone has close to 15 MTPA washery capacity and out 
of this roughly 6 MTPA is currently operation. Overall, the 
usable coking coal for steel making post washing and 
processing from these washeries is mere 4-5 MTPA. 
In the coming years (by 2025) BCCL is planning to provide 
roughly 6-7 MTPA of washed coking coal to the steel sector. 
However, this quantity is too scanty and has to be increased 
by enhancing the existing washery facilities or by setting up 
new ones. 
Current Scenario of Indian Coking Coal- 
Indian steel industry is importing 70% of its total coking coal 
requirement from Australia alone at the rate of average 42 
MTPA of coking coal per annum in last 5 years”.   
Import Diversification and Supply Risk 
 
2.38 The Committee noted that 60% of steel imports arrive from FTA 
countries (ASEAN, Japan, Korea) at zero duty. It was also informed that  
the steel Industry has proposed amendments to provisions of the Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975 and the Anti-Dumping Rules, 1995 to ensure that subsidies 
extended by exporting countries are fully countervailed in India. 
In reply to a query whether the Ministry is reviewing existing FTAs such 
as ASEAN, Japan, and Korea CEPAs, the Ministry replied as under:- 
“Being the nodal department, Department of Commerce 
undertakes the review of FTAs. M/o Steel provides inputs 
related to tariff mandate and product specific rules to DoC, 
whenever FTAs come up for review, to protect the interest of 
domestic steel industry. The amendments to provisions of the 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and the Anti-Dumping Rules, 1995 
are carried out by Department of Revenue from time to time 
for taking appropriate trade remedial actions against the 
subsidised imports “.  
 
2.39 During an interactive session with Indian Steel Association, the 
Committee inquired about the threats to the domestic steel industry by 
cheap imports, dumping practices, and unfair trade measures from 
countries like China, Vietnam, South Korea, and others..  To this, ISA 

42 
 
replied as under:- 
 
“ISA is thankful to the Government of India for Imposing an Anti-
Dumping Duty on Hot Rolled Coils originating from Vietnam. 
However, a definitive safeguard duty of 12% recommended by 
DGTR on Flat Steel is awaiting issuance of Customs notification. 
Though this 12% duty is less, keeping in view 50% duty levied by 
USA, 25% Safeguard TRQ duty by EU till June 2026-to be 
enhanced by EU to 50%, recently Mexico has also notified duty of 
50%. We would request Government to impose the recommended 
duty at the earliest. 
Apart from the above, while negotiating FTAs with global partners, 
India needs to find its own unique approach and while it's 
important for the Indian Steel Industry to be a part of Global Value 
Chains, it has to ensure it takes the right position for the benefit of 
the industry while putting up its views for FTA negotiations. 
 
Review of Existing signed FTAs like India- Korea CEPA, India – 
Japan CEPA, FTA with ASEAN countries and other FTAs must 
have a definite Tenure after which needs to be renegotiated, 
including carryover of provisions / closure of FTA depending on 
mutual positions. Japan and Korea through informal restrictions 
on Indian Steel Exports have not been giving equivalent access 
to their market, though Chinese producers have been able access 
those markets. Given the real situation India should seriously 
consider removing chapter 72 from the Korea and Japan CEPA. 
A periodic review may also be incorporated. A definite Tenure / 
review schedule allows partners the option of re-negotiating based 
on changed circumstance, including closure if so, felt necessary. 
 
This prevents the country getting permanently locked into an FTA 
which later turns un-favourable due to changed circumstances. 
 
Incorporation of Melt and Pour clause as part of Rules of Origin 
Condition in new FTA. It is already incorporated in India-Australia, 
India-UAE, and India-UK FTAs. 
Implementation of RoDTEP for Iron and Steel products Under Chapter 
72 
The initiative taken by the Government of India of 
announcing/notifying the RoDTEP scheme on August 17, 2021 – 
a step towards offering level playing parity to the Indian exporters 
in compliance with the WTO provisions. RoDTEP immensely 
helped to improve Global cost competitiveness of Indian 
exporters by eliminating extra burden of the embedded non-
creditable taxes and duties. 
 

43 
 
India is world’s 2nd largest steel producer and consumer at the 
same time, with\ most of its major steel companies accredited as 
world-class steelmakers amongst the Top-34 Global steel 
companies in terms of operational excellence, cost 
competitiveness and growth prospects. 
 
In spite of being a world class industry, the Indian steel industry 
faces challenges beyond the factory gate as it is saddled with 
structural deficiencies like non- creditable taxes and duties and 
high logistics cost etc. which adversely affect its cost 
competitiveness as against the other global steel producers. 
Taxes and duties paid towards procuring the mineral resources, 
fuel and electricity are some of the major non-creditable taxes 
incurred by the steel industry, thereby causing avoidable cost 
burden on the domestic industry ranging somewhere between 
6%-12% of the FOB export value. Various taxes, which are 
embedded in the value of exported product inter alia include State 
VAT and Central Excise duty on fuel used in the transportation, 
CGST/SGST on the tyres, lube oil, spares etc., incurred for 
transportation, taxes and levies embedded in extraction and 
consumption of Raw Material viz. iron ore, pellets, coal and taxes 
embedded in consumption of electricity.  
The domestic steel industry is capable of becoming the best in the 
world and has all the credentials to achieve the same. However, 
the burden of embedded taxes faced by it acts as a handicap vis-
a-vis its global peers. We need to urgently address this issue on 
priority by eliminating the excess cost burden faced by them”. 
 
 
(iii) Impact of Global Trade Restrictions and CBAM on Indian Steel 
 
2.40 The Committee have observed that major steel-consuming regions 
such as the European Union and the United States have imposed trade 
restrictions, including the EU’s Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism 
(CBAM). At the same time, over 350 million tonnes of excess steel capacity 
exists in Asian countries such as China, Japan, Korea and ASEAN nations. 
Recently, the EU imposed a 35.9 per cent countervailing duty on Chinese Hot 
Rolled Coils. It was submitted by ISA that CBAM could severely affect India’s 
export competitiveness. AIIFA also noted MSMEs lack capacity to measure 
and document embedded emissions.  
2.41 In this context, the Ministry was asked about  the strategy devised to 
safeguard India’s steel industry from the combined impact of global trade 

44 
 
restrictions, CBAM, and diversion of surplus steel into the Indian market. The 
Ministry replied as under:- 
“Steel is a deregulated sector, and export of steel is dependent 
on factors such as global market conditions, demand and 
supply, cost of input raw materials such as iron ore, coking coal 
etc. which are market linked. 
 
Government has taken following steps to safeguard domestic 
steel Industry:- 
 
i. Implementation of Domestically Manufactured Iron & Steel 
Products (DMI&SP) Policy for promoting ‘Made in India’ steel for 
Government procurement. 
ii. Launch of Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Specialty 
Steel to promote the manufacturing of 'Specialty Steel' within the 
country and reduce imports by attracting capital investments. 
iii. Introduction of Steel Quality Control Order thereby banning sub-
standard/ defective steel products in domestic market as well as 
imports to ensure the availability of quality steel to the industry, 
users and public at large. 
iv. Anti Dumping Duty (ADD) measures pertaining to some steel 
products like seamless tubes, pipes and hollow profiles of iron, 
alloy, or non-alloy steel (other than cast iron and stainless steel) 
(from China PR), electro-galvanized steel (from Korea RP, Japan, 
Singapore), stainless-steel seamless tubes and pipes (from China 
PR), welded stainless steel pipes and tubes (from Vietnam and 
Thailand), Hot rolled flat products of alloy or non-alloy steel (from 
Vietnam), Cold Rolled Non-Oriented Electrical Steel" originating in 
or exported (from China PR) are currently in place. 
v. Countervailing Duty (CVD) is in place for Welded Stainless Steel 
Pipes and Tubes from China and Vietnam. 
vi. Government has imposed safeguard duties on import of “Non-
Alloy and Alloy Steel Flat Products” into India for a period of three 
years, on the subject goods falling under tariff headings 7208, 
7209, 7210, 7211, 7212, 7225 and 7226 to safeguard the interests 
of domestic steel industry. 
Further, the details of steps taken by Government for 
promotion of green and low-carbon steel technology in the 
country are as under: 
(i) Ministry of Steel has released the Taxonomy for Green 
Steel to provide standards for defining and categorizing the 
low emission steel. 
(ii) Ministry of Steel has released a report titled “Greening 
the Steel Sector in India: Roadmap and Action Plan” in 
alignment with the recommendations of the 14 Task Forces 
constituted by this Ministry for this purpose which provides 
the future roadmap for green steel and sustainability, 

45 
 
towards net-zero target by 2070.  
(iii) Four pilot projects have been awarded for 
implementation of pilot projects for use of hydrogen in steel 
sector under National Green Hydrogen Mission launched 
by Ministry of New & Renewable Energy. 
 
 
D. Sustainability 
 
(i) Green Steel Taxonomy 
 
2.42  Green Steel is the future of steel industry. Green steel 
production involves significant capital investment, making access to 
green financing. Critical and Public Sector Undertakings play a key 
role in technology leadership within the steel sector.   Regarding the 
current status of adoption of green steel technologies across steel 
PSUs, and the investments being made in R&D for low-carbon and 
breakthrough steelmaking technologies, the Ministry replied as 
under:- 
“Government of India is actively working for reduction of carbon 
emissions in the steel sector and promotion of green steel 
technologies. Steel Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) are 
playing an important role in adoption of low-carbon technologies 
and in undertaking research and development (R&D) for 
cleaner steel production. 
 
Steel PSUs have undertaken multiple initiatives aimed at 
improving energy efficiency and reducing emissions. These 
include modernization of blast furnaces, improvement in coke 
rate and energy consumption, increased use of Pulverized Coal 
Injection (PCI), Top Gas Recovery Turbines (TRT), Coke Dry 
Quenching (CDQ)-Waste Heat Recovery (WHR) Systems, LD 
Gas Recovery, enhanced use of process automation and 
digitalisation. These measures have led to gradual reduction in 
emission intensity across PSU steel plants. 
 
In addition, PSUs are undertaking pilot and demonstration 
projects related to green steel technologies, including use of 
renewable energy, and exploration of hydrogen-based 
steelmaking technologies, in alignment with national 
decarbonization objectives. 
 
Steel PSUs are also investing in research and development 

46 
 
through their in-house R&D centres and collaborative projects 
with academic institutions, research laboratories and 
international technology providers. R&D efforts are focused on 
development of low-carbon ironmaking routes, increased scrap 
utilization, energy-efficient processes, alternative fuels, 
hydrogen-based Direct Reduced Iron (DRI), and other 
breakthrough technologies suitable for Indian conditions.” 
 
2.43 During their presentation before the Committee, the 
representative of the Ministry briefed the Committee as under:- 
 
“……..we, in steel industry, which is among the more polluting 
industries, each of the company and the whole sector, are 
working on decarbonization plans to make sure that not only our 
operations will be decarbonized, but also we will provide all the 
steel necessary for decarbonization of other industries”. 
 
2.44 On being asked about  preferential procurement policy for 
green steel, if any,   the Ministry replied  :- 
 
“At present Ministry of Steel has not brought any Green Steel 
Public Procurement Policy (GSPPP). The Government is 
presently focusing on promoting the production and use of 
green-rated steel as per the Green Steel Taxonomy framework 
notified by this Ministry on 23.12.2024. As on 31.03.2026, 90 
steel units have been awarded ‘Green  Steel  Certificates’  
under  this  framework  producing 12.45 million tonnes of 
green steel”. 
 
 
Decarbonisation Roadmap for the Entire Steel Ecosystem 
 
2.45 While interacting with the Ministry on the issue of decarbonization, 
the Committee desired to be apprised regarding the Government’s 
integrated decarbonisation roadmap for the steel sector, and the incentives 
which will be provided for technology adoption by both large integrated 
plants and MSME secondary producers. To this, the Ministry replied as 
under:- 
“ Ministry of Steel has released a report titled "Greening the 
Steel Sector in India: Roadmap and Action Plan" which 
provides the future roadmap for green steel and sustainability, 
towards net- zero target by 2070.  

47 
 
 
The roadmap delineates short-term, medium-term, and long-
term objectives for decarbonising the Indian steel industry in 
alignment with India’s commitment to achieve Net Zero by 
2070. In the short term (up to FY 2030), the focus is on 
enhancing energy and resource efficiency and promoting 
renewable energy use. In the medium term (2030–2047), the 
emphasis will be on adoption of green hydrogen and CCUS 
technologies, while in the long term (2047–2070), the 
transition towards net-zero will be driven by disruptive and 
breakthrough technological innovations in steelmaking 
processes. 
 
Integrated steel plants as well as Secondary Steel producers 
are being encouraged to undertake pilot and demonstration 
projects for emerging technologies such as green hydrogen-
based steelmaking and CCUS, supported by policy 
facilitation, coordination with other Ministries, and alignment 
with national initiatives such as the National Green Hydrogen 
Mission and renewable energy programmes. 
 
For Secondary steel producers, including MSMEs, the 
Government is conscious of their limited financial capacity to 
adopt high-cost green technologies. Accordingly, the 
decarbonisation strategy for the secondary sector emphasizes 
low-cost and scalable interventions, such as higher scrap 
usage, improved furnace efficiency, renewable energy 
procurement, and cleaner fuel substitution. These measures 
provide immediate emission reduction benefits without 
imposing excessive capital burden. 
 
Government’s integrated decarbonisation roadmap seeks to 
ensure a just, gradual and economically viable transition for both 
large integrated steel plants and MSME secondary producers, 
while safeguarding competitiveness, employment and growth of 
the steel sector, in line with India’s long-term climate and 
development objectives”.  
 
(ii) National Green Hydrogen Mission 
 
2.46 The objective of National Green Hydrogen Mission (NGHM) includes 
production of 5 million metric tonnes (MMT) of green hydrogen per annum by 
2030 and use of hydrogen in industrial sector. The Ministry of Steel is a key 
stakeholder under NGHM for implementation of pilot projects for the use of 
hydrogen in steelmaking. 
2.47 Under the NGHM, Ministry of Steel has been allocated ₹455 crore for 

48 
 
implementation of pilot projects for use of hydrogen in iron and steel 
production till FY 2029-30. At present, four pilot projects are being 
implemented under the NGHM for use of hydrogen in the steel sector, which 
are presently at design stages and are expected to be completed within a 
period of 24 to 45 months.  
2.48 The details of the awarded projects under NGHM in steel sector along 
with their timelines, project cost and focus area are as follows: 
 
S.No. Focus Area/ Scheme Company Name Project 
Cost 
Timelines 
1. Scheme B: Use of hydrogen in 
existing Blast Furnace to reduce 
coal/coke consumption 
SAIL 50 
Crores 
24 Months
2. Scheme B: Use of hydrogen in 
existing Blast Furnace to reduce 
coal/coke consumption 
JSW Steel Limited 70 
Crores 
45 Months
3. Scheme C: Injection of hydrogen in 
vertical shaft based DRI making to 
partially  substitute  the  NG/other 
reducing gas 
JSW Steel Limited 30 
Crores 
45 Months
4. Scheme C: Injection of hydrogen in 
vertical shaft based DRI making to 
partially substitute the 
NG/other reducing gas 
Jindal Steel Limited 
(erstwhile Jindal 
Steel   &   Power 
Limited) 
28.44 
Crores 
17 Months
 
2.49 At present, hydrogen-based steel production technologies are at the 
pilot phase and are not yet proven at commercial scale in the country. 
Accordingly, detailed planning for large-scale deployment, commercial 
viability and for achieving cost competitiveness of hydrogen-based 
steelmaking vis-à-vis conventional production routes can be assessed after 
completion and evaluation of the results of the pilot projects and the 
technological and economic insights that emerge from them. Further, no 
separate blending trajectory or targets for use of hydrogen in steelmaking, 
including for the years 2026, 2028 and 2030, have been targeted by the 
Ministry of Steel. However, the following three approaches for utilization of 
hydrogen in Iron and steel making under NGHM have been identified: 
 
“Scheme A: Pilot project to produce DRI using 100% 
hydrogen in the consortium mode. At present, no projects is 
being implemented under this scheme. 

49 
 
 
Scheme B: Injection of hydrogen in the BF through tuyeres 
to reduce the coal/coke consumption. 
 
Scheme C: Injection of Hydrogen in Vertical shaft based DRI 
making partially to substitute the natural gas/other reducing 
gas & raise its proportion in a gradual manner with an 
objective to use the maximum hydrogen”  
 
2.50 The Committee during their interaction with ISA inquired that 
beyond hydrogen-based steelmaking, what other decarbonization 
technologies and strategies is ISA prioritizing . To this, ISA replied as 
under:- 
“Beyond hydrogen-based steelmaking, the Indian Steel 
Association (ISA) emphasizes that India’s steel 
decarbonization cannot depend on one single technology. 
Instead, it must use multiple practical solutions, applied in 
stages, keeping in mind India’s raw material availability, costs, 
and existing plant designs. The ISA had engaged A.T. 
Kearney for a study report Decarbonization of Indian Steel 
Industry clearly highlights several no hydrogen pathways that 
are essential and viable for India, especially in the near and 
medium term. 
 
One of the most viable near-term options is increasing the 
share of scrap-based steelmaking through Electric Arc 
Furnaces (EAFs). Scrap-based EAF production has much 
lower emissions compared to coal-based routes. ISA 
considers this pathway practical as scrap availability in India 
is expected to rise significantly due to vehicle scrappage, 
infrastructure aging, and policy support. However, the pace of 
expansion depends on building an organized scrap collection 
and processing ecosystem. While EAFs cannot fully replace 
BF-BOF in the short term, they will play a growing role in 
reducing overall emission intensity. 
 
Energy efficiency and waste heat recovery are identified as 
the lowest-cost and most immediately deployable solutions. 
Technologies such as coke dry quenching, top pressure 
recovery turbines, waste heat recovery from coke ovens, 
sinter plants, and EAFs can significantly reduce fuel 
consumption and emissions. ISA sees these measures as 
highly viable because they improve both environmental 
performance and operating costs, making them attractive 
even without heavy subsidies. 
 

50 
 
Renewable energy integration for auxiliary and captive power 
consumption is another priority area. Steel plants consume 
large amounts of electricity, much of which still comes from 
coal-based captive power plants. ISA supports replacing this 
with solar, wind, and hybrid renewable solutions, initially 
through grid-connected and open-access models, and later 
through round-the-clock renewable power with storage. This 
pathway is considered highly viable in India and can 
immediately reduce indirect (Scope 2) emissions without 
changing core steelmaking processes. 
 
Biomass and biochar injection in blast furnaces is viewed as 
a supplementary and transitional option. Biochar can partially 
replace coal or coke and reduce emissions, but ISA notes that 
large-scale adoption is constrained by limited biomass 
availability, competing uses in power and fuel blending, and 
higher costs. Therefore, biomass is considered useful for pilot 
projects and partial substitution, but not as a standalone 
large-scale solution. 
 
Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage (CCUS) is seen as a 
critical long-term technology, especially for India’s coal-based 
BF-BOF plants, which will continue to dominate production for 
decades. ISA believes CCUS will be essential to achieve 
deep decarbonization once the efficiency and fuel substitution 
have reached a technological limit. CCUS is currently 
expensive and requires infrastructure for CO₂ transport, 
storage, and utilization. Near-term applications, such as CO₂ 
use in urea, methanol, and enhanced oil recovery are 
considered more viable, while large-scale geological storage 
is expected to develop over time. 
 
The use of alternative reductants and fuels, such as increased 
natural gas in DRI processes, coal gasification combined 
with carbon capture, and gradual blending of low-carbon 
fuels, is also part of ISA’s strategy. These options help 
reduce emissions incrementally and act as a bridge until 
advanced technologies like green hydrogen become 
commercially viable. Overall, ISA’s position is that India’s 
decarbonization pathway must be practical, phased, and 
cost-sensitive. Energy efficiency, renewable power, scrap-
based steelmaking, and waste heat recovery are the most 
viable near-term solutions. Biomass and alternative fuels 
provide limited but useful support, while CCUS plays a crucial 
role in the long term. Together, these strategies allow India to 
reduce emissions steadily while maintaining steel production 
growth and global competitiveness” . 
 
 
(iii) Steel Scrap Recycling Policy-2019 

51 
 
 
2.51  The Steel Scrap Recycling Policy 2019 aims to promote 
circular economy in the steel sector, with targets to increase steel scrap 
availability to 70 million tons by 2030 to meet 35-40% of production 
through the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) and Induction Furnace (IF) route. 
Regarding the plan to strengthen the Vehicle Scrappage Policy, domestic 
scrap processing, and a national scrap exchange so that the secondary 
steel sector has assured access to affordable scrap, the Ministry submitted 
as under:- 
 
“Scrap is an important raw material for steel production and 
presently contributes about 21% of India’s crude steel 
production, with total scrap consumption of 33.36 million 
tonnes (MT) in FY 2024. Of this, 24.67 MT is met from domestic 
sources, while the remaining 8.69 MT is met through imports 
to bridge the demand–supply gap. 
 
Various studies suggest that India’s scrap generation is 
expected to grow to about 50 million tonnes by 2030 reducing 
import dependence significantly. This increase will come 
mainly from three sources—around 6 million tonnes of extra 
home scrap due to higher crude-steel production, 8 million 
tonnes of additional prompt scrap from growing manufacturing 
activity, and about 4 million tonnes of obsolete scrap recovered 
from end-of-life vehicles (ELVs), ship recycling and 
construction & demolition (C&D) waste. 
 
Government has taken following steps to strengthen the 
Vehicle Scrappage Policy, domestic scrap processing, and 
national scrap exchange: 
 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change has 
introduced the Environment Protection (End-of-Life-Vehicles) 
Rules, 2025, which establishes a framework for managing End-
of-Life Vehicles (ELVs) in an environmentally sound manner 
and mandates Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR), 
requiring vehicle producers to meet annual scrapping targets 
based on the type of vehicle and materials recovered. 
 
ii. Recycling of Ships Act, 2019 has been notified by Ministry of 
Shipping, Ports and Waterways with aims to regulate and 
promote the safe and environmentally sound recycling of ships. 
iii. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MORTH), being 
the nodal department of the Vehicle Scrapping Policy has 

52 
 
informed that a discussion on the disposal of impounded 
vehicles which are lying in police stations was held on 11th 
June 2025 at NITI Aayog. It was decided that MoRTH will 
engage with MHA on this issue as per Rule 8 of the Motor 
Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping 
Facility) Rules, 2021 which provides that auctioned, 
impounded, or abandoned vehicles may be offered for 
scrapping to RVSF by any enforcement agency. Accordingly, 
MoRTH has requested DGPs/IGPs/CPs of States/UTs for 
identification and scrapping of impounded/abandoned vehicles 
and to scrap such motor vehicles lying in police stations at 
RVSFs, after following due legal process 
 
iv. MSTC, a CPSE under Ministry of Steel provides 
comprehensive e-commerce services, including e-auctions, 
e-sales, and e-procurement, e-Tenders etc. along with the 
specialized customized software solutions, meeting each and 
every requirement of its clients.” 
 
 
2.52 Regarding the current status of scrap availability, quality, and 
pricing in India and the key challenges in establishing a formal scrap 
collection, dismantling, and processing ecosystem, ISA replied as 
under:- 
“India needs hundreds of scrap-processing/shredding 
centres, each supported by multiple local 
collection/dismantling units to aggregate scrap from 
households, industries, old vehicles, railways, 
construction demolition, etc. 
Policy should incentivise and fast-track establishment 
of such centres — including via viability gap funding, 
tax incentives, land allotment, reduced GST, or 
subsidized electricity/power costs for processing units. 
Formalise & Organise the Informal Scrap Sector 
Encourage informal scrap dealers, small aggregators, 
local dismantlers to register, form cooperatives or 
associations, bringing them under regulatory 
supervision. This improves traceability, scrap quality, 
reduces environmental hazards, and ensures consistent 
supply. 
Enable access to training and certification for scrap-
handling, sorting, segregation, processing — raising standards and safety.”  
 

53 
 
 
(IV) Role and importance of the Secondary Steel Sector 
 
2.53  The Secondary Steel Sector forms a critical pillar of India’s steel 
economy, accounting for nearly half of national steel capacity and 
comprising a vast network of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs). Dominated by Electric Arc Furnaces (EAFs) and Induction 
Furnaces, the sector relies primarily on steel scrap and DRI, inherently 
aligning with circular-economy principles and low-carbon pathways.  With 
its wide regional distribution and employment-intensive structure, the sector 
;  
 Supports local industrial ecosystems 
 Provides cost-effective inputs for construction, infrastructure, 
engineering, and automotive sectors 
 Ensures balanced industrial development 
 Complements the capacity of integrated producers 
 
2.54 This segment is central to ensuring widespread steel availability and 
strengthening India’s overall steel supply chain. (AIIFA pg 1).  The secondary 
steel sector will be central to India’s decarbonisation agenda and its 
commitment to achieving net-zero emissions by 2070.  Owing to its high 
share of scrap-based steel making, the sector already benefits from a lower 
carbon footprint compared to conventional routes.   With targeted support and 
technology upgradation, the Indian secondary steel sector can become a 
global model for sustainable steelmaking, driving both environmental 
progress and inclusive industrial growth.   
 
The share of  Secondary steel plants including MSMEs in Crude Steel Capacity 
in 2024-25 is  94.42 MnT  out of total 200.3 MnT.  Secondary steel plants and 
MSMEs therefore hold about 47% of the total crude steel production capacity  
Challenges faced by the secondary steel sector  
2.55 The AIIFA Sustainable Steel Manufacturers Association which is a body 
representing over 1800 secondary steel units across India have highlighted key 

54 
 
challenges affecting the domestic secondary steel sector.  The Secondary steel 
plants including MSMEs face persistent challenges relating to: 
 Energy efficiency 
 Technology modernization 
 Emissions reduction particularly due to dependence on coal-based 
DRI and uneven adoption of advanced steelmaking technologies 
(AIIFA pg 2) 
 
Besides above, raw material availability remains the single most critical 
challenge for domestic steel producers, particularly secondary and mid-sized 
units that depend heavily on merchant miners.  Persistent price volatility, 
inconsistent dispatches, and the lack of supply prioritization - despite the 
National Steel Policy’s target of 300 MT capacity by 2030 – create significant 
operational uncertainty.  These disruptions hinder production planning, inflate 
input costs, and erode the competitiveness of India steelmaking, which is central 
to achieving the national goals of Aatmanirbhar Bharat and ‘Make in India’.   
 
Secondary steel sector in  the Atmanirbhar Bharat vision 
2.56 Regarding the steps which the Ministry of Steel  plans to integrate the 
secondary steel sector into the Atmanirbhar Bharat vision by ensuring 
competitive access to raw materials, finance, technology and export markets, 
the Ministry replied as under:- 
“Steel is a deregulated sector and the Government acts as 
a facilitator by creating a conducive policy environment for 
the development of the steel sector. Government has taken 
several measures for raw material availability, technology 
upgradation and energy-efficiency for MSMEs and 
Secondary Producers which include the following: - 
1. Implementation of Domestically Manufactured Iron & 
Steel Products (DMI&SP) Policy for promoting ‘Made in 
India’ steel for Government procurement. 
 
2. Launch of the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
for Specialty Steel to promote the manufacturing of value-
added steel within the country and reduce imports by 
attracting capital investments. 
 
3. The Steel Scrap Recycling Policy, 2019 provides a 

55 
 
coordination framework with various Ministries to facilitate 
and promote recycling of ferrous scrap generated from 
various sources. 
 
 
4. In the Union Budget 2024-25, following measures were 
taken to support domestic manufacturers and boost 
domestic steel manufacturing: - 
 
a. Basic Customs Duty (BCD) has been reduced from 
2.5% to Nil on Ferro-Nickel and Molybdenum ores 
and concentrates which are raw materials for steel 
industry. 
b. BCD exemption on Ferrous Scrap has been 
continued upto 31.03.2026. 
c. The exemption on specified raw material for 
manufacture of Cold Rolled Grain Oriented (CRGO) 
steel has been continued up to 31.3.2026. 
Ministry of Steel engages with secondary steel industries 
periodically, inputs from which are utilized for policy 
formulation”. 
 
 
2.57 During a briefing meeting held with AIIFA Sustainable Steel 
Manufacturers Association, the representatives of the AAIFA steel 
association briefed the Committee regarding MSMEs as under:- 
 
“….. they make affordable steel available all across India for 
infrastructure growth……. the Government has supported us 
over the last 10 to 15 years, creating a level playing field for 
our sector. However, there is still much work to be done. What 
is happening is that this affordable steel is produced via 
methods such as arc furnace, induction furnace, DRI, and 
rolling mills. These various manufacturing processes classify 
it as secondary steel. 
…….in 2016, our Government decided to abolish this 
classification. All steel makers are the steel makers. This 
decision has provided us with a level playing field. However, 
this sector still needs help and has the potential to grow. With 
our current contribution of 55 per cent to steel production, we 
believe we can increase it to 70 to 72 per cent. We have a 
roadmap for that. By 2030, the consumption is projected to be 
approximately 190 million tons while our production capacity 
may reach around 220 million tons” . 
 
2.58 n a reply to the Committee regarding the support mechanisms 
which the Ministry plans —such as common BIS testing facilities, 

56 
 
phased implementation, or financial assistance—to help MSMEs 
comply with QCOs without compromising national quality standards, 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“In order to safeguard the interest of consumers in the country, 
Government has taken measures to ensure the consumption of 
quality steel in the country. Towards this, Bureau of Indian Standard 
(BIS) and Ministry of Steel have taken steps to formulate standards 
and their incorporation in the Quality Control Order. 
 
The Central Government, after consulting BIS, publishes 
Quality Control Order (QCOs) in exercise of the powers 
conferred by sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 16 read in 
conjunction with section 17 and subsection (3) of section 25 
of the BIS Act, 2016 thereby bringing the notified products 
under BIS Mandatory Certification. 
Out of 151 standards, Ministry has suspended 55 standards 
(42 standards for three years and 13 standards relating to 
specialty steel under PLI 1.2 for one year). The remaining 96 
standards have been retained in the QCO on grounds of 
health & Safety, support to small steel producers, preventing 
unfair trade practices, upholding national security, need to 
develop self-reliance etc. The Ministry has felt that it would be 
prudent to take a balanced view taking into account the 
interest of the Steel Sector as well as the consumer industry 
of Steel. 
About 2356 Small Steel Producers contribute 47% of India's 
Steel production. They are already in financial stress due to 
low steel prices and units of 181 small producers have either 
already closed down or running at less than 10% capacity. 
There is a great possibility of cheap Chinese steel flooding 
into market, if QCO related to these products are suspended. 
Hence, such steel products being produced by Small Steel 
Producers have been retained in the QCO. 
 
The Report of High-Level Committee on Non-Financial 
Regulatory Reforms has also proposed a shift from 
mandatory, stringent factory-level certifications to voluntary or 
market-based conformity to BIS/ Ministry of Consumer Affairs. 
 
BIS continues the process of enhancing testing facilities, 
wherever necessary. 
 
2.59 Regarding how the Ministry of Steel working with the Finance 
Ministry/financial institutions to create low-cost credit lines or a Steel Technology 

57 
 
Upgradation Fund for both large and small producers,  the Ministry replied that 
:- 
“Electricity duty and power tariffs fall under respective State 
Governments and the Ministry of Power. Financing for 
capacity expansion is arranged by companies through 
debt, equity, or internal accruals. Statutory clearances are 
addressed through existing inter-ministerial mechanisms. 
Single-window systems are developed and operated by nodal 
departments of state governments and DPIIT in Government 
of India” . 
(V) Technology Adoption across integrated steel plants, secondary steel 
producers, and MSME units 
2.60 The Committee observed that India's steel sector is at the cusp of a 
technological transformation, with investments in process and digital technologies 
projected to rise from USD 1-1.2 billion in 2024 to USD 2.3-2.7 billion by 2030. The 
National Steel Policy 2017 emphasizes developing a technologically advanced 
and globally competitive steel industry, while recent government initiatives focus 
on AI adoption, Industry 4.0 integration, and green steel technologies. In this 
context the Committee desired to be apprised regarding the  current level of 
technology adoption across integrated steel plants, secondary steel producers, 
and MSME units, , ISA, inter -alia, replied as under:  
“Technology adoption in Indian steel sector can be categorised production 
wise, that is BF-BoF, EAF and EIF. Major integrated steel plants using BF-
BOF are modern and have adopted state of the art technology and also 
upgraded old units and are comparable to global standards also 
comparable to countries like Japan, South Korea, and Germany be it- 
automation, digital process control, energy efficiency, best available 
technology for waste energy recovery and other waste to wealth processes, 
zero liquid discharge  and advanced metallurgical processes,  for which the 
resources are generated within and through financial institutions or foreign 
funding or through Joint ventures. Five of the Integrated Indian steel 
producers, who are members of ISA are acclaimed as World-Class 
Steelmaker by World Steel Dynamics, one of the steel analytical agencies 
of Global repute with headquarters in the US. 
Small and medium steel producers and those in MSMEs need upgradation. 
The cost of upgrading the facilities need finances which will make them 
economically unviable to start with unless supported and given access to 
finance at reasonable cost.  
……………Further, to ensure that technology benefits the entire steel 
sector,  institutional mechanisms such as shared technology and pilot 

58 
 
demonstration centers, government-supported technology transfer 
platforms, concessional financing for modernisation, cluster-based 
upgradation programs, and stronger industry-academia-research linkages 
to enable major, medium and small steel producers including central and 
state-owned units adopt modern technologies in a practical and affordable 
manner. “ 
******************* 

59 
 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Aatmanirbharta in steel sector: A Strategic initiative for India's 
Economic Security 
 
1. The Steel industry in India serves as a crucial backbone for economic 
development and accounts for nearly 2% of the nation's GDP. The 
production and consumption of steel are widely regarded as indicators 
of economic progress. Aatmanirbharta in steel sector is of utmost 
importance because of its major end use segments like the Defence and 
Space, Railways and Automobiles, Renewable Energy and Infrastructure 
Development etc. The Committee note that India has emerged as the world's 
fastest growing major steel producer and the second largest producer of 
crude steel globally. The Committee further note that the country's crude 
steel capacity has increased from 109.85 MTPA in 2014- 
15 to over 200 MTPA in 2024-25 and is growing at a higher pace to 
achieve the target of 300 MTPA by 2030-31 under the National Steel 
Policy. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts, are of the 
view that enhancing domestic capabilities in steel for important 
sectors will strengthen the steel sector and ensure long term 
economic growth and national security. The Committee further note 
that India’s steel ecosystem has scaled rapidly across production 
capacity, national consumption, and global trade; and to achieve self-
reliance in the steel sector, the domestic steel plants are also 
prioritizing structural technological upgrades. The Committee note 
that achieving Aatmanirbharta in the steel sector is targeted at 
reducing dependency on foreign imports for coking coal, raw 
materials, high grade alloys and promoting domestic value addition, 
and therefore a significant objective for the nation. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry continue its efforts to strengthen 
measures in this direction to achieve self-reliance in the steel sector. 
 
Growth of Steel Sector in India vis-a-vis Global Economies 
 
2. The Committee note that India has continued to register growth in 
domestic steel demand supported by robust steel production. While 

60 
 
consumption across major economies have either declined or grew 
marginally over the past decade, India’s steel consumption has shown 
an increase of 7% over the last decade and the country is now the 2nd 
largest consumer of finished steel in the world. Driven by demand for 
mega-infrastructure projects, Railways, Defence and urban housing, 
India reflects a strong momentum in production of steel by expanding 
its production capacity to a target of 300 million tonnes by the year 
2030 supported by industrial expansion and Government initiatives like 
the PLI for speciality steel. The Committee while commending the 
Ministry of Steel for steering the sector on a sustained growth 
trajectory note that there is a significant potential for further growth of 
steel sector in the country and hope that the Ministry will continue to 
leverage this position while ensuring that the domestic steel industry 
grow with the support and encouragement from the Ministry of Steel. 
 
Addressing Challenges Faced by Domestic Steel Sector 
 
3. The Committee note that steel is a deregulated sector in India and the 
Government acts as a facilitator by creating a conducive policy environment 
for the development of steel sector. The Committee while noting that the 
Ministry of Steel have undertaken significant policy initiatives to promote the 
growth and development of the steel sector, the industry still has to 
overcome a few challenges. The Committee note that the primary challenges 
in the steel sector are high import dependence for coking coal due to 
domestic coal quality; decline in the availability of high-grade ore; 
logistics costs in infrastructure; and connectivity to ports, waterways and 
rail connectivity. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that to 
overcome these challenges, the Ministry of Steel may explore the feasibility 
of creation of an Inter-Ministerial Joint Task Force across various Ministries 
for coordinated efforts to achieve the targets envisaged under the National 
Steel Policy and the vision of Aatmanirbhar Bharat. 
 
National Steel Policy Targets 
 
4. The National Steel Policy (NSP) 2017 provides the foundational roadmap 
to establish a technologically advanced, globally competitive and self-
reliant Indian steel ecosystem. Approved by the Union Cabinet to replace 

61 
 
the older NSP 2005framework, it envisages to domestically meet entire 
demand of high grade automotive steel, electrical steel, special steels and 
alloys for strategic applications by 2030- 31. It also aims to increase 
domestic availability of washed coking coal so as to reduce import 
dependence on coking coal from ~85% to ~65% by 2030-31. The 
Committee note that while achieving crude steel capacity of 300 MTPA by 
the year 2030-31 and other long-term benchmarks for production 
expansion, capital investment and raw-material security, crude steel 
capacity of 220.3 MTPA has been achieved as on 31.3.2026. The Committee 
further note with satisfaction that India's steel sector has maintained robust 
growth, supported by sustained Government initiatives such as the PM 
Gati Shakti National Master Plan, National Infrastructure Pipeline, Smart 
Cities Mission, Mission Coking Coal and the DMI&SP Policy. While noting 
that NSP 2017 has proven effective in steering the nation into a high-growth 
trajectory by laying down the roadmap for long term growth of the steel 
sector with focus on several key initiatives for high quality steel 
production, modernization, capacity building and domestic demand 
creation, the Committee desire the Ministry of Steel to continue to align 
and upgrade the National Steel Policy 2017 in line with evolving 
macroeconomic shifts, international trade and domestic market to further 
strengthen India's global leadership in the steel sector. 
 
Strengthening the PLI Scheme to Accelerate Self-Reliance in 
Specialty Steel 
 
5. The Committee note that the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
for Specialty Steel, launched with an outlay of Rs. 6322 crore, is a key 
intervention aimed at reducing import dependence in high-value steel grades 
and promoting domestic manufacturing. As of September 2025, investments 
of Rs.22973 crore, production of 2.31 million tones and employment for 13284 
persons have been achieved. The Committee are pleased to note that the 
Scheme is proving to be effective in making the steel sector self-reliant by 
catalyzing investments in critical segments such as automotive steel, 
electrical steel, coated steel and alloy steel, which were previously 
dependent on imports. While dependence on imports for specialty steel is 
reducing over the years, acquiring advanced technology, reduction in capital 
and energy costs and skilled manpower can further accelerate the growth in 
this sector. The Committee, therefore desire the Ministry to strengthen 

62 
 
support for R&D and technology transfer and facilitate assured procurement 
of domestically produced specialty steel. The Ministry may undertake 
periodic review of the performance of PLI scheme and ensure that the 
intended objectives of the Scheme are achieved. Such measures would help 
maximize the impact of the PLI Scheme and accelerate India's progress 
towards complete self-reliance in specialty steel production. 
 
Commitments and achievements under PLI 
 
6. The Committee note that the PLI Scheme for Specialty Steel is applicable 
for a five-year production period, with FY 2023-24 being the first year of 
production and FY 2024-25 the first year of incentive disbursement. The final 
year of production under the original timeline is FY 2027-28, with incentive 
disbursement continuing up to FY 2028-29. As informed by the Ministry of 
Steel, the apparent gap between investment and production commitments 
and the achievements under PLI as of October 2025 is primarily attributable 
to the phased and long gestation period of steel projects, rather than any 
withdrawal of commitments. As of October 2025, actual investment of Rs. 
22,973 crore represents 52% of the total committed investment of Rs. 
44,106crore, while the remaining Rs. 21,133 crore is expected to be invested 
progressively up to FY 2029-30. Accordingly, the investment trajectory 
remains aligned with the approved timelines, and there is no material dilution 
of committed investments. The Committee hope that keeping in mind the 
bottlenecks faced during the implementation of PLI 1.0 and PLI 1.1, the 
Ministry will make more efforts to make PLI 1.2 a success. The Ministry has 
informed that it has provided greater clarity on timelines, eligibility 
conditions, and monitoring mechanisms under PLI 1.2, while also engaging 
closely with industry to ensure realistic capacity planning. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Quality Control Order (QCO) Implementation under PLI Scheme 
 
7. The Committee note that under the Steel and Steel Products (Quality 
Control) Amendment Order, 2025 the Ministryunder acalibrated approachhas 
suspended the enforcement of QCO on a total of 55 Indian Standards, 42 
related to steel products and 13 related to specialty steel grades. The 
remaining 96 standards have been retained on grounds of health and 

63 
 
Safety, support to small steel producers, preventing unfair trade practices 
and upholding national security. The Committee are of theviewthat strategic 
implementation of the QCO for steel and steel products willencourage 
innovation, reduce costs and will give boost to anti-dumping measures 
against cheap steel imports while having a positive impact on the domestic 
steel industry which will give thrust to small steel industries and Micro, 
Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). 
 
DMI & SP Policy for Greater Domestic Value Addition 
 
 
8. The Committee appreciate that the Domestically Manufactured Iron and 
Steel Products (DMI&SP) Policy implemented by the Ministry of Steel provides 
preference to domestically produced iron & steel material in Government 
tenders and seeks to accomplish ‘Make in India’ with the objective to 
encourage domestic manufacturing. The amended DMI & SP policy, 2025, 
inter alia, provides that all government ministries, departments, PSUs, and 
entities under their control must source iron and steel products domestically. 
The policy covers procurement of iron and steel for projects under centrally 
sponsored and central sector schemes, for items valued above Rs.5 lakh. DMI 
& SP Policy is a strategic framework, to take the nation forward towards self-
reliance. The policy effectively shields the domestic steel sector from cheap 
imports, retains capital within the country, and incentivizes technological 
upgrading among indigenous suppliers because it requires foreign suppliers 
to transfer technology to domestic companies within specified timeframes if 
they wish to bid for Indian government contracts. The Committee observe 
that major organisations have largely been complying with the DMI & SP 
Policy since its launch in 2017. The Committee are hopeful that the Policy 
will achieve greater success with its wider adoption by other procuring 
organisations as well as small and medium steel producers. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to closely monitor its compliance and implementation in a 
periodic manner and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
Strengthening Rail and Road Logistics Infrastructure 
 
9. The Committee note that the rail and road logistics are critical to the 

64 
 
 
 
 
steel sector for moving heavy raw materials and finished products 
efficiently. This network links mines, production plants, and end 
consumers across vast geographical distances. The Committee are of the 
view that last mile road connectivity, coupled with adequate rail wagons 
and rakes will ensure timely and cost-effective transportation of steel and 
its raw materials. At the same time, the Committee appreciate the efforts 
of the Ministry in coordination with the Ministry of Railways to address 
logistics issues and note that a target has been set for reducing average 
rake turnaround time from the current 5–6 days to about 3 days by FY 
2030-31 through dedicated freight corridors and operational reforms. The 
Committee also note the identification of nearly 1,000 km of first and last 
mile road infrastructure for upgradation in key steel producing regions. 
The Committee desire that these initiatives be implemented in a time 
bound manner with close interministerial coordination so as to reduce 
logistics cost in the steel sector. 
 
Leveraging PM Gati Shakti for Efficient Steel Logistics 
 
10. The Committee appreciate the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan which is 
a transformative mega infrastructure initiative launched by the Government of 
India. It syncs railways, highways, ports, waterways, airports, mass transit, and 
logistics infrastructure to ensure seamless last mile connectivity for freight which 
is the backbone for infrastructure development in steel sector. The Committee 
feel that the development of Multi-Modal Logistics Parks (MMLPs) under PM 
Gati Shakti, along with port linked and hinterland warehousing hubs at key 
locations will reduce steel logistics drastically and also reduce time for raw 
materials to reach steel plant and finished product from steel plants to the market. 
The Committee, hence, urge that such projects be implemented on priority so 
as to strengthen connectivity to steel and mining clusters, improve supply chain 
efficiency and enhance the competitiveness of the domestic steel industry. The 
Committee wish to apprised of the progress made under this plan. 
 
 
 

65 
 
 
 
 
Promoting Coastal and Inland Waterways for Cost Effective Steel Logistics 
 
 
11. The Committee understand that Sagarmala Programme is a flagship 
initiative by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways to modernize 
India's maritime sector and is aimed at transforming the country's economy 
through port-led development. Its core objective is to harness India’s coastline 
and navigable waterways to drastically reduce domestic and Export-Import 
(EXIM) logistics costs. The Committee note the potential of the Sagarmala 
Programme to improve logistics efficiency in the steel sector and appreciate 
the Ministry's assessment that, by FY 2030-31, enhanced port infrastructure could 
handle around 15 per cent of iron ore movement and approximately 3 per cent 
of steel movement. The Committee further note that the coastal shipping for steel 
movement has been partially operationalized, with limited but gradually 
increasing movement along the eastern and western coasts. Inland waterway 
transportation of steel remains at early development and pilot stage, restricted to 
select stretches only. While noting that this will reduce rail and road logistics 
costs in the steel sector by providing an alternative and cheaper means of 
transportation for raw materials as well as finished steel products, the Committee 
hope that this initiative of the Government will reap huge benefits for the steel 
sector. 
 
Slurry Pipelines for Cost-effective and Environmentally Friendly Bulk 
Transportation 
 
12. The Committee understand that the slurry pipelines specially designed to 
transport fine particulate solids such as iron ore, coal or mining waste over long 
distances offer a cost effective and environmentally preferable mode of 
transporting iron ore etc. with significant potential to reduce dependence on rail 
and road logistics and lower transportation costs. As of now, 34 MTPA of slurry 
pipeline capacity, accounting for about 6 per cent of total iron ore movement, 
is currently operational in the country. The Committee are informed that slurry 
pipelines are water intensive and to address the water availability concerns, 
Return Water Pipelines and Closed Loop Recycling Systems are emerging as 
primary mitigation strategy; and desalination for coastal units are also being 
evaluated for make-up water or full water sourcing. The Committee, therefore, are 

66 
 
 
 
 
of the view that development of slurry pipelines with efficient technologies may 
be encouraged which will help in reducing logistics costs and will help in 
reducing the carbon footprint in the steel sector. 
 
Reducing Logistics Costs to Enhance Global Competitiveness of Indian 
Steel 
 
13. The Committee are informed that logistics costs for steel industry in India 
in road and rail freight make the domestic steel industry becoming less 
competitive outside the factory gate. The Committee note that Indian steel 
producers presently incur logistics costs of about 16–18% of revenue, 
compared to the global benchmark of 10–12%. The Committee are informed 
that that to minimize this gap by FY 2028–29, over 14000 km of rail infrastructure 
is expected to be operational, including 2840 km of Dedicated Freight Corridors 
(Eastern and Western DFCs), 3000 km of feeder and last mile connectivity, and 
7000 km of capacity augmentation works such as doubling and tripling on high 
density network railway corridors. These projects will enable segregation of 
freight traffic, higher axle loads, longer trains and improved turnaround time. The 
Committee appreciate the initiatives being undertaken for rail freight 
rationalisation, development of logistics hubs and multimodal transport 
corridors, as well as the commissioning of rail infrastructure by FY 2028-29 under 
PM Gati Shakti. The Committee appreciate these reforms and infrastructure 
projects as they are vital to reduce logistics costs, improve supply chain 
efficiency and enhance global competitiveness of the domestic steel industry. 
 
Strengthening Iron Ore Security through Mine Development and 
Beneficiation 
 
14. The Committee note that assured availability of iron ore, particularly high 
grade ore required for advanced and low carbon steel production, is critical for 
the steel sector. While India possesses substantial iron ore resources of about 
25.36 billion tonnes, high grade hematite reserves (>62% Fe) constitute only 
around 1.45 billion tonnes, necessitating increasing reliance on medium and low 
grade ores. The Committee note that the operationalisation of auctioned mines, 
often range from 24 to 60 months, affecting timely availability of raw materials. 
The Committee further note that declining ore grades increase mining and 

67 
 
 
 
 
processing costs and that substantial quantities of low grade iron ore fines 
remain under utilised or are exported in the absence of adequate beneficiation 
and pelletisation, despite the country having an installed beneficiation 
capacity of 114.15 MT. The Committee while noting the efforts of the Ministry to 
secure raw material availability, opine that mine development, beneficiation and 
pelletisation infrastructure may be encouraged to promote efficient utilization of 
low-grade ore and ensure assured raw material linkages for steel producers. 
 
Coking Coal 
 
 
15. The Committee note that due to the limited availability of high-quality 
low ash domestic coal, there is continued dependence on imports for coking 
coal, which account for nearly 85–90 per cent of the sector’s requirements. The 
Committee also note that the Ministry is taking steps to diversify the sourcing of 
imports of coking coal. The Committee also note that one of the objectives under 
the National Steel Policy is to increase domestic availability of washed coking 
coal so as to reduce import dependence on coking coal from ~85% to ~65% by 
2030-31. The Mission Coking Coal, a key initiative to meet the raw material goals 
under the National Steel Policy, aims to increase domestic raw coking coal 
production up to 140 MT by FY 2029-30. The Committee appreciate the efforts 
being made under the Mission Coking Coal to enhance domestic production and 
increase the blending of indigenous coking coal, as continued dependence on 
imported coking coal make the sector vulnerable to global price volatility, 
geopolitical uncertainties and supply chain disruptions, which impact the 
competitiveness and long-term resilience of the steel industry. The Committee 
opine that the Government continue with its strategy for coking coal security 
through domestic coking coal production and beneficiation, promoting advanced 
coal blending technologies and further diversifying import sources so as to 
strengthen raw material security and support sustainable growth of the steel 
sector. 
Decarbonisation Roadmap and Green Steel Certification 
 
16. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Government for 
reduction of carbon emissions in the steel sector and promotion of green steel 
through Green Steel Taxonomy, National Green Hydrogen Mission and the Steel 

68 
 
 
 
 
Scrap Recycling Policy. The Committee note that the Green Steel Certification 
Portal is a digital platform managed by the National Institute of Secondary 
Steel Technology (NISST)under the Ministry of Steel. This portal work as 
interface for implementing India’s Green Steel Taxonomy which sets rules for 
low-carbon steel. This helps the steel industry produce steel with lower 
emissions, supporting national climate goals and global sustainability. The 
Ministry of Steel is a key stakeholder under NGHM for implementation of pilot 
projects for the use of hydrogen in steelmaking. The Committee also note that 
four pilot projects have been awarded for use of hydrogen in iron and steel 
production. Besides, the Steel Scrap Recycling Policy 2019 also aims to promote 
circular economy in the steel sector, thereby reducing emissions. The Committee 
are informed that for secondary steel producers, including MSMEs, the Ministry 
is conscious of their limited financial capacity to adopt high-cost green 
technologies and the decarbonisation strategy for the secondary sector has 
been chalked accordingly so that it emphasizes low cost and scalable 
interventions, such as higher scrap usage, improved furnace efficiency, 
renewable energy procurement, and cleaner fuel substitution. These measures 
provide immediate emission reduction benefits without imposing excessive 
capital burden.  The Committee are of the view that the Ministry may explore a 
gradual and economically viable transition for decarbonisation for both large 
steel plants and the MSME secondary producers, while also ensuring 
competitiveness and growth of the steel sector. The Committee desire the 
Ministry to explore a Green Steel Transition Roadmap that protects the 
competitiveness of the domestic steel industry while advancing India’s long-
term commitments. 
 
MSMEs - Key Driver of Sustainable Steel Production 
 
17. The Committee note that the secondary steel sector accounts for nearly 47 
per cent of the country's crude steel production capacity with 94.42 million 
tonnes out of the total 200.3 million tonnes in 2024-25. Comprising predominantly 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), the sector plays a crucial role 
in ensuring the availability of affordable steel for infrastructure, construction, 
engineering, automotive and other downstream industries while generating 
significant employment and promoting regional industrial development. The 
Committee further observe that the sector, being largely based on Electric Arc 

69 
 
 
 
 
Furnaces (EAFs), Induction Furnaces and steel scrap, is inherently aligned with 
the principles of resource efficiency, circular economy and low-carbon steel 
production, thereby making it an important component of India's strategy to 
achieve Net Zero emissions. The Committee appreciate the various initiatives 
undertaken by the Government, including the DMI & SP Policy, the PLI Scheme 
for Specialty Steel and the Steel Scrap Recycling Policy, to promote domestic 
steel manufacturing. The Committee are of the view that the secondary steel 
sector has the potential to produce more efficiently in realising the objective of 
reaching 300 million tonnes of steel capacity by the year 2030. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry continue their support for the development of steel 
sector and also aim at technology upgradation for medium and small-scale 
producers to adopt modern technologies for production of sustainable steel. 
 
Technology upgradation in Steel Plants 
 
18. The Committee are informed that big steel plants use BF-BOF (Blast 
Furnace - Basic Oxygen Furnace) are modern and have adopted state of the 
art technology and also upgraded old units vis- a- vis automation, digital 
process control, energy efficiency, waste to wealth processes, etc., for which the 
resources are generated within and through financial institutions and Joint 
ventures. Where the small and medium steel producers and MSMEs need 
upgradation, the need of finance for high cost of upgradation can make them 
economically unviable, unless fully supported or if the finance is made available 
at a reasonable cost. The Committee, hence urge the Ministry to explore such 
policies aimed at incentivizing technological upgradation for MSMEs and 
encourage major, medium and small steel producers including central and State 
owned units to adopt modern technologies in a practical and affordable 
manner. 
 
Carbon Measurement and CBAM Preparedness 
 
19. The Committee note that product-level measurement, reporting and 
verification of embedded carbon emissions are increasingly becoming important 
for international steel trade. The Committee are informed that domestic 
producers, particularly MSMEs and secondary steel units, require technical 
support to measure emissions, improve traceability and demonstrate compliance 

70 
 
 
 
 
with emerging market requirements.  The Committee desire the Ministry to 
explore the feasibility of a Green Steel Measurement, Reporting and Verification 
Framework, aligned with the national Green Steel Taxonomy and compatible with 
relevant international reporting requirements, which may also provide common 
technical-assistance facilities for the MSMEs. The Ministry may coordinate with 
concerned agencies for Carbon Measurement and CBAM Preparedness while 
ensuring that domestic emission-reduction efforts and India’s developmental 
goals receive due recognition. 
 
Export Competitiveness of Made in India Steel 
 
20. The Committee observe that, with expanding domestic capacity, a 
competitive steel sector must be able to reach overseas markets, particularly for 
value-added and specialty grades. The Committee are informed that Indian steel 
exporters face high logistics costs, non-tariff barriers, safeguard restrictions and 
increasingly stringent carbon-related reporting requirements in certain export 
markets. The Committee suggest that the Ministry, in coordination with 
concerned agencies may explore a strategy for Export Competitiveness and also 
explore a diversification strategy to identify priority markets and product 
segments and facilitate compliance with destination-country quality, traceability 
and carbon-reporting requirements to encourage export of Made in India Steel. 
 
Steel Research Technology Mission 
 
21. The Committee observe that the transition towards specialty steel, 
advanced manufacturing, automation, digital process control, green steel, 
modern recycling and high-quality production requires a workforce equipped 
with specialised technical skills. Skilled manpower shortages have also been 
identified as a challenge in implementing high-value specialty-steel projects. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts being made under the Steel Research 
Technology Mission of India (SRTMI) for providing a collaborative R&D platform 
that unites industry, academia, and startups to drive sustainable, self-reliant 
technological innovation in the Indian steel sector. The Committee are of the view 
that the Mission may explore the possibility of developing specialized and 
recognized certification courses in various disciplines related to the steel sector 
and may also provide focused support to workers, supervisors and 

71 
 
 
 
 
entrepreneurs in MSME steel clusters. 
Whole of Government Approach for Steel Sector 
 
22. The Committee recommend that in order to promote Made in India Steel, 
the Ministry may explore a coordinated action mechanism with concerned 
Ministries, State Governments, regulatory agencies, financial institutions and 
industry as a part of Whole of government approach. The Committee are of the 
view that a formal mechanism will help monitor outcomes and address issues 
relating to mines, coal, logistics, power, technology, environment, trade and skills 
in a coordinated manner. The Committee while appreciating the ‘Skill GAP 
Analysis Portal’, a specialized tool developed for steel manufacturing units to 
assess manpower requirements, identify skill gaps, evaluate training needs, and 
submit data securely, are of the view that the Ministry may also explore a 
real-time Steel Sector Dashboard covering details regarding grade-wise domestic 
production, import dependence, PLI outcomes, DMI&SP compliance, mine 
operationalisation, logistics indicators, scrap availability, export performance, 
employment, safety and emissions intensity. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     ANURAG SINGH THAKUR 
       ….. July, 2026                                                             Chairperson 
       ….Ashadha, 1948(Saka)                              Standing Committee on Coal,  
                                                                        Mines and Steel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
(2025-26) HELD ON 24 NOVEMBER 2025  
 The Committee sat on Monday, 24 November 2025 from 1215 hrs. to 1345 hrs.in 
Committee Room No.1, Parliament Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak 
4. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
5. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
6. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat 
7. Shri Shatrugan Prasad Sinha 
8. Shri S Venkatesan 
 
Rajya Sabha  
 
9.  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
10.  Shri Deepak Prakash 
11.  Shri Murli Milind Deora 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
2.  Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Indian Steel Association 
 
1. Shri Alok Sahay-Secretary   -General, Indian Steel Association 
2. Shri Amarendu Prakash   -Chairman & Managing Director, SAIL 
3. Shri Ranjan Dhar    -Director & Vice President-Sales  
4. Shri Ravinder Bhan   -Senior Director, Indian Steel Association 
5. Shri Pankaj Kumar Satija  -Executive Vice President, JSW 
6. Shri Manish Mishra   -Chief, Corporate Affairs, Tata Steel 
7. Shri Sudhir Sharma   -Sr. General Manager ,AMNS India 
8. Shri M.R. Gupta    -Director (T,P&RM), SAIL 
9. Dr. A.K. Panda    -Director (Finance), SAIL 
10. Shri Vinod Gupta   -ED (Commercial), SAIL 
11. Shri Arindam Dasgupta   -ED, CMD ’s Sectt., SAIL 
12. Shri Amit Kumar,   -DGM, CMD ’s Sectt., SAIL 
13. Shri Santosh Kumar   -General Manager (HR), SAIL 
14. Shri Amit Pratap Singh    -Head, Regulatory Affairs, Tata Steel 
15. Shri Prakash Duvvuri,   -AGM, JSW Steel 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of the Indian 

73 
 
 
 
 
Steel Association (ISA) to the sitting of the Committee convened  to have a discussion on the 
subject ’Aatmanirbharta in the steel sector and roadmap for ‘Made-in-India’ steel production’. 
The Chairperson outlined in brief the major issues on which the Committee would like to have 
a discussion and requested the representatives of the ISA to present their points.  
2. The representatives of ISA briefed the Committee on global steel sector trends and India’s 
comparative position in terms of production and consumption. They highlighted India’s current 
standing as the world’s second-largest steel producer and elaborated on the dynamics of steel 
imports from the South Asian countries, including the manner in which China channels cheap 
steel into India through these economies. The Committee was also apprised regarding new 
varieties of steel, technological upgradation in steel sector and the critical areas which need to 
be focused  to make India the world’s leading producer and consumer of steel..  
3. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised various queries regarding growth 
challenges of steel sector. The Members pointed out the gaps in the implementation of various 
Government policies and drew attention to the key areas of the industry that require urgent focus. 
The Members also asked the representatives of ISA to give their frank opinion on the measures 
needed to strengthen the steel sector and the specific  issues that must be addressed to unlock 
its full potential.  
4. The representatives of ISA responded to some of the queries raised by the 
Chairperson and the Members. The Chairperson then directed the representatives of the 
ISA to furnish written replies to the queries which remained unanswered during the sitting 
of the Committee within fifteen days. 
5. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Members of the Committee and officials of ISA for 
their active participation in the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
(2025-26) HELD ON 15 DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
The Committee sat on  15 December, 2025 from  1700hrs to 1800 hrs in Committee 
Room No. 1 , Parliament Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur-Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
3. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
5. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
6. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
7. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
8. Shri Ananta Nayak  
9. Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
10. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
11. Shri Shatrugan Prasad Sinha 
12. Smt. Pratibha Suresh Dhanorkar 
13. Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
14. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
15. Shri Deepak Prakash 
16 Shri Aditya Prasad  
17. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
18. Shri Pradip Kumar Verma 
19. Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
AAIFA Sustainable Steel Manufacturers Association 
 
1. Shri Yogesh Mandhani   -President AAIFA 
2. Shri Kamal Aggarwal   - Hon. Secretary General  
3. Shri Nishant Aggarwal   - National Council Member  
4. Shri Mohit Kapoor    - Advisor    
5. Shri Rajesh Shivlal Shriwastav  - Advisor   
6. Shri P Mishra     - Sr. Executive Director   
7. Shri Sourav Mishra    -Odisha Chairman 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of the AIIFA 
Sustainable Steel Manufacturers Association  to the sitting of the Committee convened  to have 

75 
 
 
 
 
a discussion on the subject ’Aatmanirbharta in the steel sector and roadmap for ‘Made-in-India’ 
steel production’. The Chairperson outlined in brief the major issues on which the Committee 
would like to have a discussion and requested the representatives of the AIIFA to present their 
points.  
2. The representatives of AIIFA  briefed the Committee on critical challenges faced by the 
Secondary Steel Sector and also highlighted the strategic measures needed to strengthen the 
domestic steel ecosystem, ensuring raw material security and advance the country’s mission for 
Atmanirbhar Bharat.  They highlighted how Secondary Steel Sector forms a critical pillar of Indias 
Steel economy accounting for nearly half of nations steel capacity comprising a vast network of 
MSMEs. The representatives recommended various measures needed for Sustainability and 
growth of Steel sector according to National Steel Policy and the policy initiatives needed to give 
boost to the sector.  
3. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised various queries regarding growth 
challenges of steel sector. The Members pointed out the gaps in the implementation of various 
Government policies and drew attention to the key areas of the industry that require urgent focus. 
The Members also asked the representatives of AIIFA to give their frank opinion on the measures 
needed to strengthen the steel sector and the specific  issues that must be addressed to unlock 
its full potential.  
4. The representatives of AIIFA  responded to some of the queries raised by the 
Chairperson and the Members. The Chairperson then directed the representatives of the 
AIIFA to furnish written replies to the queries which remained unanswered during the 
sitting of the Committee within fifteen days. 
5. Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Members of the Committee and officials of AIIFA for 
their active participation in the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  

76 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
(2025-26) HELD ON 15 DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
The Committee sat on  15 December, 2025 from  1820 hrs to 1900 hrs in Committee 
Room No. 1 , Parliament Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur-Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat 
3. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak  
5. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde 
6. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
7. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
8. Shri Ananta Nayak  
9. Smt. Bharti Pardhi 
10. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
11. Shri Shatrugan Prasad Sinha 
12. Smt. Pratibha Suresh Dhanorkar 
13. Shri Aditya Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
14. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
15. Shri Deepak Prakash 
16 Shri Aditya Prasad  
17. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
18. Shri Pradip Kumar Verma 
19. Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo 
 
Secretariat 
 
4. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  -  Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Director 
6. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Steel 
1. Shri Ashish Chatterjee    -Additional Secretary and FA 
2. Shri Abhijit Narendra     -Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Gopal Krishna Ganeshan   -Director 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members, the representatives of the 
Ministry of Steel  to the sitting of the Committee convened to take  oral evidence on the 
subject, ‘Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and Roadmap for ‘Made In India’ , Steel 
Production.’ The Chairperson outlined in brief the major issues on which the Committee 
would like to have a discussion and requested the representatives of the Ministry to 

77 
 
 
 
 
present their points. The representatives of the Ministry made a PPT on various aspects 
of the subject  like Projected iron and steel demand and production by 2030-31 and 
various initiatives taken by the Government for growth of Iron and Steel Sector.The 
representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee the issues due to which the steel 
sector is lagging behind in its physical and financial performance. They highlighted new 
initiatives like PLI scheme, DMI and SP policy of Specialized Steel which have been 
recently launched by the Ministry .  They outlined the  steps being taken by the Ministry  
to make India Aatmanirbhar in the Steel sector. 
3.  Thereafter , the Chairperson and the Members  raised various queries based 
on the testimonies given by the Ministry. The key issues highlighted relate to several 
structural and operational constraints that continue to hamper the growth trajectory of 
PSUs. Big Private Steel Producers as well as MSMEs. Members also noted that 
various Government assessments and media reports have highlighted several 
performance gaps in Steel sector growth,  
4. The representatives of the Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by 
the Members. The Chairperson then directed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Steel to furnish written replies to the queries which remained unanswered during the 
sitting  to the Committee secretariat within fifteen days. 
5 . Hon’ble Chairperson thanked the Members of the Committee, officials of the 
Ministry and SAIL for their active participation in the sitting of the Committee.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-26) HELD ON  20 JULY,  
2026 FROM 1700 HRS TO 1730 HRS IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 1,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI  
PRESENT 
                   Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson  
Lok Sabha  
  
2.Smt. Kamlesh Jangde  
3.Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
4.Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato  
5.Shri Ananta Nayak  
6.Dr. Manna Lal Rawat  
7.Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan  
  
Rajya Sabha   
  
8.Smt. Mahua Maji  
9.Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi  
10.Shri Devendra Pratap Singh  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Harish Chandra Bist - Joint Secretary  
  Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee - Deputy Secretary  
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the following draft  
Reports without any amendments:-  
  
(i)‘Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel  
Production’ pertaining to the Ministry of Steel;  
  
(ii)Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations  

79 
 
 
 
 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for  
Grants (2026-2027) pertaining to Ministry of Coal;  
   
(iii)Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations  
contained in the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for  
Grants (2026-2027) pertaining to the Ministry of Mines.  
  
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present  
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 