29 STANDING COMMITTEE ON
coAL, MINES AND STEEL (2025-2026)
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF MINES
KABIL: India's quest for Global Critical Minerals
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHT
AUGUST, 2026ISRAVANA 1948 (Saka)
_ i::,i1..;.t_"1 :
..,,L{}-};.
;.::fi;i rL\-!
'S4raiiV
;;4,r i*;
l:- t, :

TWENTY.NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
coAL, MrNES AND STEEL (2025-2026)
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF MINES
KABrL: rndia's quest for Global critical Minerars
Presented to Lok Sabha on .1.?.".O8. 2026
Laid in Rajya Sabha on .Ji...Og .2026
': .: .t .::.'
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2026|SRAVANA 194a (Saka)

CM&S No.
@2026 by Lok Sabha Secretariat Published under Rule 382 of the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (_
Edition) and printed by

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.........
r NTRO D UCTrON.............
IV
VI
vil
vilt
tx
X
XI
(i
(i
PART.I
Formation of KABIL
Structure and Governance of KABIL
(a) Equity Holdings of KABIL
(b) Organizational structure and Governance of KABIL
(c) Financial Performance of KABIL
(d) Manpower availability at KABIL
Mandate and Targets
Ongoing Engagements & Achievements in Overseas lnitiatives
(i) Engagement of KABIL in Argentina
(ii) Engagement of KABIL in Australia
(iii) Engagement of KABIL in other countries
Technology transfer and Research & Development
lnter-Ministerial and PSU Coordination
Global Scenario - Competitiveness of KABIL and PSU Consortiums
Alignment of KABIL with NCMM
Processing and Refining / Recycling of Critical & Strategic Minerals
Domestic MineralValue Chain & Demand-side Linkages
Private Participation / Public Private Partnership (PPP) Model
PART.II
Observations/Recom mendatio ns
ANNEXURES
Minutes of the Third sitting held on 1.0.1L.2025
Minutes of the Twenty-first and Twenty-second sittings held
on 29.05.2026
Minutes of the Thirty-third sitting held on 10.08.2026
L
L
L
3
5
6
7
9
9
15
16
18
19
27
25
26
29
31
33
47
50
53
il

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL. MINES AND STEEL
(2025-20261
Chairperson - Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat
3. Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal
4. Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak
6. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde
7. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol
L Shri Selvaganapathi T.M.
9. Smt. Jyotsna Charandas Mahant
10. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
11. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
12. Shri Ananta Nayak
13. Smt. Bharti Pardhi
1 4. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
15. Dr. Manna Lal Rawat
16. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan
17. Shri Kali Charan Singh
18.Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
19. Smt. Dhanorkar Pratibha Suresh
20. Shri S. Venkatesan
21. Shri Aditya Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad
23.Smt. Mahua Maji
24. Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi
25. Shri Aditya Prasad
26. Shri Devendra Pratap Singh
27. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma
28.Shri Milind Murli Deora*
29. Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo#
30. Dr. Sasmit Patra@
31. Shri M. Nagaraja$
*nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 vide Bulletin - Part-ll, Para No. 3329 dated 17.10.2025
# nominated w.e.1.05.12.2025 vide Bulletin - Part-ll, Para No. 3767 dated 08.12.2025
@ nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide Bulletin - Part-ll, Para No. 5267 dated 04.06.2026
$ nominated w.e.1.23.07.2026 vide Bulletin - Part-ll, Para No. 5724 daled 24.07.2026
Secretariat
Shri Harish Chandra Bist
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee
Shri Abhishek Sharma
1
2
3
4
Joint Secretary
Director
Deputy Secretary
Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject 'KABIL: India's quest for Global Critical Minerals' pertaining to the
Ministry of Mines.
2. The Committee selected the subject for detailed examination during
2025-26. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of Ministry of
Mines on 10.17.2025. The Committee, thereafter, undertook oral evidence of
the representatives of Ministry of Mines and NITI Aayog on 29.05.2026. Based
on the oral and written testimonies submitted to the Committee, a report on
the subject was prepared.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
sitting held on 10,08.2026. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are
appended to the Report.
4, The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of Mines
and NITI Aayog for placing material information as well as tendering evidence
and views before the Committee.
5. The Committee place on record their profound appreciation for the
valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-II of the Report.
NEW DELHI;
1O August,2026
19 Sravana, 1948(Saka)
ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
Chairperson
Standing Committee on Coal,
Mines and Steel

Part-l
REPORT
KABIL: INDIA'S QUEST FOR GLOBAL CRITICAL MINERALS
I. FORMATION OF KABIL
1. The Planning Commission of lndia (now NlTl Aayog) in its report published in
2011, highlighted the need for the assured availability of mineral resources for the
country's industrial growth, with a clear focus on the well-planned exploration and
management of already discovered resources. The report described a separate group
outlining 12 minerals and metals as strategic minerals which include: Lithium (Li),
Cobalt (Co), Germanium (Ge), Indium (ln), Beryllium (Be), Niobium (Nb), Selenium
(Se), Gallium (Ga), Tantalum (Ta), Tungsten (\A/), Bismuth (Bi) and Tin (Sn), which are
critical raw materials for various strategic sectors but have meagre resource base in
the country.
2. Expedited exploration, overseas mineral acquisition, resource efficiency,
recycling of minerals, and finding substitutes through suitable R&D was recommended
in the report. With a view of making the country self-reliant in the areas of strategic
minerals and fulfilling the 'Make in lndia' drive launched by Government of lndia,
formation of a separate company for identification of sources of the strategic and
critical minerals in overseas countries, exploration, acquisition, development,
processing, and sourcing to lndia, under the aegis of the tilinistry of [Vines,
Government of lndia was planned.
3. Accordingly, Khanij Bidesh lndia Limited (KABIL), a JV Company between three
Government Enterprises, NALCO, HCL & MECL, under the Ministry of [t/ines,
Government of lndia was formed with the objective of sourcing critical raw materials
from overseas to the domestic market and achieving mineral security of the country.
II. STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE OF KABIL
a) Equity Holdings of KABIL

4. KAB|Lwas incorporated on 8th August2019, under Companies Act 2013 with
equity holdings of NALCO, HCL & TMECL: 4oo/o,30% & 30% respectively. KABIL's
initial Authorized Capital was Rs.100 Cr and paid-up capital Rs.30 Cr, which was
enhanced to Rs.500 cr and paid-up capital to Rs.100 cr on 27 .07 .2023.
5. During the examination of the subject, the Committee have been informed that
a proposal for Change in Equity Holding ratio of NALCO, HCL & MECL to 60%, 35%
& 5% respectively, and enhancement of Authorized Capital to 1000 Crore, subject to
approval of Board /shareholders of individual companies, has been agreed by KABIL
Board on 29.09.2025.
6. lt was further submitted that with this change in the shareholding, KABIL has
effectively become a subsidiary company of NALCO. Boards of NALCO, HCL and
MECL have accorded approval for amending the JV agreement and process of
finalizing Supplementary JV Agreement for signing amongst the three promoters is in
progress.
7. Accordingly, Khanij Bidesh lndia Limited (KABIL), a JV Company between three
Government Enterprises, NALCO, HCL & MECL, under the Ministry of Mines,
Government of lndia was formed with the objective of sourcing critical raw materials
from overseas to the domestic market and achieving mineral security of the country.
8. When asked about the reasons and rationale for change in equity holdings of
KABIL by NALCo, HCL and tvECL from 40o/o, 30% & 30% to 600/0, 3s% & s%
respectively and how the revised ratio was determined, the Ministry submitted as
under:-
"The overseas activities of KABIL need huge capital outgo in coming years. ln the
five Lithium blocks allotted in Argentina, the non-invasive exploration has been
completed. KABIL has committed investment of USD 25.712 tr/illion for
completion of the exploration activities. KABIL is also exploring other overseas
projects of Lithium and REE. ln absence of any internal accruals or reserves,
fund raising through equity calls from promoter companies, is the only source for
KABIL.
DPE guidelines dated 05.08.2005 for [\Iiniratna companies provides for
establishment of JV companies and subsidiaries with investment limit of 1|o/o of

net worth. Due to these investment restrictions, it was not possible to enhance
Authorized Capital of KABIL beyond 500 Cr, due to the limited net worth and
investment capacity of ti/ECL. Therefore, to enhance the Authorized Capital of
KABIL from 500 Cr to 1000 Cr, change in the shareholding ratio of NALCO, HCL
& lvlECL from 40:30:30 to 60:35:05 respectively, has been envisaged. Proposal
has been approved by the Board of NALCO, HCL and IVIECL and sent to DIPAM
for concurrence to convert the status of "JV company" to "Subsidiary of NALCO".
L On the specific advantages or synergies anticipated from increasing NALCO's
stake and the expected governance/ performance benefits, the Ministry informed as
under:-
"The proposed shareholding of 60% by NALCO in KABIL will make it a subsidiary
company as per provisions under the Companies Act. The anticipated advantages/
synergies by increasing NALCO's stake are:
a. Being a subsidiary company of NALCO, capital requirement shall be easily
met from NALCO. Further this will help KABIL in obtaining financial supporU
loan etc., through Bank and other financing bodies with NALCO being the
guarantor.
b. [Vlanpower support shall be available easily to KABIL from NALCO."
10. On the approximate cost of change in equity holdings of NALCO, HCL and
MECL in KABIL from 40o/o, 30o/o & 30% respectively at the time of incorporation to
60%, 35% & 5%, the Committee were informed as under:-
"No cosU expenditure is involved for change in equity holdings of NALCO, HCL
and MECL in KABIL from 40o/o, 30o/o & 30% respectively at the time of
incorporation to 60%, 35% & 5%.
For increasing the authorized share capital from Rs.500 crore to Rs.1000 crore
the cost includes Registrar of Companies (ROC) fees and stamp duty charges
which is approximately Rs 3 to 4 crore."
b) Organizational structure and Governance of KABIL
a
a

,I
CTO CFO
I
: Head I
Finante
I
Financo
Officer
, llead llusiness
, Development
Head HII
& Admin
Have been selected, are to join shortly
Currently in place
Organizational structure of KABIL
11. Regarding the internal governance mechanisms which exist within KABIL for
oversight of overseas acquisitions and whether they are commensurate with the
international best practices, the t\Iinistry stated as under:-
"The day-to-day activities of KABIL are managed by its Chief Executive Officer,
who reports to the Chairman/KABlL. CMD/NALCo holds the charge of
Chairman/KABlL. The activities of KABIL are closely monitored by its Board,
which constitutes CMD/HCL, CtVID/MECL, Director/ Production/NALCO &
CEO/KABIL as directors along with two government nominee directors from
tMinistry of N/ines and ChairmaniKABlL. KABIL is also subject to periodic audit by
CAG.
For any overseas acquisition, after completion of the initial internal due diligence,
detailed due diligence activities covering Technical, Financial, Legal aspects is
carried out by experienced and reputed specialized Consultants/ Transaction
Advisors, which are appointed through tendering process for taking investment
decision. KABIL has empaneled consultants for taking up project Due Diligence
and providing Transaction Advisory services, to expedite the project evaluation
processes during ltlay 2026. Four number of Globally recognized companies i.e.;
PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu lndia LLP,
KPIVG Assurance and Consulting Services LLP and Grant Thornton Bharat LLP
have been empaneled. KABIL also gets guidance/ technical support from GSI
and other reputed research / academic institutes, as per requirement. [Vloreover,
KABIL along with all stakeholder PSUs like clL, olL, ovl, NLCIL, BPRL, locL
are jointly pursuing the investment opportunities and doing due diligence."
12. On the mechanisms in place for regular performance review of KABIL at the
Government level including tracking of key performance indicators (KPls), the
Committee were informed as under:-

"The KABIL Board includes two Government nominee directors from the tt/inistry
of Mines. The activities of KABIL are closely monitored by the KABIL Board. Any
investmenUexpenditure above the value of Rs. 10 crore requires the approval of
KABIL Board.
The activities of joint evaluation and investment by the lndian PSUs
spearheaded by KABIL is also being closely monitored by the Ministry of Mines,
through regular review meetings chaired by Secretary (tMines) and JS(NCM[/)."
c) Financial Performance of KABIL
13. The details of financial performance of KABIL during the last three years, year-
wise are as under:-
The financial performance of KABIL during the
last three financial vears is as below:
Figures in Rs. Crores
Financial
Year
Revenue
from
Operation
S
Other
lncom
e
Total
Expense
S
ProfiU(Loss)
2023-24 NIL 4.51 6.34 (1.83)
2024-25 NIL 5.67 13.46 (7.73)
2025-26 NIL 4.55 13.39 (7.05)
Total NIL 14.73 33.1 I 16.61
14. KABIL has accumulated losses of {16.61 crore over three years with zero
revenue from operations. On the projected annual cash burn for the next three years,
and whether KABIL has sought or obtained any debt financing, the tt/inistry replied as
under:-
"Presently, the expenditure of KABIL is funded through the paid-up capital only.
The projected total expenditure for next three years is approximately Rs.200
crores which shall be funded from promoter companies.
KABIL presently has no revenue generation.Any debt financing option at this
stage is difficult and the interest liability would have an adverse impact on the
financial health of KAB|L."
15. When asked about the interim power assigned to the CEO of KABIL to
negotiate and sign binding agreements without referring every decision back to the
three CMDs t until the restructuring is completed, the tt/inistry informed as under:-

"As per the delegation of financial powers approved by the KABIL Board on
14.03.2024, CEO has the power of financial transaction up to Rs.2 crore in each
case; whereas, Chairman of KABlLfrom Rs.2 croreto Rs.10 crore in each case
and Board of Directors of KABIL above Rs.10 Crore."
d) Manpower availability at KABIL
16. On the issue of severe manpower shortage in KABIL, when asked about filling
up the positions of CFO, Head of Business Development, Head of HR & Admin and
Finance Officer, the total sanctioned / working staff strength of KABIL and its
comparison with comparable overseas mineral acquisition entities such as ONGC
Videsh, the tt/inistry replied as under:-
"Selection process for filling the positions of cFo, Head of Business
Development, Head of HR & Admin and Finance Officer has been completed.
one officer from MECL has been joined as Head of HR & Admin on
01 .06.2026 on deputation.
Three officers from NALCO have been selected for the positions of CFO,
Head of Business Development and Finance Officer. Approval process for
release of the officers is in final stage.
The organizational structure with 17 identifled posts was approved on
17.03.2023 by the Board. Till 04.06.2026,7 positions are fiiled up, which
includes one staff posted in Argentina branch office). For 3 positions,
selection process has been completed.
a
a
a ONGC Videsh does not have its own manpower cadre and sanctioned
strength. Entire manpower is deputed by the parent company i.e. oNGC on
requirement basis, depending on number of overseas Projects and
activities. ONGC manpower deputed in ONGC Videsh is transferred back to
the parent company as per the Job Rotation and Transfer Policy of the parent
company i.e. ONGC.
As on 09.06.2026, oNGC videsh has manpower strength of 162 employees
(deputed from oNGC), which varies depending upon incoming/ outgoing
transfers and superannuation."
a
17. When asked about NlTl Aayog's views on converting KABIL into a fully
Government-owned special purpose vehicle (SPV), directly capitalised by the
Government of lndia, on the lines of ONGC Videsh, NlTl Aayog submitted as under:-
"Considering the need for expedited results, KABIL may be made a subsidiary of
ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) which has requisite financial and implementation
capacity."
o

III. MANDATE AND TARGETS
18. The Committee are given to understand that the Mandate of KABIL is to identify,
explore, acquire, develop, mine, process and procure strategic and critical minerals
from outside lndia. KABIL is aiming at acquiring strategic and critical mineral assets
outside lndia or long-term investment for sustainable sourcing of the critical raw
materials through G2G, G2B or B2B routes based on due diligence. KABIL along with
other PSUs like OVL, OlL, NLCIL, NLC etc. is regularly pursuing various opportunities
in this field.
19. ln the context of KABIL's overseas mandate, when asked whether a strategy
document has been prepared or being prepared which lists out countries of interest,
mineraltypes, risk matrix, funding model and timeline milestones, the Committee were
apprised as under:-
"A Techno-economic study was taken up by NALCO, through a consultancy firm
(DMT Consulting (P) Limited), for identification of priority minerals and
prioritization of target countries during 2018-19, covering the aspects like
occurrences of the minerals, market status, identification of potential countries,
status of global assets, business models for acquisition of the minerals, risk
assessment with respect to countries socio-political status, policies etc. and
selection of 5 best countries for investment, criticality assessment of the minerals,
country policies and recommendations.
Major recommendations for the study are:
Lithium and Cobalt were recommended as the most critical minerals due to High
supply risk and High importance.
[/ost potential countries:
Lithium: Australia,Chile, Brazil, Argentina, Canada
Cobalt: Australia, Canada, USA, Russia, D.R. Congo
Mode of Acquisition: Acquisition of greenfield or brownfield mining assets,
investment for obtaining equity share and oftake or other mechanisms through
G2G, G2B or B2B routes subject to due diligence.
Apart from the above, KABIL takes up regular assessment of potential overseas
critical mineral sources. KABIL also gets investment offers from various sources.
The same are discussed in the internal meetings between the group of lndian
PSUs for initial screening. "
20. Regarding measurable targets (in terms of number of overseas mineral assets,
value of overseas investment, volume of minerals secured etc.) which have been set

. .,',, _
for KABIL by the Ministry of l/ines and the Government, for the short (lo 2O2S),
medium (to 2030) and long term (beyond 2030), the Ministry replied as under:-
"Under the National Critical [Mineral [Vission, Ministry of tVines has taken a target
of 50 overseas critical mineral asset acquisitions through PSUs and Private
companies, by lt/arch 2031.
KABIL at present has acquired 5 Lithium Brine Blocks in Argentina and is
evaluating 7 additional greenfield lithium blocks offered by the Government of
Catamarca for acquisition. Discussions are also in progress for obtaining two
green field brine type lithium projects in Jujay Province under the purview of the
[/oU signed with state owned company of the province, JEMSE.
Since acquisition of assets depends on availability of suitable opportunities
globally at reasonable rates, that cannot be predetermined, it is not feasible to set
quantitative targets. However, KABIL along with all stakeholder PSUs like ClL,
olL, ovl, NLCIL, BPRL, GAIL, NALCO, locl are joinfly pursuing the overseas
investment opportunities and doing due diligence."
21. Regarding the projected material volumes and revenue streams from these
overseas assets for lndia/ by KABIL overthe next 5-10 years, the Committee were
informed as under:-
"KABIL is developing 5 Lithium brine blocks in Catamarca, Argentina. The
exclusivity rights for exploration and development of the blocks have been
obtained in January 2024. On obtaining required statutory approvals, KABIL has
completed non-invasive exploration and is preparing for taking up detailed
exploration including drilling. The same will be followed by metallurgical studies,
pilot plant operation and feasibility studies.
Projected material volumes and revenue streams from the project can be
assessed on completion of the feasibility study, which is planned to be completed
by early 2029.
Other projects are under due diligence at present and mode of acquisition is
through timebound competitive investment process. tVaterial volumes and
revenue streams can be assessed on successful completion of the acquisition
processes."
22. Considering the global strategic context, on the processes which are in place
for KABIL to review and update its mandate (or operations) in light of emerging
minerals (e.9., gallium, indium, bismuth) or technology shifts (battery-chemistries,
recycling), the Committee were apprised as under:-
"KABIL is currently focusing on acquisition of critical mineral assets and
establishment of long term offtake agreements for Lithium and REEs due to their
strategic importance and country's strategic goals. Lithium is a critical mineral

)
:J
required for EV batteries, storage systems etc. REEs like Nd, Pr, Dy and Tb are
essentially required in manufacturing permanent magnets, which has application
in defense sector, aerospace, electric vehicles, wind turbines etc."
23. On whether KABIL's current mandate, structure and capital base are adequate
for the scale of ambition required under the Viksit Bharat and Net Zero frameworks,
NlTl Aayog replied as under:-
"For achieving the objective of ensuring security of critical minerals for the
industry, the capacity of KABIL needs to be increased in terms of capital, qualified
manpower, execution capacity etc. However, considering the need for expedited
results, KABIL be made a subsidiary of CPSU which has requisite financial and
implementation capacity in the similar activity. This would also accelerate the
efforts of providing critical minerals security in the country."
24. On whether NlTl Aayog has prepared any internal review or evaluation report
on KABIL's performance and if so, the key findings thereof, the Committee were
informed that NlTl Aayog has not specifically undertaken any review or performance
audit of KABIL.
IV ONGOING ENGAGEMENTS & ACHIEVEMENTS IN OVERSEAS
INITIATIVES
(i) Engagement of KABIL in Argentina
25 Details of engagement of KABIL in Argentina arc as under:-
KABIL signed tMoUs with 3 state-run companies of Argentina i.e. JEIVISE, YPF
& CATMYEN in 2020 to explore sourcing of lithium and other mineral assets in
Argentina. CAMYEN, the state-owned company of Catamarca province of
Argentina, offered few greenfield lithium brine blocks in Fiambala region of
Catamarca. A Joint team of geologists from KABIL, GSI & MECL was deputed
for preliminary geological evaluation of the offered blocks during November
2022. Based on the above, 5 blocks comprising of 15,703 hectares area were
selected.
ln January 2024, KABIL signed an Exploration & Development agreement with,
CAMYEN and obtained exclusivity rights for exploration, development and
mining if found potential in the 5 brine type lithium blocks.
a
On obtaining required statutory approvals, KABIL started non-invasive
exploration activities including Geochemical and Geophysical surveys during
October 2024. The same was completed by July 2025. Detailed exploration
was started in Jan 2026. Advanced geophysical surveys to assess depth wise
extent of the potential brine zone, have been completed. Environmental permit
a
a

'12
a
for initiating Drilling or other invasive activities has been obtained on
09.04.2026.
KABIL is preparing for drilling activities. Drilling contractor has been finalised
through competitive tendering process. Tendering process for allied activities
such as setting and maintenance of exploration camp as well as environmental
services has been completed
The mining authority of the Catamarca has advised to submit water
management plan, waste management plan, etc as stipulated in the
Environmental Permit. All essential documents have been submitted. KABIL
will start drilling on getting the final concurrence from the authority. KABIL has
also initiated activities related to local community engagement.
Detailed exploration including drilling will be followed by metallurgical studies,
pilot plant studies etc., to complete Feasibility study for the project. KABIL is
aiming to start extraction of lithium in next 4 to 5 years' time, on establishment
of feasibility of the project. A Project [t/anagement Consultant with
specialization in Lithium Brine project execution has been appointed for
assisting KABIL for feasibility study for the project and fast track efficient
execution of the project till completion of feasibility study.
The Government of Catamarca has offered seven additional greenfield brine-
type lithium blocks in Catamarca Province under the existing agreement
between KABIL and CAIVIYEN. KABIL is evaluating the preliminary information
received from the CAMYEN.
N/oreover, KABIL is in the process of signing MOU with the tt/inistry of
Production and Mining of the Province of Salta, Argentina and Energy and
Mining Resources Salta SA (RElVSa), a state-owned company of Salta,
Argentina to collaborate for identification, acquisition, and development of
Lithium projects in Salta. Salta Province is one of the three provinces of
Argentina falling under the Lithium Triangle along with Catamarca and Jujay
provinces.
Discussions are also in progress for obtaining green field or brownfield brine
type lithium projects in Jujay Province under the purview of the MoU signed
with state owned company of the province, JEMSE.
Currently two additional projects are also under evaluation on B2B basis for
investment:
San Jorge-Greenwing: An exploration stage Lithium Brine Project in
Catamarca, Argentina, is being evaluated by KABIL & OIL jointly.
Rio Grande-NOA:An advanced exploration stage Lithium Brine Project in Salta,
Argentina, is being evaluated by KABIL & IOCL jointly.
a
a
a
a
o

26. Regarding the projected timelines for completion of feasibility studies,
environmental clearances, and commencement of extraction ect. of the Argentine
lithium project, the Committee were apprised as under:-
The tentative timelines for Argentina project are
Environmental
Exploration
permits for lnvasive Obtained in
April 2026
Completion of Detailed
Exploration/Drilling
July 2028
ltletallurgical Studies, Pilot Plant
installation and Process technology
finalization
October
2028
Feasibility ReporUDPR March 2029
Production of Lithium December
2030
27. On the current status of lithium exploration by KABIL in Catamarca province of
Argentina and whether the project is progressing as per the set timelines, the IiIinistry
stated as under:-
"Status of lithium exploration by KABIL in Catamarca province of Argentina is as
below:
It/ajor Milestones Planned (as of
Nov 2025)
hctual/
lrxnecteo
Obtaining Environmental permit for invasive
exploration
December
2025
lnnrit 
zozo
Submission of Water lvlanagement Plan, Waste
[/anagement plans etc for fulfilling obligations of
Environmental permit to obtain consent to start drilling
January 2026 ay 2026
Start of Drilling on obtaining consent to start drilling Jan 2026
Completion of invasive Exploration/ Drilling by July 2027
lJulv 
2028
Metallurgical Studies, Pilot Plant installation and
Process technology finalization
October 2027
Detailed Feasibility Study (DFS) lvlarch 2028
lMarch 
2o2e
Production of Lithium December
2029
lDecember
lzoso
The project is progressing as per above schedule subject to statuary clearances etc
in Argentina"
:!,
loctober
lzoza
loctober
lzoza

28. While observing that the production timeline for the Argentina lithium project
has slipped from September 2029 to December 2030, the Committee desired to know
the specific reasons for the same, and the revised milestone chart with committed
dates. The Committee were apprised as under:-
"Revised milestone chart with committed dates, along with reasons for revision is
as under:-
Activities Completion/
Target Date
Remarks
Obtained exclusivity rights 15.01 .2024 Completed
Obtained status of mining operator 14.04.2024 to
19.09.2024
Environment Permits for
exploration in 5 blocks
non-rnvasrve 13.08.2024 to
06.01 .2025
Non-invasive exploration in 5 blocks October 2024
to July 2025
Submission of
Assessment report
Environmental lmpact 28.08.2025
Envi ronmenta I Perm it for I nvasive exploration 09.04.2026 Completed
(Delay of 3
months)
Advanced geophysical surveys 31.01 .2026 Completed
Selection of Drilling Contractor, LOI issued 20.04.2026 Completed
Submission of Water il/anagement Plan,
Waste [Vlanagement Plan, etc. to IMining
Authority
12.05.2026 Completed
Completion of other preparatory activities
including issue of LOI for exploration camp
set up and maintenance
15.06.2026 Planned
Acceptance of Water management plan,
Waste management plan, other documents /
consent to start drilling by the tMining
Authority
31.08.2026 Reasons for
revised date
listed as Note 1
lz

rt of Drilling (On completion of
lization of contractors)
15.10.2026 Reasons for
ised date
isted as Note 2
Note 1: A conservative time schedule has been assumed for the milestone. "Acceptance of
Water management plan, Waste management plan, other documents / consent to start
drilling by the Mining Authority" based on previous experience.
Note 2: lt is anticipated that Mining Authority of Catamarca may impose additional conditions
for water and waste management as well as environmental impact monitoring measures. A
conservative time schedule has been assumed for completing preparatory activities,
including mobilization of contractors.
Note 3: Based on results of advanced geophysical study for assessment of depth wise
extension of the potential brine zone, planned drilling depth has been increased in number
of wellsi boreholes for better assessment of available resources, thus additional time is
anticipated to complete Detailed exploration.
Considering that the reasons for delay (mostly due to challenges in obtaining statutory
approvals and local conditions) are beyond the control of KABIL, project schedule has been
considered. However, initiatives are being taken to reduce timelines to the extent possible,
which includes timely compliances of all statutory requirements, continuous follow up,
engaging with local/ provincial and federal authorities, community engagement activities,
suitable contractual measures to ensure preparedness to start work on immediate basis on
obtaining consent to work etc.
Current Longest Critical Path
Consent to start drilling by the Mining Authority--- Drilling --- Metallurgical Studies
-- Feasibility Study/DPR --- lVline Developmeht -> Commissioning --- Lithium
Production
29. When asked about the major challenges for KABIL in executing the Lithium
exploration project in Argentina and the learning experience from the project so far,
the Committee were apprised as under:-
"Major challenges for KABIL:
a
a
a
a
Completion of Detailed Exploration/ Drilling 31.03.2028
I\Ietallurgical Studies, Pilot Plant installation
and Process technology finalization
June 2028
Feasibility Report / DPR December
lseptem
lzoso
Linked with
previous
activities
Production of Lithium ber
lReasons for
lrevised date
lri.t"o 
as Note 3
It-int<eo witr
lprevrous
lactivities
Itint<eo witr
lprevrous
lactivities

a
a
a
a
As brine type lithium deposits are not reported in lndia till date, experience
and expertise for exploration and development of these types of deposits
are not available with the lndian explorers and/ or service providers.
Due to harsh winters, working season is limited to 9 to 10 months. Another
major challenge is remote location of the project, located at an altitude of
about 3500 msl, with dry and windy weather condition.
. Time taken for obtaining various statuary clearances
Learning experience:
Experience gained in exploration activities for development brine type
lithium projects (considering that brine type lithium deposits are not
reported in lndia, experience and expertise of exploration and
development of this type of deposits are not available with lndian explorer/
service providers).
Experience of taking up exploration activities and feasibility studies
adhering the applicable standard of reporting in Canada and Latin
American countries namely Nl 43-101 .
Understanding of Lithium extraction and processing technology to produce
Lithium Chloride and Lithium Carbonate.
Operating project at a remote location with extreme weather condition at
an altitude of 10,800 ft."
30. On the participation of KABIL in other overseas projects such as Lithium brine
project in Salta province of Argentina, the [Vinistry replied as under:-
"KABIL along with ClL, OlL, OVL, NLCIL, BPRL decided to jointly evaluate the
investment opportunity received by KABIL, for obtaining 20o/o eeurty stake and
oftake in a Lithium Brine project in Salta, Argentina, and invest as a
consortium of lndian Government companies, considering high value
investment.
An advisor was appointed by the consortium for project due diligence based
on data shared by the seller and for assisting in preparation of the Non-
Binding Offer.
As per the timeline of the process, KABIL and the consortium partners
submitted NBO during January 2026. A revised NBO was submitted in
February 2026.
However, the offer of the consortium was not selected by the seller for the
Binding Offer Phase."
a
a
a
o
a
o

31
(ii) Engagement of KABIL in Australia
Details of engagement of KABIL in Australia are as under:-
ln Australia, KABIL has signed a tvlOU with Critical lt/ineral Office (CMO), DISR,
Govt. of Australia on 1 0.03.2022, under the purview of which joint due diligence
activities were undertaken for selection of suitable lithium and cobalt projects in
Australia for investment of KABIL/other CPSES, by appointing a consultant.
Shortlisting of prospective projects was completed in November 2024,
resulting in identification of 9 projects (8 Lithium and 1 Cobalt), including 5
priority projects. Detailed due diligence has been completed for the 5 Lithium
projects (tt/t. tt/arion, Wodgina, [\It Holland, Andover and Delta Lithium). KABIL
along with other PSUs like Oil lndia Limited, Coal lndia Limited and ONGC
Videsh Limited participated in two timebound competitive investment processes
for select Lithium mining projects in Australia with the objective of securing
minority equity stakes and oftake agreements. ln one of the investment
opportunities comprising two projects (Mt. tt4arion and Wodgina), the lndian
consortium was not successful. ln another opportunity involving two projects
(lVt Holland and Andover), project owner had placed the process on hold in
June 2025, and reopened the same in February 2026. KABIL along with other
PSUs like Oil lndia Limited, Coal lndia Limited and NLC lndia Limited,
is presently undertaking a joint evaluation of the project for investment
considerations.
a
a
32. When asked about the anticipated returns or strategic benefits from KABIL's
collaborations in Australia with the Critical [Vlinerals Office (CMO), and the reasons for
earlier delays in due diligence, the [\Iinistry replied as under:-
"A [/loU was signed between lMinistry of lVlines, Gol & Department of lndustry,
Science, Energy and Resources (DISER) Government of Australia on 03.06.2020
for co-operation in field of mining & processing of critical and strategic minerals.
Under the purview of the above, a tt/OU signed between KABIL and Critical
l/ineral Office, DISER, Government of Australia on 10.03.2022 with an objective
for building an Australia-lndia partnership in critical minerals investment.
Under the tMOU between KABIL & Ct\4O, joint due-diligence of projects were
taken up during January 2023 for selection of suitable Lithium and Cobalt projects
in Australia, for investment by lndian Companies, by appointing a consultant.
Following outcome / benefits have been achieved: Through a systematic market
scanning and assessment amongst more than 200 lithium and cobalt projects
in Australia, 9 projects (8 Lithium and 1 Cobalt) have been shortlisted and ranked
for further assessment in November 2024.
Detailed due diligence (Technical) completed five lithium projects in June 2025.
Amongst which for 4 projects, KABIL has taken up further financial and other due

33
diligence required to take up investment decisions, while 5th one was found not
suitable to take up further evaluation as this stage.
KABIL has participated in time bound competitive investment processes for
investment in the above-said 4 projects during December 2024. While KABIL and
the consortium could not succeed for 2 of the above-said projects through the
competitive process, investment opportunities for 2 other projects were kept on
hold by the seller during June 2025.
The same has been reopened in February 2026. KABIL along with other PSUs
like Oil lndia Limited, Coal lndia Limited and NLC lndia Limited, is presently
undertaking a joint evaluation of the project."
(iii) Engagement of KABIL in other countries
Details of engagement of KABIL in other countries are as under:-
During June 2025, KABIL has signed an NDA for information sharing with
Uranium One Group, a subsidiary of Rosatom, a state-owned company of
Russia, for joint evaluation and investment in critical mineral projects in any
third countries other than lndia & Russia. Under which, due diligence activities
for an exploration stage lithium project (hard rock type) in [t/ali, Africa, was
taken up. However, the due diligence activity has been kept on hold on ground
of recent socio-political instability in Mali.
a
a
a
Discussion has also been initiated with the lt/alawi Mining lnvestment Company
(tuAMlco), a designated company of tMalawi, in the African continent, for
collaboration and exploring provision of joint investment and development of
critical mineral projects in Malawi by KABIL and MAtVllCO.
KABIL is also evaluating investment opportunities in the countries like Brazil,
Canada, Russia, lndonesia etc.
34. On the participation of KABIL in other overseas projects such as Lithium brine
project in Chile, the Ministry replied as under:-
"KABIL after signing NDA in 17 Oct 2025 and obtained initial stage Data room
access.
The project involved high value investment. Therefore, joint bidding along with
other PSUs like ClL, OlL, OVL was decided. Due diligence by the partnering
companies was initiated.
Due to limited time period, bid could not be submitted."
a
a
a

35. ln May 2023, KABIL signed a Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) with ENAMI
(Chile's state-owned mining company) to evaluate possible business opportunities in
exploration, extraction, processing and commercialization of lithium, particularly brine-
type blocks. When asked about the current status of the same and the timeline and
milestones envisaged for exploration, exclusivity, JV or acquisition with ENAMI, and
how these align with KABIL's broader critical mineral acquisition roadmap, the
Committee were apprised as under:-
"KABIL signed a Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) with ENAMI (Chile's state-
owned mining company) in tt/ay 2023. Due to the limited financial capacity of
KABIL and with the context of KABIL's acquisition of 5 lithium brine blocks in
Argentina in January 2024 and the investment requirement for developing the
same, it was decided that instead of KABIL, Coal lndia Limited (ClL) will pursue
the opportunity with ENAIVI for acquisition of Lithium brine blocks in Chile."
36. The Committee have observed limited progress in securing overseas mineral
assets and the prolonged timelines in moving from negotiations to actual acquisition
and production phase. When asked whether the Ministry has undertaken any
independent assessment of delays in KABIL's overseas acquisition strategy and the
institutional bottlenecks affecting conversion of ttloUs into commercially operational
assets, the Ministry stated as under.-
"For overseas asset acquisition of KABIL, G2Gl G2B route are exercised by
leveraging the MoUs of Ministry of Mines with the countries, having critical mineral
potential. Similarly, engagements through B2B route are also being explored.
Signing of MoU is just an enabling provision which does not automatically lead to
allocation of exploration/ mining blocks. From allocation of block to its conversion
into commercially operational asset requires various complex steps like
environmental clearance & other statutory approvals, exploration, feasibility
studies, mine development activities etc., which take considerable time. Studies
(S&P Global, 2025) shows "average lead time for mines continues to rise,
reaching 17.8 years for those that became operational between 2020 and 2024.
Extended periods for exploration, permitting and financing have significantly
contributed to these longer lead times". The timelines for KABIL's overseas
acquisition are well within the average timelines.
lnterest of KABIL/ other PSUs for obtaining blocks / permits for exploration,
development and mining on nomination basis or by joint venture with state
owned companies of the target countries are discussed during Joint Working
Group meetings or other G2G engagements between the tvlinistry of tt/ines and
its counterparts.
a

a JS (National Critical [\4ineral Misson/ NCMM) is holding weekly meetings to
monitor the progress of overseas investment opportunities in critical mineral
sector by KABIL and other PSUs.
Secretary (lt/lines) is also reviewing the progress on monthly basis."a
V. TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AND RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
37. When asked whether KABIL has entered into specific Research & Development
(R&D) or technology-transfer agreements (domestic or international) for critical-
minerals extraction, processing, recycling, or alternate sources (e.9., tailings, red-mud,
geothermal brines) the Committee were informed as under:-
"KABIL signed tMoU with CSIR- IMIVT on 10.04.2024 to have long-term
collaboration for knowledge/ technical support to KABIL, for
(i) execution of Brine type Lithium exploration & development project of KABIL
at Catamarca, Argentina,
(ii) for due diligence of Lithium (Hard Rock/ Spodumene) and Cobalt projects
in other geographic locations, and
(iii) to pursue research projects of direct interest and relevance to industries of
Copper, Aluminium, Aluminium battery, Aluminium refining, Lithium, Graphite,
Rare Earth Elements (REEs), Cobalt, Nickel, Manganese, other minerals and
secondaries including critical minerals, with financial arrangements, to be
decided on case-to-case basis.
KABIL signed ttloU with the University of Nevada, Reno, USA on
25.01.2025,for
(i) Technical support and cooperation in the areas of Exploration, Extraction,
Processing & Refining of Lithium and other critical minerals.
(ii) To take up joint R&D projects in processing of Lithium (Hard rock & Brine)
and other critical minerals with emphasis on fast and environment friendly
processing technology for brine type Lithium.
(iii) Cooperation in the field of skill development."
38. On whether KABIL has a roadmap (or is part of one) for establishing
downstream capacity (refining, chemical processing, recycling) in lndia or abroad, in
tandem with its upstream overseas acquisitions, the Ministry stated as under:-
"For the Lithium brine project of KABIL being developed in Catamarca, Argentina,

-i-
objective of KABIL is to develop the project for extraction of Lithium chloride from
the brines and conversion of the same to Lithium Carbonates."
39. Given the pace of global innovation in battery-chemistries and alternative
minerals, when asked how KABIL plans to remain agile (i.e., not be locked into
obsolete assets) and pivot to emerging minerals or processing pathways (for example
new battery chemistries requiring nickel, cobalt, manganese, silicon), the Committee
informed as under:-
"KABIL at present is prioritizing on sourcing Lithium as short-term plan,
considering the steadily uprising global and domestic demand for Lithium.
Apart from Lithium, KABIL is also focusing on investment in REE projects at
present. lt is also open for investment opportunity for other mineral projects as
well."
40. Khanij Bidesh lndia Limited (KABIL) has signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with the Council of Scientific and lndustrial Research - lnstitute
of Minerals and Materials Technology (CSIR-lIUNIT) for Technical & Knowledge
cooperation for Critical Minerals on 10.04.2024. Under the MoU, KABIL will leverage
the technical expertise and knowledge support of CSIR-ltt/tt/T to undertake various
projects. When asked about the concrete outcomes expected from this and how these
willbe integrated into KABIL's overseas projects, the [\Iinistry informed as under:-
"KABIL signed ttloU with CSIR- IMMT on 23.04.2024 to have long-term
collaboration for knowledge/ technical support to KABIL, for execution of Brine
type Lithium exploration & development project of KABIL at Catamarca,
Argentina, for due diligence of Lithium (Hard Rock/ Spodumene) and Cobalt
projects in other geographic locations, and to pursue research projects of direct
interest and relevance to industries of Copper, Aluminium, Aluminium battery,
Aluminium refining, Lithium, Graphite, Rare Earth Elements (REEs), Cobalt,
Nickel, lvlanganese, other minerals and secondaries including critical minerals,
with financial arrangements, to be decided on case-to-case basis."
VI. INTER.MINISTERIAL AND PSU COORDINATION
41. On the mechanisms which exist to coordinate between KABIL and other lndian
PSUs (for example Oil lndia Ltd. (OlL), ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL), NLC lndia Ltd.
(NLCIL)) for joint bids or co-investment opportunities in overseas critical mineral
projects, the Committee were informed as under:-
"The consortium partners, through initial internal due diligence, select suitable

projects and agree for joint evaluation to take investment decisions. For the
selected investment opportunities, the partners, sign a Summary of
Understanding, with all terms and conditions for joint investment specified in the
document. Summary of Understanding contains agreement on Participating
lnterests for each partner. The consortium partners share the costs for
appointment of consultants for Technical, Financial and other due diligence
activities. The procedure is being followed for all ongoing and planned joint
investment efforts by the PSUs and KABIL.
KABIL spearheads the project evaluation activities. Consortium partners
meet on a regular basis.
Representatives of the PSUs meet every week for discussions of the
opportunities, work plans and progress review, apart from regular interactions for
specific req u irements,
The progress is closely monitored by the [\Iinistry of [t/ines. Progress review
meetings are also taken up by the Secretary (l\Iines) and JS(NCIVIV) regularly."
42. When asked about the manner in which other ministries (e.9., Ministry of
External Affairs, tt/inistry of Commerce, Department of lndustrial Policy & Promotion,
IVinistry of New & Renewable Energy) are engaged in the overseas acquisition
strategy for critical minerals via KABIL and whether there is an inter-ministerial
steering committee or task force in place, the Ministry replied as under:-
"The Ministry of [t/ines, vide OM No. 1/5/2023-lC dated 15.09.2023, constituted
an lnter-fMinisterial Group (llVG) on Critical Minerals under the chairmanship of
Secretary (Mines) to develop a coordinated approach for formulating a holistic
national strategy on Critical Minerals and action plan to support the same". The
ItVG includes key stakeholder [t/inistries/Departments such as the Ministry of
External Affairs, Department of Commerce, Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, IVinistry of Coal, National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS), Ministry
of Steel, NlTl Aayog, etc. IMG meetings are held as required to deliberate on
matters related to Critical lVlinerals.
l/oreover, a Working Group on Critical [t/inerals under the l[VG, chaired by
Joint Secretary (NCl\IfU) has also been formed in February 2026.
National Critical [t/ineral Mission's activities are being coordinated by the
Empowered Committee (EC), chaired by the Cabinet Secretary including
members from relevant stakeholder ti4inistriesiDepartments. First meeting of
Empowered Committee, held on 11th September 2025."

43. Regarding the manner in which the domestic coordination between l/inistry of
Mines, NlTl Aayog, lvlinistry of Heavy lndustries, etc. is being managed to ensure that
KABIL's acquisitions dovetail with lndia's downstream manufacturing needs for EV-
batteries, wind/solar, defence rather than remaining purely upstream mining, the
Committee were apprised as under:-
"The Ministry of ltlines plays a complementary role in meeting lndia's critical
mineral requirements based on demand projections received from NlTl Ayog,
l\Iinistry of Heavy lndustries etc. for EV- batteries, wind/solar, defence etc.
These raw material needs are addressed through inter-ministerial
coordination, enabling prioritization of minerals essential for lndia's downstream
manufacturing needs.
The tMinistry of lMines has also undertaken a demand assessment of critical
minerals through consultations with ministries/ departments and industry
bodies. This will ensure that KABIL's overseas acquisitions align with the lndia's
downstream manufacturing needs"
44. When asked to elaborate on the collaboration of KABIL with other PSUs like
ClL, OlL, OVL, NLCIL, BPRL etc. in exploring overseas investment opportunities in
the domain of critical mineral exploration, the lVinistry stated as under:-
"For provisioning investment funds and derisking of high value investments,
KABIL is participating in the competitive bidding processes and/ or evaluating
projects along with other Government enterprises / PSUs.
a
a
a
For the previous occasions of bidding and ongoing project evaluation
processes, the CPSEs like Coal lndia Limited, Oil lndia Limited, ONGC Videsh
Limited, NLC lndia Limited, Bharat Petro Resources Limited are participating
as a consortium. The Singareni Collieries Company Limited, Gas Authority of
lndia Limited and lndian Oil Corporation Limited have also started evaluating
opportunities along with KABIL.
Combination of the consortium for a particular opportunity is decided based on
interests of the PSUs in the project.
KABIL is spearheading till the project evaluation or due diligence stage. The
consortium partners sign a Summary of Understanding for each investment
opportunity, keeping the provision of deciding internally about Participating
lnterests on finalization of project valuation and investment decision."
GLOBAL SCENARIO.COMPETITIVENESS OF KABIL AND PSU
CONSORTIUMS
a
vil

45. On whether the proposed restructuring of KABIL and enhancement of its capital
base are sufficient to enable participation in large-value global acquisitions, especially
against financially stronger global competitors, the Ministry submitted as under:-
. With the proposed restructuring: authorized capital of KABIL will be enhanced
to 1000 Cr in place of current authorized capital of 500 Cr. This will enhance
KABI L's investment capacity
For large-value investment opportunities, KABIL is participating along with
other PSUs including Coal lndia Limited, OIL lndia Limited, NLC lndia Limited
etc. as part of a consortium of lndian Government Companies for distributed
financial burden and investment risks.
a
46. lt is observed that China dominates the global supply chain from mining to
processing making it difficult for others to secure a significant foothold. When asked
about the views of the tVinistry and KABIL on this global concentration of supply-chain
control, and the measures being considered to reduce lndia's strategic dependence on
such concentrated sources, the tt/inistry submitted as under:-
"For diversification of sources for critical minerals, tt/inistry of Mines is focusing
on enhancement of domestic critical mineral exploration and overseas acquisition
of critical mineral assets through KABIL, other PSUs and private companies.
KABIL and other organizations are exploring possibilities in the countries like:
Australia, Argentina,Brazil, Canada, Chile, Malawi, lndonesia, Russia, etc.
The tt/inistry of [/ines has recognized 9 Centres of Excellence (CoEs) under
the National Critical Mineral [Mission (NCNlllV)to boost research and development
in the entire critical mineral value chain, including processing. CoEs are also
being supported by Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) through
Rs 210 crore funding.
The Ministry of [Vlines has launched a t1,500 crore lncentive Scheme for
Critical lt/ineral Recycling as part of the National Critical Mineral Mission to boost
lndia's recycling capacity for materials like e-waste and spent lithium-ion
batteries. This initiative aims to recover critical minerals from secondary sources,
strengthen the domestic supply chain, and reduce import dependency.
Guidelines for funding pilot projects for the recovery of critical minerals from
overburden/ tailings/ fly ash/ red mud, etc., were issued on 14.11.2025. Financial
outlay of the scheme is t'100 crore. One Project of NFTDC has been approved
for Recovery of REE from multiple feedstock.
The tMinistry has also formulated a 'Policy for exploration of critical minerals
in new projects and Recovery of Critical Minerals from overburden, dumps and
tailing of Existing Mines, 2025'which aims at ensuring systematic identification,
assessment and recovery of critical and strategic minerals from the new
exploration projects as well as existing mines."

47. KABIL faces competition from companies in China, the US and the EU that
have deep financial resources, established local networks and technological
advantages. Regarding the plan of action to enhance lndia's competitive positioning
in this landscape particularly in terms of financial partnerships, technology access, and
longterm oftake agreements, the Committee were informed as under:-
"For high value investment, lndian PSUs, comprising KABIL, OlL, OVL, ClL,
NLCIL, GAIL, IOCL are holding weekly meetings to discuss potential overseas
opportunities in critical minerals. Additionally, the IVinistry is holding regular
meetings chaired by the Secretary (tt/ines) and JS(NCM[VI), to expedite the
acquisition of critical mineral assets overseas.
IVIMDR Act has been amended in 2025 for expanding the scope of Ntt/ET to
support critical mineral exploration and mining in other countries.
The tVlinistry maintains regular coordination with lndian embassies to identify
potential opportunities in the critical minerals sector. ln the interest of developing
bilateral cooperation with mineral resource-rich countries, the lVinistry has
entered into bilateral [\IoUs with the Governments of a number of countries such
as Australia, Argentina, Zambia, Japan, etc. Further, lt/inistry is also engaged in
various multilateral and bilateral platforms such as Minerals Security Partnership
(MSP)/FORGE, lndia-US Strategic lt/ineral Recovery lnitiative (SMRI), lndo-
Pacific Economic Framework (IPEF), and UK-lndia Technology Security lnitiative
(TSl), etc. for strengthening the critical minerals value chain.
Moreover, lndia and the United States signed a bilateral framework on
cooperation in the supply, mining and processing of critical minerals and rare
earths on 26 \Aay 2026 in New Delhi. Additionally, the Quad partners - lndia,
Australia, Japan and the United States announced the Quad Critical [Vlinerals
lnitiative Framework to strengthen critical mineral supply chains."
48. ln view of the fact that competitors like China's CNGR Advanced lVaterial and
Western companies with deep balance sheets are bidding for the same assets, when
asked how KABIL plans to remain financially competitive in future bid processes, the
Committee were informed as under:-
As per the market trend, high value investment is required for obtaining equity
stake & offtake rights in operational or advanced stage projects. For
provisioning investment funds and derisking of investments, KABIL is
participating in the competitive bidding processes and/ or evaluating projects
along with other Government enterprises / PSUs.
a
For the previous occasions of bidding and ongoing project evaluation
processes, the CPSEs like Coal lndia Limited, Oil lndia Limited, ONGC
Videsh Limited, NLC India Limited, Bharat Petro Resources Limited have
a

participated as a consortium. The Singareni Collieries Company Limited, Gas
Authority of lndia Limited and lndian Oil Corporation Limited have also started
evaluating opportunities along with KABIL.
Combination of the consortium for a particular opportunity is decided based
on interests of the PSUs in the project.
For the high value investment requirements, the Participating interest of
KABIL remains within a range of about 5 to 10 %.
49. KABIL and the lndian PSU consortium were unsuccessful in the competitive
process for the Mt. [Varion and Wodgina lithium projects in Australia. When asked
about the reasons for the same and the lessons drawn so far, the Committee were
apprised as under:-
. "For the tMt. [/arion and Wodgina lithium projects in Australia, a NBO (Non-
Binding Otfe) was submitted on 17.12.2024 by the consortium of KABIL, Coal
lndia Limited, OIL lndia Limited and ONGC Videsh Limited. For obtaining 10%
equity stakes in both the mines (20o/o equity stake in the holding company,
Mineral Resources Limited, owning 50% stakes in both the mines), a NBO offer
price of 184 million USD was submitted.
. On process reopening, a revised NBO was submitted on 27.09.2025, for
obtaining 20% stakes in both the mines (40% equity stake in the holding
company, lt/ineral Resources Limited, owning 50% stakes in both the mines),
with offer price of 325 million AUD (-233 million USD).
. As per the information available in the public domain: South Korean steel and
chemicals company, POSCO has taken 15% equity stakes in each of the
Wodgina and tVt lt/arion mines for 765 million USD (30% equity stake in the
holding company, Mineral Resources Limited, owning 50% stakes in both the
mines).
The lessons drawn included the following:-
Absence of domestic value chain for Spodumene Concentrate (End product
for tMt. [\4arion and Wodgina lithium projects)
Highly fluctuating price for Lithium components.
Variation between long term price forecasts for Spodumene concentrate
published by various market intelligence.
Overpriced assets and highly competitive market.
50. The Committee further noted that due diligence for a lithium project in ttlali
(under NDA with Uranium One Group/Rosatom) was put on hold due to socio-political
instability. When asked about the lessons drawn by the Ministry from the Mali
a
a
a
a
a
o

experience, and how will these inform future country-level due diligenc, the N/inistry
informed as under:-
"Mali has an established potential for Lithium, with ongoing projects like
Goulamina Lithium Mine, owned by Ganfeng Lithium, producing since lale 2024
and Bougouni Lithium Project of Hainan tt/ining being developed since 2016.
KABIL started evaluation of a Project of Uranium One Group, a subsidiary of
Rosatom, the state-owned company of Russia during June 2025. Uranium One
Group has offered a joint investment in the project, with an option of obtaining up
to 49% of the equity stake. Phase 1 and Phase 2 exploration activities have been
completed till November 2025 by Uranium One Group.
Project Due-diligence process was kept on hold by KABIL due to adverse
local conditions."
VIII. ALIGNMENT OF KABIL WITH NCMM
51. When asked how KABIL's mandate integrates with the National Critical
Minerals [Vission (NCMM) and other national policy frameworks in terms of
prioritisation of minerals, value chain mission and coordination across ministries, the
Committee were apprised as under:-
"The key objective of NCMM is "to secure lndia's critical mineral supply chain by
ensuring mineral availability from domestic and foreign sources.", which is in sync
with the KABIL's objective i.e. "to identify, explore, acquire, develop, mine,
process and procure strategic and critical minerals from outside lndia".
KABIL is currently focusing on acquisition of critical mineral assets and
establishment of long term off-take agreements for Lithium, Graphite and REEs."
52. Regarding alignment of KABIL's mandate with the National Critical Minerals
lVlission (NCIMI\4) and National [t/ineral Exploration and Development Trust (NtUEDT),
the Ministry replied as under:-
. "fi/andate of KABIL is to identify, explore, acquire, develop, mine, process and
procure strategic and critical minerals from outside lndia.
National ft/ineral Exploration and Development Trust (NMEDT) is dedicated to
fund and promote regional and detailed mineral exploration in the country,
particularly for critical and deep-seated minerals, to enhance domestic mineral
resource discovery.
a

Both are under the administrative control of the t\4inistry of Mines and are
aligned with the objectives of the National Critical lilineral [vlission (NCMIM).
Through NCIUM, the Government is pursuing a coordinated approach to
securing critical mineral resources, including the acquisition of overseas assets.
. To support exploration and mining of critical minerals overseas, the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, was amended in August
2025 to expand the scope of NMEDT.
Activities and progress of KABIL are closely monitored and reviewed by JS,
NCtUtM. KABIL works as an integral part of NCIMNI."
IX PROCESSING AND REFINING / RECYCLING OF CRITICAL &
STRATEGIC MINERALS
53. While lndia is expanding its focus on mineral exploration and securing critical
minerals', the capacity for processing these minerals into high-value end-use products
remains limited. To achieve true self-reliance, regarding specific initiatives being taken
by KABIL to explore downstream value addition, i.e. in mineral processing, refining
and recycling facilities overseas or within lndia, particularly for critical and strategic
minerals alongside upstream acquisition of raw mineral blocks, the Committee were
informed as under:-
"KABIL is focusing on acquisition of upstream projects for critical minerals
covering exploration, mining and processing. However, most of the upstream
assets being evaluated by KABIL are restricted up to a certain stage of
processing, considering the fact that the processing technology and facilities for
the high-value end-use products are only limited to a specific country.
lVlinistry of l/ines is in the process of finalizing the Capex Support Scheme
for Processing of Lithium and Nickel. EFC Note has been sent to DoE on
25.05.2026. This will ensure downstream value addition in the country."
54. ln view of technological evolution, the Committee have observed the need to
diversify into REEs and emerging strategic minerals. When asked whether the Ministry
and KABIL have prepared a long-term mineralprioritization strategy based on evolving
battery chemistries, defence requirements, semiconductor technologies, and
renewable-energy transitions, the Ministry replied as under:-
"KABIL is following the studies and reports of NlTl Aayog and think tanks of
IVlinistry of lt/lines, apart from the guidelines of the NCMM. Accordingly, KABIL is
also looking for suitable investment opporlunities overseas to diversify into REEs

and emerging strategic minerals."
55. On whether the Ministry has prepared a national roadmap for establishing
domestic refining and chemical-processing capacity for lithium, cobalt, nickel and rare
earth elements to reduce dependence on foreign processing hubs, the Committee
were apprised as under:-
"Yes. The lvlinistry of lt/ines has taken several steps to strengthen the domestic
processing value chain, for critical minerals such as lithium, cobalt, nickel, and
rare earth elements.
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has recommended the scheme
of the Ministry of Mines viz. 'CAPEX Support Scheme to Promote Critical Mineral
Processing' with an outlay of Rs. 2,814 crore from 2026-27 lo 2030-31 on 3rd
June 2023. The Scheme seeks to bridge the existing midstream processing gap
in the critical minerals ecosystem and support downstream manufacturing
capacities in batteries, clean energy technologies, specialty steel, and electric
vehicles.
Ministry of Mines is supporting the establishment of Critical [t/ineral
Processing Parks (CMPPS) in four States, namely Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Odisha, and Maharashtra, with financial support of t125 crore for each park,
leveraging existing infrastructure. The locations of these parks have been
finalised by the respective State Governments viz; lt/aharashtra (Dighi), Andhra
Pradesh (Burugupalem), Gujarat (PCPIR Dahej) and Odisha (PCPIR Paradeep).
Further, tVinistry of Mines vide letter dated 22.05.2026, shared the concept note
with states for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR)."
56. On the role envisaged for KABIL in developing integrated ecosystems relating
to recycling, recovery, refining, and reuse of critical minerals from end-of-life batteries
and e-waste, both within lndia and through internationalcollaborations, so as to reduce
long-term import dependence and strengthen strategic mineral security, the Ministry
stated as under:-
"N/andate of KABIL is to identify, explore, acquire, develop, mine, process and
procure strategic and critical minerals from outside lndia. Till date KABIL is
focusing on upstream exploration and mining projects for sourcing the raw
materials from overseas to the domestic mid-stream and downstream sectors, as
per the mandate."
57. The lncentive Scheme for Critical Mineral Recycling has attracted 58 eligible
units with pledged capacity far exceeding targets. When asked about the related
issues such as how 58 units would share <1,500 crore meaningfully, whether the

l,:'t -
Ministry is planning to expand the scheme, the projected volume of critical minerals to
be recovered through recycling by 2030, how it compares with overseas acquisition
targets, the regulatory or administrative bottlenecks being identified in the e-waste and
spent Li-ion battery recycling ecosystem and whether the Ministry has engaged with
the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change to create a formal Extended
Producer Responsibility (EPR) linkage with critical mineral recovery, the Committee
were apprised as under:-
"Under the National Critical Mineral [/ission (NCtVltVI), the Government has
approved a 11,500 crore lncentive Scheme for critical mineral recycling on
03.09.2025. The Scheme was launched on 02.10.2025, to build domestic
capacity of and supply chain resilience in critical minerals by incentivizing that
part of recycling value chain in which actual extraction of critical minerals takes
place. The 58 recycling entities have been declared eligible under the Scheme
with the pledged capacity of around 850 KTPA against 270 KTPA target. The
Scheme provides financial incentive of up lo 20o/o of the eligible investment
(maximum subsidy for Group A (large established recyclers): t50 crore & Group
B (small, new recyclers): 125 crore). Based on the proposals received from
eligible entities, the estimated amount of incentive is around <932 crore,
comprising approximately 1426 crore for Group A entities and t506 crore for
Group B entities. However, the actual disbursement of incentive money is
dependent upon timely commencement of commercial production, eligible
investment, achievement of specified project milestones, fulfilment of the
conditions prescribed under the Scheme Guidelines, etc.
At present, no specific regulatory or administrative bottleneck has been
reported that impedes the growth of the e-waste and spent lithium-ion battery
recycling ecosystem. Further, tt/inistry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
(IVoEFCC) has been engaged with, since the Scheme formulation stage and
Scheme has been designed in alignment with the existing Extended Producer
Responsibility (EPR) framework of ti4oEFCC.
The matter has been taken up with MOEFCC since December 2025
suggesting measures regarding EPR framework which will ensure that strategic
waste material streams are directed to technically qualified recyclers, thereby
strengthen ing national resou rce secu rity and ci rcu lar-economy outcomes. "
58. When asked about the current status of the Capex Support Scheme for Lithium
and Nickel Processing, its expected approval from CabineUEFC, other Plltype
incentives or fiscal measures being considered to attract private investment in critical
mineral refining in lndia and whether any specific location/SEZ/industrial corridor has
been identified for establishing a critical mineral processing hub in lndia, the
Committee were informed as under:-

'.J
_l
"The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has recommended the scheme of
the Ministry of Mines viz. 'CAPEX Support Scheme to Promote Critical Mineral
Processing' with an outlay of Rs. 2,814 crore from 2026-27 lo 2030-31 on 3rd
June 2023.
The Scheme seeks to bridge the existing midstream processing gap in the
critical minerals ecosystem and support downstream manufacturing capacities in
batteries, clean energy technologies, specialty steel, and electric vehicles.
Further, Ministry of ft/ines is supporting the establishment of Critical Mineral
Processing Parks (CIt/PPs) in four States, namely Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Odisha, and Maharashtra, with financial support of t125 crore for each park,
leveraging existing infrastructure. The locations of these parks have been
finalised by the respective State Governments viz; lt/aharashtra (Dighi), Andhra
Pradesh (Burugupalem), Gujarat (PCPIR Dahej) and Odisha (PCPIR Paradeep).
Further, ttlinistry of Mines vide letter dated 22.05.2026, shared the concept note
with states for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR). States to submit the
DPR by Dec2026."
X. DOMESTIC MINERAL VALUE CHAIN & DEMAND.SIDE LINKAGES
59. lndia has discovered significant lithium deposits in Jammu, Rajasthan and rare
earth deposits along the eastern coastline. When asked about the development of
these domestic deposits, and whether there is a risk that lndia is spending heavily on
overseas assets while keeping the domestic deposits undeveloped, the tt/inistry
replied as under:-
"The lithium deposits identified in Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh
and Rare Earth Element (REE) deposits along the eastern coastal regions are
being explored by national exploration agencies such as the Geological Survey
of lndia (GSl), Mineral Exploration & Consultancy Limited (tVECL), Atomic
[/inerals Directorate (AIt/D), lndian Rare Earths Limited (IREL) and Notified
Private Exploration Agencies. These agencies undertake exploration and
establish mineral resources up to the prescribed exploration stages (G4 to G2)
as applicable. Upon completion of the requisite exploration, mineral blocks are
made available for auction under the provisions of the tVt\tlDR Act, 1957.
Thereafter, the responsibility for further detailed exploration, mine development,
mineral beneficiation and commercial production rests with the successful lessee.
With regard to overseas acquisitions, KABIL has been specifically mandated
to identify and acquire critical and strategic mineral assets abroad, particularly
lithium, cobalt and other critical minerals, to supplement lndia's long-term mineral
security and diversify supply chains.
The Government is simultaneously pursuing domestic resource development
and overseas mineral asset acquisition as complementary strategies. Significant
efforts have been undertaken to accelerate domestic critical mineral development

through amendments to the MMDR Act, introduction of Exploration Licences,
increased participation of private explorers, auction of critical mineral blocks, and
implementation of the National Critical [t/ineral [\Iission (NCtUtvl).'
60. During oral evidence of the Committee held on 29.05.2026, Secretary, ttlinistry
of l/ines submitted as under:-
"......xxx....... so our biggest problem is thatthe processing value chain in our
country was almost non-existent. We had one company that was doing this
production, and we were mostly exporling it, because there was no downstream
industry for it in our country. And for lithium, nickel, etc., there is no processing
value chain in our country at all. Even today, private companies have mines. They
have lithium mines and cobalt mines as well. We have spoken with them, and
they say that they are ready to bring it here, but they also say that they cannot do
anything with it after bringing it here. Therefore, trading is happening entirely
outside the country. Our highest priority rs fo esfablish a processing value chain
in our country. Without that, none of our efforts in this direction will be effective.
........xxx......"
61. A key concern expressed by the Committee was whether KABIL's upstream
acquisitions are actually linked to lndian downstream manufacturers. When asked
whether KABIL has signed any oftake agreement, binding or in principle, with any
lndian manufacturer of EV batteries, semiconductors, solar panels or defence
equipment; the [t/inistry's plan to create a demand-pull mechanism that links KABIL's
future production to assured domestic buyers, rather than leaving the oftake question
to be resolved after the feasibility study and whether there is a formal inter-ministerial
arrangement with the tVinistry of Heavy lndustries and TVNRE to develop a demand-
forecast-to-offtake pipeline, the Ministry replied as under:-
"The Lithium Project of KABIL in Argentina is in exploration stage. Till date,
quality (Grade and associated elements) or quantity (Resources & Reserve) are
unknown. End product as well as economic viability of the project can be
assessed on completion of the feasibility study.
. However, it is likely that product of the Brine type lithium project will be either
Lithium Chloride or Lithium Carbonate/Lithium Hydroxide.
. For the Hardrock type Lithium Projects also, Lithium Carbonate or Lithium
Hydroxide will be the potential end products or though offtake contracts KABIL
will source the above said Lithium components.
. Therefore, the Cathode Active [Material (CA[U) manufacturers will be the
potential offtakers for KABIL.
. As on date, domestic Cathode Active l/aterial (CAM) manufacturers are
limited in number. Domestic demand for Lithium Carbonate or Lithium Hydroxide
is also limited, as commercial production of CAM is nominal.

--11
. KABIL is in contact with the existing CAtt/ manufacturers to understand
short-term, midterm and long-term demand, however no concrete offtake
agreements has been signed yet.
. KABIL may engage with the potential downstream off takers through back-
to-back offtake agreements once economic feasibility of its Argentina Project is
established or KABIL secures any other mining assets/ offtake contracts.
While specific demand-pull mechanisms are generally finalised based on project
feasibility studies and market conditions, the Ministry will continue to facilitate
appropriate linkages with domestic users, including through existing policy
frameworks and stakeholder consultations, as and when projects advance.
KABIL's projects are being developed with due consideration to long-term
demand security in the critical minerals value chain; and
ln line with the whole-of-government approach envisaged under the National
Critical lt/ineral [/ission, various ministries are members of the Empowered
Committee under the mission, chaired by the Cabinet Secretary.
The tMinistry of lVines continues to engage with the Ministry of Heavy
lndustries, [VlNRE, and other stakeholders to facilitate coordinated planning and
implementation across the critical mineral value chain, including assessment of
demand requirements and supply-side interventions."
xl. PRTVATE PARTTCTPATTON / PUBLTC PRTVATE PARTNERSHTP (PPP)
MODEL
62. When asked whether the role of private sector is also being explored in
exploration and acquisition of overseas assets of Lithium and Cobalt in countries such
as Australia, Chile, Argentina, Canada, Russia and D.R. Congo, the Committee were
informed as under:-
"Yes. The Government is encouraging participation of both PSUs and private
sector in exploration and acquisition of overseas assets of Lithium and Cobalt in
resource rich countries such as Australia, Chile, Argentina, Canada, Russia and
D.R. Congo.
Ministry is actively looking for potential investment opportunities through
coordination with lndian Missions abroad, investment bankers, and project
owners, which are shared with interested lndian entities as and when found
suitable.
Several private sector entities have started investments and acquisitions in
overseas critical mineral projects. For example, Virtus Lloyds lt/inerals Holding
(VLMH), completed the acquisition of the Chemaf Group in the DRC in March
2026, with capacity of 4KTPA for Cobalt. Greenko- Energy Transition and
Decarbonization Solution Company is taking up exploration activities in two
lithium blocks in Argentina. Lohum has secured 10 lithium blocks with area of
1100 hectares in Zimbabwe. Altmin has acquired 30% stake in a lithium refinery
unit in Brazrl.

However, investments undertaken independently by private sector entities
are commercial decisions and may not necessarily be disclosed to the [Vinistry."
63. On whether lndian private firms can co-invest with KABIL in future projects, the
lVlinistry stated as under:-
"KABIL may co-invest with the lndian private firms in future projects, as per
prevalent guidelines of DPE on "Acquisition of Raw [Vaterial Assets abroad"
64. When asked about the policy or financial mechanisms being contemplated to
encourage greater participation of lndian private-sector companies in overseas critical
mineral acquisition, processing, and refining projects alongside KABIL and PSUs, the
Ministry replied as under:-
"To encourage greater participation of lndian private-sector companies in
overseas critical mineral acquisition, lt/inistry is engaging with various financial
and institutional stakeholders, including World Bank, EXItM Bank, NllF, llFC (UK)
to explore suitable funding and de-risking mechanisms for overseas critical
mineral projects and investments.
Ministry is holding regular meetings with various private companies to
facilitate their participation in overseas critical mineral acquisition, processing,
and refining projects and to connect them with relevant financial institutions."

PART.II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS
Structure and Governance of KABIL
The Committee note that Khanij Bidesh lndia Limited (KABIL) was incorporated
on 8 August 2019 under the Companies Act,2013 as a JointVenture of National
Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO), Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) and Mineral
Exploration and Consultancy Limited (MECL) with equity participation in the ratio of
40:30:30, with the objective of sourcing critical raw materials from overseas and
achieving mineral security for the country. The Committee further note that KABIL's
authorised capital, initially Rs.100 crore, was enhanced to Rs.500 crore in July 2023.
However, owing to the investment ceiling prescribed under the Department of Public
Enterprises (DPE) guidelines for Miniratna companies and the limited investment
capacity of MECL, revision of the equity holding pattern of NALCO:HCL:MECL to
60:35:5 along with enhancement of the authorised capital to Rs.1000 crore has been
envisaged. The Committee also note that the Boards of all three promoter companies
have approved the proposal and the same has been forwarded to the Department of
lnvestment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) for concurrence. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the present status of the restructuring proposal, the likely
timeline for its completion, and the revised governance structure which will enable it
to effectively discharge its strategic mandate. The committee also suggest that the
Ministry evaluate the long-term merits of a simpler, more direct Government
shareholding structure for KABIL to enable faster decision-making in time-bound
situations, drawing lessons from ONGC Videsh's model, which operates effectively as
a wholly Government-owned entity with a simpler decision-making structure.
(Recommendation No. 1)
KABIL: Transition from a Joint Venture to a Subsidiaor
The Committee note that the proposed transition of KABIL from a Joint Venture
company to a subsidiary of NALCO marks a significant institutiona! shift aimed at
strengthening KABIL's financial and operational capabilities to undertake its
expanded mandate under the National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM). The
Gommittee have been informed that the transition is expected to address KABIL's

existing constraints in raising capita!, as NALCO would be in a position to extend
financial support, facilitate access to institutional finance and provide the necessary
guarantees for securing loans from banks and other financial institutions. The
Ministry has further stated that the revised structure would also enable KABIL to draw
upon NALCO's technical and managerial manpower to augment its execution
capabilities. The Committee further note that during the examination of the subject,
NlTl Aayog also underscored the need to significantly strengthen KABIL's
institutional capacity in terms of financial resources, qualified manpower and project
execution capabilities. While the Committee appreciate the proposed restructuring as
an important step towards strengthening KABIL, they are of the considered view that
change in ownership structure alone may not be sufficient to enable KABIL to
compete effectively in the highly competitive global critical mineral sector. At the
same time, the Committee are of the view that while the proposed transition may
address KABIL's immediate capital and manpower constraints, the requisite financial
capacity, international project management experience and institutional capability of
NALCO to support KABIL's expanded overseas acquisition programme may also be
assessed.
(Recommendation No.2)
Financial Position and Capital Constraints of KABIL
The Committee note that KABIL, entrusted with the strategic mandate of
identifying, exploring, acquiring, devetoping, mining, processing and procuring criticat
and strategic minerals from overseas face significant financial constraints. The
Committee note that KABIL is presently in the exploration and project development
phase and, therefore, has not yet commenced revenue generating operations. During
the last three financial years, i.e. from 2023-24 to 2025-26, the KABIL incurred
expenditure of Rs.33.19 crore towards its activities, which was supported by other
income of Rs.14.73 crore, resulting in an accumulated deficit of Rs.l6.61 crore. The
Committee further note that KABIL's activities are presently financed entirely through
equity contributions from its promoter companies and that the projected
expenditure over the next three years is approximately Rs. 200 crore, which is
also proposed to be met through equity support. The Committee are informed
that debt financing is presently not considered a viable option, as the
associated interest burden could adversely affect KABIL's financial health.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry take expeditious measures
to strengthen

a/
KABIL's capital base. The Committee would aiso like tc be apprised oi the roadmap
envisaged for ensuring KABIL's long-term financiai sustainability, incluciing the expec'ced
tirmeline for commencernent of revenue generation frcm its overseas projects.
{Recomrnencjation 5tJo. 3}
The Corn,mittee further note that althougn KAB!L's crganisational structure
comprising 17 sancticned pcs'is v'las approveci by its Board cn 27 rrliarch 2023, only 7 posts
had been filiec as on 4 June 2A25, inciuciing one position a'i 'rhe ,A.rgentina Bi.anch Or'fice,
while the selecticn i3rocess l'cr three ad'iitionai posts had only recentiy been completed.
The ComnTittee cbserve tnat KABIi- continues tc funct!o;''l r,vith minimum skiiiea r,ylanpo$/er
even aftei'three yeai's ef BcarC apc:"cvaI of its crganisaticnal str"ucture, r,r,'h!ch is i!lceiy 13
adversely affect its capacity to execute comple)< cverseas prcjects requriring slcec;aiiseci
technlcal, cornmerclal anC iegal expe::tise. The Ccmmittee are of the ccnsicered vier'.r that
KABIL's mandate requ!res a n::uitlCisci=llnarv speciaiised tear,r and hence the i\4inistry nnay
accord priority tc strengtheniirg KABiL's huinan r€source base sc'ihat (ABIL's execution
capacity l<eeps pace with its expaniing rnanciate, The Conrmit'tee wcuici like to be apprised
of the concrete steps'iaken in this regai'C anci'the timeiine envisaged foi'anabling i(AB!L to
attain its full organisationai and technica! capacity.
{R.ecornmer:dation [\o. a.i
Acquisition of Cverseas Criricai ii,lineral Assets
The Committee note that; (A3iL has been r:raniated tc icien'iifir, exoiore, acquire,
develop, mine, process and prceure ci'itical a;':d strateglc minerai assets overseas thrcugh
Government-to-Government (G2G), Gouernment-tc Business (CZS) and Business-to-
Business {328} arrangemen'ls. The Ccn:r,ritteeiurther no':e '.fiat unier the itaticnal Critical
Mineral l\fi[ssion (t{CMtvii, tne ir/iinistrv has set a 'rarget of acquiring 50 overseas criticai
mineral assets through Public Sec':or Uncjertakings and prirrate companies bir tu4arch 2031.
ln this regard, KABiL has acquirecifive Iithiu,m brine blocks in Argentina, is evaluating seven
additional lithium biccks offereci bri the Governrnent of Catamarca, and is pursuing
ciiscussions for accuisiticn of two ilthiurn prcjects in juju*y Prcvince under its IVioi",l wi';h
JEMSE. The Committee also note that KA3iL is presentlrr pricritising Iith!urn anC rare earth
elements (REEs) in view of their strategic irnportancefcr e!ectric rncoility, energy ste!'age,
Manpower Requirements of K,ABIL

*- J:a *-
renewable energy, defence anci advanced manufacturing. The Committee are informed
that a techno economic study undertaken by N,ALCO during 2OL8-19 identified lithium and
cobalt as the highest pi'iority minerals and recommended several resource rich countries,
including Australia, Angen'r!na, Chile, Canada and Brazil, i'oi' strategic engagement. While
appreciating the [\liinistry's fscused approach towards securing overseas critical mineral
assets, the Con:mittee are of the view that the target of acquiring 50 overseas assets by
lViarch 2031 v,rill require a cIeariy Cefined implernentation roacjn'rap with measurable
milestones. The Comnnittee, therefoi"e, urge that the Ministry periodically review KABTL's
prCIgress against the tViissioi': targets anci apprise the Comnrittee of the country ',vise status
of acquisitions, Iong term offtake ari'angements and the timelines envisaged for translating
t!: ese sti'ategi c engagements i nto co,n mercial ly oper"a'iiona I proj ects.
(Recomrnenciaticn No. 5)
Ferforn'rance Auciit of |(ABIL
The Conrnrittee iicte that since the incorporation cf KABI1, thei"e have been
significant changes in the critical rninerals ciornain in the country, economic anci geopoiitical
challenges to giobai suopiy cnains ani o'rhei' s:milai' facto:'s affecting the i'cie and
perfc:'n::arice of i(ABi[-. During its subrnission be'io:'e the Ccmm:t'tee, t,re iHlTi A,alrcg
app;'ised that a fori'nai i"eview ci' pei'i'ormance audi't of KABlL is yet to be u;rCertaken; the
Ccrnr:'littee desire that such a re'",iei,,", srther by itiTlAaycg or br,r CAG or a thirC-party auciitor
nrar,r be ii'lstituticna[ised ci: a pe,-ioilc casis gcing fci:v.;ard, glrren the signiiicant changes in
ti-, e c:"i'lica! rninera !s ia ildscape si nce KA,B[ L's i ncorpcration.
{Reccmmencjation Flo. 6}
Engagement of KABii- ir: F.leentfCa
The Ccri-.mittee appr"eciate the progi'ess n'lade bi/ KABIL in estab!ishing lndia's
presence in Argentina's iithiurn sectcr tiri'cugh stra';egic part;rerships with prorrinciai state
ovviled eiltities anC 'rhe acquisitiori o;' e;rclusive exploraticn rights in Catarnarca. T'he
systerlatic cornpietio:r oi' ncn-in';asive exp[oration, securing or' environmental permits,
appoi;it;',-,ei-,t oi speciailzed ccnsui'iar.':s anc o:'epara';icn for driliing i'eflect KABIL's
cornmltmei'it rG acuanci;ig the p;"cject in a sti"uctui'ec I:".anner. i-icwever, the Cornmlttee
note tha'c statutory approvais, envii"onmental compliance requirements anci challenging
iocai conciitIcns i'iave resuited in i'evisions to the projec'r scheCule. The Comnrittee

therefore hope that a prcactive approach is adopted by KABIL and the Ministry or' hlines
with the concerneci authorities for ensuring timely subrnission of regulatory requirements,
and maintaining continuous ciia!ogue with Iocal communities to minimize avoidable deiays.
The Committee further welcome that KABIL along ,arith ClL, Cl!-, OVL, NLCIL, BPRL decided
to jointly evaluate the investment opportunity received by KABIL in a Lithiurn Brine prcject
in Salta, Ai'gentina, and invest as a consci'tium of indian Govei'nment cornpanies,
considering high vaiue investment, anci assessment of cther strategic investment
opportunities. The Comrnittee therefore cjesire the Ministry to ensure that necessary
institutional and diplomatic support continue tc be e;<tenCecj to #.BlL so that the project
is innplemented within the revised timelines and contributes to India's critical mineral
security.
{Recommencjation No. 7}
Tirnelines RegardiOg Explolaticn brr KAtsjL in ArEentina
Regarding the current s'iatus of iithiu,n expicration i:'y KABii- in Catamarca
nrovir':ce o'iA,rgentina,':he Committee ncte that the nrcgress r:ade
in Catamarca, inclucil';g ccmpleticn of non-invasive expioi'aticn, receipt of environmental
permit for invasive expioration, appointment o'i ci:'illing con'iractc;' ai'rC prepai'ation for
drilling activi';ies, is encouraging. However, the Ccrnrni'rtee feei that re'ylsed prociuction
timeline extending to 2030 hignllghts the need fc,- sti'onger project moniloring, proactive
regulatory engagement and effective i'isk mitigaticn to minimise deialrs arising fronr
statutory approvals, environrnental compllance and iacai operatisna! cha!ienges. The
Committee are of the vieiry that the I'/iinistry malr instituticnai:se a rcbust milestcne-based
monitcring mechanism with clearly ciefineci acccuntabiiitlt and periodic reporting te ensure
adherence to revised timelines.
(,Recon rnrendation No. 8)
Engagement of KABIL in Austraiia
The Committee note that KABIL iras esteblished a frarneir;oi'k fcr cooperation vyith
the Government of Austi'alia through its partnei'ship with the Ci'itical i\.4inerals Office,
enabling systematic identification and evaiuation of strategic iithiunn and coba!t assets. The
ccmprehensive assessrnent of more than 2C0 prcjects, foilctveci by the shoi'tlisting or'nine

prornis!rig oppoi'tunities and cietailed ciue diligence of priority lithiurn projects,
demonstrates a rigoi"ous approach towards securing overseas critical mineral assets.The
Cornrnittee note that KA,BIL's substantiat clue ciiligence efforts in Austraiia have yet to be
trailslated into a concluied investment, owing to intense global competition and evolving
project timelines of asset ownei's. While these developments are largely influenced by
rnarket dynai'nics and comrnercial considerations beyond l(ABIL's control, the Committee
are of the consiciered opinicir that KAB|!- needs to strengthen its commercial capabilities,
enhance coorciination with consortium partners, ancj maintain readiness to respond swiftly
to evoiving invastment opportunities in competitive global markets. The Comrnittee
further urge the IViii:istry to per"icdicaliy review the effectiveness or( KABiL's overseas
iirvestment strategy i:'r Australia to :'ei'ine future approaches fci" particination in
competitiue acquisi'iicn p16cesses. The Cornr,rittee bei!eve that continued strategic
ei'tgageifrent '"rvi'ih Austra!la, suppcrtei b.,r tin-,e:1r decisicn making and cocrdina'ted action
a:rlong lndian cubiic ssctcr partners wiii significantly contribute to indie's objective of
securing resilient and Civersil'ied suppir,i chains i'cr criticai minerals.
{Reconrmenciation No. 9}
Eneagernent of i(A.BlL in other countries
The Ccnirnittee note that KABiL has expandec its engagenlent beyond ,Argentina
and Australia by pursi.riilg strategic pai'tnerships anci evaluating investment opportunities
across A'l'i"ica, l-atin Arnerica, arid cthei'minei'al :"ich jur"isdicticns. The signing of agreernents
with internationai partners, including riraniunr O;ie G;'oup of Russia, engagement rn,ith
i\4aiawi I\4ining in,irest,-ri3nt Con':pa-:: and evaluation cf otpoi'tuniries in Brazil, Canacia,
!ndonesia, anci cthe:'couilti"ies, rerolects a broad-baseci stiategy to diversifrr, inCia's access
'lo criticai rninerai resoui'ces. The Cornrnittee note that the traasltion from negotiation tc
acquisition has tai<en ionger- tnai: i:',itiaiiy envlsaged !n several jurisclictlons, reflecting the
Inherent compiexit'rr of otrelseas resoui.e acquisit!on.The Cornnrittee desires 'ihat KABiI-
needs tc cieveicp a =ipe:ine of inrrest,ment ready prcjec'ts, strengthen conrr,'lerciaI due
diligence capaicilities, anc ensui'e that tecnnica!, financiai, and !egal evaluations are
compie'led ia a t:me ieound rnanner ts enabie convei'sion cf these engegements into
':angible acquisitions. !r': specific prcjects where inv=sti':''ien'; rec,uii'ei'nents exceed KABIL's
financiai capacity, collaborative mocieis invoiving nTuitipie pubtic sector entities may also
be expicreci to enhalrce iniia's competitlvei''iess in securing s'trategic assets. The Committee

Cesire to be apprised of the measures taken and progress made in this regard.
(Recommendation No.10)
f e c h n orogUftaqs'ie f q n1|flegeetc h & D evel a p rne n t
The Committee note that KABIL has initiated important collaborations with CSIR-
IMMT and the University of lVevada, Reno, for technical support, joint research, technoiogy
development and skill enhancement in the exploration, extraction and processing o'f
Iithium and other critical minerals. These partnersh!ps represent a significant step torruards
builciing indigenous technoiogicai capai:ilities, particulariy in areas wnere lndia presently
has limiteci expertise, such as brine tyne irthir-:nr exploration and environrnentally
sustainable extraction technciogies. The Cornmitree, however, observe that these
coilaborations are presently broac in natui'e and:'eel that the tViinistry and KABIL shouid
prepare a time bound R&D and '.echncicgy trans'ler rcacirnap with cieariir aefined
cieiive:'ables, r,reasurable cutccmes ar:i mechanisms fcr ccmmercial cieplcirrnent.
Pai'ticular emphasls may be placed on Ceveloplng inciigenous tecnnoiogies for iithium
refining, !ithiurn carbonate prcduction, recyciing ci cr!ticai rninerais, extraction from
seccndai'y resoui'ces such as mine tailings anci industrial uuaste, and enuironmentaily
sustainable processing tecnniques. The ConrrT rittee are cf the view that research outcornes
from these partnerships may be effectivsir/ integrated into KABIL's overseas projects as
well as !nciia's cjomestic critical mine:'al vaiue chain tc reduce ciepenc!ence on impor.ted
technoiogies. The Comrnittee ernpiras:ze the neeci fcr KAB!L tc expand its research
collaborations vuith ieaciing intei"natlonal ancJ na'lional universities, technology prorriciers
anci research institutions possessing acivanced expertise in cniticai minerai processing and
batterv rnateriais, anC suggest that i(ABIL shouiC periociicaily review its technology strategy
to aiign with emerging battei'y chemlst:"ies and future rninerai requirements beyond
lithium, inciuciing rare eai'th elernents, nickei, cobait, manganese anci other strategic
minerals. Such an approach woulci ensure that lncjia's ovei'seas raineral acquisition strategy
is cornplemented by strong domestic technoiogicaI capabiiities, thereby enhancing Iong-
terrn resource security, value acicjition and global competitiveness.
(Recommendation No.11)
lnter-Ministerial and PSU Coordination
The Cornraittee note with satisfactlcn that the Ministry of iViines has establisheC

c-
institutional mechanisms foi' ccorciination among KABIL, participating Central Public Sector
Enterpi"ises (CPSEs), and various Ministries through the lnter-Ministerial Group (lMG), the
Working Group on Critical Minerals, and the Empowei"ed Committee undei'the National
Critical iViineral ltfrission. The Coi':ri'aittee also appi'eciate the consortium-based approach
adcpted b)r KABi!- and CPSEs for joint evaluation, due diligence, risk sharing,
and co-investment in cverseas critical rnineral assets. Such collaborative arrangements not
oniy reduce financial and operational risks but also levei'age the technicai and commercial
strengths of pai"ticipating eirterpi"ises. The Comnrittee also feel that ciemand projections
prepareC by NlTl Aayog, 11lu Ministry of Fieavy lnclustries, the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy, the Ministry of Defence, and other stakeholder Ministries should form
the basis for pi"iorltizing overseas acquisitions so that KABiL's investments are fully aligned
vvith india's long ternr inousti"iai and strateg!c requirernents. The Committee, however, are
of the considereci view that as globa! competiticn itoi' c!'itical rnineral assets intensifies, the
country i'equii'es a r*ore ir:s'ii';utionai!zeci and t!me hound coordinat!on frarnewoi'k to
faciiitate faster decisicn making and e'ffective execution. The Committee, therefore,
suggest that the Ministry of Nliines deveicp a ccrilpi'enensive coorciination framework
cleai'iy clelineating the roles anci respcnsiciiities of participating tViinistries and PSl,.,ls at
various stages of project identification, due Ciiigence, investment approva!, financing,
acquisition, and post-acquisition ifianagen:lent. A dedicated Pi'oject lJionitoring and
Coordinaticn Ce!! ma-v aiso 'ne estabiished v,-ithin the IViinistry tc monltor the progress of
strategic Gverseas acquisitions, resoive lnter agsi'lcy issues, and ensure acjherence to
defined tirneiines.
{Recommendation ltlo.12}
Competitiveness of l(AB lL and PSU consoi"tiui'ns
The Comnrittee take note of the prcpcsed enhance,'nent of KABi!-'s authorised
capital and i;he consor'eium-pasei app;"oec,1 aCop':ed vvlth othei' Central Fublic Sectoi'
Eiitei:pnses for cverseas cliticai minerai acquisitions. t"4Jhiie these r$laasures wii! sti'engthen
india's abilitl, to participate in high vair.re investmeirts, the Committee observe that KABIL
continues to cor-npete against gloi:al plar,:s;5 nossessiag substantiaily greaterlinancial
resources, technological capabilities and establisheci international netwcrks. The
Comnrittee thei'efore feel the need fcr a comprehensive strategy to enhance the
-- "i

lLil-
competitiveness of KABIL anC indian PSU consortiums through tirmely financial support,
greater operational flexibility and faster decision making during competitive bidding
processes. The Committee desire that the existing conscrtium model may be
institutionalised r,rrith clea rly defi n ed governa nce
structures and rapid approval mechanisms to ensure that commercially viable
opportunit!es are not l:st Cue to proceciural deiays. Simultaneously, country risk
assessment and clue diligence frarneworks shouid be strengthened, drawing lessons from
the suspension cf the lVIaii prcject due to socio political instability. The Committee suggest
that the Ministry may pericdlcaliy review the financial anci strategic requirements of KABIL
in view cf the evolving global market Cynamics so that Incjia remains a credible and
competitive participant in securing critical rnineral resources essential for long term
economic growth, industrial cieveioprnent and strategic security.
(Reconrrnendation No.13i
Alignment of KABIL with i{ClvlM
The Comnrittee note that the i<ey sbjective of NCMi\/: ls "io secure inCia's critical
minei'ai suppiy chain by ensui'ing rninei"ai avaiiabiiity fi'onr doniestic anci for.eign soL.trces',
which is in alignment vuith K,XBII-'s objective 'to iaentify, exploi'e, acquii'e, ievelop, mine,
process anC procure s'lrategic and criticai n:'rinerais froi'n outsice india'. Kl:3iL is currently
focusing on acquisition cf criticai mlneral assets and establlshment of long term of'r take
agreernents for Liti'tium, G:'aphite anci ,REEs. The clcse ccordination between KABIL and
NCVIM is reflectec in the r'act that the activities and progress of I(ABIL are clcsely
monitored and reviev'red by Jcint Secretary, NCMM uncjei'the Ministry cf Mines thereby
making KABiL an lntegraI part of MFllvl. The Conrmittee further note that NationaI lVlinerai
Exploration anci Development Trust (NMEDT) is ciecicated to fund and promote regional
and detalled rninerai exploration in the country, particularly fcr *iticai anci deep-seateC
minerals, to enhance domestic rnineral resource ciiscovery. Thereiore, while t(ABIL is
focussed on overseas m!nerai acquisiticn and !s fully aligned with tUCMRl, t{lViEDT is
focusseci on funding and explci'ation of minerals within the country. ln order to support
explcration and rnining of critical minerals overseas, the lViines and Minerals (Deve!opment
and Reguiation) Act,1957, was amended in August 2025 to expancithe scope of h!MEDT.
The Committee ackncwledge the clcse alignmen'i of KAtslL with l,JCMiVi and hope that

NMEDT also u.iorks in sync with KABIL both of which utilize the NMEDT fund to further the
objectives of NCMM to strengthen mineral exploration and development in general and of
critical minerals in particular.
(Recommendation No.14)
Processing and Refinine Capabilities
The Conrmittee observe that while lndia is expanding its focus on rninei'al
exploration and secui^ing critical minerals', the capacity for processing these minerals into
high va!ue end use proCucts remains limited. The Conrr,rittee feel that while significant
progress has been nrade in secur[ng overseas critical mineral assets, India's iong term
strategic objective cannot be achieved through upstream acqulsition alone. The real
economic and strategic value of critical minerals lies in ciownsti'eanr processing, i'efining,
recyciing, and the prociuction of high vaiue materials requ:red fcr batteries, electric
vehicles, renewable enei'gy systenrs, serniconCuctors, ancj defence apolications. A'i present,
india's depencence on foreign pi'ocessing hubs leads tc suppigr chain vulnerabi!ities anci
geopolitical risks. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the iMinistr-v to introduce
the CAPEX S'upport Scherne for Critical itlinei"al Pi"ocessing anC establish Ct'itical l\fineral
Processing Parks {Ci\f FPs} in selectecj States which repi'esent an imporlant beginning and
hope that sirniiar initlatives wil! con'iinue tcvrarcis building domestic capabiiities.
(RecommenCation t{o.15}
The Committee observe 'that KABi!-'s i'nandate anci currer:t activities i'emain
predoirrinantiy focused on exploraticn and acquisition of overseas mineral assets, 'arith
lirnited emphasis on dcv,rnsti"ea,r p:"ccessing, :"efining, and recycling ai'ld a:'e of the
considered view that lnciia's ci'iticai minerai str^ategy must evclve into an integrated'ralue
charn approach covering expIorat!on, ,-nining, beneficiaticn, ref!ning, chemica! processing,
recycling, anci recovei'ir of criticai minei'als. Tne Ccmnrittee aiso emphasize that recycling
and urban mining need to emerge as a majoi' pillai' of India's criticai mineral secui'ity
strategy. The Cornmittee appreciate the encouragingrespcnse'co the lncentive Scheme for
Critical [Viineral Recycling and its alignr:':ent v;ith the E>rtenCed ProCucer Responsibility
(EFR) framework, and suiggest that the lViinistrlr, ii'l cocrdination with the rrlinistry cf
Environment, Foi'est anci Cliniate Change, estaciish a cemprehensive national roadrnap
Recvcling of Critical & StrateEic Minerals

with clearly defined !'ecovery targets for critical minerals from end-of-life batteries,
electronic waste and industrial scrap. The Ccmmittee alsc suggest periodic assessment of
recycling capacity vis-ir-vis futui"e mineral demand and overseas acquisition targets so that
primary mining, refining, and secondary resource recovery evolve in a balanced and
coordinated manner, thei'eby strengthening lndia's resource security, reducing import
dependence, and advancing the country's circular econorny objectives. The Committee may
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
{Recornmendation No.15)
Developing Demand Sicie Linkages
The Committee note the Ministry's submissicn that whiie KA3!L is pursuing
acquisiticn of overseas critical mineral assets, the c'omestic ecosystem for consumption of
critical mineral products rernains at a nascent stage. The Ccmmittee iurther note that while
KAtslL is actively engaging domestic Cathocie Active iVlaterial (CAMi rnanufacturei"s to assess
ciemand, conci'ete offtake agreements are yet to be i'inaiisecj. The Committee also note that
coorcjinaticn among the ccncei'ned Ministi"ies is being unciertaken under the framework of
the Nationai Critical illineral l\4issicn. The Corirmittee are of the view that the success of
overseas mineral acqu!siticn efforts would ciepend not only on securing mineral assets but
also on establishing assured domestic demand and ma:'ket Iinl<ages ior the rninerals
sourced through such assets. The Committee, therefcre, desire that the Ministry, in
coordination with KABIL and other stakeholder lViinlstries, formulats a structureci
framework fcr engaging prospective cjcmestic oft takers and developing long term de,rrand
projections for cri'tical minerals. The Comrnittee wouid iike to be apprisecl oithe measures
taken to create robust c'ernand side Iinkages anci aiign KABI!-'s overseas acquisition strategy
with the evoiving requirenrents of lncjia's strategic and industria! sectcrs.
(Recommendation No.17)
Need to Encourage Frivate Sector Participation
The Ccnrmittee note that the Government is actively prcmoting the participation
of both public sector undertakings (PSUs) and private companies in the exploration and
acquisition of overseas criticai rnineral assets, particularly lithium and cobalt, in resource
rich countries such as Australia, Chile, Argentina, Canada, Russia, and the Democratic
Republic of Congo. The IVlinistry facilitates this process by identifying investment

-_ ,11 _
opportunities through Indian Missions abroad, investment bankers, and project owners,
and sharing suitabie prospects with interested lndian entities. The Committee are
alsoinformedthat several lncjian private conrpanies have already made investmentsin
overseas critical mineral assets in countries such as the Democi"atic Republic of Congo,
Argentina, Zimbabwe and Brazil. l'{owever, as informed by the Ministry, investments made
independently by pi'ivate entities are cornrfier"cial decisions and may not always be
ciisclosed to the Ministry, and the Committee desii"e that the Ministry create a voluntary
information-sharing mechanism so that a consolidated national picture of overseas critical
inineral investments is available. The lVlinistry has also indicated that KABIL may co-invest
with lndian pi"ivate companies in future overseas projects, subject to the prevailing
Departrnent ofPublic Enterprises {DP=} guicielines on acqulsition of raw material assets
abroad. The Con'lmittee obsei've that tc furthei' encou!"age private sector participation, the
tViinistry is engaging with financial ancj institutional stakeholclers, incluCing the World
Bank, EXtlVi Bani(, l\liF, and llFC {UK}, to deveiop suitable funding anci rlsk mitigation
mechanisms. Regular consultations are also being held with private companies to faciiitate
their involve,-nent in overseas criticai rnineral acquisition, crocessing, anci refining projects.
The Committee therefoi'e desire that the Gcvernment continues to encourage and facilitate
private sector participation in exploraticn and acquisition of critical mineral assets.
(Recomrnendation No.18)
Rare Earth Elements Acqulsition Strateev
The Connr,rittee notes that rare earth elements (REEs) are ci'itlcai to lndia's defence
and electric vehicle pernraneilt-magnet suppiy chains. The Ccmmittee also notes that
KAtsii-'s ovei'seas REE strategy remains at a nascent stage, of onlytwo IREE projects so far (in
Vietnain ani Brazil), the Vietnan.r oppor"tunitl, invciving a 5 per cent stake anci offtake rights
in Trident Zoetics' pro.iects in Lai Chau prcrrince was w'ithdrawn by the seller before due
diligence coulci be compieteci. The Comnrittee further nctes that domestically, REE
Corricjors have been announced under i.Jnion Budget 2A26-27 in Odisha, Andhi'a Pradesh,
Tanril itadu anci Kerala for light REEs sourced from beach sand minei'als, while hard-rock
heavy REE poter':tiai in Guja:'at's Ainbaciungar anC Rajasthan's Siwana depcsits remains
comparatively unexplored. The Committee ciesires that KABIL develop a dedicated,
ressurced REI acquisition pipeline distinct frorn its iithium-focuseci approach, with specific
emphasis on rnagnetic REEs (neodymium, praseodymiurn, dysprosium, terbium), and that

the Ministry simultaneously expedite domestic heavy-REE exploration through GSI and
AMD so overseas sourcing and domestic development advance in tandem.
(Recommendation No.19)
Leveraging Multilateral Mineral Platforms
The Committee note that lndia has, over the past few years, steadily embedded
itself into a wide architecture of multilateral and bilateral critica! minerals frameworks, the
Minerals Security Partnership (MSP), the lndia-US Strategic Mineral Recovery lnitiative
(SMRI), the tndo-Pacific Economic Framework (IPEF), the UK-lndia Technology Security
lnitiative (TSl), and the Quad Critical Minerals lnitiative Framework, in addition to a
dedicated bilateral framework on cooperation in the supply, mining and processing of
critical minerals and rare earths signed with the United States on 26 May 2026. The
committee also note that these platforms are intended to strengthen the critical minerals
value chain, facilitate technology access, and open avenues for co-financing and asset
identification through coordination with lndian embassies and bilateral MoUs already in
place with countries such as Australia, Argentina, Zambia and Japan. The Committee is of
the view that with lndia now party to at least six distinct multilateral or bilatera! mineral
platforms, there is a need for platform-wise account of tangible outcomes that will make it
easier to assess whether this expanding diplomatic architecture is translating into
measurable gains for KABIL's overseas mandate, particularly given that KABIL itself has
faced setbacks such as the withdrawal of the Vietnam REE opportunity and few unfruitful
bids in Australia. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Mines present
status mapping each platform (MSP, SMRI, IPEF, TSl, Quad Critical Minerals lnitiative, and
the lndia-US bilateral framework) against specific instances where it has been used for asset
identification, co-financing support, or technology transfer relevant to KABTL's projects.
Such a mapping would help the Ministry identify underutilised platforms where renewed
diplomatic push, backed by the Ministry of External Affairs and Indian missions abroad,
could unlock additiona! acquisition or financing opportunities.
(Recommendation No.20)
Whole-of-Government approach in KABIL
The Committee note the recent MoU between GAIL and KABIL for joint

identification, assessment, and development of critical mineral opportunities across the
value chain, including exploration, processing, and technical capacity building. This
arrangement is significant because it brings in GAIL, a gas-sector CPSE with its own balance
sheet strength, technical expertise in large infrastructure projects, and international
commercial experience, thereby widening the base of public sector capital and capability
available to KABIL's overseas mandate. The Committee view this MoU as a bilatera!
arrangement between two entities and also as a proof of concept for how India's whole-of-
government approach to critical minerals can be deepened so that decision-making during
time-bound competitive bidding processes is not slowed down by first having to negotiate
the basic terms of partnership. The Committee is of the considered view that this model
should be extended and institutionalised as standard practice across the wider universe of
financially strong CPSEs, including NTPC, Power Grid Corporation, SAIL, ClL, OlL, OVL, NLCIL,
BPRL and other Miniratna and Navratna companies with surplus capita! or relevant
technical capabilities, even where their core business is not directly linked to mining or
minerals, since the strategic imperative of critical mineral security under the NCMM
justifies drawing on the balance sheets and expertise of the broader public sector, not just
entities traditionally associated with mining or oil and gas exploration. The Committee
therefore desires that the Ministry of Mines, in coordination with relevant departments,
develop a standard template MoU framework, covering equity contribution ratios,
technical collaboration protocols, and dispute resolution mechanisms, that can be readily
adapted and offered to any willing CPSE, so that KABIL's model becomes a scalable, whole-
of-government instrument rather than a series of one-off partnerships negotiated afresh
each time a new opportunity or partner emerges. Such institutionalisation would also send
a clear signal to global asset owners and competing bidders that lndia's public sector can
mobilise capital and expertise swiftly and collectively, strengthening the country's
competitive position in high-value overseas critical mineral transactions.
(Recommendation No.21)
ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
Chairperson
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel
NEW DELHI;
.19.. eugust, 2O26
.l.1.Srava na, 1948(Sa ka )

f, r., ..: t'i-h-C - |
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES
AND STEEL (202s-2026) HELD ON 10.11.202s FROM 1030 HRS. TO 1210 HRS. lN
COMMITTEE ROOM No.1, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION BUILDING,
NEW DELHI.
PRESENT
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak
3. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde
4. Smt. Bharti Pardhi
5. Dr. [\/anna Lal Rawat
6. Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan
7. Shri Kali Charan Singh
8. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad
10. ShriAnil Kumar Yadav Mandadi
1 1. Shri Deepak Prakash
12.Shri Milind lVurli Deora
Shri Harish Chandra Bist
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee
SECRETARIAT
- Joint Secretary
- Director
- Deputy Secretary
MINISTRY OF MINES
1. Shri Piyush Goyal, Secretary
2. Shri Sanjay Lohiya, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Brijendra Pratap Singh, CN/D, NALCO
4. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, CEO, KABIL
1
2
a.-)

-:tZ-
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of
the [Vlinistry of IMines, NALCO and KABIL to the sitting of the Committee convened to have
briefing on the subject'KABIL: India's Quest for GIobal Critical IVIinerals"'.
3. The Chairperson then, drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. Thereafter, he directed the
representatives to introduce themselves.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of lVines during the power point presentation briefed the
Committee about the subject and submitted that KABIL (Khanij Bidesh lndia Limited) is a
Joint-Venture company of three PSUs viz. NALCO, HCL and l\/ECL under the aegis of
N/inistry of lVines formed for acquiring Critical N/inerals which are essential for lndia's
economic cievelopment, energy transition, defence, food security etc. He informed the
Committee that KABIL. with the mandate to identify, explore, acquire, develop, mine,
process and procure strategic and critical minerals from abroad and thereby strengthen
lndia's minerals security, is undertaking overseas exploration activities with a current focus
on projects related to Iithium and Rare Earth Elements. Further, KABIL is evaluating
investment opportunities jointly with other PSUs- such as. Coal lndia Limited, Oil lndia
Limited. ONGC Videsh Limited, NLC lndia Limited & Bharat Petro Resources Limited to
advance lndia's access to critical mineral assets.
5. The representative of the lVlinistry informed that the restructuring of KABIL is under
progress, with a revised equity holding pattern among the three PSUs. He also elaborated
about the ongoing projects of KABIL in Argentina and Australia. Briefing the Committee on
theArgentinian project, he informed that KABIL had signed an IVIoU with the State-owned
company of Catamarca Province in December 2020, pursuant to which 5 contiguous lithium
bearing blocks in Fiambala region comprising 15703 hectares located within "Lithium
Triangle", containing about 60% of World's total Lithium resources- have been identified. He
further apprised the Committee of the project timelines which aims production of Lithium by
September,2029. RegardingAustralia, he further briefed the Committee that an IVoU has
been signed between KABIL and Critical IVlineral O,'fice, DISER, Government of Australia on
14.03.2022
6. He also informed the Committee about the launching of Critical lVineral Recycling
incentive scheme's guidelines on 2nd October, 2025 aiming to recycle 300,000 tonnes of e-
waste and recovering all the necessary critical minerals over the next four to five years. The
Guidelines provide the modalities of the scheme including indicative outlays for recycling
systems, methodology for incentive allocation application, evaluation and disbursement
procedures, institutional mechanism, and performance review.
7. The Chairperson and members raised several issues/concerns regarding formation
of KABIL and its complex structure having three stakeholders; limited progress achieved in
international acquisitions and prolonged negotiations, addressing geopolitical risks involved
in exploration in other countries, timelines for identifying prospective mines and starting

L')
production by KABIL and other private players, etc. They emphasized that KABIL shot-tld
also focus on processing and refining of the critical minerals, noting that China, despite
limited domestic lithium resources is processing 70% of the world's Lithium. Further it was
desired that KABIL explore the possibilities to secure REE in Arctic region as lots of
opportunities are available in that region and diversify its activities to include other emerging
minerals in view of the rapid technological changes.
8. The Chairperson then directed the representatives of the l\/inistry of N/ines to furnlsh
written replies to the queries raised by the lVembers which remained unanswered during the
sitting of the Committee and thanked the lMembers of the Committee and oflicials of the
lVinistry and PSUs for their active participation in the sitting of the Committee.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of verbatim record of the sitting of the Committee has been kept separately
The Committee then adjourned,

', <'i
f,t'(,:-;.:.)i. _ 
-t-_
- -.') -"
I\IINUTES OF THE TWENTY.FIRST AND TWENTY-SECOND SITTINGS CF THE
cotvttulTTEE oN coAL, tMiNES AND STEEI (2025-26) HELD ON 29 IVIAY, 2026.
The Committee sat on 29 ltAay,2A26 from 1100 hrs lo 1240 hrs in Committee
Room G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur-Chairperson
Lok Sabha
Z.
J,
4.
5.
6.
7.
U.
9.
10
11
Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat
Smt. Roopkumari Choudhary
Shri Govind iVakthappa Karjol
ShriAnanta Nayak
Smt. Bharti Pardhi
Dr. [/lanna Lal Rawat
Dr. Rajkumar Sangwan
Shri Shatrugan Prasad Sinha
Shri S. Venkatesan
ShriAditya Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Deepak Prakash
13. Shri IVilind N/urli Deora
Secretariat
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
3. Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee
WITNESSES
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Piyr-rsh Goyal
2. Shri Kadam Sandeep Vasant
3. Shri Brijendra Pratap Singh
4. ShriAnshoo Pandey
5. Shri Sunil Kumar Singh
NlTl Aayog
6. ShriAnupam Lahiri
7. Shri Partha Sarathi Reddy Chevuru
8. Shri Dhrijesh Kumar Tiwari
Secretary, N/inistry of [Vlines
Joint Secretary
CN/ID, NALCO
Director
CEO, KABIL
Addl. DG, NlTlAayog
Advisor, NITlAayog
Joint Secretary, NlTl Aayog
Joint Secretary
Director
Deputy Secretary

)r
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the lVlembers, the representatives of
the lVinistry of Nlines and the representatives of NITI Aayog to the sitting of the
Committee convened to take oral evidence on the subject, 'KABIL: lndia's quest for
Giobai Crrtical [/inerais'. The Chairperson outlined the major issues relating to the
subject and requested the representatives of the N/inistry and NlTl Aayog to present
their views.
2. The representatives of the IVIinistry made a presentation on various aspects of
the subject such as overviev'r of Khanij Bidesh India Limited (KABIL), its incorporation,
equity holding, authorized capital and organizational structure, empanelment of
consultants for services like project due diligence and transaction advisory services,
current strategy of evaluating joint investment opportunities with other PSUs etc. The
pi-esentation aiso covered renewed focus on Lithium, Rare Earth Elements (REEs)
arrd Graphite, ongoing engagements of KABIL viz. progress of Argentina project, new
engagements in Argentina, engagement in Australia and evaluation of investment
oppor-tunities in other countries like Brazil, Canada, Russia, lndonesia etc.
3. The representatives of NITI Aayog briefed the Committee on three broad
aspects related to the subject viz. (l) the initiatives that the Government of lndia has
already taken, (ii) the requirements of critical minerals estimated by NITI Aayog for
various sectors and (iii) the actions that Copper industry should undertake in future to
nreet the objectives of the Government of lndia. The representatives gave an overview
of National Critlcai lVlineral [Vlission (NCf!4lifl) and the manner in which it addresses the
criticai minerals sector focusing both on exploration/mining as well as mineral
processing. the focus on acquisition of critical nnineral assets abroad through KABIL,
recycling of critical minerals anci promotion of trade in critical minerals and
de,velopment of critical minerals market. The representatives of NlTl Aayog also
briefed the Committee on the role of critical minerals in development of solar energy,
vrind energy, electric vehicles and energy storage systems. lt was reiterated that
KABIL, whrch is constrained by availabillty of capital and human resource, has to move
from ioentifying the greenfield projects to actually operating the mines and extracting
the results.
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson and the lVlembers raised various queries based on
the inputs giverr bythe N/inistry and NITI Aayog. The key points of discussion included
steps to move beyoncl iithium and focus on other Rare Earth Elements (REEs),

measures to circumvent Chinese control on rare earth eiements, the role and
objectives of Pax-Silica, the steps to make India a refining and processing hub for
REEs and to develop REE processing value chain in lndia. The iVembers also desired
to know from NITI Aayog whether KABIL, ir,rhich was formed in 20'19 has performed as
per the expectation, the manner in which shortage of capital as well as hunran resource
at KABIL is being addressed and whether NCIV1M in general and KABIL in particular
are progressing on the right track at the required pace.
5. Other points of ciiscussion included details of Lithium resources identified in
regions of Karnataka, Janrmu & Kashmir and Rajasthan, prolected sector-vrise
requirements of Lithiurn by the year 2030 and 2040, the role of NALCO in KABIL,
lndia's dependency on China for import of Lithium, Cobalt and other REEs, detatls of
recycling policy for rare-earth elements, key takeaways frcm the challenges faced in
Argentina and the performance and achievements of KABIL etc.
6. The representatives of the I\iinistry and NITI Aayog responded to some of the
queries raised by the [\lembers. The Chairperson then ciirected the i"epresentatives of
the IVlinistry of i\4ines and NIT! Aayog to furnish written replies to the queries which
remained unanswered during the sitting of the Committee.
7. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the lvlembers of the Committee and
representatives of the lvlinistry and NlTl Aayog for their active participation in the sitting
of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned
(The witnesses fhen withdrew)
Averbatim record of the proceedings has been kept

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
oN coAL, MTNES AND STEEL (2025-26) HELD ON 10 AUGUST,2026 FROM
1O3O HRS TO 1045 HRS IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 1, PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ANNEXE EXTENSION BUILDING, NEW DELHI
PRESENT
Shri Ananta Nayak Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sukhdeo Bhagat
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Hansdak
4. Smt. Kamlesh Jangde
5. Shri Govind Makthappa Karjol
6. Shri Bidyut Baran [Vlahato
7. Smt. Bharti Pardhi
8. Dr. [Manna Lal Rawat
9. Shri Kali Charan Singh
10. Smt. Pratibha Suresh Dhanorkar
Rajya Sabha
11
12
13
14
15
16
Shri Harish Chandra Bist
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
Smt. Sunanda Chatterjee
Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad
Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi
Shri Devendra Pratap Singh
Shri Pradip Kumar Varma
Shri Sajjad Ahmad Kichloo
Shri tvl. Nagaraja
SECRETARIAT
Joint Secretary
Director
Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the [Members to the sitting of the
Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the draft Report
on the subject'KABIL: lndia's quest for Global Critical [/linerals' pertaining to the
lVlinistry of [/ines without any amendments
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report and
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
/- .. . i_