           MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY   [Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management’]   THIRD REPORT      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI    March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka)   DRAFT REPORT    
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25) EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 3 
 

 2 
THIRD REPORT  STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25)  (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)   MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY   [Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management’]  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2025  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12th March, 2025   
 
               LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
 

 
3 
 
 
COE NO. 381 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by_____________. 
  

 
4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
24 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
50 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
51 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
54 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 11th March, 
2025 
55 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty 
First Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Energy. 
57 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25) 
 
 LOK SABHA 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne -  Chairperson  
2. Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3. Shri Jagadish Chandra Barma Basunia 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Shri Shahu Shahaji Chhatrapati 
6. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
7. Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
9. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
10. Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
11. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
12. Shri Dulu Mahato 
13. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
14. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
17. Smt. Shambhavi 
18. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
19. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
20. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
24. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
25. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
26. Shri R. Dharmar  
27. Shri N.R. Elango 
28. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
29. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
30. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
31. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Madhumita Assistant Committee Officer 
 

 
6 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Third Report on action-taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations contained in Forty First Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy 
from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban 
Local Bodies in Energy Management’. 
 
2. The Forty First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19th 
December, 2023 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
Replies of the Government to the observations/recommendations contained 
in this Report were received on 21st February, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 11th March, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
11 March, 2025 
Phalguna 20, 1946 (Saka) 
Shrirang Appa Barne 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
 

 
7 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- 
taken by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy from 
Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban Local 
Bodies in Energy Management’. 
 
2. The Forty First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on  
19th December, 2023 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same 
day. The Report contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,6,7,8,9, 10 and 11                                                Total -   9 
                         Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Nil                            Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Serial Nos. 4 and 5                                                                                 Total– 2              
                                                                                                                    Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil                                                       Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
4. The Committee further desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 

 
8 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on 
some of their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 [ 
Recommendation No. 2 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee feel that with regard to Waste to Electricity plants, the 
major issue is the high cost of power from such plants. Many such 
projects are being pursued under public-private partnership (PPP) 
model and the main source of revenue for these projects is selling of 
the power generated from municipal solid waste (MSW) and some by- 
products which are used as construction material. The power being 
generated from these projects are sold to the state DISCOMs. However, 
these plants face huge delays in executing power purchase agreement 
(PPA) with the State Electricity Departments/DISCOMS as the tariff is 
typically high at about Rs. 8 per kilowatt hour (KWH) which is higher 
than that of other renewable energy such as Solar. The generation 
capacity of these plants is also small. Today, most of the DISCOMS are 
financially weak and hence, are finding it difficult to purchase costly 
power from these plants. In such a scenario, it becomes important to 
devise a mechanism whereby the power from Waste to Electricity 
plants are surely taken off but at the same time, the DISCOMS are not 
burdened excessively. The Committee are of the view that a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) can be created for this purpose, which can be 
made procurer of this power. This arrangement can have multiple 
partners in the form of Central PSUs like Solar Energy Corporation of 
India (SECI), Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency (IREDA) 
and also private companies. The SPV, after procuring power from the 
plant, can then sell this power to interested entities and can also list it 
for trading on power exchanges. The Committee are of the opinion that 
such an arrangement will provide guaranteed takeoff of power being 
generated from waste, instilling further confidence amongst the 
stakeholders and build a suitable case for attracting low cost capital 
from the market, while encouraging more players to invest in this 
field, thus eventually driving down the cost of Waste to Electricity 
power.” 
 
7 . In the action-taken reply, the various Ministries and Organisations have 
stated as under: 

 
9 
“(i) MoHUA:  A SPV maybe formed under the guidance of Ministry of 
Power having participation from multiple partners such as State 
Urban Development Departments, DISCOMS, SERCs, and central PSUs 
such as SECI and IREDA. 
(ii) WTE Division, MNRE:  It has been observed that, the Waste to 
Electricity plants set up in the country are mainly utilizing Municipal 
Solid Waste as feedstock. Moreover, the process used are mainly 
incineration of the MSW. However, as per the direction of DoE, the 
MSW to power component had to be excluded under the National 
Bioenergy Programme, as the component is supported under the 
Swachh Bharat Mission (2.0) of MoHUA. 
(iii) IREDA:  IREDA is dedicated NBFC for financing of renewable 
energy projects and not engaged in power trading. However, in order 
to make Waste to Energy (WTE) power plants commercially viable, the 
following are submitted: 
a. Government support in the form of generation / manufacturing 
linked incentives may help improve project viability 
b. Interest subvention for WTE / pallet manufacturing plants on the 
loans to be extended by banks / financial institutions for eligible 
projects may be explored 
c. A WTE energy procurement direction may be introduced in line 
with Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) and Hydro Power 
Purchase Obligation (HPO) mandating Discoms to source minimum 
percentage of WTE based generated power out of their total 
procurement. 
(iv) SECI:  SECI is open to the recommendations of the 
Committee. As suggested, a procurement intermediary will guarantee 
off-take of power from waste to energy projects thereby instill 
confidence among private investors and other stakeholders. As per the 
applicable guidelines that may be issued by Government, SECI will 
issue tenders and take on the role of intermediary power procurer in 
these projects.  
• Further, in the year 2022, SECI had endeavored to work in this 
direction. A tender was issued for setting up of 8 MW Waste to Energy 
Project in Kanpur, through a tariff-based competitive bidding 
mechanism, on behalf of the Uttar Pradesh DISCOMs. SECI was 
envisaged to play the role of the intermediary trader for such power, 
to provide payment security to the bidders. However, during the 
various stakeholder consultations held, the estimated tariffs were not 
in line with expectations of the final off-taker, due to which assured 
offtake of power could not be ascertained. As a result, SECI was 
constrained to cancel the tender due to lack of response.” 

 
10 
 
8. The Committee while highlighting the issues of high cost of power 
from Waste to Electricity (WtE) plants and the inability of DISCOMs in 
purchasing the power so generated, had suggested for creation of a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for this purpose. The Committee had 
opined that such an arrangement would ensure complete takeoff of 
power from WtE plants and at the same time the DISCOMs would not be 
burdened excessively. The Committee were further of the view that the 
SPV could have multiple partners in the form of government and private 
companies and the power so produced could either be sold to 
interested entities or traded at power exchanges. In their reply, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and Solar Energy 
Corporation of India (SECI) have agreed with the Committee’s 
suggestion of creating a SPV for procuring Waste to Electricity power. 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has referred to the 
direction of Department of Expenditure whereby the Municipal Solid 
waste (MSW) to power component has been excluded from National 
Bioenergy Programme as the component is supported under the 
Swachh Bharat Mission (2.0) of MoHUA. IREDA has suggested for 
working on the direction of a WtE procurement mechanism on the lines 
of Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) and Hydro Power Purchase 
Obligation (HPO) mandating DISCOMs to source minimum percentage of 
WtE based generated power out of their total procurement. The 
Committee note the SECI’s efforts to work in the direction of becoming a 
procurement intermediary for WtE power in the year 2022 whereby 
SECI was envisaged to provide payment security to the bidders of a 8 
megawatt (MW) WtE project in Kanpur. However, the tender had to be 
cancelled as consensus on tariff could not be reached between the 
stakeholders. The Committee note the constraints in forming a SPV for 
procuring WtE power and are of the view that if all the stakeholders 
come together and work towards identifying the issues and finding 
solutions, a successful SPV in this direction can be formed. The 
Committee feel that MoHUA, Ministry of Power and Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy can together work towards developing the mandate 
of SPV for the appropriate utilization of power generated from WtE 
plants. 
 

 
11 
Recommendation No. 4 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee have noted that the supply chain scenario of biomass-
based briquettes/pellets to the Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) of our 
country is still in the process of development. Currently, the 
briquettes/ pellets are not consistently available throughout the year 
to meet the requirement of co-firing in TPPs. At present, the estimated 
pellet manufacturing capacity in the country is only around 7,000 TPD, 
which falls short of the requirement of approximately 1 lakh TPD for 
co-firing. In the NCR region in particular, the pellet manufacturing 
capacity is approximately 2,000 TPD, whereas the requirement is of 
5,000 TPD. In such a scenario, the Committee are of the view that the 
Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs)/co-operatives can be 
encouraged to setup briquette/pellet manufacturing units. Raw 
materials for briquette/pellet making are readily available with 
farmers and when a number of farmers will come together in the form 
of FPOs or cooperatives, they’ll have enough quantities to achieve 
scale and economy. Replication of few successful stories of profitable 
briquette/pellet manufacturing by FPOs/cooperatives will encourage 
more such organizations in this sector. Further, the Committee are of 
the opinion that to develop the market for briquette/pellet 
manufacturing in the country and to achieve the target of 5% blend of 
Biomass pellets in thermal power plants, it is important that the 
procedure for setting up such units is simplified like that of Haryana 
which has waived off the requirement of land use norms for setting up 
CBG plants. Apart from simplified procedures, the early resolution of 
administrative and regulatory issues also needs to be ensured.’’ 
 
10. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
has stated as under: 
“Biomass Division MNRE: At present, no scheme regarding Biomass 
Supply Chain is under consideration in the Ministry.” 
 
11. The Committee in their recommendation highlighted the issue of 
inadequacy of briquettes/pellets for the Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) 
in the country. To enhance briquette/pellet manufacturing capacity, the 
Committee had recommended that Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs)/co-operatives be encouraged to setup briquette/pellet 
manufacturing units. The Committee believed that raw materials for 
making briquettes/pellets are readily available with farmers as a result 

 
12 
of which scale and economy could be achieved under this setup. The 
Committee were also of the view that the procedure related to setting 
up of briquette/pellet manufacturing in the country needs to be 
simplified along with early resolution of the related administrative and 
regulatory issues. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, in its 
reply, has only stated that no scheme regarding Biomass Supply Chain is 
under the consideration of Ministry at present. The Committee are of 
the view that there might be no scheme related to Biomass Supply Chain 
in particular but under the National Bioenergy Programme of the 
Ministry, one component is Biomass programme which aims at 
supporting the setting up of Biomass Briquette/Pellet manufacturing 
plants and Biomass (non-bagasse) based cogeneration projects in 
industries. To meet the objectives of Biomass Programme, the Ministry 
also provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to project developers. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry is closely 
associated with briquette/pellet manufacturing in the country and 
should provide its inputs on the Committee’s recommendation. The 
Committee would also urge the Ministry to seriously consider their 
recommendation and apprise the Committee about the Ministry’s view 
on encouraging farmers to form FPOs and engage in briquette/pellet 
manufacturing. The Committee may also be apprised of the measures, if 
any, being undertaken in this direction.  
 
Recommendation No. 5 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“Apart from inadequate pellet manufacturing units, the Committee 
have also noted that the Biomass resources are being diverted to other 
sectors where the rates are more attractive and the demand is higher. 
This is presenting a major challenge in the development of a steady 
and reliable supply chain market of Biomass-based briquettes/pellets 
for co-firing in thermal power plants (TPPs). The Committee are of the 
opinion that to attract briquette/pellet manufacturing units to the 
power sector, it is important to discover the appropriate rate of 
different categories of briquettes/pellets and offer various incentives 
to the manufacturing units viz. assured takeoff, timely payment, 
providing land for unit setup, assisting in infrastructure development 
etc. There is also an urgent need on the part of the Government to 
develop requisite number of quality collection/aggregation/storage 
facilities for storing briquettes/pellets as well as the raw materials for 
meeting present as well as future use. The Committee appreciate the 

 
13 
Ministry of Power for issuing Revised Model Long term contract for 
Biomass supply on 06.01.2023 under which the minimum tenure of 
model contract shall be seven years. This is expected to help in 
developing Biomass supply chain infrastructure. The Committee also 
support the setting up of Custom Hiring Centers (CHCs) for agriculture 
machineries which help farmers in custom hiring of machines and 
equipments for collection and aggregation of agro-residue. The 
Committee expect such centers to be further developed in large 
numbers. The Committee also feel that setting up of biomass trading 
platforms can help in ensuring availability and accessibility of raw 
materials as well as finished products on a real time basis.’’ 
 
13. In the action-taken reply, Indian Oil Corporation and the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy have stated as under: 
“Indian Oil:  Presently biomass / agricultural residue like paddy straw, 
etc. has multiple uses in Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) Plants, 2G Ethanol 
Plants, power plants for co-firing with coal, briquettes, etc.  As multiple 
biomass-based plants come up in a certain area, there is competition 
and increase of biomass supply rates making the biofuels projects 
unviable. It is accordingly proposed to create biomass clusters by all 
states to ensure that biomass from the cluster formed with group of 
villages selected based on biomass availability and the capacity of the 
project is assigned to a certain Plant to ensure long term biomass 
supply at viable rates. This has already been implemented in Haryana 
for IndianOil’s 2G Ethanol Plant. 
• Additional 30% subsidy (in line with S-MAM provisions) may be 
provided by State Governments to make the procurement of the 
equipment by Farmer Producer Organization (FPO) more viable. The 
same is being provided under Uttar Pradesh Bio-Energy Policy. In 
addition, State Governments should ensure placement of adequate 
number of agriculture residue collection and aggregation equipment 
near the agriculture residue based CBG Plant locations as per the Plant 
capacity. 
• There are already existing private players who have set up 
biomass trading platforms.  
(ii) Biomass Division MNRE:   At present, no scheme regarding 
Biomass Supply Chain is under consideration in the Ministry.” 
 
14. The Committee in their recommendation highlighted the issue of 
inadequate pellet/briquette manufacturing units as well as the 
diversion of biomass resources to other sectors that are offering 

 
14 
attractive rates. The Committee were of the opinion that discovering 
appropriate rates of different categories of briquettes/pellets and 
offering incentives to manufacturing units play an important role in 
attracting briquette/pellet manufacturing units to power sector. The 
Committee had further recommended for development of quality 
collection/aggregation/storage facilities for storing 
briquettes/pellets/raw materials as well as Custom Hiring Centres for 
hiring of agricultural machineries by farmers for collection/aggregation 
of agro-residue. To ensure availability and accessibility of raw materials 
and finished products on a real time basis, the Committee had 
recommended for setting up biomass trading platforms. In its reply, 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC) has broadly agreed with the 
Committee’s recommendation. IOC has proposed for creation of 
biomass clusters by all States and assigning biomass plants to dedicated 
projects in order to ensure long term biomass supply at viable rates. 
IOC has further proposed for additional subsidies on procurement of 
farm equipments by Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs). IOC has 
also informed the Committee about the existence of private players in 
biomass trading. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has 
replied with a single line statement that no scheme regarding Biomass 
Supply Chain is under consideration in the Ministry at present. The 
Committee are of the view that the reply of Ministry appears evasive as 
Biomass Programme is one of the major component of the National 
Bioenergy Programme that is being implemented by the Ministry. The 
Committee feel that since the Ministry is associated with the setting up 
of briquette/pellet manufacturing plants under its Biomass 
Programme, the onus lies with them for developing a steady and 
reliable biomass supply chain in the country and should invariably 
share its knowledge and expertise for generation of clean energy from 
biomass and reducing dependence on fossil fuels which is the ultimate 
aim of the Government.  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that there is lack of coherent data with regard to 
feedstock availability (raw materials used in Waste to Energy, 
briquette/pellet manufacturing, biogas etc. plants) in the country and 
the data which is available is not uniform across organisations. As per 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), the biomass 
availability is around 750 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) per year out of 

 
15 
which surplus availability is around 230 MMT per year (after 
subtracting for use as fodder, domestic household use etc.). This 
corresponds to a potential of 28 GW of power. As per MoHUA, the 
energy generation potential from urban and industrial organic waste 
is about 5.6 GW. However, as per the Technology Information, 
Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) of the Department of 
Science and Technology, the 2G ethanol production potential is about 
51.35 billion litres from about 178 MMT of surplus crop biomass. 
Similarly, as per the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), the 
Compressed Biogas (CBG) potential is estimated at 62 MMT with bio-
manure potential of 370 MMT. The Committee also note that there is 
unavailability of data at the State, district and block level as a result of 
which case-by-case study becomes time consuming. The majority of 
stakeholders carry out their own analyses to evaluate the feedstock 
availability. The Committee while appreciating MNRE for developing a 
dashboard and Geographic Information System (GIS) based waste 
mapping tools, would also like to recommend that these 
dashboard/tools be strengthened and all the players be sensitized 
about its usage. The Committee also feel that robust monitoring 
mechanism will ensure that authentic data is uploaded on the 
dashboard which would increase its reliability among the 
stakeholders. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that a 
comprehensive mapping of waste/feedstock is needed for effective 
utilization in different areas (such as CBG, bio-ethanol, biomass to 
power, methanol, green hydrogen etc.) and such mapping should be 
carried out regularly to improve the demand supply situation in the 
market and enable short as well as long term planning with regard to 
Bioenergy and Waste to Energy in the country.’’ 
 
16. In the action-taken reply, the various Ministries and Organisations have 
stated as under: 
“(i) MoHUA:  The Committee’s recommendations highlight the crucial 
need for precise data monitoring, thorough waste and feed stock 
mapping, and strategic planning to optimize waste use in the bioenergy 
and waste-to-energy (WtE) sectors. Adopting these recommendations 
could enhance waste management efficiency, boost energy production, 
and ensure better alignment with market needs and regulatory 
standards. 
 Integrating the dashboard created by MNRE with the schemes of 
various Ministries dealing with various organic waste feed stock could 
further strengthen data management and strategic planning. This 

 
16 
approach will help the country advance its bioenergy and WtE 
objectives more effectively. 
 MoHUA supports the recommendation. 
(ii) ASCI:   As per the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE), the biomass availability is around 750 million metric tonnes 
(MMT) per year out of which surplus availability is around 230 MMT 
per year (after subtracting for use as fodder, domestic household use 
etc.). This corresponds to a potential of 28 GW of power. 
The 2020-21 ASCI biomass power generation potential and surplus 
agriculture biomass availability study, given the scope could consider 
254 districts and 54 crops across India and projected it forward to the 
entire country’s potential. For biomass to power generation, co-
incineration process is widely used. 
 However, as per the Technology Information, Forecasting and 
Assessment Council (TIFAC) of the Department of Science and 
Technology, the 2G ethanol production potential is about 51.35 billion 
litres from about 178 MMT of surplus crop biomass. 
The 2018 TIFAC study considered 19 states, 43 districts and 11 crops. 
Both of these studies, considered secondary data on crop type, crop 
acreage, crop production/ yield from the state level agriculture 
departments. Therefore, this estimate by TIFAC is only a subset of the 
total crop residue biomass availability and that is specifically meant for 
2G ethanol production, which is produced from digestible biomass. 
 Similarly, as per the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), the 
Compressed Biogas (CBG) potential is estimated at 62 MMT with bio-
manure potential of 370 MMT. 
Like in the case above, digestible biomass can be used for generation of 
bio-gas so once again, the above quantity estimate is only a subset of 
the total crop residue biomass availability. 
 As per MoHUA, the energy generation potential from urban and 
industrial organic waste is about 5.6 GW. 
Not applicable for agriculture biomass as MoHUA is considering urban 
industrial organic waste 
 The Committee also note that there is unavailability of data at the 
State, district and block level as a result of which case-by-case study 
becomes time consuming. The majority of stakeholders carry out their 
own analyses to evaluate the feedstock availability. The Committee 

 
17 
while appreciating MNRE for developing a dashboard and Geographic 
Information System (GIS) based waste mapping tools, would also like 
to recommend that these dashboard/tools be strengthened and all the 
players be sensitized about its usage. The Committee also feel that 
robust monitoring mechanism will ensure that authentic data is 
uploaded on the dashboard which would increase its reliability among 
the stakeholders. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that a 
comprehensive mapping of waste/feedstock is needed for effective 
utilization in different areas (such as CBG, bio-ethanol, biomass to 
power, methanol, green hydrogen etc.) and such mapping should be 
carried out regularly to improve the demand supply situation in the 
market and enable short as well as long term planning with regard to 
Bioenergy and Waste to Energy in the country. 
The above secondary data is available at the district and crop level and 
at regular Intervals (such as weekly, quarterly) only for some states. 
However, what fraction of the crop is available as residue feedstock for 
biomass-based end-products/ end-uses (bio-ethanol, biomass to power 
generation, etc.), is not readily accessible. 
In addition to that, to arrive at surplus residue biomass available for 
biomass to energy use, has to be arrived at after subtracting the 
amount of biomass being used for other uses (domestic, cottage and 
non-cottage industrial use as well as other use) from the total crop 
residue quantity. However, this estimation involves deep 
understanding of the local supply chains for these end-uses and 
therefore becomes complex. This understanding however can be 
developed in collaboration with unit/ local offices of State Agriculture 
Departments and State Nodal Agencies of MNRE that are spread across 
the state typically. 
Further, past studies for estimating agriculture crop residue feedstock 
availability for Waste to Energy (WTE) did not have a scope to cover in 
detail crops and information gathering at each block, district and state 
level. 
Given the inputs above, it is essential to gather surplus crop residue 
feedstock availability at the block, district and state level specifically for 
Waste to Energy (specifically crop residue biomass to energy) end-
uses. 
 Inputs proposed to address the above: 
1. Standardized Data Collection and Data Reporting 

 
18 
 Develop and implement a standardized framework for data 
collection and reporting on agriculture feedstock availability. This 
framework should include uniform definitions, methodologies, and 
metrics to ensure consistency across different organizations and 
regions. 
 Define clear parameters for categorizing residual agriculture 
biomass/ bagasse feedstock based on: 
 Crop Type 
 Crop Residue quantity available at the Block, District and State 
level 
 Crop Residue being used for other end-uses (domestic, cottage/ 
non-cottage industry and other end use applications) 
 Surplus Crop Biomass Residue available at the Block, District and 
State level 
 Seasonality in the Crop Residue availability 
 Suitability of various crop feedstocks for different end-products 
and/ or end-uses (bio-ethanol, methanol, biomass to power generation, 
green hydrogen etc.) 
 Amount of biomass feedstock utilized linked to the end-product 
and/ or end-use (and the number of existing biomass to energy plants 
that are utilizing the same) 
This would ensure that the data is comparable, integrated and holistic 
and would be useful as multiple agencies/ departments are assessing 
potential for different end-products and end-uses from the same finite 
source of agriculture feedstock 
 Formulate detailed guidelines for reporting agriculture feedstock 
data at multiple administrative levels (block, district and state) 
 Data Collection at regular intervals could be done by the 
respective State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) of MNRE and their various 
local/ unit offices in coordination with the State Agriculture 
Department and their local/ unit offices that are spread across the 
state. 
 Here mechanisms can be created to gather granular and real-
time access to information covering type of crops, crop acreage, crop 
production/ yield, residual feedstock availability for Waste to Energy 
end-use. 
 These guidelines should address data collection methods, 
reporting intervals, and quality assurance practices 

 
19 
2. Enhance Dashboard and GIS Tools for Real-time Data Reporting 
and Monitoring 
 Strengthen the MNRE’s dashboard and Geographic Information 
System (GIS) tools by incorporating advanced features such as real-
time data updates along with predictive analytics for future projections 
and appropriate mapping of the data at the block, district and state 
level. 
 Ensure that the tools are accessible and user-friendly, with 
interfaces designed to facilitate the following: 
 Easy data entry on agriculture feedstock at the state, the district 
and the block level, by the State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) of MNRE in 
coordination with respective state agriculture departments and their 
local/ unit offices 
 Verification, additional analysis, reporting and regular 
monitoring by MNRE 
 Access to real-time updates on agriculture feedstock availability 
by various stakeholders 
3. Promote Stakeholder Engagement and Training 
 Conduct Training Programs: Organize regular training sessions 
and workshops for stakeholders to ensure they are proficient in using 
the dashboard and GIS tools. Include training on data entry standards, 
tool functionalities, and data interpretation. ASCI is keen to take up this 
effort jointly with MNRE 
 Ongoing Support: Provide ongoing support and resources to 
stakeholders to address any issues related to data reporting and tool 
usage. 
 Foster Collaboration and Information Sharing: Encourage 
collaboration between government agencies, private sector entities, 
and research institutions to enhance data sharing and coordination. 
Create platforms for regular dialogue and exchange of information 
By implementing these recommendations, the Standing Committee can 
address the inconsistencies and gaps in feedstock data, leading to more 
effective planning and utilization of bioenergy resources in India. 
(iii) SSS NIBE: The data as per MNRE and TIFAC report is based on 
agricultural residues utilization for bioenergy generation. MNRE data 
indicates the bioenergy potential in the form of biomass-based power 
and TIFAC indicates the bioenergy potential in the form of Bioethanol. 
The data from MoHUA is based on urban and industrial organic waste. 

 
20 
The SATAT CBG potential considers Surplus agro-residues, spent 
wash/press mud, STPs, and animal and poultry waste. Further the data 
is considered for different periods of time in these different reports.  
The data on biomass availability from different ministries is based on 
their area of interest and relevance to their respective ministerial 
activity. However, a convergence in efforts from all the relevant 
ministries is necessary in order bring uniformity on the feedstock 
availability at the national level. Therefore, it is suggested that:  
 As there are different schemes from different ministries in the 
country, for more uniformity in data, one ministry may be made a nodal 
point for data collection, compilation and information dissemination. 
All the concerned ministries should timely provide the annual data 
pertaining to respective bioenergy targets, status of implementation, 
biomass utilization and bioenergy generation through their respective 
schemes. This will facilitate annual updation of the biomass utilization 
and availability scenario in the country along with the actual annual 
bioenergy generation in the country under different pathways such as 
CBG, biomass pellets/briquettes, bioethanol, green hydrogen etc. 
 Further for the annual updation of biomass potential data, 
Ministry of agriculture may be directed to annually provide the crop 
production data at a district and state level to the designated nodal 
ministry for yearly updation of the theoretical surplus biomass 
potential in the country. This will facilitate the regular and updated 
availability of biomass potential information at a district level in the 
country and help in short and long term planning of biomass utilization 
for bioenergy generation. 
 To streamline the assessment initially, a committee of relevant 
agencies coordinated by the identified nodal agency such as MNRE, 
MoPNG, MoA&FW, MoHUA, MoP, DDWS, TIFAC, NIBE etc. can be 
formed to establish a mechanism for biomass assessment and 
bioenergy potential estimation under different pathways. Once it is 
established, then year on year the updation can be done. 
Since SSS NIBE (an autonomous institution of MNRE) has worked on 
developing the existing dashboard of biomass atlas at the national 
level, it has a self-appointed task of bringing improvisation. In this 
regard, the institute is currently working on the following activities: 
1. Estimation of data at district level for all the states in the country 

 
21 
2. Dynamic updated portal where estimations on the biomass 
availability and bioenergy potential will be based on the latest available 
crop production data (sourcing from MoA&FW) 
3. Extending the atlas to estimate the livestock manure-based energy 
potential in the country. 
4. Planning and Development of interactive biomass atlas – query-
based system.  
Efforts are on to make the data available online in 2025. 
(iv)  TIFAC:   It is agreed that various data sources provide divergent 
data on various feedstocks of Biofuels projects. There is a requirement 
of creation of uniform data source and a comprehensive mapping of 
waste/feedstock. This will also assist in creation of feedstock clusters 
to ensure that the number of Plants in a cluster is limited by the 
feedstock availability, which will further ensure Plant viability. 
 TIFAC in collaboration with NRSC, in past has geospatially 
mapped the residual biomass availability across India and is working 
towards updating the projections of biomass crop residues potential to 
cover under the existing portal named BHUVAN JAIVOORJA, with 
involvement of different stakeholders, and enable it dynamic. 
 Further, the competing uses of feedstock for various end users 
(bioethanol/ biogas/ CBG/ methanol/ biohydrogen) is also being 
considered. The existing database would be further expanded with 
addition of other important crops with updating the data. This 
initiative is planned in collaboration with office of PSA and MNRE. 
 Preparation of detailed projects (DPR), has started and 
stakeholders’ meetings were held to discuss the work packages, roles 
and responsibilities of different stakeholders. 
(v) Indian Oil:  The following data sources are used to estimate major 
feedstock for Biofuels projects:” 
S 
No. 
Feedstock Data Source Data mentioned in the 
report 

 
22 
S 
No. 
Feedstock Data Source Data mentioned in the 
report 
1 Agriculture 
Residue 
Estimating Surplus Crop Residues 
in India for Biofuel Production 
prepared by Center for 
Environment Science and Climate 
Resilient Agriculture, Indian 
Agricultural Research Institute, 
New Delhi submitted to 
Technology Information, 
Forecasting & Assessment 
Council (TIFAC), Department of 
Science & Technology 
Surplus Agriculture 
Residue: 178 MMT 
2 Sewage Waste National Inventory of Sewage 
Treatment Plants prepared in 
March 2021 by Central Pollution 
Control Board 
Sewage Generation: 
72,368 MLD 
Operational Treatment 
Capacity: 26,869 MLD 
3 Organic MSW Annual Report 2020-21 on 
Implementation of Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 
Solid Waste Generated: 
1,60,038 TPD 
Solid Waste Collected: 
1,52,749 TPD 
(Organic waste is 
considered as 50% of total 
waste) 
4 Press Mud Indian Sugar Mill Association 
(ESY 2020-21) 
Press Mud Generated: 12 
MMT 
5 Cattle Dung 20th Livestock Census (2019) The total number of cattle 
in the country: 192.49 
million 
 
17. The Committee highlighted the lack of coherent data on 
feedstock/biomass availability in the country. The Committee 
appreciated the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for developing 
dashboard and Geographic Information System (GIS) based waste 
mapping tools and called for strengthening the system for enhancing its 
reliability among stakeholders. Further, the Committee recommended 
for regular and comprehensive mapping of waste/biomass/feedstock in 
order to improve their supply in the market and thus, enabling planning 
with regard to generation of energy from these sources. Against this 
recommendation, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), 

 
23 
Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), National Institute of Bio-
Energy (NIBE), Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment 
Council (TIFAC) and Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) have submitted their 
replies. MoHUA as well as all the abovementioned Organisations have 
broadly supported the Committee’s recommendation on the need for 
uniformity in data collection on feedstock availability in the country. 
MoHUA has proposed for integration of MNRE dashboard with schemes 
of other Ministries dealing with organic waste feedstock. ASCI, in its 
reply, referred to its study of 2020-21 on biomass power generation 
potential and surplus biomass availability and also talked about the 
complexities involved with such studies. Further, ASCI stated that 
comprehensive data can be developed if unit/local offices of State 
Agriculture Departments collaborate with State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) 
of MNRE as these are spread across the States. ASCI has also provided in 
detail its suggestions to address the challenges faced in data collection 
related to agriculture feedstock. The National Institute of Bio-Energy 
(NIBE) has called for convergence in efforts from all relevant Ministries 
to bring uniformity in feedstock availability at national level and has 
also suggested measures for achieving this uniformity. NIBE has further 
talked about its work on the biomass dashboard of MNRE, the ongoing 
work on upgradation of the dashboard and the efforts to make biomass 
related data online in 2025. TIFAC has informed the Committee about 
its collaboration with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) on 
geospatial mapping of residual biomass availability across India and its 
work related to the BHUVAN JAIVOORJA portal in collaboration with the 
office of the Principal Scientific Adviser (PSA) and MNRE. Indian Oil 
Corporation (IOC) has furnished the various data sources that are used 
to estimate major feedstock for biofuel projects. The Committee are 
happy to note the work done by various Organisations in collecting and 
collating data related to feedstock/biomass availability in the country 
and would also like to appreciate ASCI, NIBE and TIFAC for their 
detailed submission and suggestions on the issue. The Committee, while 
reiterating their recommendation, would like to urge the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy to study the suggestions provided by the 
abovementioned Organisations and collaborate with other 
Ministries/Organisations to develop a robust mechanism for 
comprehensive mapping of feedstock/biomass in the country. In 
particular, the Committee would like the Ministry to work on engaging 
its State Nodal Agencies in data collection and reporting on agriculture 
feedstock availability, as suggested by ASCI. Further, the Committee 
may be apprised with the status of MNRE’s biomass dashboard and 
BHUVAN JAIVOORJA portal.  

 
24 
CHAPTER – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee observe that Waste to Electricity plants generate power at 
the rate of 1 Mega Watt equivalent (MWe) per 20-30 Tonnes Per Day (TPD) 
dry waste. However, as much as 100 TPD mixed waste is required to generate 
the same amount of energy. As per Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 
2016, only the non-recyclable combustible waste can be used in these plants. 
However, the Committee note frequent instances of mixed waste being 
incinerated in Waste to Electricity plants without proper segregation. The 
Committee also feel that waste segregation at source in our country is still far 
from satisfactory. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that the existing 
awareness programmes for waste segregation need to be pushed further 
with active participation of local bodies and reward/incentive should be 
made part of these programmes to make waste segregation a behavioural 
practice of every household. The Committee are of the view that it is better to 
process wet waste through methods other than incineration viz. composting, 
biomethanation etc. as these are less polluting processes. Further, the 
Committee are of the opinion that the recyclable waste should necessarily be 
recycled as recycling plays an important role in reducing the waste stream 
with lower demand for raw materials, and minimising pollution associated 
with the manufacturing of new products. The Committee therefore, support 
the setting up of Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) and appreciate the 
decision to set up around 45,000 MRF under Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) MoHUA: Sanitation is a State subject under 7th schedule of the 
constitution. It is the responsibility of State/ULBs to plan, design and execute 
sanitation projects in the urban areas of the country. Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) supplements the efforts of States/UTs through the 
Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban by providing policy directions, financial and 
technical support to deal with various issues concerning management of 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). 
• Also, Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 clearly states that it is the 
responsibility of the waste generators to segregate the waste generated by 
them in bio–degradable, non-biodegradable (recyclable and combustible), 
sanitary waste and domestic hazardous wastes. 

 
25 
• Under Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban (SBM-U) financial assistance is 
provided to States/UTs on the basis of demand made by the State/UT in the 
form of complete proposals/action plans duly approved by State Level 
Technical Committees (SLTC) for setting up of various waste processing 
facilities such as transfer stations, Waste-to-Compost (WtC) plants, Waste-to-
Energy (WtE) plants, bio-methanation plants, Construction and Demolition 
(C&D) waste plants, sanitary landfill including Material Recovery Facilities 
(MRFs). Funds are also provided for Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) to ensure awareness creation along-with large scale 
citizen outreach to intensify ‘Jan Andolan’ and institutionalize swachh 
behavior and related set of actions, towards achieving the vision of Garbage 
Free cities. 
• A key component of the Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0 has been 
citizen engagement for source segregation which will result in clean cities. 
Over the past years, the Mission has facilitated several citizen-based 
interventions to promote the concept of source segregation and waste 
management. 
• Moreover, under the Mission the ULBs are encouraged to setup 
material recovery facilities for sorting of recyclable materials to enable 
authorised waste pickers and waste collectors to separate recyclables and 
provide easy access to waste recyclers for collection of segregated recyclable 
waste thus promote recycling and the non-recyclable combustible portion 
maybe channelized for energy recovery. Waste to Electricity plants generate 
power at the rate of 1 Mega Watt equivalent (MWe) per 35-40 Tonnes Per 
Day (TPD) from non-recyclable combustible portion of dry waste. 
• For management of organic waste, the ULBs are also encouraged to 
setup compost plants and biomethanation plants for which additional central 
assistance is provided under as per the mission guidelines. 
(ii) Indian Oil:  Bio-methanation should be the preferred method to process 
organic waste, as the waste is used to produce Methane, which is used as fuel 
for vehicles, industries and commercial establishments thereby reducing 
import of fossil fuel and assisting in climate change mitigation. The process 
also produces Fermented Organic manure which increases the soil organic 
carbon and reduces chemical fertilizer consumption thereby promoting 
organic / natural farming. The Biogenic CO2 produced in the process can be 
used in various downstream industries.  
• This is as against incineration of mixed waste which produces 
pollution, Green House Gases like CO2, NOX, etc., various volatile organic 
compounds which are harmful for the environment as well as ash. 
(iii)  WTE Division, MNRE:  MNRE has been supporting the biomethanation 
based projects under the Waste to Energy sub-component of National 

 
26 
Bioenergy Programme (Phase-I), utilizing the organic waste and addressing 
its proper disposal. 
• Further, it has been observed that, the Waste to Electricity plants set up 
in the country are mainly utilizing Municipal Solid Waste as feedstock. 
Moreover, the process used are mainly incineration of the MSW. However, as 
per the direction of DoE, the MSW to power component had to be excluded 
under the National Bioenergy Programme, as the component is supported 
under the Swachh Bharat Mission (2.0) of MoHUA. 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee feel that with regard to Waste to Electricity plants, the major 
issue is the high cost of power from such plants. Many such projects are being 
pursued under public-private partnership (PPP) model and the main source 
of revenue for these projects is selling of the power generated from municipal 
solid waste (MSW) and some by- products which are used as construction 
material. The power being generated from these projects are sold to the state 
DISCOMs. However, these plants face huge delays in executing power 
purchase agreement (PPA) with the State Electricity Departments/DISCOMS 
as the tariff is typically high at about Rs. 8 per kilowatt hour (KWH) which is 
higher than that of other renewable energy such as Solar. The generation 
capacity of these plants is also small. Today, most of the DISCOMS are 
financially weak and hence, are finding it difficult to purchase costly power 
from these plants. In such a scenario, it becomes important to devise a 
mechanism whereby the power from Waste to Electricity plants are surely 
taken off but at the same time, the DISCOMS are not burdened excessively. 
The Committee are of the view that a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) can be 
created for this purpose, which can be made procurer of this power. This 
arrangement can have multiple partners in the form of Central PSUs like 
Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency (IREDA) and also private companies. The SPV, after 
procuring power from the plant, can then sell this power to interested 
entities and can also list it for trading on power exchanges. The Committee 
are of the opinion that such an arrangement will provide guaranteed takeoff 
of power being generated from waste, instilling further confidence amongst 
the stakeholders and build a suitable case for attracting low cost capital from 
the market, while encouraging more players to invest in this field, thus 
eventually driving down the cost of Waste to Electricity power. 
 

 
27 
Reply of the Government 
(i) MoHUA:  A SPV maybe formed under the guidance of Ministry of Power 
having participation from multiple partners such as State Urban 
Development Departments, DISCOMS, SERCs, and central PSUs such as SECI 
and IREDA. 
(ii) WTE Division, MNRE:  It has been observed that, the Waste to 
Electricity plants set up in the country are mainly utilizing Municipal Solid 
Waste as feedstock. Moreover, the process used are mainly incineration of 
the MSW. However, as per the direction of DoE, the MSW to power 
component had to be excluded under the National Bioenergy Programme, as 
the component is supported under the Swachh Bharat Mission (2.0) of 
MoHUA. 
(iii) IREDA:  IREDA is dedicated NBFC for financing of renewable energy 
projects and not engaged in power trading. However, in order to make Waste 
to Energy (WTE) power plants commercially viable, the following are 
submitted: 
a. Government support in the form of generation / manufacturing linked 
incentives may help improve project viability 
b. Interest subvention for WTE / pallet manufacturing plants on the loans 
to be extended by banks / financial institutions for eligible projects may be 
explored 
c. A WTE energy procurement direction may be introduced in line with 
Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) and Hydro Power Purchase Obligation 
(HPO) mandating Discoms to source minimum percentage of WTE based 
generated power out of their total procurement. 
(iv) SECI:  SECI is open to the recommendations of the Committee. As 
suggested, a procurement intermediary will guarantee off-take of power from 
waste to energy projects thereby instill confidence among private investors 
and other stakeholders. As per the applicable guidelines that may be issued 
by Government, SECI will issue tenders and take on the role of intermediary 
power procurer in these projects.  
• Further, in the year 2022, SECI had endeavored to work in this 
direction. A tender was issued for setting up of 8 MW Waste to Energy Project 
in Kanpur, through a tariff-based competitive bidding mechanism, on behalf 
of the Uttar Pradesh DISCOMs. SECI was envisaged to play the role of the 
intermediary trader for such power, to provide payment security to the 
bidders. However, during the various stakeholder consultations held, the 
estimated tariffs were not in line with expectations of the final off-taker, due 
to which assured offtake of power could not be ascertained. As a result, SECI 
was constrained to cancel the tender due to lack of response. 
  

 
28 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
The Committee have noted that Waste to Electricity plants incinerate 
municipal solid waste to generate electricity which cause pollution. These 
plants have often been found to violate pollution norms for which they have 
also been fined a number of times. Local residents have often opposed the 
setting up and expansion of these plants due to increased pollution levels, 
noise, foul smell etc. In such a scenario, the Committee are of the view that to 
achieve the target of setting up around 9,700 TPD of Waste to Electricity 
plant capacity under Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0 of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) and around 200 compressed biogas (CBG) plants 
under National Bioenergy Programme of MNRE, it is important that the issue 
of pollution from these plants is addressed first. Under SBM 2.0, Engineers 
India Limited (EIL) has been engaged to provide Technical and Transaction 
Advisory support to States/UTs/Cities for planning and setting up integrated 
Waste to Energy plants without any cost to the States/UTs/Cities. The 
Committee are of the view that EIL, including environmental engineers and 
scientists, can assist in devising mechanism using technology to reduce 
emissions from these plants, such as emission filters. The Committee also feel 
that global best practices should be studied and adopted in our plants to the 
extent possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) MoHUA:  Waste to Energy (Electricity) Plants are subjected to 
emissions and as per Clause 16 of the Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, it 
is the duty of the State Pollution Control Board or Pollution Control 
Committee to monitor environmental standards and adherence to conditions 
as specified under the Schedule I and Schedule II for waste processing and 
disposal sites. 
• Latest WtE plants leverage advanced technologies to significantly 
mitigate the environmental impact of waste incineration. High-efficiency 
scrubbers, advanced filters, real-time emission monitoring, and catalytic 
reduction systems all play critical roles in controlling emissions and ensuring 
that these facilities operate within stringent environmental standards. These 
advancements help make WtE plants a more sustainable option by 
minimizing its impact on air quality and public health. 

 
29 
(ii)  EIL: Waste to Electricity (WtE) plants incinerate municipal solid 
waste (MSW) to generate electricity. The plants shall be designed with 
adequate air pollution control measures to treat these pollutants to comply 
with the applicable statutory norms before being venting out to atmosphere. 
The MSW used for incineration contains various components like carbon, 
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, volatile matter, ash, chlorine, silica, etc. 
Combustion of this waste or waste derived fuels results in generation of 
mixture of gases termed as flue gas consisting of air, water vapour, carbon 
dioxide, acid gases like HCL, HF, HI, SO2, NOx, organic substances, dioxins, 
furans, heavy metals, fly ash particles, etc, which need to be controlled 
through appropriate operating conditions and flue gas treatment technology 
to meet the standards. The flue gas generated can be treated by using a 
suitable flue gas cleaning system before releasing into the atmosphere. Flue 
gas cleaning system (FGCS) refers to a range of processes imposed on 
untreated combustion gas to limit harmful pollutants. Particulate matter 
consists primarily of entrained non-combustible matter in the flue gas, and 
the products of incomplete combustion that exist in solid or aerosol form, 
which can be removed using different technologies like Cyclone Separators, 
bag filters, Electro Static Precipitators (ESPs), Venturi Scrubbers, etc. NOx can 
be treated in a separate system with deNOx process options like Selective 
Non-Catalytic Reduction (SNCR) and Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR). 
Typical gaseous contaminants generated from waste incinerators like HCL, HI 
(Hydrogen Iodide), SOx, etc can be removed by various technological options 
like Dry, Semi-dry & Wet scrubbing system. Removal of the toxic substance 
like dioxins, furans and mercury can take place by injection of finely divided 
activated carbon particles into the flue gas stream. The Waste to Electricity 
plants shall be monitored by Online Continuous Emission Monitoring System 
to monitor the treated flue gas quality. Globally also, the Flue gas cleaning 
system (FGCS) in Waste to Electricity plants are equipped with similar air 
pollution control equipment as discussed above. 
Waste to Gas plant involves bio-methanation of biodegradable wet waste to 
generate bio-gas. This is comparatively environmentally clean process. 
Biogas contains about 55-65% of Methane, 35-44% of Carbon Dioxide and 
traces of other gases, such as Hydrogen Sulphide, Nitrogen and Ammonia. 
Biogas, can be purified and upgraded to make it suitable to be used as a green 
and clean fuel for transportation. Various technologies available for gas 
purification includes pressure swing adsorption (PSA) process, Water 
Scrubbing System, Membrane and Solvent based technologies, etc. 
With proper design of pollution control measures, better housekeeping and 
above specified technologies implemented, it is feasible to address the 
environmental concerns associated with operation of Waste to Energy plants. 

 
30 
(iii) WTE Division MNRE:  MNRE has been supporting the biomethanation 
based projects under the Waste to Energy sub-component of National 
Bioenergy Programme (Phase-I), utilizing the organic waste and addressing 
its proper disposal. After the notification of Phase-I of NBP, 60 BioCNG 
projects with cumulative installed capacity of 489 TPD have been supported, 
under the Waste to Energy sub-component. The budget for Phase I of 
National Bioenergy Programme (NBP) of MNRE is almost fully allocated. An 
Interim evaluation of Scheme for Phase-II of NBP, is under process. 
• Moreover, the Waste to Energy projects developers have to submit the 
Consent to Established/Consent to Operate from the respective State 
Pollution Control Board, for availing the CFA under Waste to Energy 
programme of MNRE.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee note that there is lack of coherent data with regard to 
feedstock availability (raw materials used in Waste to Energy, 
briquette/pellet manufacturing, biogas etc. plants) in the country and the 
data which is available is not uniform across organisations. As per the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), the biomass availability is 
around 750 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) per year out of which surplus 
availability is around 230 MMT per year (after subtracting for use as fodder, 
domestic household use etc.). This corresponds to a potential of 28 GW of 
power. As per MoHUA, the energy generation potential from urban and 
industrial organic waste is about 5.6 GW. However, as per the Technology 
Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) of the Department 
of Science and Technology, the 2G ethanol production potential is about 
51.35 billion litres from about 178 MMT of surplus crop biomass. Similarly, 
as per the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), the Compressed Biogas 
(CBG) potential is estimated at 62 MMT with bio-manure potential of 370 
MMT. The Committee also note that there is unavailability of data at the State, 
district and block level as a result of which case-by-case study becomes time 
consuming. The majority of stakeholders carry out their own analyses to 
evaluate the feedstock availability. The Committee while appreciating MNRE 
for developing a dashboard and Geographic Information System (GIS) based 
waste mapping tools, would also like to recommend that these 
dashboard/tools be strengthened and all the players be sensitized about its 
usage. The Committee also feel that robust monitoring mechanism will 
ensure that authentic data is uploaded on the dashboard which would 
increase its reliability among the stakeholders. Further, the Committee are of 
the opinion that a comprehensive mapping of waste/feedstock is needed for 

 
31 
effective utilization in different areas (such as CBG, bio-ethanol, biomass to 
power, methanol, green hydrogen etc.) and such mapping should be carried 
out regularly to improve the demand supply situation in the market and 
enable short as well as long term planning with regard to Bioenergy and 
Waste to Energy in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) MoHUA:  The Committee’s recommendations highlight the crucial need for 
precise data monitoring, thorough waste and feed stock mapping, and 
strategic planning to optimize waste use in the bioenergy and waste-to-
energy (WtE) sectors. Adopting these recommendations could enhance 
waste management efficiency, boost energy production, and ensure better 
alignment with market needs and regulatory standards. 
 Integrating the dashboard created by MNRE with the schemes of 
various Ministries dealing with various organic waste feed stock could 
further strengthen data management and strategic planning. This 
approach will help the country advance its bioenergy and WtE 
objectives more effectively. 
 MoHUA supports the recommendation. 
(ii) ASCI:   As per the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), the 
biomass availability is around 750 million metric tonnes (MMT) per year out 
of which surplus availability is around 230 MMT per year (after subtracting 
for use as fodder, domestic household use etc.). This corresponds to a 
potential of 28 GW of power. 
The 2020-21 ASCI biomass power generation potential and surplus 
agriculture biomass availability study, given the scope could consider 254 
districts and 54 crops across India and projected it forward to the entire 
country’s potential. For biomass to power generation, co-incineration process 
is widely used. 
 However, as per the Technology Information, Forecasting and 
Assessment Council (TIFAC) of the Department of Science and 
Technology, the 2G ethanol production potential is about 51.35 billion 
litres from about 178 MMT of surplus crop biomass. 
The 2018 TIFAC study considered 19 states, 43 districts and 11 crops. Both of 
these studies, considered secondary data on crop type, crop acreage, crop 
production/ yield from the state level agriculture departments. Therefore, 
this estimate by TIFAC is only a subset of the total crop residue biomass 

 
32 
availability and that is specifically meant for 2G ethanol production, which is 
produced from digestible biomass. 
 Similarly, as per the Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), the 
Compressed Biogas (CBG) potential is estimated at 62 MMT with bio-
manure potential of 370 MMT. 
Like in the case above, digestible biomass can be used for generation of 
bio-gas so once again, the above quantity estimate is only a subset of 
the total crop residue biomass availability. 
 As per MoHUA, the energy generation potential from urban and 
industrial organic waste is about 5.6 GW. 
Not applicable for agriculture biomass as MoHUA is considering urban 
industrial organic waste 
 The Committee also note that there is unavailability of data at the State, 
district and block level as a result of which case-by-case study becomes 
time consuming. The majority of stakeholders carry out their own 
analyses to evaluate the feedstock availability. The Committee while 
appreciating MNRE for developing a dashboard and Geographic 
Information System (GIS) based waste mapping tools, would also like 
to recommend that these dashboard/tools be strengthened and all the 
players be sensitized about its usage. The Committee also feel that 
robust monitoring mechanism will ensure that authentic data is 
uploaded on the dashboard which would increase its reliability among 
the stakeholders. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that a 
comprehensive mapping of waste/feedstock is needed for effective 
utilization in different areas (such as CBG, bio-ethanol, biomass to 
power, methanol, green hydrogen etc.) and such mapping should be 
carried out regularly to improve the demand supply situation in the 
market and enable short as well as long term planning with regard to 
Bioenergy and Waste to Energy in the country. 
The above secondary data is available at the district and crop level and at 
regular Intervals (such as weekly, quarterly) only for some states. However, 
what fraction of the crop is available as residue feedstock for biomass-based 
end-products/ end-uses (bio-ethanol, biomass to power generation, etc.), is 
not readily accessible. 
In addition to that, to arrive at surplus residue biomass available for 
biomass to energy use, has to be arrived at after subtracting the amount of 
biomass being used for other uses (domestic, cottage and non-cottage 
industrial use as well as other use) from the total crop residue quantity. 

 
33 
However, this estimation involves deep understanding of the local supply 
chains for these end-uses and therefore becomes complex. This 
understanding however can be developed in collaboration with unit/ local 
offices of State Agriculture Departments and State Nodal Agencies of MNRE 
that are spread across the state typically. 
Further, past studies for estimating agriculture crop residue feedstock 
availability for Waste to Energy (WTE) did not have a scope to cover in detail 
crops and information gathering at each block, district and state level. 
Given the inputs above, it is essential to gather surplus crop residue 
feedstock availability at the block, district and state level specifically for 
Waste to Energy (specifically crop residue biomass to energy) end-uses. 
 Inputs proposed to address the above: 
1. Standardized Data Collection and Data Reporting 
 Develop and implement a standardized framework for data 
collection and reporting on agriculture feedstock availability. This 
framework should include uniform definitions, methodologies, 
and metrics to ensure consistency across different organizations 
and regions. 
 Define clear parameters for categorizing residual agriculture 
biomass/ bagasse feedstock based on: 
 Crop Type 
 Crop Residue quantity available at the Block, District and State 
level 
 Crop Residue being used for other end-uses (domestic, cottage/ 
non-cottage industry and other end use applications) 
 Surplus Crop Biomass Residue available at the Block, District and 
State level 
 Seasonality in the Crop Residue availability 
 Suitability of various crop feedstocks for different end-products 
and/ or end-uses (bio-ethanol, methanol, biomass to power 
generation, green hydrogen etc.) 
 Amount of biomass feedstock utilized linked to the end-product 
and/ or end-use (and the number of existing biomass to energy 
plants that are utilizing the same) 
This would ensure that the data is comparable, integrated and holistic and 
would be useful as multiple agencies/ departments are assessing potential 
for different end-products and end-uses from the same finite source of 
agriculture feedstock 

 
34 
 Formulate detailed guidelines for reporting agriculture feedstock 
data at multiple administrative levels (block, district and state) 
 Data Collection at regular intervals could be done by the 
respective State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) of MNRE and their 
various local/ unit offices in coordination with the State 
Agriculture Department and their local/ unit offices that are 
spread across the state. 
 Here mechanisms can be created to gather granular and real-time 
access to information covering type of crops, crop acreage, crop 
production/ yield, residual feedstock availability for Waste to 
Energy end-use. 
 These guidelines should address data collection methods, 
reporting intervals, and quality assurance practices 
2. Enhance Dashboard and GIS Tools for Real-time Data Reporting and 
Monitoring 
 Strengthen the MNRE’s dashboard and Geographic Information 
System (GIS) tools by incorporating advanced features such as 
real-time data updates along with predictive analytics for future 
projections and appropriate mapping of the data at the block, 
district and state level. 
 Ensure that the tools are accessible and user-friendly, with 
interfaces designed to facilitate the following: 
 Easy data entry on agriculture feedstock at the state, the district 
and the block level, by the State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) of MNRE 
in coordination with respective state agriculture departments and 
their local/ unit offices 
 Verification, additional analysis, reporting and regular monitoring 
by MNRE 
 Access to real-time updates on agriculture feedstock availability 
by various stakeholders 
3. Promote Stakeholder Engagement and Training 
 Conduct Training Programs: Organize regular training sessions 
and workshops for stakeholders to ensure they are proficient in 
using the dashboard and GIS tools. Include training on data entry 
standards, tool functionalities, and data interpretation. ASCI is 
keen to take up this effort jointly with MNRE 
 Ongoing Support: Provide ongoing support and resources to 
stakeholders to address any issues related to data reporting and 
tool usage. 

 
35 
 Foster Collaboration and Information Sharing: Encourage 
collaboration between government agencies, private sector 
entities, and research institutions to enhance data sharing and 
coordination. Create platforms for regular dialogue and exchange 
of information 
By implementing these recommendations, the Standing Committee can 
address the inconsistencies and gaps in feedstock data, leading to more 
effective planning and utilization of bioenergy resources in India. 
(iii) SSS NIBE: The data as per MNRE and TIFAC report is based on 
agricultural residues utilization for bioenergy generation. MNRE data 
indicates the bioenergy potential in the form of biomass-based power 
and TIFAC indicates the bioenergy potential in the form of Bioethanol. 
The data from MoHUA is based on urban and industrial organic waste. 
The SATAT CBG potential considers Surplus agro-residues, spent 
wash/press mud, STPs, and animal and poultry waste. Further the data 
is considered for different periods of time in these different reports.  
The data on biomass availability from different ministries is based 
on their area of interest and relevance to their respective ministerial 
activity. However, a convergence in efforts from all the relevant 
ministries is necessary in order bring uniformity on the feedstock 
availability at the national level. Therefore, it is suggested that:  
 As there are different schemes from different ministries in the 
country, for more uniformity in data, one ministry may be made a 
nodal point for data collection, compilation and information 
dissemination. All the concerned ministries should timely provide 
the annual data pertaining to respective bioenergy targets, status of 
implementation, biomass utilization and bioenergy generation 
through their respective schemes. This will facilitate annual 
updation of the biomass utilization and availability scenario in the 
country along with the actual annual bioenergy generation in the 
country under different pathways such as CBG, biomass 
pellets/briquettes, bioethanol, green hydrogen etc. 
 Further for the annual updation of biomass potential data, 
Ministry of agriculture may be directed to annually provide the crop 
production data at a district and state level to the designated nodal 
ministry for yearly updation of the theoretical surplus biomass 
potential in the country. This will facilitate the regular and updated 
availability of biomass potential information at a district level in the 

 
36 
country and help in short and long term planning of biomass 
utilization for bioenergy generation. 
 To streamline the assessment initially, a committee of relevant 
agencies coordinated by the identified nodal agency such as MNRE, 
MoPNG, MoA&FW, MoHUA, MoP, DDWS, TIFAC, NIBE etc. can be 
formed to establish a mechanism for biomass assessment and 
bioenergy potential estimation under different pathways. Once it is 
established, then year on year the updation can be done. 
Since SSS NIBE (an autonomous institution of MNRE) has worked 
on developing the existing dashboard of biomass atlas at the 
national level, it has a self-appointed task of bringing improvisation. 
In this regard, the institute is currently working on the following 
activities: 
1. Estimation of data at district level for all the states in the country 
2. Dynamic updated portal where estimations on the biomass 
availability and bioenergy potential will be based on the latest 
available crop production data (sourcing from MoA&FW) 
3. Extending the atlas to estimate the livestock manure-based 
energy potential in the country. 
4. Planning and Development of interactive biomass atlas – query-
based system.  
Efforts are on to make the data available online in 2025. 
(iv)  TIFAC:   It is agreed that various data sources provide divergent 
data on various feedstocks of Biofuels projects. There is a requirement 
of creation of uniform data source and a comprehensive mapping of 
waste/feedstock. This will also assist in creation of feedstock clusters 
to ensure that the number of Plants in a cluster is limited by the 
feedstock availability, which will further ensure Plant viability. 
 TIFAC in collaboration with NRSC, in past has geospatially 
mapped the residual biomass availability across India and is working 
towards updating the projections of biomass crop residues potential to 
cover under the existing portal named BHUVAN JAIVOORJA, with 
involvement of different stakeholders, and enable it dynamic. 
 Further, the competing uses of feedstock for various end users 
(bioethanol/ biogas/ CBG/ methanol/ biohydrogen) is also being 
considered. The existing database would be further expanded with 

 
37 
addition of other important crops with updating the data. This 
initiative is planned in collaboration with office of PSA and MNRE. 
 Preparation of detailed projects (DPR), has started and 
stakeholders’ meetings were held to discuss the work packages, roles 
and responsibilities of different stakeholders. 
(v) Indian Oil:  The following data sources are used to estimate major 
feedstock for Biofuels projects:” 
S 
No. 
Feedstock Data Source Data mentioned in the 
report 
1 Agriculture 
Residue 
Estimating Surplus Crop Residues 
in India for Biofuel Production 
prepared by Center for 
Environment Science and Climate 
Resilient Agriculture, Indian 
Agricultural Research Institute, 
New Delhi submitted to 
Technology Information, 
Forecasting & Assessment 
Council (TIFAC), Department of 
Science & Technology 
Surplus Agriculture 
Residue: 178 MMT 
2 Sewage Waste National Inventory of Sewage 
Treatment Plants prepared in 
March 2021 by Central Pollution 
Control Board 
Sewage Generation: 
72,368 MLD 
Operational Treatment 
Capacity: 26,869 MLD 
3 Organic MSW Annual Report 2020-21 on 
Implementation of Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 
Solid Waste Generated: 
1,60,038 TPD 
Solid Waste Collected: 
1,52,749 TPD 
(Organic waste is 
considered as 50% of total 
waste) 
4 Press Mud Indian Sugar Mill Association 
(ESY 2020-21) 
Press Mud Generated: 12 
MMT 
5 Cattle Dung 20th Livestock Census (2019) The total number of cattle 
in the country: 192.49 
million 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 

 
38 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that the Gross Calorific Values (GCVs) of bioenergy 
feedstocks differ across regions of India. This results in variable power 
generation from Waste to Energy plants. For briquette/pellet manufacturing 
units, the inconsistent nature of feedstock/biomass poses problem in 
producing briquettes/pellets that meet the standards specified by Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS). The Committee feel that these shortcomings being 
faced by power plants can discourage entrepreneurs and private industry 
players from investing in this sector. The Committee agree with the 
observation of NITI Aayog that very few technology providers are present in 
the Indian market currently and the efficiencies claimed by the technology 
providers is not achieved in certain cases. The Committee note the 
continuation of the Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development (RE-RTD) programme of MNRE for a period 2021-22 to 2025-
26 at a total cost of Rs. 228 crore. This programme aims at scaling research 
and development (R&D) effort for promoting indigenous technology 
development and manufacture for wide spread applications of new and 
renewable energy in efficient and cost-effective manner across the country. 
The Committee appreciate the Ministry for sanctioning R&D projects in the 
area of agro-waste and biomass gasification. The Committee would also like 
to laud NTPC Limited for its initiative to study the effect of long-term storage 
on GCV of different types of biomasses and to undertake detailed 
characterization of biomass and its ash to evaluate its properties with respect 
to co-firing in pulverized coal (PC) fired boiler. However, the Committee are 
of the opinion that there is a need to undertake more research on the 
differing characteristics of feedstocks and identify appropriate technologies 
for utilizing them. To encourage research in this field, the Committee agree 
with the suggestion of NITI Aayog that the incentive in this sector should be 
linked with generation (Generation Based Incentive) instead of capital based. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i)  R&D Division, MNRE:  Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is 
implementing a “Renewable Energy Research and Technology Development 
Programme (RE-RTD)” through various research institutions and industry to 
develop indigenous technologies and manufacturing for widespread 
applications of new and renewable energy in efficient and cost-effective 
manner including Biomass and Biogas research and development.  It provides 
up to 100% financial support to government/non-profit research 

 
39 
organizations and up to 70% to industry, startups, private institutes, 
entrepreneurs, and manufacturing units. 
• Ministry can take up the new R&D projects as per latest thrust areas of 
Biomass and Biogas research and development which can include more 
research on the differing characteristics of feedstocks and identify 
appropriate technologies. 
(ii) BIS:  The Solid Mineral Fuels and Solid Biofuels Sectional Committee, 
PCD 7 of BIS, has developed the following two standards related to briquettes 
and pellets specifications, which are attached for your reference: 
- IS 18724: 2024 Solid biofuels - Fuel specifications and classes - Pellets from 
agro and herbaceous residues 
- IS 18725: 2024 Solid biofuels - Fuel specifications and classes - Briquettes 
from agro and herbaceous residues' 
(iii) NTPC:  As regards NTPC, it has taken the following research/projects: 
• Collection of different types of biomasses and study the effect of long-
term storage on GCV (Activity 22)  
• Detailed characterization of biomass and its ash to evaluate its 
properties with respect to co-firing in PC fired boiler (Activity No 23) 
• Experimental and Simulation analysis and establishing correlation of 
biomass characteristics with PC fired boiler combustion process for 
optimizing and increasing cofiring ratio of biomass. (Activity No 24) 
• Experimental and Simulation studies on ash slagging, fouling and high 
temperature corrosion behavior during burning of biomass in a PC fired 
Boilers (Activity No 27) Interim reports for all the above-mentioned activities 
are prepared and final reports are in progress. 
(iv)  NITI Aayog: A scoping on the differing characteristics of 
feedstocks and identify appropriate technologies for utilizing them needs to 
be carried out by MNRE. The identified technologies need to be promoted 
through Generation-based Incentives scheme by MNRE. 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 858 crore has been sanctioned for 
National Bioenergy Programme (NBP) of MNRE and the Ministry is expecting 
this programme to bring an investment of about Rs. 10,650 crore. In case of 
both pelletisation plant & torrefaction plant, a maximum amount of Rs. 28 

 
40 
lakh per tonne plant production capacity per hour, or 40% of the capital cost 
considered for plant and machinery of a 1 tonne per hour (TPH) plant, 
whichever is lower, is being given as one-time financial support by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), subject to a maximum total financial support 
of Rs. 1.4 crore per proposal. Under SBM (U) 2.0, Central Financial Assistance 
(CFA) of Rs. 18 crore/MWe is being provided for Waste to Electricity plants. 
However, the Committee are of the view that these funds are inadequate to 
meet the cost required for developing a sustainable ecosystem for effective 
management of waste in the country and developing Bioenergy sector. 
Setting up of plants in Waste to Energy sector entails a number of variables 
such as land, machinery, air pollution control devices and other accessories 
which escalates the capital cost for the plant. Therefore, the Committee are of 
the opinion that low cost financing from IREDA and other financial 
institutions should be made available to such projects in order to attract 
entrepreneurs, MSMEs and other private players to this sector. The 
Committee welcome the inclusion of 'Biomass pellet manufacturing’ under 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) and expect the Government to further facilitate 
easy financing to this sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) MoHUA: Sanitation is a State subject under 7th schedule of the 
constitution. It is the responsibility of State/ULBs to plan, design and execute 
sanitation projects in the urban areas of the country. Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) supplements the efforts of States/UTS through the 
Swachh Bharat Mission-Urban by providing policy directions, financial and 
technical support to deal with various issues concerning management of 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). 
• The project cost of Rs18 Cr/MWe of WtE plants was estimated based 
on the available data during the preparation of scheme guidelines during the 
year 2021 and this project cost does not include land costs. 
• Also under the mission, projects under PPP mode are encouraged, to 
invite private capital in urban infrastructure as well as to bring in private 
sector efficiency in delivery of urban services and O&M 
(ii) Biomass Division MNRE:  Point has been noted.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
 
 
 

 
41 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note that our country generates municipal solid waste (MSW) 
of about 1,50,000 TPD and around 1,87,000 TPD of waste processing facility 
is already existing in the country. Out of the total existing facilities, around 
98,544 TPD facility is available for converting waste into compost. Further, a 
capacity of 30,700 TPD for converting waste into compost is proposed under 
SBM (U) 2.0. However, the Committee note that the demand for bio-fertilizers 
or compost is lacking in the country, despite its numerous benefits for the 
crops and environment. The Committee are of the view that easy availability 
of chemical fertilizers, lack of awareness about the benefits of bio-fertilizers 
among farmers and fragmented market of bio-fertilizer are some of the 
reasons for weak demand in this sector. Therefore, the Committee would like 
to recommend that a robust market for bio-fertilizers be developed through 
public awareness campaigns, information & education (I&E) programmes, 
incentivization of farmers, development of supply chain etc. 
    
Reply of the Government 
(i)      Indian Oil: An important co-product from the digestate of CBG Plants is 
Fermented Organic Manure (FOM). Valorisation of this organic manure which 
is 3-4 times of CBG production is important for the viability of the CBG Plants. 
Use of this organic manure will increase soil organic carbon, reduce use of 
chemical fertilizers and propagate organic farming in the long run.  India’s 
CBG plants under SATAT scheme are expected to produce about 50 million 
Metric Tonnes of FOM. 
• Chemical fertilizer Companies may be mandated to off-take FOM @ 
10% of Chemical fertilizer Sold and market through their channels. The FOM 
should be off-taken at ~Rs. 5000/ton from CBG Plant gate to ensure CBG 
Plant viability.  
(ii) MoHUA:  Ministry supports the recommendation. However, it may be 
noted that the off-take of city compost still remains a challenge due to the 
withdrawal of Market Development Assistance (MDA) in Sept 2021 by Dept. 
of Fertilizers. It is suggested that the MDA for city compost maybe reinstated 
and FCO norms maybe rationalized/developed (for sludge) in order to ensure 
improved off-take. 
(iii) Dept. of Fertilizers: The Government had formulated a policy on 
promotion of city compost on 10.02.2016 wherein Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) of Rs. 1500/M.T in the form of subsidy was provided for 
scaling up production and consumption of city compost. The scheme of MDA 
for city compost has been discontinued after 30th September, 2021 based on 
the review of the MDA Policy and recommendations of Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) in its meeting dated 2nd August, 2021. Further, the 

 
42 
promotion of bio-fertilizers, awareness campaigns & education, etc. is the 
subject matter of DA&FW. 
(iv) DA&FW: The Government of India promotes the judicious use of 
nutrient in conjunction with Bio-fertilizer and Organic fertilizer. The various 
steps have been initiated by the GOI to promote the use of Bio and Organic 
fertilizers. 
1.  Steps taken by Government to boost Biofertilizer and Organic Fertilizer 
Production: - 
(i) The Central Government has implemented various schemes for promoting 
use of bio-fertilizers and organic fertilizers which are as follows: 
CISS 
• Under CISS Scheme Financial assistance was provided to 
Municipalities, APMCs, Public sector/Private sector companies, fertilizer 
companies or any individual entrepreneurs for establishment of 
fruit/vegetable market/agro waste compost production units and bio- 
fertilizer/bio-pesticide production units. Financial assistance is provided for 
Bio-fertilizer unit-25% of TFO or Rs 40.00 lakh whichever is less for setting 
up of 200 Ton Per Annum (TPA) capacity production unit whereas for 
fruit/vegetable waste compost units' assistance is provided @ 33% of Total 
Financial Outlay (TFO) or Rs. 60.00 lakh whichever is less for 100 Ton Per 
Day (TPD). Total Units funded since 2012-13 under NPOF CISS for which One 
time/ Advance/Final Instalment of subsidy released are 66 Units. 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
• Government is promoting organic farming on priority in the country 
since 2015-16 through the scheme of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY) in all the States including Uttar Pradesh other-than North Eastern. 
The scheme stress on end-to-end support to farmers engaged in organic 
farming i.e from production to processing, certification and marketing and 
post-harvest management Training and Capacity Building are integral part of 
the scheme. Under PKVY scheme, total assistance of Rs 31,500 per ha for a 
period of three years is provided for promotion of organic farming to cover 
different components like Training & Capacity Building, Data Management, 
PGS Certification, value addition, marketing and publicity. Out of this, the 
assistance of Rs. 15,000 per ha for a period of three years is provided to 
farmers through DBT for on-farm/off-farm organic inputs. 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
(MOVCNER): 
• Government of India has been implementing Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) scheme since 
2015-16, exclusively in the 8 North Eastern States, for development of 
certified organic production in value chain mode to link growers with 
consumers and to support the development of the entire value chain from 

 
43 
inputs, seeds and certification to the creation of facilities for certification, 
aggregation processing, marketing and brand building initiatives. Under 
MOVCDNER, assistance of Rs. 46,500/ha for 3 years is provided for creation 
of FPO, support to farmers for organic inputs, quality seeds/ planting 
material and training, hand holding and certification. 
Financial assistance @RS 32500/ ha for 3 years is provided to farmers for off-
farm /on-farm organic inputs. 
RKVY Scheme for Commercial Production Units of Organic Inputs:- 
• Initiated in the year 2007 as an umbrella scheme for ensuring holistic 
development of agriculture and allied sectors. The funding pattern of the 
scheme has been altered in the ratio of 60:40 between Centre and States 
(90:10 for North Eastern States and Himalayan States). However, for Union 
Territories the funding pattern is based on central grant @ 100 %. The 
scheme has provision for setting up of Bio-fertilizers & Organic Fertilizer 
Quality Control labs. Around Rs. 3000 per unit financial assistance is 
provided for establishment of vermi-compost unit and bio-fertilizers and 
vermi-compost are distributed at subsidized rates. 
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH):- 
• Under MIDH provisions have been made for Vermi-compost 
Units/Organic input production units 50% of cost conforming to the size of 
the unit of 30'X8'X2.5" dimension of permanent structure to be administered 
on pro-rata basis whereas for HDPE Vermi-bed financial assistance 50% of 
cost conforming to the size of 96 cubic foot (12'X4'X2) to be administered on 
pro-rata basis (Rs 100,000/ unit for permanent structure and Rs. 16,000/unit 
for HDPE Vermi-bed). 
National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP ): 
• Financial assistance 50% subsidy to the tune of Rs. 300/- per ha is 
being provided for different components including bio-fertilizers, Supply of 
Rhizobium culture/Phosphate Solubilizing Bacteria (PSB)/ Zinc Solubilizing 
Bacteria (ZSB)/ Azotobacter! Mycorrhiza and vermi compost. 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM): 
• Under NFSM- Pulses, financial assistance is being provided for 
promotion of Bio-Fertilizer (Rhizobium/PSB) 50% of the cost limited to 
Rs.300 per ha. Under Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern India (BGREI), a 
sub scheme of RKVY, also supplied bio-fertilizer 50% of the cost limited to Rs. 
300 per ha for Rice and Wheat crops 
• The GOI prescribed the standards of various Organic and Bio-fertilizer 
under FCO, 1985 to ensure that good quality of these to be provided to 
farmers. FCO prohibits the sale of any Bio-fertilizer/Organic/Chemical which 
are not of prescribed standards. 
(ii) Steps taken by Ministry to create awareness among farmers about long 
term benefits of using Bio-fertilizers:- 

 
44 
DA&FW, Ministry of Agriculture through NCONF has promoted the use of bio-
fertilizers and organic fertilizers among farmers in different ways which are 
as follows: 
• By organizing HRD Trainings for various stakeholders to popularize the 
use of Bio- fertilizers and Organic Fertilizers 
• Through Publication of Training Literature (OFNL, BFNL & Compilation 
of various ITKs) 
• Dissemination of region and crop specific best Package of 
Practices/Success Stories etc. 
• IEC activities (organizing/participating in National/International 
Exhibitions/ Trade Fairs, Seminars) 
Way Forward: - 
 To ensure the wider adaptability of bio-fertilizers in the country, the 
proposal on setting up of 500 mini Bio-fertilizer production units is at 
the level of consideration in MoA&FW, Gol. The proposed scheme offers 
a significant opportunity to promote bio-fertilizers in rural areas by 
establishing local enterprises with institutes like SAUs will act as 
handholding institutions for establishing these enterprises. It 
advocates for the exemption of sales certificate requirements for bio-
fertilizer units, similar to existing exemptions for other products, with 
mandatory quality checks through periodic sampling. 
 IEC activities will be taken up through online webinars and developing 
multilingual printed material for easy understanding of stakeholders. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee note that under National Bioenergy Programme, Gaushalas 
have also been made beneficiaries whereby they get 20 per cent additional 
CFA over the normal CFA. This is expected to help them in bringing and 
utilising the dung that is produced into a useful energy, that is, bio-CNG. The 
Committee expect MNRE to provide all help to Gaushalas and popularize the 
scheme amongst farmers and rural areas so that they avail this fund for 
setting up plants to generate energy from their waste.  
Likewise, the Committee are of the view that wastes of industries may be 
better dealt in a captive manner i.e., within or near the industrial plant itself. 
Setting up Waste to Energy plants within the jurisdiction of industrial 
townships would not only help in reducing the net waste generation but also 
save the transportation cost of such waste. Further, mandatory setting up of 

 
45 
these plants would also aid in achieving the goals of Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR).     
Reply of the Government 
(i) WTE Division, MNRE:  Under the Waste to Energy sub-component of 
MNRE, projects set up on Gaushalas are eligible for 20% enhanced CFA than 
the standard CFA pattern for Waste to Energy projects. 
• Under the Waste to Energy sub-component of MNRE, industrial waste-
based power projects are eligible for Central Financial Assistance (CFA), 
which includes the captive consumption-based projects also. 
(ii) Biogas Division, MNRE:  There is ample potential of setting up biogas 
plants in India considering the livestock population of 535.78 million, which 
includes about 300 million total population of bovines (comprising of cattle, 
buffalo, mithun and yak). The livestock sector contributes about significantly 
to India’s GDP and will continue to increase. The dissemination of biogas 
technology is a boon for Indian farmers with its direct and collateral benefits. 
So far about Up to 31.07.2024, a total of 51.04 Lakhs of small biogas plants 
has been installed and 349 medium sized biogas plants have been installed 
with a cumulative off-grid power generation capacity of about 10.6 MWeq in 
the country. 
About the Biogas Programme 
i. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of 
India has notified the National Bioenergy Programme on November 2nd, 2022. 
MNRE has continued the National Bioenergy Programme for the period from 
FY 2021-22 to 2025-26 with an outlay Rs. 858 crores, which included Rs. 100 
Crore for the Biogas Programme to support setting up of small (1 m3 to 25 
m3 biogas per day) and medium size Biogas plants i.e. above 25 m3 to 2500 
m3 biogas generation per day for corresponding power generation capacity 
range of 3 kW to 250 kW from biogas or raw biogas for thermal energy / 
cooling applications. 
ii. Objectives: The objective of this programme is to support setting up of 
biogas plants for clean cooking fuel, lighting, meeting thermal and small 
power needs of users which ultimately results in GHG reduction, improved 
sanitation, women empowerment and creation of rural employment. The 
details of Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for different components under 
this programme is as follows: 
(a) For small biogas plants (1-25 cubic meter/day plant capacity): Rs. 
9800/- to Rs. 70,400/- per plant based on size of the plant in cubic meter;  
(b) For Power generation and thermal application (25 - 2500 cubic 
meter/day plant capacity):  Rs. 35,000/- to Rs. 45,000/- per kilowatt for 
power generation and Rs. 17,500 /- to Rs. 22,500/- per kilowatt equivalent 
for thermal applications (25 -2500 cubic meter/day plant capacity) (The 

 
46 
eligible CFA would be 20% higher than Standard CFA in for NER, Island, 
Registered Gaushalas and SC/ST beneficiaries).  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note that the National Bioenergy Programme (NBP) of MNRE 
supports the SATAT (Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation) initiative of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MoPNG) which has the objective of establishing 5000 CBG plants across the 
country. Similarly, the NBP finds convergence with the GOBARdhan 
(Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro Resources Dhan) scheme of Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti which provides financial 
assistance for setting up biogas plants at village/block/district levels. The 
programme of MNRE and SBM (U) 2.0 already share the similar objective of 
setting up Waste to Energy plants for effective waste management. The 
SAMARTH Mission (National Mission on Co-firing of Biomass in Thermal 
Power Plants) of the Ministry of Power promotes manufacturing of pellets 
and briquettes for use in power generation and finds convergence with the 
Biomass Programme component of MNRE’s NBP. The Committee are of the 
view that better convergence and interlinking of schemes amongst various 
Ministries of the Government of India can be utilized to achieve greater 
coherence and better outcomes for sustainable waste management and 
recovery of energy from waste in the country. There is also a need to finetune 
these schemes in order to avoid overlaps, duplication and prevent avoidable 
conflicts in their operation. For instance, MoHUA has requested MoPNG to 
reduce the SATAT condition to 1 TPD CBG, so that more urban local bodies 
can be covered. The Committee are of the opinion that an empowered 
coordination mechanism comprising representatives from all these different 
Ministries can be formed, which can work in tandem to achieve the combined 
targets of these schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 (i) MoHUA: In order to achieve convergence of schemes a Joint Working 
Group (JWG) was constituted between MoHUA and MoPNG for fast tracking 
implementation, facilitate consultation between States & OGMCs, monitor 
progress, resolve issues related to MSW based CBG projects and off-take of 
CBG under SATAT 
(ii) MoPNG/Indian Oil: Presently, the SATAT initiative on CBG is in a 
nascent stage with 71 commissioned CBG Plants and about 60 CBG Plants in 

 
47 
various stages of construction. There are issues in viability of CBG Plants due 
to various reasons including: - 
• Sourcing of feedstock at long term viable rates. 
• Marketing of Fermented Organic Manure, which is about 3 to 6 times of 
CBG production at remunerative rates. 
• Standardization of technologies for setting up CBG Plants, etc. 
Government has introduced various enablers to support the CBG Plants. 
There is a requirement of continuation of such support mechanisms to 
ensure the progress of CBG Plants. 
The viability of CBG sales through a single Retail Outlet (RO) is at ~2 TPD and 
hence 2 TPD was proposed for supply to RO under SATAT scheme. In case 
there are CBG plants of less than 2 TPD, the CBG from multiple Plants can be 
aggregated and supplied to a RO to ensure sale as well as RO viability.  
Alternatively, MoP&NG has already announced the CBG-CGD Synchronization 
scheme for injection of CBG in CGD network, through which CBG Plants of 
less than 2 TPD can explore injection of CBG in CGD network.   
A Coordination Mechanism on CBG has been established under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoP&NG with representatives of 
DDWS, MNRE, DFS, MoHUA, Dept. of Fertilizers, DoA&FW, MoEF&CC, DPIIT, 
representatives from Bureau of Indian Standards and representatives of Oil & 
Gas Marketing Companies to track developments in the CBG sector, 
resolution of issues in implementation of CBG initiatives and suggest changes 
to existing support measures / introduction of new measures.  
• The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) acknowledges the 
need for better convergence and coordination among various ministries to 
achieve sustainable waste management and energy recovery from waste. In 
this regard, several committees and groups have been established to ensure 
effective collaboration across ministries: 
1. Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC): An IMC has been constituted by DAFW 
to strategize the convergence of various initiatives and schemes from 
different ministries/departments, specifically focusing on the ex-situ 
management of paddy straw. The committee includes representatives from 
the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, the National Bioenergy 
Program of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, the Ministry of Power, and the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution. It is chaired by the Special Secretary of the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DAFW). 
2. Inter-Ministerial Task Force for GOBARdhan: To steer the implementation 
of the GOBARdhan initiative, an Inter-Ministerial Task Force has been set up. 
This task force is chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation (DDWS) and includes representatives from the 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, the 

 
48 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (or ICAR), the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, the Department of Fertilizers, the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the 
Department of Rural Development, and the Department of Science and 
Technology 
3. Joint Working Group between MoPNG and MoHUA: A Joint Working Group 
between MoPNG and the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has 
been established to enhance coordination and expedite the implementation 
of approved CBG projects in urban areas. 
4. Coordination Mechanism (CM): MoPNG has also established a Coordination 
Mechanism to monitor developments and suggest resolutions for issues 
related to the CBG ecosystem. This mechanism includes members from the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy, the Department of Financial Services, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, the Department of Fertilizers, the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade, the Bureau of Indian Standards, and Oil and Gas Marketing Companies. 
5. Committee of Secretaries (CoS) Meetings: Regular meetings of the 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS), chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, are held to 
review the GOBARdhan Scheme. 
• These coordination efforts aim to align the objectives of various 
ministries and prevent overlaps and duplication, ensuring a cohesive 
approach for effective implementation of Waste to Energy program. 
(iii) Ministry Of Power:  1. The Government of India has established the 
Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) to coordinate Schemes related to ex-situ 
paddy straw management under the Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture. The IMC constituted has representations 
from relevant Ministries and agencies Including Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MoPNG), Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change 
(MoEFCC), and the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). 
2.  The IMC has been actively monitoring and facilitating the 
Implementation of various Schemes to combat paddy stubble burning. It has 
held eight meetings to ensure effective implementation and convergence of 
Scheme. The IMC meetings were held on 4th & 13th December 2023, 15th 
February 2024, 25th April 2024, 11th & 27th June 2024, 16th July 2024, and 
21 August 2024. 
3.  Based on the IMC's recommendations, the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE) has revised the Rate of Central Financial 
Assistance for pellet manufacturing units under its 'National Bioenergy 

 
49 
Programme'. The Scheme now has enhanced rate of CFA for non-torrefied 
and torrefied pellet manufacturing units. Further revisions are under 
consideration. Additionally, the Central Pollution Control Board Scheme is 
slated to be phased out once the MNRE scheme is fully revised. 
(iv) DDWS: Galvanizing Organic Bio-Resources dhan (GOBARdhan), 
launched in 2018 under SBM(G), is an integral component of biodegradable 
waste management under SBM(G) Ph-II for ensuring cleanliness in villages by 
converting organic/ biodegradable waste including cattle dung, crop residue, 
market waste etc. into biogas and bio-slurry. Financial assistance of up to Rs 
50 lakh per district is available for the entire programme period. 
• Further, GOBARdhan "Waste to Wealth" initiative of GoI is based on a 
whole of Government approach. It covers the entire gamut of 
schemes/programmes aimed at converting organic waste like cattle dung/ 
agri-residue etc. to biogas/ Compressed Biogas (CBG) and organic manure. 
GOBARdhan initiative provides a common platform for schemes of different 
Ministries/ Departments such as the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE); Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG); 
• Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying; Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare; Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs etc. 
DDWS is the nodal coordinating Dept. at GoI level for implementation of the 
initiative. As on date, a total of 709 CBG plants and 1325 biogas plants 
registered under different categories on the Unified Registration Portal for 
GOBARdhan (https://gobardhan.co.in/)" 
• Joint Secretary, DDWS, has been designated as Mission Director for 
GOBARdhan initiative to ensure smooth coordination between stakeholder 
Ministries. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
50 
CHAPTER – III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's Replies 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
51 
CHAPTER – IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require Reiteration 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee have noted that the supply chain scenario of biomass-based 
briquettes/pellets to the Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) of our country is still 
in the process of development. Currently, the briquettes/ pellets are not 
consistently available throughout the year to meet the requirement of co-
cofiring in TPPs. At present, the estimated pellet manufacturing capacity in 
the country is only around 7,000 TPD, which falls short of the requirement of 
approximately 1 lakh TPD for co-firing. In the NCR region in particular, the 
pellet manufacturing capacity is approximately 2,000 TPD, whereas the 
requirement is of 5,000 TPD. In such a scenario, the Committee are of the 
view that the Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs)/co-operatives can be 
encouraged to setup briquette/pellet manufacturing units. Raw materials for 
briquette/pellet making are readily available with farmers and when a 
number of farmers will come together in the form of FPOs or cooperatives, 
they’ll have enough quantities to achieve scale and economy. Replication of 
few successful stories of profitable briquette/pellet manufacturing by 
FPOs/cooperatives will encourage more such organizations in this sector. 
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that to develop the market for 
briquette/pellet manufacturing in the country and to achieve the target of 5% 
blend of Biomass pellets in thermal power plants, it is important that the 
procedure for setting up such units is simplified like that of Haryana which 
has waived off the requirement of land use norms for setting up CBG plants. 
Apart from simplified procedures, the early resolution of administrative and 
regulatory issues also needs to be ensured.’’ 
 
Reply of the Government 
Biomass Division MNRE: At present, no scheme regarding Biomass Supply 
Chain is under consideration in the Ministry. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

 
52 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Apart from inadequate pellet manufacturing units, the Committee have also 
noted that the Biomass resources are being diverted to other sectors where 
the rates are more attractive and the demand is higher. This is presenting a 
major challenge in the development of a steady and reliable supply chain 
market of Biomass-based briquettes/pellets for co-firing in thermal power 
plants (TPPs). The Committee are of the opinion that to attract 
briquette/pellet manufacturing units to the power sector, it is important to 
discover the appropriate rate of different categories of briquettes/pellets and 
offer various incentives to the manufacturing units viz. assured takeoff, 
timely payment, providing land for unit setup, assisting in infrastructure 
development etc. There is also an urgent need on the part of the Government 
to develop requisite number of quality collection/aggregation/storage 
facilities for storing briquettes/pellets as well as the raw materials for 
meeting present as well as future use. The Committee appreciate the Ministry 
of Power for issuing Revised Model Long term contract for Biomass supply on 
06.01.2023 under which the minimum tenure of model contract shall be 
seven years. This is expected to help in developing Biomass supply chain 
infrastructure. The Committee also support the setting up of Custom Hiring 
Centers (CHCs) for agriculture machineries which help farmers in custom 
hiring of machines and equipments for collection and aggregation of agro-
residue. The Committee expect such centers to be further developed in large 
numbers. The Committee also feel that setting up of biomass trading 
platforms can help in ensuring availability and accessibility of raw materials 
as well as finished products on a real time basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Oil:  Presently biomass / agricultural residue like paddy straw, etc. has 
multiple uses in Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) Plants, 2G Ethanol Plants, power 
plants for co-firing with coal, briquettes, etc.  As multiple biomass-based 
plants come up in a certain area, there is competition and increase of biomass 
supply rates making the biofuels projects unviable. It is accordingly proposed 
to create biomass clusters by all states to ensure that biomass from the 
cluster formed with group of villages selected based on biomass availability 
and the capacity of the project is assigned to a certain Plant to ensure long 
term biomass supply at viable rates. This has already been implemented in 
Haryana for Indian Oil’s 2G Ethanol Plant. 
• Additional 30% subsidy (in line with S-MAM provisions) may be 
provided by State Governments to make the procurement of the equipment 

 
53 
by Farmer Producer Organization (FPO) more viable. The same is being 
provided under Uttar Pradesh Bio-Energy Policy. In addition, State 
Governments should ensure placement of adequate number of agriculture 
residue collection and aggregation equipment near the agriculture residue 
based CBG Plant locations as per the Plant capacity. 
• There are already existing private players who have set up biomass 
trading platforms.  
(ii) Biomass Division MNRE:   At present, no scheme regarding Biomass 
Supply Chain is under consideration in the Ministry. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 21/02/2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
  

 
54 
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
11 March, 2025 
Phalguna 20, 1946 (Saka) 
Shrirang Appa Barne 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
 
 
  

 
55 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
MINUTES OF TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2024-25) HELD ON 11TH MARCH, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-3, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
 MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne -  Chairperson 
 
2.  Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
4.  Captain Brijesh Chowta 
5.  Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
6.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
7.  Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
8.  Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
9.  Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
10.  Shri Dulu Mahato 
11.  Shri Ramprit Mandal 
12.  Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
13.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
14.  Smt. Shambhavi 
15.  Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
16.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
17.  Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
 
18.  Shri Gulam Ali 
19.  Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
20.  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
21.  Shri R. Dharmar  
22.  Shri N.R. Elango 
23.  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
24.  Shri Harsh Mahajan 
25.  Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

 
56 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee 
then took up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on Action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 41st Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy-Recovery of 
Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues 
and Role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management’. 
(ii) Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Power. 
(iii) Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee 
adopted the abovementioned three draft Reports without any amendment/ 
modification. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses of the 
Parliament during the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
57 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Energy 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
11 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
 
Total:  9 
Percentage:  
 
81.82 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. 4 and 5 
 
Total:  2 
Percentage: 
 
18.18 % 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 00 
 
 
 
 