STANDING COMMITTEE  ON
ENERGY
(2022-2023)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF NEW  AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
[Action-taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘Tidal Power Development in India’]
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
July, 2023/Ashadha,1945  (Safka)
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale at the Sales Counter,
Reception,  Parliament  House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."
36

 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2022-2023) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations  
contained in Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject  
‘Tidal Power Development in India’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.07.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023/Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 


(2) 
 
COE No. 365 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in  
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 

(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) ……………………………………………………. iii 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………………………… v 
CHAPTER I Report. ……………………………………………………………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government ………………………………………………………………………… 
4 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies ……………………………………… 
8 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ………………………………………………………………….………… 
9 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited ……………………………………………………… 
10 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 20th July, 2023 ………………… 11 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Energy …………...………….. 
13 
         

(ii) 
 
 
 

(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY(2022-23) 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary* 
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
16. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
19. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri P. Velusamy 

(iv) 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Gulam Ali# 
23. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
24. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
26. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
28. Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
29. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan – Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora – Additional Director 
4. Ms. Madhumita – Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th November, 2022. 
# Nominated as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 16th December, 2022. 
 
 

(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Sixth Report on action-taken 
by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in Twentieth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Tidal Power Development in India’. 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2021 and was 
laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the Government to the 
observations/recommendations contained in this Report were received on 22nd September, 2022. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
20th July, 2023. 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL, 
20 July, 2023 Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy. 
 
  

(vi) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- taken by the Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy on observations/recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2020-21) on the subject ‘Tidal Power 
Development in India’. 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2021 and was laid 
on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 5 Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 
Total - 5 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial No.: Nil 
Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Serial No.: Nil 
Total– 00 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No.: Nil 
Total- 00 
Chapter-V 
4. The Committee further desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to 
the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 

2 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on some of their 
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that there are three main types of Ocean Energy; Wave, Tidal and 
Ocean-Thermal. The estimated potential of tidal and wave power in India are 12,455 MW 
and 41,300 MW respectively, while the potential for Ocean-Thermal has not been 
estimated till date. The Ministry has submitted that the estimated potential of tidal and 
wave power is purely theoretical and does not necessarily constitute practically exploitable 
potential. The Committee feel that as a first step, there is a need to find out the actual 
exploitable potential of tidal, wave and ocean-thermal power in the Country. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should get the potential of tidal, wave 
and ocean-thermal power reassessed in order to explore the practically exploitable 
potential.” 
7. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has stated as under: 
“Ministry of Earth Science is requested vide O.M No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated 
21/09/2022 to get the potential of tidal and ocean thermal power assessed in order to 
explore the practically exploitable potential.” 
8. In response to the Committee’s recommendation that the Ministry should get the 
potential of tidal, wave and ocean-thermal power reassessed in order to explore the 
practically exploitable potential, the Ministry in its action-taken reply has only stated that it 
has requested the Ministry of Earth Sciences on 21st September, 2022 to get the potential 
of tidal and ocean thermal power assessed in order to explore the practically exploitable 
potential. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences and the outcome thereof as well as the results of the reassessment process 
in order to explore the practically exploitable potential of all types of ocean energy. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that India has been playing an active role in harnessing of 
Renewable Energy in order to mitigate climate change as the Government has set a target 
to install 175 Giga-watts of Renewable power by the year 2022. However, tidal power has 
not been included in this target despite the fact that our Country is surrounded by sea on 
three sides and has a long coastline of around 7500 Kilometers with the estuaries and 
gulfs where tidal power can be harnessed. However, the Ministry has submitted that all 
sources of renewable energy, including tidal power will be considered in the deployment 
targets for 2030. Further, the Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in India – Survey on potential 
and proposition of Roadmap’ conducted by Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai in 
association with Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited (CRISIL) and funded 

3 
by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA), has suggested a 
roadmap with a goal to set up commercial tidal power projects by the year 2030. Also on 
August 22, 2019, the Ministry issued a notification clarifying that energy produced using 
various forms of ocean energy such as tidal, wave, ocean thermal energy conversion, etc. 
shall be eligible for meeting non-solar Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO). As per the 
Ministry, this notification was in response to inquiries from industry and the inclusion was 
made to provide scope for tidal power projects. The Committee therefore desire that the 
Ministry must actively follow-upon this notification through appropriate incentives so that 
the Country can have commercial tidal power projects by the year 2030. While the 
decision to make tidal power eligible for meeting Renewable Purchase Obligations is 
noteworthy, the Ministry cannot rest at that and it needs to actively participate in the 
process. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should set up one 
demonstration/pilot tidal power project in the Country at the most favourable cost-effective 
location like Gulf of Kutch considering that the capital cost of a tidal power project is site 
specific. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the follow-up action taken by 
the Government on the findings of the Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in India – Survey on 
potential and proposition of Roadmap.” 
10. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has stated as under: 
“Ministry has issued call for proposal under the Renewable Energy Research and 
Technology Development Programme (RE-RTD) including Tidal Power. The R&D/Pilot 
projects proposals received in the area of Tidal Power will be examined as per the 
notification and relevant proposals will be considered.” 
11. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should set up one 
demonstration/pilot tidal power project in the country and the Ministry was also specifically 
asked to apprise about the follow-up action taken by the Government on the findings of the 
Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in India – Survey on potential and proposition of Roadmap’. 
The Ministry in its action-taken reply has indicated that a call for proposal has been issued 
under the Renewable Energy Research and Technology Development Programme(RE-RTD) 
including Tidal Power, and the R&D/Pilot projects proposals received in the area of Tidal 
Power will be examined as per the notification and relevant proposals will be considered. 
The Committee feel that merely issuing a call for proposals is not enough and the Ministry 
should actively engage in preparing the groundwork for a demonstration/pilot tidal power 
project so that the feasibility of commercial generation of tidal power can be explored. 
Nonetheless, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the area of 
Tidal power under RE-RTD. The Committee would also like to point out that the Ministry has 
not furnished anything about the action-taken by the Government on the findings of the 
Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in India – Survey on potential and proposition of Roadmap’. 
The same may be submitted to the Committee without any further delay. The Committee 
may also be apprised about the proposed share of tidal power in the renewable energy 
targets for 2030. 

4 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that there are three main types of Ocean Energy; Wave, Tidal and 
Ocean-Thermal. The estimated potential of tidal and wave power in India are 12,455 MW and 
41,300 MW respectively, while the potential for Ocean-Thermal has not been estimated till date. 
The Ministry has submitted that the estimated potential of tidal and wave power is purely 
theoretical and does not necessarily constitute practically exploitable potential. The Committee feel 
that as a first step, there is a need to find out the actual exploitable potential of tidal, wave and 
ocean-thermal power in the Country. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry 
should get the potential of tidal, wave and ocean-thermal power reassessed in order to explore the 
practically exploitable potential. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Earth Science is requested vide O.M No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated 
21/09/2022 to get the potential of tidal and ocean thermal power assessed in order to explore the 
practically exploitable potential. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated: 22/09/2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee note that two tidal power projects of 3.75 MW and 50 MW installed capacity 
were initiated in the years 2007 and 2011 in the states of West Bengal and Gujarat respectively. 
However, both these projects were dropped because of exorbitant cost. In the case of 3.75 MW 
Durgaduani Tidal Power Project in West Bengal, the project cost was placed at Rs. 238 crore i.e. 
Rs. 63.50 crore per MW and in the case of 50 MW Tidal Power Project at the Gulf of Kutch in 
Gujarat, the estimated cost of the project was placed at Rs. 750 crore i.e. Rs. 15 crore per MW. 
The Ministry has also submitted that the normative cost of installation of 1 MW Solar, Wind, 
Biomass, Hydro and Thermal Power Plant is Rs. 3.5 crore, Rs. 5.5 crore, Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 10-15 
crore, Rs. 5 crore respectively. The Committee feel that comparing the project cost of Tidal Power 
that was arrived at around ten years back with the present project cost of Solar, Wind, Hydro, etc. 
is not justified. The cost of tidal power may have come down in the last ten years as is the case 
with other Renewable Energy like Solar Power. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 

5 
Ministry needs to reassess the cost of Tidal Power in India in order to consider its economic 
viability and benefits in a longer time span. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has issued call for proposal under the Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development Programme (RE-RTD) including Tidal Power. The R&D/Pilot projects proposals 
received in the area of Tidal Power will be examined as per the notification and relevant proposals 
will be considered to assess the cost of Tidal Power in India including their economic viability and 
benefits in a longer time span. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated: 22/09/2022] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that India has been playing an active role in harnessing of Renewable 
Energy in order to mitigate climate change as the Government has set a target to install 175 Giga-
watts of Renewable power by the year 2022. However, tidal power has not been included in this 
target despite the fact that our Country is surrounded by sea on three sides and has a long 
coastline of around 7500 Kilometers with the estuaries and gulfs where tidal power can be 
harnessed. However, the Ministry has submitted that all sources of renewable energy, including 
tidal power will be considered in the deployment targets for 2030. Further, the Study ‘Tidal and 
Wave Energy in India – Survey on potential and proposition of Roadmap’ conducted by Indian 
Institute of Technology, Chennai in association with Credit Rating Information Services of India 
Limited (CRISIL) and funded by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA), 
has suggested a roadmap with a goal to set up commercial tidal power projects by the year 2030. 
Also on August 22, 2019, the Ministry issued a notification clarifying that energy produced using 
various forms of ocean energy such as tidal, wave, ocean thermal energy conversion, etc. shall be 
eligible for meeting non-solar Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO). As per the Ministry, this 
notification was in response to inquiries from industry and the inclusion was made to provide 
scope for tidal power projects. The Committee therefore desire that the Ministry must actively 
follow-upon this notification through appropriate incentives so that the Country can have 
commercial tidal power projects by the year 2030. While the decision to make tidal power eligible 
for meeting Renewable Purchase Obligations is noteworthy, the Ministry cannot rest at that and it 
needs to actively participate in the process. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should set up one demonstration/pilot tidal power project in the Country at the most 
favourable cost-effective location like Gulf of Kutch considering that the capital cost of a tidal 
power project is site specific. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the follow-up 
action taken by the Government on the findings of the Study ‘Tidal and Wave Energy in India – 
Survey on potential and proposition of Roadmap. 
 

6 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has issued call for proposal under the Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development Programme (RE-RTD) including Tidal Power. The R&D/Pilot projects proposals 
received in the area of Tidal Power will be examined as per the notification and relevant proposals 
will be considered. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated: 22/09/2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee also note that no study has been conducted for assessment of 
environmental and ecological impact of a tidal power plant. The Ministry has submitted in this 
regard that a barrage across an estuary may environmentally impact a very wide area ranging for 
many miles upstream and downstream. The Committee are of the opinion that while seeking to 
harness the potential of tidal power, there is also a need to pragmatically assess environmental 
impact and ecological sustainability of tidal power plants. The Ministry may also evaluate global 
experience in this regard; particularly the two projects installed in France and South Korea, which 
at present constitute 90 % of the installed capacity of tidal power in the World. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) will be requested to 
conduct environmental impact and ecological sustainability study of the approved R&D 
demonstration/pilot projects in tidal power. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated: 22/09/2022] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that the Ministry has not spent any funds on development of tidal power 
so far. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry, the Committee 
had observed that the funds allocated to the Ministry for R&D in Renewable Energy Sector as a 
whole had been drastically reduced at the time of Revised Estimates and the Ministry could not 
utilize even the reduced amount since at least 2017-18. The Committee, therefore recommend 
that the Ministry instead of curtailing R&D, should enhance its support significantly, particularly for 
un-harnessed sources like tidal power, which can go a long way in realizing the vast potential of 
Renewable Energy in the Country. 
 

7 
 
Reply of the Government 
The RE-RTD Programme has been structured to support research, design, technology 
development and demonstration for renewable energy sector including Ocean/Tidal Energy 
research projects. The received proposals will be supported as per the recommendation of the 
R&D Project Appraisal Committee (RDPAC). 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 151/13/2021-MNRE-GT, Dated: 22/09/2022] 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL, 
20 July, 2023 Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Energy. 
  

11 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2022-23) HELD ON 20th JULY, 2023 IN MAIN COMMITTEE  
ROOM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hours. 
PRESENT 
Shri Jagdambika Pal – Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
4. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
5. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
6. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
7. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
8. Shri Jai Prakash 
9. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
12. Shri P. Velusamy 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Shri Gulam Ali 
14. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
15. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
16. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
17. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora – Additional Director 

12 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption 
the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in 20th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Tidal Power Development 
in India’. 
(ii) Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in 21st Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Financial Constraints in 
Renewable Energy Sector’. 
(iii) Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/ recommendations 
contained in 27th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Evaluation of Wind 
Energy in India’. 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the 
aforementioned draft Reports without any amendment/modification. The Committee also 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-mentioned Reports and present the same to both 
Houses of the Parliament during the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

13 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION-TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
TWENTIETH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(i) Total number of Recommendations : 5  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 
 
Total:  5 
Percentage: 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
Sl. No.: Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 00 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. No.: Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 00 
 
 