 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
 
BIO-ENERGY AND WASTE TO ENERGY – RECOVERY OF ENERGY 
FROM URBAN, INDUSTRIAL AND AGRICULTURAL 
WASTES/RESIDUES AND ROLE OF URBAN LOCAL BODIES IN 
ENERGY MANAGEMENT 
  
  
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2023-24) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
41 

  2  
  
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY  
 
 
Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy 
from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues 
and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023 
 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 

  3  
  
 
 
 
COE NO. 375  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs...................  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2023 by LokSabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by__________. 
 
 

  4  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
CONTENTS  
 Page 
No. 
Composition  of the Committee (2023-24) 5 
Introduction  6 
PART –I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
Chapter I Introductory  7 
Chapter II Energy from Waste  14 
Chapter III Energy from Biomass  24 
Chapter IV Recovery of Energy in the form of Biogas  37 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
42 
ANNEXURES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 19th  May, 2023 53 
II Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 1st June, 2023  57 
III Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on  15th June, 2023  62 
IV Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on  14th December, 
2023 
66 

  5  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2023 -24) 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal -  Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
18. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
20. Shri P. Velusamy 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
24. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
26. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
28. Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
29. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Additional Director 
3. Ms. Madhumita Assistant Committee Officer  
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13 th 
December, 2023 consequent upon his resignation from membership of the Lok Sabha. 
 
 

  6  
  
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Forty-First Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste 
to Energy – Recovery of Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural 
Wastes/Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management ’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.  
2. The Committee held a briefing on the subject with representatives of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, NITI Aayog and Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs on 19th May, 2023. The Committee again held discussion on 
the subject with representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare on 1st June, 2023. 
3. The Committee took e vidence of representatives of the Ministry of 
Power, Central Electricity Authority , NTPC Limited, Damodar Valley 
Corporation and NLC India Limited on 15 th June, 2023. The Committee wish to 
express their thanks to all the representatives of the above mentioned 
Ministries and Organizations for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing the desired information in connection with the issues relating to 
the subject. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 14th December, 2023. 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok  Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
6. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -
II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
December 14, 2023 
Agrahayana 23, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
Jagdambika Pal 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 

  7  
  
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 ‘Bio-Energy’ or energy from biomass has always been an important 
energy source for the country considering the benefits it offers. It is 
renewable, widely available, carbon -neutral and has the potential to provide 
significant employment in the rural areas.  Biomass is also ca pable of 
providing firm energy.  About 32% of the total primary energy use in the 
country is still derived from biomass and more than 70% of the country’s 
population depends on it for its energy needs. According to International 
Energy Agency (IEA) Bioenergy Report 2022, Modern bioenergy is the largest 
source of renewable energy globally, accounting for 55% of renewable energy 
and over 6% of the global energy supply. 
 
1.2 ‘Waste to Energy’  refers to the  recovery of energy in the form of 
Biogas/BioCNG/Electricity from agricultural, industrial and urban wastes of 
renewable nature such as municipal solid wastes, vegetable and other market 
wastes, slaughterhouse waste, agricultural residues and industrial/S olid 
Treatment Plant (STP)  wastes & effluents.  In recent years, technologies have 
been developed that not only help in generating substantial quantity of 
decentralized energy but also in reducing the quantity of waste for its safe 
disposal.  
 
1.3 There are d ifferent types of waste which are generated from our daily 
or industrial activities such as organic waste, e -waste, hazardous waste, inert 

  8  
  
waste etc.  However, o rganic waste has significant portion in overall waste 
generation in industrial/urban/ agricultur al sector and therefore , it can be 
used for energy generation.  The organic f raction of waste can be further 
classified as non-biodegradable and biodegradable organic waste .  
(i) Biodegradable waste  consists of organics that can be utilized for food 
by natu rally occurring micro - organisms within a reasonable length of time. 
The biodegradable organic comprise of agro residue, food processing 
rejections, municipal solid waste (food waste, leaves from garden waste, 
paper, cloths/ rags etc.), waste from poultry farms, cattle farm slaughter 
houses, dairy, sugar, distillery, paper, oil extraction plant, starch processing 
and leather industries. 
(ii) Non-Biodegradable organic materials  are organics resistant to 
biological degradation or have a very low degradation r ate. This primarily 
includes woody plants, Cardboard, cartons, containers, wrappings, pouches, 
discarded clothing, wooden furniture, agricultural dry waste, bagasse, rice 
husk etc. 
 
1.4 In 2022, at CoP-26 in Glasgow, India has made a commitment to increase 
its non-fossil fuel based installed energy capacity to 500 GW by 2030.  The 
projected installed capacity of biomass energy is 14.5 GW by the year 2030.  
The total estimated energy genera tion potential from urban and industrial 
organic waste in India is approximately 5.69 GW. The current capacity of Bio -
Energy and Waste to Energy in the Country is given in the table below:  
 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE) 
Programme/Scheme wise Cumulative Physical Progress as on 31.10.2023 
Installed RE Capacity (CAPACITIES IN MW) 
S. No. Sector Cumulative Achievements 

  9  
  
1 Biomass (Bagasse) Cogeneration 9,433.56 
2 Biomass(non bagasse)Cogeneration 828.25 
3 Waste to Power 249.74 
4 Waste to Energy (off-grid) 323.72 
Total 10,835.19 
  
1.5 Since 1980s, the Bio -Energy sector has been promoted by providing 
financial assistance through targeted schemes. Separate Central Sector 
Schemes were implemented by MNRE between 2018 to 2021. Under these 
schemes, Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to project developers were 
provided for setting up of projects for generation of Biogas/Producer 
gas/BioCNG/Power. The details of schemes along with their achievements has 
been provided in the table below: 
 
Sector Cumulative Achievement till 
31.03.2021 
Waste to Energy Projects  
(Biogas, BioCNG& Power) 
394 MWeq (Mega Watt equivalent) 
(228 nos. of projects) 
Biomass Power/Cogen Projects 10,145 MW (Mega Watt) 
Small &Medium Biogas Plants 50.8 Lakhs 
 
1.6 To support a greater number of projects and promote ease of doing 
business in the Country, MNRE expanded the Bio -Energy programme by 
bringing all three separate schemes under one umbrella programme viz. 
National Bioenergy Programme (NBP). The Programme has a budget outlay 
of Rs. 1,715 crore and is to be implemented in two phases. In Phase -I of the 
programme, a total outlay of Rs. 858 crore have been sanctioned which also 

  10  
  
includes the committed liabilities of the sanctions issued under the various 
schemes of the programme  upto 31st March 2021. The period of Phase -I is 
from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26. Component wise details of capacity to be added 
along with expected investment and budget outlay is given in the table below:  
 
Sector Envisaged capacity to 
be added 
Expected 
Investment 
(Rs in 
crore) 
Budget 
outlay of 
Phase-I 
(Rs in 
crore) 
Waste to Energy 
Programme 
Compressed Bio Gas 
(CBG) Projects: 200 no. 
6,000 600 
Biomass Programme Pellet/briquettes 
manufacturing plants: 
800 no . (2400tonnes per 
hour)  
Biomass cogen projects: 
40 no (200MW) 
4,000 158 
Biogas Programme 
 
Small & Medium - 1.66 
Lakh no projects 
650 100 
  Rs. 10,650 
crore 
Rs. 858 
crore 
 
1.7 The main features of NBP are as follows: 
(i) Online submission of applications  
(ii) Minimal documentation  
(iii) Self-funded projects eligible for CFA. 
(iv) Advance CFA for bank financed BioCNG projects under SATAT  

  11  
  
(v) 20% higher CFA for special category states (NE Region, Sikkim, 
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and UTs of Jammu & Kashmir, 
Ladakh, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Isla nd) and 
Gaushalas. 
(vi) Registered corporate entities also allowed for scheme 
implementation under Biogas programme in consultation with 
SPIAs 
(vii) CFA for small and medium size biogas plants increased.  
(viii) MSW to Power projects are now supported by MoHUA.  
 
1.8 Convergence of MNRE’s Bioenergy Programme   
The BioCNG component of the programme supports the SATAT (Sustainable 
Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation) initiative of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (M oPNG) and GOBARdhan (Galvanizing Organ ic 
Bio-Agro Resources Dhan) scheme of Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. NBP also finds convergence with Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0  of MoHUA and National Mission on Co -firing of 
Biomass in Thermal Power Plants (SAMA RTH Mission) of the Ministry of 
Power. Details of these schemes are given below: 
 
(i) Gobar-Dhan component of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen)  
under Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) provides 
financial assistance of up to Rs.  50 lakh per di strict for setting up biogas 
plants. Cluster and community level biogas plants can be constructed at 
village/block/district levels (being implemented in modified form since 
2020).  
 
(ii) SATAT of MoPNG has the objective of establishing 5000 C ompressed 
Bio Gas (CBG)  plants across the country with an estimated production of 15 

  12  
  
MMT CBG per annum by 2023. Under the Scheme, the Oil and Gas Marketing 
Companies will have a long -term assured purchase prices agreement with the 
CBG plants (being implemented since 2018). 
 
(iii) Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban)  of MoHUA, funds are provided 
for various activities of Solid W aste Management including setting up o f waste 
biomethanation plants and W aste to Electricity plants. Under SBM -U 2.0, 
projects under PPP mode are encouraged. 
  
(iv) The Biomass Programme promotes manufacturing of pellets and 
briquettes for use in power generation. This component of the programme 
supports the SAMARTH Mission of the Ministry of Power. 
 
1.9 When asked about the estimated time of complet ion, money spent so far 
and the details of investments made upto this point under Phase -I of NBP, the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in a written reply stated that: 
“Phase-I of the National Bioenergy  Programme is scheduled to be  completed 
by March 31, 2026. In terms of expenditure under Phase -I, Rs 72 crore has 
been spent thus far from committed liabilities. However, expenditure 
pertaining to new proposals received under the NBP have not been made yet 
as it will be processed after the receipt of pro posals for disbursement of 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA). Under Phase -I, a total investment of 
approximately Rs . 2,700 crore has been made towards projects that have  
received approval or ar e currently under the process of approval by the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.”  
 
1.10 The details of different components of NBP as well as the measures of 
different Ministries have been dealt with in subsequent chapters  viz. 

  13  
  
(i)    Energy from Waste  
(ii) Energy from Biomass 
(iii) Recovery of Energy in the form of Biogas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  14  
  
CHAPTER II 
ENERGY FROM WASTE  
 
2.1 The objective of MNRE’s Waste to Energy programme is to support the 
setting up of Waste to Energy projects for generation of 
Biogas/BioCNG/Power/Producer or Syngas from urban, industrial and 
agricultural wastes/residues. 
 
2.2 As per the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), the waste 
generation in urban areas of the country is currently around 1.5 lakh tonnes 
per day (TPD), which is expected to rise to 4.5 lakh TPD by 2031 and by 2050, 
it will be close to 12 lakh TPD. 
 
2.3 The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016 notified by the 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change ( MoEFCC) clearly define 
the rules fo r different statutory bodies in carrying out the municipal solid 
waste management (MSWM) and describe clearly the methods to be followed. 
The principles on which MSWM stands are: 
(i) segregation of waste at source i.e. , at the waste generation 
stage itself int o two basic streams of wet (Biodegradable) 
waste  and dry (Non-Biodegradable) waste, and, 
(ii) door to door collection of waste.  
Without these two principles, the MSWM is not successful.  
 
2.4 The normative characterisation of MSW is as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Organic/Compostable 
 Recyclables/Resource 
recoverable 
 Non-Recylable/Combustible 
waste (RDF) 
 Construction & 
Demolition/Usable construction 
material  

  15  
  
2.5 Regarding the processing of MSW, several methods and technologies 
have been used in the country such as: 
(i) Composting 
(ii) Biomethanation 
(iii) Recycling of dry waste and  
(iv) Incineration of non- recyclable combustible dry waste. 
To support these  infrastructure, Government has started Swachh Bharat 
Mission (SBM) Urban (U). 
 
2.6 Intervention of SBM (U) 
The Swachh Bharat Mission - Urban was launched on 1st October 2014 as a 
national flagship programme aimed at eradicating open defecation and 
establishing efficient solid waste management practices. The continued 
mission i.e. Swachh Bharat Mission Urban 2.0 was launched on 1st October 
2021 with the vision of realizing Garbage Free Cities by 2026. The key 
components of the Mission comprise of: 
(i) Sustainable Sanitation  
(ii) Sustainable Solid Waste Management  
(iii) Used Water Management  
(iv) Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
(v) Capacity Building.  
Under SBM  (U) 2.0, Additional Central Assistance (ACA) is being provided to 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). The ACA varies between  different States & ULBs 
depending upon their characteristics as follows:  
 
 
 

  16  
  
S. No. Type of State/UT Central 
Share 
per 
Unit(%) 
Minimum 
State/UT 
share per 
unit (%) 
Balance (from 
15th Finance 
Commission 
funds, ULB 
share, p rivate 
sector share) 
1. UTs without Legislature 100 0 - 
2. UTs with legislature 80 20 - 
3. North East and Hilly 
States 
90 10 - 
4. Other States :ULBs with 
population of above 10 
lakh 
25 16 59 
5. Other States :ULBs with 
population between 1 - 
10 lakh(both included 
33 22 45 
6. Other States :ULBs with 
population of less than 1 
lakh 
50 
 
33 17 

  17  
  
2.7 Waste processing infrastructure under SBM (U):  
Details of existing & proposed waste processing facilities under SBM  (U) are 
as below: 
Existing Facilities 
Proposed under 
SBM (U) 2.0 
Type of Project 
Designed Capacity 
(TPD) 
Designed Capacity 
(TPD) 
Waste to Compost 98,544 30,700 
Waste to Electricity 11,114 9,700 
Bio-methanation 3,135 15,200 
Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) 74,830 45,200 
Total 1,87,623 1,00,700 
It is seen from the above that two kinds of Waste to Energy infrastructure is 
proposed i.e., Bio-methanation plants, and Waste to Electricity  plants. 
 
(i) Bio-methanation plants  
This is for processing of the segregated wet waste fraction through the 
process of anaerobic digestion generating methane, carbon dioxide, water and 
traces of hydrogen sulphide. The process yields 50 -60% methane only, hence, 
there is need to remove carbon dioxide and H2S and enric h the biogas to 
confirm to IS:16087 with minimum 92% methane. This enriched biogas is a 
substitute to natural gas. The Bio-methanation process plants have been 
adopted in SBM 2.0 proposals for cities or cluster of cities with total 
population of minimum 3 lakhs from which minimum of 50 -60 TPD 
segregated wet waste can be processed. The compressed biogas yield is about 

  18  
  
3%. CFA of Rs. 18 c rore/100 TPD is being provided under SBM (U) 2.0 for Bio - 
methanation. 
 
(ii) Waste to Electricity plants 
These plants typic ally process the dry fraction of MSW through incineration.   
Sometimes, pre-processed mixed waste is also incinerated. In the se plants, the 
entire waste gets burned to generate heat energy. As per SWM rules , only the 
non-recyclable combustible waste can be  used in these plants. These plant s 
generate power at the rate of 1MWe per 20 -30 TPD dry waste ( i.e., about 100 
TPD mixed waste).  After the incineration of waste, the process is typically the 
same as in the thermal power plants. The major difference is th at MSW fuel 
characteristics are variant throughout the operation unlike that of coal in a 
thermal power plant.  
 
Waste to Electricity plants are fully industrial kind of units which reduce the 
volume of waste and leave about 20 -25% bottom ash at much less volume 
which can be landfilled in a sanitary landfill (SLF).  
 
Government has classified the power generated from W aste to Electricity 
plants as renewable power and the DISCOMs are obligated to evacuate entire 
such power under the tariff policy. CFA of Rs. 18 crore/MWe is being provided 
under SBM (U) 2.0 for this plant. Waste to Electricity infrastructure proposed 
under SWM (U) 2.0 is 9,700 TPD. 
 
2.8 Some of the initiatives under SBM in setting up Waste to Energy plants 
(Bio- methanation & Electricity) are: 
(i) Under SBM-Urban 2.0, impetus is on creating sustainable infrastructure 
for efficient and scientific Waste to Electricity and Bio -methanation 
projects.  

  19  
  
(ii) Engineers India Limited (EIL)  has been engaged for providing 
Technical and Transaction Advisory support to States/cities. 
Shortlisted States/ULBs can avail these services at no -cost basis. 
(iii) With EIL the Ministry is in process to finalize around 25 -30 million 
plus population and other cities having potential for developing Waste 
to Electricity and Bio-methanation projects. 
(iv) Assisting State Governments and Cities for planning and setting up 
integrated waste to energy plants to ensure sustained supply of waste.  
(v) The Ministry is providing Model request for proposals ( RFPs) and 
Concession Agreement for setting up Waste to Energy plants. 
(vi) Determination/revision of unified tariff for Waste to Electricity is 
proposed. 
(vii) Development of different financial models for sustainability of large 
SWM pro jects/Waste to Electricity and enabling finances from 
Multilateral agencies. 
(viii) Non-funded guarantee instrument through Urban Infrastructure 
Development Fund ( UIDF) for waste processing/waste to energy units 
to increase credit worthiness. 
(ix) 5% Compressed Bio -Gas (CBG) blending mandate for all companies 
marketing natural gas. 
(x) Exemption of excise duty on amount of GST paid blended with CNG.  
(xi) Budget Announcements enabling development of waste to energy 
projects. As per para no. 56 “Enhanced focus will be provided for 100% 
scientific management of dry and wet waste in all the cities town”  
 
2.9 When asked about the reason for only 10 States having Waste to 
Electricity plants that are operational, planned or under -construction and the 

  20  
  
ways in which the remaining States can be persuaded to follow suit, MoHUA 
in a written reply furnished the following: 
“Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) is heterogeneous in nature and has high 
moisture content. Segregation of waste and avoiding moisture is the key 
factor for ULBs to achieve before planning Waste to Electricity plants. 
Further, Waste to Energy plants need substantial quantum of waste and 
guaranteed supply of the same on daily basis. Only large cities more than, say 
20 lakh population having sound door to door collection and transportation 
system are suitable to plan Waste to Electricity plants.  
 
The CERC in 2015-16 had determined Power Tariff from Waste to Electricity 
as Rs. 7.04/KWH for mass incineration plants and 7.90/ kilowatt hour (KWH) 
for Refused Derived Fuel ( RDF) based plants. This tariff is higher than that of 
other renewable energy such as Solar.  Hence, DISCOMs have concerns to 
execute PPAs with these plants. The generation capacity is also small.  
 
The W aste to Electricity Plants have to be treated essentially as waste 
processing plants because of their proven capacity to guzzle waste. Hence, 
the Ministry is supporting and guiding States/ UTs to set up these Plants in 
large cities. It has also made a M emorandum of Understanding (Mo U) with 
EIL for complete project development and Transaction Advisory Support in 
the W aste to Electricity sector withou t any cost to State/UTs/ULBs as an 
incentive to Waste to Electricity proposals.” 
 
2.10 When the issues of environmental concerns, noise, odor and safety 
concerns of locals residing beside Waste to Electricity plants and their 
agitation to the setting up or  operation of such plants was raised and the 
ways in which these issues could be addressed, the experience regarding 

  21  
  
existing operational plants and the standards in other countries regarding 
bad odor was inquired, the MNRE in a written reply furnished to the 
Committee that:  
“The existing norms for setting up of Waste to Electricity Plants and their 
operations & maintenance are examined and consented to by 
CPCB/SPCB/PCCs including that for buffer spaces. The problem is the lack of 
segregation on the part of citizens. Segregation, if done properly at least as dry 
and wet waste - will minimize leachate generation and reduce odor issues 
thereby. 
 
In other countries, the population pressure around the Waste to Electricity 
Plants is far less that in India due to dense urban population. The Waste to 
Electricity plants in other countries are set up as fee -based industry hence 
located in industrial areas. However, Waste to Electricity Plants are capable of 
odour control. Buffer spacing norms implemented in other coun tries have 
been adapted in India as well.” 
 
2.11 Support provided by MNRE 
The Waste to Energy programme provides CFA to project developers and 
service charges to implementing/inspection agencies in respect of successful 
commissioning of Waste to Energy pla nts for generation of Biogas, Bio -
CNG/enriched Biogas/Compressed Biogas, Power/generation of producer or 
syngas. Details of the f inancial assistance available under the Programme on 
Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/ Residues for settin g 
up Waste to Energy plant is as follows: 
(i) Biogas generation: Rs 0.25 crore per 12,000cubic meter/day 
(ii) BioCNG generation: Upto Rs 4.0 crore per 4800 kg/day  
(iii) Power generation based on Biogas: Upto Rs 0.75 crore/MW  

  22  
  
(iv) Power based on bio & agro-industrial waste: Rs 0.4 crore/MW 
(v) Biomass Gasifier:  Upto Rs 1.5 crore per MW 
(vi) 20% higher CFA for special category states (NE Region, Sikkim, 
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Andaman & Nicobar Islands) and Gaushalas/Shelters. 
 
2.12 Recovering energy from waste - Initiatives by different 
organizations:   
(i) NTPC Limited 
(a) NTPC has revived the defunct Municipal Solid Waste Processing Plant  
of 600 TPD capacity at Karsada, Varanasi and has been operating the same 
since July 2 017. The waste received from the Varanasi  Nagar Nigam is  
processed daily. This plant played an important role  in making Varanasi  the 
'Best Ganga Town' in the Swachh Survekshan 2021. 
 
(b) Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) - Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) Enhanced  
Steam Gasification & Power :- Waste to Energy includes gasification of MSW -
RDF with producer gas  cleaning and generation of electricity in a suitable gas 
engine. The  purpose of Phase -I is to first achieve stable gasification, gas  
cleaning &  power generation and subsequently enhancing the percentage of 
hydrogen inproducer gas. A pilot project of 16 TPD RDF / 4OO kWe capacity  is 
commissioned on 15.08.2022 at NTPC Energy Technology Research Alliance 
(NETRA). 
 
(c) Waste to Products :- NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam Limited (NVVN) (a 
wholly owned subsidiary of NTPC)  is setting up a 600 TPD Waste to Charcoal 
project at Ramna, Varanasi  to process 600 TPD of  MSW into Charcoal. 

  23  
  
Performance Guarantee (PG) test for first reactor has been successfully 
completed and erection work of pre-processing facility is in progress. 
 
(ii) Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) 
(a) Conversion of food/bio -Waste to Energy :- DVC has signed an MoU with 
NIT Jamshedpur on 13.O8.2022 to execute  a pilot project on co nversion of  
food/bio-waste to energy at one of its  thermal power stations.  The project 
status is as below: 
 Sources of food/bio -waste and its quantification done at M ejia Thermal 
Power Station (MTPS), DVC (food waste-20kg/day approx.) 
 Design, Development & Engineering of a small -scale pilot project  model 
(15 kg capacity) is in progress at NIT-Jamshedpur. 
 A suitable site (Mega Mess) has been identified. The developed model  
will be placed nearer to the mess for study (by Aug.2023).  
 After feeding the input into  the digester model, the performance  study 
and its optimization will be carried out. 
 The Project completion timeline is February 2024.  
 Based on the results, a large -scale waste to energy digester system  
including design, engineering, erection & commissioni ng at MTPS,  DVC 
will be taken up for biogas production and its uses in the  canteen. 
 
(b) Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) to Energy at Asansol :- DVC is exploring a 
pilot project to convert the fresh municipal solid waste  generated in Asansol 
Municipal area into Torrefied charcoal / RDF for cofiring in their existing coal 
based thermal power  plants. The project is in the discussion stage with 
Asansol Municipal  Corporation. The present status of the project is that the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) has been prepar ed and submitted to Asansol  
Municipal Corporation on 05.06. 2023. 

  24  
  
CHAPTER III 
ENERGY FROM BIOMASS  
 
3.1 Every year about 22 million tonnes of rice straw is burnt in Punjab and  
Haryana. Since last few years, Delhi/NCR regions has been facing heavy  
pollution level and getting covered under the blanket of smog in the month of  
October-November after harvesting  season. Stubble burning in fields emits a 
large amount of ash/soot/unburnt carbon to the atmosphere which is the 
real cause  of air pollution and elevates  the Particulate Matter (PM)  2.5 and 
PM 10 level in the atmosphere. It  is learnt that farmers burn stubble as they 
find it the cheapest, quickest and  easiest means to prepare the land for the 
next crop because of the short time  available. Stubble burning i n fields also 
reduces soil fertility by killing the critical bacterial and fungal populations.  
 
3.2 Agro residue is an untapped resource that is available in huge quantity,  
estimated at  around 250 million  metric tonnes (M MT) annually. W hen agro 
residue-based fuel, in the form of pellets, is utilized in  coal-fired power 
plants, it burns completely in the power plant, and ash  emitted from its 
combustion gets absorbed in Electro Static Precipitator (ESP)  which prevents 
air pollution while generating power from it. 
 
3.3 Most power plants in India are running on coal. To reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions from its coal -based thermal power plants, the power plant 
intends to utilize agro residue-based pellets/torrefied pellets along with coal 
for power  generation through biomass co -firing which is a technology 
recognized by UNFCCC to mitigate carbon emission. 
 
3.4 Biomass co-firing  

  25  
  
A low-cost option for converting biomass efficiently and cleanly to electricity 
by adding biomass as a partial substitute fuel in high -efficiency coal fired  
boilers. 
 
3.5 Benefits of Biomass co-firing 
(i) Carbon neutral: Net Zero emissions: Enhancing climate 
(ii) Existing Infrastructure utilization: Capitalizing on the large 
investment and infrastructure associated with the existing coal-based 
power plants. 
(iii) Greenhouse Gas (GHG) reduction: Biomass co -firing is a suitable 
method to reduce GHG emission, because this process reduces net 
CO2, PM, SO2 and often NOX emissions, compared to coal combustion.  
(iv) Reduction in Coal Dependency: It reduces the over reliance on coal for 
power generation. 
(v) Supplement Renewable source: Many coal plants are aging and near 
replacement, cofiring with biomass could be an excellent survival 
strategy to bring down specific CO2 emissions of aging plants.  
(vi) Income generation: Revenue source for MSME entrepreneurs and 
Farmers. 
 
3.6 Benefits of Biomass co-firing for the stakeholders: 
GENCOs 
 
Pellet 
Manufacturers 
Farmers 
Handy solution for 
Green energy 
generation with 
Minimal Infrastructural 
changes. 
 
 New & lucrative  - 
Blue ocean Business 
strategy 
 
Additional income 
source for farmers 
through selling of 
Agro-residue. 
Less dependability on 
coal 
 
Government 
Financial assistance 
schemes for pellet 
plant set-up. 
Employment 
generation for 
Marginal farmers. 

  26  
  
Lesser Carbon Footprint 
 
Opportunity 
towards India’s 
Green energy 
Transition.  
 
 Improves soil 
health by saving 
from negative 
effects of stubble 
burning 
 
Considered under 
Renewable Purchase 
Obligation (RPO)  by 
MNRE 
Helps the farmers to 
clear the land for 
next crop at no cost. 
 
 
 
3.7 Current schemes/programmes 
The Ministry of Power is implementing a  National Mission on use of Biomass 
in coal  based thermal power plants known as SAMARTH (Sustainable 
Agrarian Mission on use of Agri Residue in Thermal Power Plant) 
Mission. Details of the Mission are as follows:  
 
(i) Under this  National Mission, a full time body namely Mission 
Directorate has been  constituted which is coordinating and monitoring the 
overall policy  implementation and the targets of the National Mission. The 
duration of the proposed National Mission would be a minimum 5 years.  
 
(ii) The mission aims at c onversion of Biomass to Power in an eco -friendly 
and cost effective manner with suitable market mechanism thereby mitigation 
of air quality deterioration.  As a result, the mission is expected to a ddress the 
issue of air pollution due to farm stubble burning  as well as r educe carbon 
footprints of thermal power generation. 
 

  27  
  
(iii) The objectives of the mission are as follows: 
(a) To expand Biomass co -firing across all thermal power plants (TPPs) in 
the country and to have a larger share of carbon neutral power 
generation from the TPPs. 
(b) To take up R&D activity to handle the biomass pellets with higher 
amount of silica & alkali. 
(c)To facilitate in overcoming the constraints  in supply chain of Biomass 
pellets and agro- residue and its transportation upto the power plants.  
(d) To resolve regulatory issues in Biomass co-firing. 
 
3.8 The Biomass programme of MNRE aims at supporting the setting up of 
Biomass Briquette/Pellet manufacturing plants and to support Biomass (non -
bagasse) based cogeneration projects in i ndustries in the country. The 
broader objectives of the scheme are to reduce stubble burning by utilizing 
surplus agricultural residue, to provide additional source of income to farmers 
through sale of surplus agro residue and to enable better environmental 
practices and reduce pollution.  For achieving these objectives, the MNRE 
provides CFA to project developers and service char ges to implementing 
agency and inspection agencies in resp ect of setting up of Briquette/ Pellet 
manufacturing plants and Biomass (non - bagasse) cogeneration projects in 
industries. 
 
3.9 Enabling Policies 
 (i) The revised policy of the Ministry of Power issued on 08.10.2021 on 
Biomass utilization for power generation through co -firing in coal based 
power plants states the following: 

  28  
  
(a) mandatory use of 5% blend of biomass pellets made, primarily, of agro 
residue along with coal with effect from one year of the date of issue of 
this policy.  
(b) this obligation shall increase to 7% with effect from two years after 
the date of issue of above policy and thereafter. 
(c)The policy shall be in force for 25 years or till the useful life of TPPs, 
whichever is earlier. 
(d) The increase in cost due to co -firing of biomass pellets shall be pass ed 
through in Energy Charge rate (Projects under Sec 62, E lectricity 
Amendment (E A) 2003) or can be claimed under Change in law 
provisions (Projects under Sec 63, EA 2003).  
(e) Additional Impact on ECR shall not be considered in deciding Merit 
Order Dispatch (MOD) of the power plant.  
(f) Addendum to Revised Policy for Biomass was  issued on 03.05.2023, 
which includes Bamboo and its by -products, Horticulture waste, 
Elephant Grass, Sarkanda etc. for manufacturing Biomass pellets.  
 
(ii) The Ministry of Power (MoP) issued Revised Model Long term contract 
for Biomass supply on  06.01.2023. The Minimum tenure of Model contract 
shall be s even years.  This is expected to  help in developing Biomass supply 
chain infrastructure. 
 
(iii) As per MNRE, the power generated from co -firing of biomass in TPPs is 
renewable energy and such power is eligib le for meeting other RPO. 
 
3.10 Financial Support  
(i) Briquette/ Pellet Manufacturing plants: Rs. 9 Lakh per TPH of capacity 
with a capping of Rs. 45 Lakh per project by MNRE. 

  29  
  
(ii) Biomass (Non -bagasse cogeneration projects): Rs. 40 Lakh per project 
with a capping of Rs. 5 crore per project by MNRE. 
(iii) Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)  financial support under 
Environment Protection Charge (EPC) Funds which states that in case of 
both pelletisation plant &  torrefaction plant, a maximum  amount of Rs.  
28 lakh per ton ne plant production capacity per hour, or  40% of the 
capital cost considered for plant and machinery of a 1 TPH  plant, 
whichever is lower, shall be given as one -time financial support  by 
CPCB, subject to a maximum total financial support of  Rs. 1.4 crore  per 
proposal. 
(iv) Model S tandard Operating Procedure (SOP)  on co -firing of Biomass 
pellet in fluidized bed combustion (FBC) and pulverized-fuel (PF) 
Boilers was issued to all TPPs. 
(v) Procurement Provision of Biomass Category has been created on 
Government e Marketplace (GeM) portal. 
(vi) RBI has approved 'Biomass pellet manufacturing ’ as an eligible activity  
under Priority Sector Lending (PSL). 
(vii) Total purchase order (PO) has been placed for 69.06 lakh metric tonnes 
(LMT) (NTPC - 45.12 LMT). Tendering  of 114 million metric tonnes 
(MMT) of Biomass pellets is under different stages in the  country. 20 
new power plants have started co-firing of Biomass in 2022-23. 
(viii) As a result of these efforts, a total 1.64 LMT of  Biomass has been utilized 
as Green fuel for co -firing in power plants so  far. Till 31.05.2023, 47 
TPPs across the country has started utiliz ing B iomass in the co -firing 
with coal.  
(ix) As per para 6.4 (1) (ii) of Revised Tariff Policy  2016, "Distribution 
Licensee(s) shall compulsorily procure 100 % power produced from all  
the Waste -to-Energy plants in the State, in the ratio of their  

  30  
  
procurement of power from all sources including their own, at the tariff  
determined by the Appropriate Commission under Section 62 of the  
Electricity Act, 2003". 
(x) As per para 6.4(2) of Revised Tariff Policy 2O 16, "States shall endeavor  
to procure power from renewable energy sources through competitive  
bidding to keep the tariff low, except from the Waste to Energy plants.  
Procurement of power by Distribution Licensee from renewable energy  
sources from projects above the notified capacity, shall be done through  
competitive bidding process, from the date to be notified by the Central  
Government". 
 
3.11 When asked about the challenges being faced by Biomass sector and the 
ways in which these challenges can be tackled, a representative of NITI Aayog 
made the following remarks: 
“I think this is sourced from t he MNRE that there is availability of some 750 
million metric tonnes of biomass per  year, and the surplus availability is 
projected to be around 230 million metric  tonnes after using substantial 
biomass waste for fodder, domestic and other  kinds of uses. T his potential 
estimate is something like 28 GW of power if that  230 MMT is taken into 
consideration. Similarly, the energy generation potential from urban and 
industrial organic waste is roughly around 5.6 GW, and that has flown from 
the Report on  Circular Economy prepared by the MoHUA. The third aspect is 
the TIFAC, Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council. They 
have projected 51.35 billion litres of 2G ethanol production from the existing 
178 million metric tonnes of surplus crop biomass.  Similarly, IOCL has 
estimated compressed biogas potential of roughly  around 62 MMT, and bio -
manure potential of around 370 MMT. So, there are  different kinds of 
estimates on the biomass potential. I think we need to take an  integrated view 

  31  
  
on what exactly  is the mapping for biomass because we are now  aiming at 
different kinds of projects, including green hydrogen from biomass. So,  that is 
absolutely critical. We have identified various issues and challenges. We have 
identified various issues and challenges. One, of course, is  related to the raw 
materials supply chain management. Sometimes, the stock  quality and the 
energy content are compromised due to various reasons like  inefficient 
collection, aggregation, transportation, and storage which real ly impact the 
economy for the plant . Another aspect is about multi -feedstock design of the 
plants. As the crop  cycle changes and other crop cycle comes, plants design 
itself need multifeedstock kind of arrangement for running the plants for the 
whole year. Sometimes it happens that if there are many economic potentials, 
then prices of  the raw materials certainly go up. That also affects the 
economies of the plants.  The way forward is that adequate supply -chain of 
raw material is ensured.  For that, we need t o create regional warehouses/ 
storages or we may set up biomass trading platform on the regional basis so 
that raw material can be made  available. So far as technology mapping is 
concerned, the Gross Calorific Values  (GCVs) of bioenergy feedstock differs 
across regions of India. There is a need  to undertake research on differing 
characteristics of feedstock and identify  appropriate technologies for utilizing 
them. Sometimes the efficiencies claimed  by the technology providers does 
not match with whatever th ey claim. The way forward should be that instead 
of going through the capital based  incentive why not to devise a policy for the 
generation based incentive. There is also a lack of demand for bio -fertilizers. It 
is one of the revenue streams for the biomass plants. Since this bio -fertilizer is 
not attractive and is not being sold in the market, that also impacts the project 
economies. So, it is  imperative to encourage farmers to adopt bio -fertilizers 
through creating  awareness. Here some kind of branding is  also required so 
that it is promoted  and if it happens, perhaps this will add to the revenue 

  32  
  
stream that would support the biomass plants. Then, data on feedstock should 
be available across geographies. Unavailability of data at the State, district and 
block level necessitates case by  case investigation. As a result, majority of the 
stakeholders carry out their own  analysis to evaluate feedstock availability. In 
this regard, MNRE has already created a dashboard/ GIS based waste mapping 
tools which need to be strengthened, and players should be sensitized to use 
it. The second aspect is that a comprehensive mapping for effective  utilization 
of different kinds of biomass in different areas should be there  because we are 
promoting all kinds of sources of energ y like compressed  biogas, bio-ethanol, 
biomass to power, methanol, green hydrogen, etc. from the  single biomass 
source. So, a complete and clear -cut demarcation on how much  potential is 
available, and how much can be utilized for different kinds of energy  
resources is required at this stage.” 
 
3.12 Biomass Co-firing by thermal power plants of the country 
(i) NTPC Limited 
(a) In line with the focus of the Government of India (GoI), NTPC has taken 
the pioneering stride and  quantum leap in recent times in Gree n Energy 
Transition. Biomass cofiring  in its T PPs has been one such initiative. NTPC 
began testing of cofiring at Dadri in 2016 and started commercial scale firing 
from November 20 19. Till now, NTPC has awarded contracts for supply of 
45.52 LMT of Biomass pellets for 20 NTPC projects and 01 joint venture. As of  
now, 69.06 LMT of Biomass pellets order has been placed by all thermal  
power stations in India out of which 65 % of total orders are placed by NTPC.  
Till now, 13 NTPC Plants and 1 NTPC -JV plant have already started Biomass 
cofiring, and other plants are also coming up. As of now, over 1.04 LMT  of 
Biomass has been fired till date. This is the highest amount of Biomass pellets 
cofired by any thermal power station in India. 

  33  
  
 
(b) Long-term and short -term tenders for around 95  MMT of Biomass for  
22 NTPC stations are under progress. 
 
(c) NTPC is also establishing biomass pellets plants as per following details:  
 NTPC is establishing 22 TPD non -torrefied pelle t plant at Guru 
Hargobind Thermal Plant (GHTP), Lehra Mohabbat, Bhatinda 
 NTPC has awarded tender to set up 100 TPD pellet plant at  Aravali 
Power Company Private Limited (APCPL), Jhajjar 
 NTPC has floated tender to set up 100 TPD Torrefaction plant at  APCPL-
Jhajjar 
 NTPC awarded tender for 50 TPD Non-Torrefied Plant at Dadri 
 NTPC has sent a letter to Punjab and Haryana Governments for  
allocation of land to set up 5 pellet plants each in both states.  
 
(d) Other initiatives of NTPC: 
 Collection of different  types of Biomasses and study the effect of long -
term storage on Gross Calorific Value (GCV). 
 Detailed characterization of biomass and its ash to evaluate its 
properties with respect to co-firing in pulverized coal (PC) fired boiler.  
 Experimental and Simu lation analysis and establishing correlation of  
Biomass characteristics with PC fired boiler combustion process for  
optimizing and increasing co-firing ratio of Biomass.  
 Experimental and Simulation studies on ash slagging, fouling and  high 
temperature corrosion behavior during burning of biomass in a  PC fired 
Boiler.  
The above projects are under various stages of implementation.  
 

  34  
  
(ii) Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) 
(a) After successful completion of pellet formations, p article size 
distribution test and combustion behavior study , proven experienced vendors 
in this domain were approached for setting  up of a 16 Ton ne/Day pellets  
manufacturing unit in Mejia Thermal Power Station ( MTPS) on Build-Own-
Operate-Transfer (BOOT) mode. The p roject completion ti meline is March 
2024. 
 
(b) Biomass Co-firing status of other power plants of DVC: 
 First successful starting of biomass cofiring in DVC was done at 
Durgapur Steel Thermal Power in February, 2023.  
 On trial basis , Non-Torrefied Biomass co -firing was done at Durgapur 
Steel Thermal Power Station  (DSTPS) in Feb -March, 2023 for which 
small quantity of pellets was procured through GeM. 
 Although DVC started procurement action way back in December 2021 
for Torrefied & Non -Torrefied though open tendering for S even ye ars 
requirement for all plants but could not award the contract as the L1  
bidder backed out for both (Torrefied & Non-Torrefied). 
 Meanwhile National Biomass Mission (S AMARTH) finalized model 
contract, based on which four tender s were floated in December -2O22 
for DSTPS,  Raghunathpur Thermal Power Station  (RTPS), Bokaro 
Thermal Power Station  (BTPS) and Koderma Thermal Power Station  
(KTPS). However, purchase order could not be placed for low response 
of vendors and high price quoted. 
 
(iii) NLC India Limited 
Brief status of Biomass co -firing preparedness of NLCIL/JV Thermal Power 
Plants: 

  35  
  
(a) Coal Fired Ghatampur Thermal Power Plant (3x660 MW) ( Neyveli Uttar 
Pradesh Power Limited (NUPPL) - A subsidiary of NLCIL) 
This plant is under construction and is in advanced stage of commissioning. 
Co-firing of Biomass will be taken up after commissioning of this plant.  
(b) Coal Fired Talabira Thermal Power Plant (3x800 MW)  
This is an up -coming project of NLCIL in Odisha  State. Co-firing of Biomass up 
to 10 % has been included in Technical Specification  
(c) Coal Fired NLC Tamil Nadu Power Ltd. (NTPL - A subsidiary of NLCIL) in 
Tuticorin plant 
A sub -committee of NLCIL and NTPL members visited the NTPC Dadri plant 
for an on-site study on the use of bio-mass pellets. 
Summary of preparedness of NLCIL/JV Thermal Power Plants:  
No NLCIL /JV TPPS Status of Preparedness 
1.  
Ghatampur Thermal Power Plant  
(3x660 MW) under construction 
Biomass co -firing will be 
implemented after commissioning 
of units 
2.  
Talabira Thermal Power Plant 
(3x800 MW) – upcoming project 
Co-firing up to 10 %, included in 
Technical Specification 
3.  
JV- NTPL- Tuticorin (2x500 MW) 
Pulverised Coal Fired Boilers 
Bio-mass Trial order placing under 
progress for making Fuel specific 
trial study, 
4.  
BTPS Thermal (2x125 MW), 
Barsingsar 
Lignite fired CFBC Boilers 
Placement order to OEM M/s BHEL 
for conducting the feasibility study 
of bio-mass co-firing in CFBC lignite 
fired boilers – in final stages 
5.  
TPS II (7x210 MW), Neyveli 
Lignite fired Pulverised Fuel 
Boilers 
Co-firing in PF fired lignite boilers 
not possible due to higher mill inlet 
gas temperature and pre -ignition 

  36  
  
6.  
TPS I - Expn (2x210 MW), Neyveli 
Lignite fired Pulverised Fuel 
Boilers 
safety constraints.  
Beater Fan type Mills – not suitable. 
7.  
NNTPS (2x500 MW), Neyveli 
Lignite fired Pulverised Fuel 
Boilers 
8.  
TPS II - Expn (2x250 MW), 
Neyveli 
Lignite fired CFBC Boilers 
Sustainable operation is yet to be 
achieved due to design issues – 
modifications in pipeline - trial 
operation to be taken up in next 
phase. 
 
3.13 Major constraints being faced by TPPs in Biomass Cofiring:  
(i) Irregular supply of Biomass -based pellets - There is a shortage of 
manufacturing capacity for pelletisation. At present, the estimated pelleted 
manufacturing capacity is around 7,000 tonnes per day, which falls short of 
the requirement of approx. 1 lakh ton es per day for 5% co -firing. In the NCR 
region in particular, the pellet manufacturing capacity is approximately 
2,000 TPD, whereas the requirement is of 5,000 TPD.  
(ii) Unavailability of enough vendors 
(iii) Diversion of biomass resources to other sectors  where the rates and 
demand are more attractive. 
(iv) Logistic constraints (because of transportation from long distance) etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  37  
  
CHAPTER IV 
RECOVERY OF ENERGY IN THE FORM OF BIOGAS 
 
4.1 There is ample potential for setting up biogas plants in India 
considering the livestock population of around 535.78 million, which includes 
about 302 million total population of bovines (comprising of cattle, buffalo, 
mithun and yak).  
 
4.2 Biogas contains about 55 -65 % of M ethane, 35- 44 % of Carbon Dioxide 
and traces of other gases, such as Hydrogen Sulphide, Nitrogen and Ammonia. 
Biogas, in its raw form, that is without any purification can be used as clean 
cooking fuel like LPG, lighting, motive power and generation of electricity. It 
can be used in diesel engines to substitute diesel up to 80% and up to 100% 
replacement of diesel by using 100% Biogas Engines. Further, Biogas can be 
purified and upgraded up to 98% purity of methane content to make it 
suitable to be used as a green and clean fuel for transportation or filling in 
cylinders at high pressure of 250 bar or so and called as Compressed Bio -Gas 
(CBG). 
 
4.3 Initially, Biogas P lants were developed for digesting cattle dung. 
However, over a period of time, technology has been developed for the bio -
methanation of various types of biomass materials and organic wastes. Biogas 
plant designs are now available from 1 m 3 to 1000 m3 unit size or more and 
multiples of that can be installed for achieving high er Biogas Plant sizes, 
depending upon availability of the raw material such as for family/ household, 
small farmers, dairy farmers and for community, institutional and industrial/ 
commercial applications. 
 

  38  
  
4.4 Under the National Bioenergy Programme of MNRE , Rs. 100 crore has 
been set aside for the Biogas Programme to support setting up of small (1 m3 
to 25 m3 biogas per day) and medium size Biogas plants i.e. above 25 m3 to 
2500 m3 biogas generation per day for corresponding power generation 
capacity range of 3 kW to 250 kW from biogas o r raw biogas for thermal 
energy/cooling applications.  
 
4.5 The MNRE launched the Biogas programme with the following 
objectives: 
(i) To provide clean gaseous fuel mainly for cooking and lighting purposes 
for individual house holds by setting up of small biogas plants in the capacity 
range from 1 m3 to 25 m3; 
(ii) To promote setting up of biogas based power generation (off -grid) 
projects for power generation in the capacity range (3 kW to 250 kW) and 
thermal energy from the bio gas produced from Biogas plants of size greater 
than 25 m3 and up to 2500 m3 size; 
(iii) To mitigate drudgery of rural women and reduce pressure on forests; 
and  
(iv) Creation of a pool of skilled manpower for all activities relating to 
biogas production.   
 
4.6 The type of project s covered and financial support available  under the 
Biogas Programme are as follows: 
(i) CFA for Biogas Plants 1 M3 to 25 M3 Biogas generation per day:  Th e 
CFA for Biogas plants of size ranging from 1 M3 to 25 M3 of biogas generation 
per day are as given below: 
 

  39  
  
Particulars of Central 
Financial Assistance (CFA) 
and States / UTs, regions & 
categories of beneficiaries 
 
Biogas Plants under Biogas 
Programmeranging from size 1 to 25 cubic 
Metre biogas per day (In ₹per plant ) 
CFA  Applicable 1 M3 2-4 M3 6 M3 8-10 
M3 
15 M3 20-25 
M3 
(i) Hilly/NER States 
(Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, 
Ladakh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura 
and Uttarakhand)  
(ii) Island; and  
(iii) Scheduled Castes 
(SC)/ Scheduled Tribes  
(ST). 
17,000 22,000 29,250 34,500 63,250 70,400 
(iv) All other  States and 
Categories  
9,800 14,350 22,750 23,000 37,950 52,800 
 
In addition to above -mentioned CFA, financial support is also available for 
Turn-Key Job Fee, Administrative Charges payable to PIA for physical target 
achievement range of biogas plants, Support for Training courses, Support for 
BDTCs and Incentive for saving fossil fuels & electricity.  
 

  40  
  
(ii) CFA for Medium size biogas plants: The CFA for biogas plants of size 
above 25 M3 to 2500 M3 biogas generation per day are as given below:  
 
Power 
generating 
Capacity (kW) 
CFA limited to the  
following ceiling limit 
Administrative Charges  
for PIA*  
Power 
Generation 
Thermal 
Application 
 
Power 
Generation 
Thermal 
application 
3 kW – 50 kW ₹ 45,000 
per kW 
₹ 22,500 per 
kWeq thermal/ 
cooling 
 
10% of 
the CFA 
5% of the 
CFA 
>50 kW – 200 
kW 
₹ 40,000 
per kW 
 
₹ 20,000/- per 
kWeq thermal/ 
cooling 
₹2,00,000/- 
(fixed) 
₹1,00,000/- 
(fixed) 
>200 kW – 250 
kW 
₹ 35,000 
per kW 
₹ 17,500/- per 
kWeq thermal/ 
cooling 
₹2,50,000/- 
(fixed) 
₹1,00,000/- 
(fixed) 
 
4.7 During discussion on the Biogas component of National Bioenergy 
Programme, a representative of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
made the following submission: 
“This caters to the s mall and individual households which have cattle. Now, 
this programme is  implemented through the State programme implementing 
agencies. Every State  is included and there are a few of the Central agencies, 
like Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), National Dairy 
Development Board (NDDB), Amul  on the cooperative side. But for every 
State, there is a programme implementing  agency. They are implementing this 

  41  
  
programme on the individual household  level. The target that we have kept 
for this current fi nancial year is 46,000. Out  of that, for 30,000, the advance 
has been released and we are also looking at  the balance, that is, 16,000.  
 
In the medium size category, this programme  supports smaller industries, 
especially the dairy industry which actually has their  input coming from the 
cattle. So, there they inherently have the dung and what  they do is they use 
this for biogas plant which can be converted to electricity for  their captive 
needs. We have received already 37 projects equivalent to Rs. 8.31  crore. We 
are also considering it on a faster scale. 
 
Over the years, we have tried to reach to the end beneficiaries through  various 
advanced digital tools but this time what we have done is we have tried  to 
innovate in the designs, in the models that we ca n provide, especially in the  
biogas sector. The earlier designs were based on the brick and cement use.  
Now, there are flexible biogas plants also which are coming up where the  
beneficiaries are actually demanding that. We have introduced those into the  
smaller biogas programmes. We have also introduced a communication plan.  
Public awareness and information are critical. We are implementing a public  
awareness campaign through the State nodal agencies and implementing  
agencies also.  One more important thing which we did, which was missing 
earlier, was  the actual codes and standards to support such kinds of plants. 
The Ministry through its National Institute of Bioenergy worked on a standard 
and BIS, that  is, Bureau of Indian Standards has adopted that. What t his will 
do is this will  enable the developers to maintain the quality that is required 
which will ultimately result in better output.” 
 
 
 

  42  
  
PART –II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
1. The Committee observe that W aste to Electricity plants generate 
power at the rate of  1 Mega Watt equivalent ( MWe) per 20 -30 Tonnes 
Per Day ( TPD) dry waste. However, a s much as  100 TPD mixed waste is 
required to generate the same amount of energy. As per S olid Waste 
Management (SWM) R ules 2016, only the non -recyclable combustible 
waste can be used in these plants. However, the Committee note 
frequent instances of mixed waste being incinerated in Waste to 
Electricity plants without proper segregation. The Committee also feel 
that waste segregation at source in our country is still far from 
satisfactory. Therefore, the Committee are of the view  that the existing 
awareness programmes for waste segregation need to be pushed further 
with active participation of local bodies and reward/incentive should be 
made part of these programmes  to make waste segregation a 
behavioural practice of every household . The Committee are of the view 
that it is better to process wet waste through methods other than 
incineration viz. composting, biomet hanation etc . as these are less 
polluting processes . Further, the Committee are of the opinion that the 
recyclable waste should necessarily be recycled  as r ecycling plays an 
important role in reducing the waste stream  with lower demand for raw 
materials, a nd minimising pollution associated with the manufacturing 
of new products. The Committee therefore, support the setting up of 
Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) and appreciate the decision to set up 
around 45,000 MRF under Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0. 
 

  43  
  
2. The Committee feel that w ith regard to Waste to Electricity plants, 
the major issue is the high cost of power from such plants. Many such 
projects are being pursued under public-private partnership ( PPP) 
model and the main source of revenue for the se projects is selling of the 
power generated from municipal solid waste ( MSW) and some by - 
products which are  used as construction material. The power being 
generated from these projects are sold to the state DISCOMs. However, 
these plants face huge delays in execut ing power purchase agreement 
(PPA) with the State Electricity Departments/D ISCOMS as the tariff is 
typically high at about Rs.  8 per kilowatt hour ( KWH) which is higher 
than that of other renewable energy such as Solar . The generation 
capacity of these pla nts is also small. Today, most of the D ISCOMS are 
financially weak and hence, are finding it difficult to purchase costly 
power from these plants . In such a scenario, it becomes important to 
devise a mechanism whereby the power from W aste to Electricity plants 
are surely taken off but at the same time, the D ISCOMS are not burdened 
excessively. The Committee are of the view that a special purpose 
vehicle (S PV) can be created for this purpose , which can be made 
procurer of this power. This arrangement can hav e multiple partners in 
the form of Central PSUs like Solar Energy Corporation of India ( SECI), 
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency ( IREDA) and also private 
companies. The SPV, after procuring power from the plant, can then sell 
this power to interested entities and can also list it for trading on power 
exchanges. The Committee are of the opinion that s uch an arrangement 
will provide guaranteed takeoff of power being generated from waste, 
instilling further confidence amongst the stakeholders and build a 
suitable case for attracting low cost capital from the market , while  

  44  
  
encouraging more players to invest in this field , thus eventually  driving 
down the cost of Waste to Electricity power. 
 
3. The Committee have noted that Waste to Electricity plants 
incinerate municipal solid waste to generate electricity which cause 
pollution. These plants have often been found to vi olate pollution norms 
for which  they have also been fined a number of times. Local residents 
have often opposed the setting up an d expansion of these plants  due to 
increased pollution levels, noise, foul smell etc.  In such a scenario, the 
Committee are of the view that to achieve the target of setting up around 
9,700 TPD of Waste to Electricity plant capacity under Swachh Bharat 
Mission 2.0 of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs ( MoHUA) and 
around 200 compressed biogas (CBG) plants under National Bioenergy 
Programme of MNRE, it is important that the issue of pollution from 
these plants is addressed first. Under SBM 2.0, Enginee rs India Limited 
(EIL) has been engaged to provide Technical and Transaction Advisory 
support to States/ UTs/Cities for plan ning and setting up integrated 
Waste to Energy plants  without any cost to the States/UTs/Cities . The 
Committee are of the view that E IL, including environmental engineers 
and scientists, can assist in devising mechanism using technology to 
reduce emissions from these plants, such as  emission filters. The 
Committee also feel that global best practices should be studied and 
adopted in our plants to the extent possible. 
 
4. The Committee have noted that the supply chain scenario of 
biomass-based briquettes/pellets to the Thermal Power Plants (TPPs) of 
our country is still in the process of development. Currently, the 
briquettes/ pellets are not consistently available throughout the year to 

  45  
  
meet the requirement of co -cofiring in TPPs. At present, the estimated 
pellet manufacturing capacity in the country is only around 7, 000 TPD , 
which falls short of the requirement of approximately 1 lakh TPD for co-
firing. In the NCR region in particular, the pellet manufacturing capacity 
is approximately 2,000 TPD, whereas the requirement is of 5,000 TPD. 
In such a scenario, the Committee are of the view that the Farmer 
Producer Organisatio ns (FPOs)/ co-operatives can be encouraged to 
setup briquette/pellet manufacturing units. Raw materials for 
briquette/pellet making are readily available with farmers and when a 
number of farmers will come together in the form of FPOs or 
cooperatives, they’ll have enough quantities to achieve scale and 
economy. Replication of few successful stories of profitable 
briquette/pellet manufacturing by FPOs/cooperatives will encourage 
more such organizations in this sector . Further, the Committee are of the 
opinion that to develop the market for briquette/ pellet manufacturing 
in the country and to achieve the target of 5% blend o f Biomass pellets in 
thermal power plants , it is important that the procedure for setting up 
such units is simplified like that of Haryana which has waived off the 
requirement of land use norms for setting up CBG plants. Apart from 
simplified procedures, t he early resolution of administrative and 
regulatory issues also needs to be ensured. 
 
5. Apart from inadequate pellet manufacturing units, the Committee 
have also noted that the Biomass resources are being diverted to other 
sectors where the rates are mor e attractive  and the demand is higher . 
This is presenting a major challenge in the development of a steady and 
reliable supply chain market of Biomass-based briquettes/pellets for 
co-firing in thermal power plants ( TPPs). The Committee are of the 

  46  
  
opinion that to attract briquette/pellet manufacturing units to the 
power sector, it is important to discover the appropriate rate of 
different categories of briquettes/pellets and offer various incentives to 
the manufacturing units viz. assured takeoff, t imely payment, providing 
land for unit setup, assisting in infrastructure development etc. There is 
also an urgent need on the part of the Government to develop requisite 
number of quality collection/aggregation/storage facilities for storing 
briquettes/pellets as well as the raw materials for meeting present as 
well as future use. The Committee appreciate the Ministry of Power for 
issuing Revised Model Long term contract for Biomass supply on  
06.01.2023 under which the minimum tenure of m odel contract shall be 
seven years.  This is expected to help in developing Biomass supply 
chain infrastructure.  The Committee also support the setting up of 
Custom Hiring Centers (CHCs) for agriculture machineries which help 
farmers in custom hiring of machines and equipmen ts for collection and 
aggregation of agro -residue. The Committee expect such centers to be 
further developed in large numbers. The Committee also feel that 
setting up of biomass trading platforms can help in ensuring availability 
and accessibility of raw m aterials as well as finished product s on a real 
time basis. 
 
6. The Committee note that there is lack of coherent data with regard 
to feedstock availability (raw materials used in W aste to Energy, 
briquette/pellet manufacturing, biogas etc. plants) in the country and 
the data which is  available is not uniform  across organisations . As per 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) , the biomass 
availability is around 750 million metric tonnes ( MMT) per year out of 
which surplus availability is around 230 MMT per year (after 

  47  
  
subtracting for use as fodder, domestic household use etc.). This 
corresponds to a potential of 28 GW of power . As per MoHUA, the energy 
generation potential from urban and i ndustrial organic waste is about 
5.6 GW. However, as per the T echnology Information, Forecasting and 
Assessment Council  (TIFAC) of the Department of Science and 
Technology, the 2G ethanol production potential is about 51.35 billion 
litres from about 178 MM T of surplus crop biomass. Similarly, as per the 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited ( IOCL), the Compressed Biogas (CBG) 
potential is estimated at 62 MMT with bio -manure potential of 370 MMT. 
The Committee also note that there is unavailability of data at the S tate, 
district and block level as a result of which case -by-case study becomes 
time consuming . The majority of stakeholders carry out their own 
analyses to evaluate the feedstock availability. The Committee while 
appreciating MNRE for developing a dashboar d and Geographic 
Information System (GIS) based waste mapping tools , would also like to 
recommend that these dashboard/tools be strengthened and all the 
players be sensitized about its usage. The Committee also feel that 
robust monitoring mechanism will en sure that authentic data is 
uploaded on the dashboard which would increase its reliability among 
the stakeholders. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that a 
comprehensive mapping of waste/feedstock is needed for effective 
utilization in different ar eas (such as CBG, bio -ethanol, biomass to 
power, methanol, green hydrogen etc.) and such mapping should be 
carried out regularly to improve the demand supply situation in the 
market and enable short as well as long term planning with regard to 
Bioenergy and Waste to Energy in the country. 
 

  48  
  
7. The Committee note that the gross calorific values (GCVs) of 
bioenergy feedstocks differ across regions of India. This results in 
variable power generation from W aste to Energy plants. For 
briquette/pellet manufacturing  units, the inconsistent nature of 
feedstock/biomass poses problem in producing briquettes/pellets that 
meet the standards  specified by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). The 
Committee feel that th ese shortcomings being faced by power plants can 
discourage entrepreneurs and private industry players  from investing in 
this sector. The Committee agree with the observation of NITI Aayog  that 
very few technology providers are present in the Indian market 
currently and the efficiencies claimed by the technology providers is not 
achieved in certain cases. The Committee note the continuation of the 
Renewable Energy Research and Technology Development (RE -RTD) 
programme of MNRE for a period 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 at a total cost of 
Rs. 228 crore. This programme aims at scaling research and 
development (R&D) effort for promoting indigenous technology 
development and manufacture for wide spread applications of new and 
renewable energy in efficient and cost -effective manner across th e 
country. The Committee appreciate the Ministry for sanctioning R&D 
projects in the area of agro -waste and biomass gasification. The 
Committee would also like to laud NTPC Limited for its initiative to study 
the effect of long -term storage on GCV  of diffe rent types of biomasses 
and to undertake d etailed characterization of biomass and its ash to 
evaluate its properties with respect to co -firing in pulverized coal (PC) 
fired boiler. However, the Committee are of the opinion that there is a 
need to undertake more research on the differing characteristics of 
feedstocks and identify appropriate technologies for utilizing them. To 
encourage research in this field, the Committee agree with the 

  49  
  
suggestion of NITI Aayog that the incentive in this sector should be 
linked with generation (Generation Based Incentive) instead of capital 
based. 
 
8. The Committee note that an outlay of Rs. 858 crore has been 
sanctioned for National Bioenergy Programme  (NBP) of MNRE and the 
Ministry is expecting this programme to bring an investment of about Rs. 
10,650 crore. In case of both pelletisation plant &  torrefaction plant, a 
maximum amount of Rs. 28 lakh per tonne plant production capacity per 
hour, or 40% of the ca pital cost considered for plant and machinery of a 
1 tonne per hour ( TPH) plant, whichever is lower, is being given as one -
time financial support by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), 
subject to a maximum total financial support of Rs. 1.4 crore per 
proposal. Under SBM (U) 2.0, Central Financial Assistance (CFA) of Rs. 18 
crore/MWe is being provided for Waste to Electricity plants. However, 
the Committee are of the view that these funds are inadequate to meet 
the cost require d for developing a sustaina ble ecosystem for effective 
management of waste  in the country and developing B ioenergy sector. 
Setting up of plants in Waste to Energy sector entails a number of 
variables such as land, machinery, air pollution control devices and 
other accessories which escalates the capital cost for the plant. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion that low cost financing from 
IREDA and other financial institutions should be made available to such 
projects in order to attract entrepreneurs, MSMEs and other private 
players to this sector. The Committee welcome the inclusion of 'Biomass 
pellet manufacturing’ under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) and expect 
the Government to further facilitate easy financing to this sector. 
 

  50  
  
9. The Committee note that our country generate s municipal solid 
waste (MSW) of about 1,50,000 TPD and around 1,87,000 TPD of waste 
processing facility is already existing in the country. Out of the total 
existing facilities, around 98,544 TPD facility is available for converting 
waste into compost. Fu rther, a capacity of 30,700 TPD for converting 
waste into compost is proposed under SBM (U) 2.0. However, the 
Committee note that the demand for bio -fertilizers or compost is lacking 
in the country,  despite its numerous benefits for the crops and 
environment. The Committee are of the view that easy availability of 
chemical fertilizers, lack of awareness about the benefits of bio -
fertilizers among farmers and fragmented market of bio -fertilizer are 
some of the reasons for weak demand in this sector. Therefor e, the 
Committee would like to recommend that a robust market for bio -
fertilizers be developed through public awareness campaigns, 
information & education (I&E) programmes, incentivization of farme rs, 
development of supply chain etc.    
 
10. The Committee note that under National Bioenergy Programme, 
Gaushalas have also been made beneficiaries whereby they get 20 per 
cent additional CFA over the normal CFA. This is expected to help them 
in bringing and utilising the dung that is produced into a useful energy, 
that is, bio -CNG. The Committee expect MNRE to provide all help to 
Gaushalas and popularize the scheme amongst farmers and rural areas 
so that they avail this fund for setting up plants to generate energy from 
their waste.  
Likewise, the C ommittee are of the view that wastes of industries 
may be better dealt in a captive manner i.e., within or near the industrial 
plant itself.  Setting up Waste to Energy plants within the jurisdiction of 

  51  
  
industrial townships would not only help in reducing the net waste 
generation but also save the transportation cost of such waste. Further, 
mandatory setting up of these plants would also aid in achieving the 
goals of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR).    
 
11. The Committee note that the National Bioenergy Programme (NBP) 
of MNRE supports the SATAT (Sustainable Alternative Towards 
Affordable Transportation) initiative of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MoPNG) which has the objective of establishing 5000 CBG 
plants across the country. Similarly , the NBP finds convergence with the 
GOBARdhan (Galvanizing Organic Bio -Agro Resources Dhan) scheme of 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti 
which provides financial assistance for setting up biogas plants at 
village/block/district levels. The programme of MNRE and SBM (U ) 2.0 
already share the similar objective of setting up Waste to Energy plants 
for effective waste management. The SAMARTH Mission (National 
Mission on Co-firing of Biomass in Thermal Power Plants) of the Minis try 
of Power promotes manufacturing of pellets and briquettes for use in 
power generation and finds convergence with the Biomass Programme 
component of MNRE’s NBP. The Committee are of the view that better 
convergence and interlinking of schemes amongst various Ministries of 
the Government of India can be utilized to achieve greater coherence 
and better outcomes for sustainable waste management and recovery of 
energy from waste in the country. There is also  a need to finetune these 
schemes in order to avoid overlaps, duplic ation and prevent avoidable 
conflicts in their operation. For instance, MoHUA has requested MoPNG  
 

  52  
  
to reduce the SATAT condition to 1 TPD CBG, so that more  urban local 
bodies can be cover ed. The Committee are of the opinion that a n 
empowered coordination  mechanism comprising representatives from 
all these different Ministries can be formed , which can work in tandem 
to achieve the combined targets of these schemes . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
December 14, 2023 
Agrahayana 23, 1945 (Saka) 
Jagdambika Pal 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
 

  53  
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON ENERGY (2022-23) HELD ON 19th MAY, 2023, IN MAIN COMMITTEE 
ROOM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs to 1830 hrs 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal   -   Chairperson 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2  Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
4  Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
5  Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
6  Shri P. Velusamy 
RAJYA SABHA 
7  Shri Gulam Ali 
8  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
9  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
10  Shri Muzibulla Khan 
11  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan          Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora        Additional Director  

  54  
  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Minis try of New and Renewable Energy, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and NITI Aayog  to the S itting and 
informed that the S itting had  been called for briefing on the subject ‘Bio - 
Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy from Urban, Industrial and 
Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy 
Management’. The Chairperson also apprised them about the provisions of 
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker.  
 
3. During the discussion, a power -point presentation was made on the 
subject by the representative of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
1  Shri Bhupinder Singh Bhalla Secretary 
2  Shri Lalit Bohra Joint Secretary  
3  Shri Ajay Yadav Joint Secretary 
4  Shri Dinesh Dayanand Jagdale Joint Secretary 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
5 Shri Manoj Joshi Secretary 
6 Ms. Roopa Mishra Joint Secretary 
NITI Aayog 
7 Shri Rajnath Ram Adviser  
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
8 Shri Praveen Mal Khanooja Additional Secretary 
9 Shri Ashish Anand Gupta CGM, GAIL (India) Ltd. 
10 Shri Shantanu Gupta ED, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) 
DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
11 Shri Samir kumar Economic Adviser 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
  12 Smt. S. Rukmani Joint Secretary 

  55  
  
which, inter-alia, covered MNRE’S Major Bioenergy Programmes; Progress 
made under different components of National Bioenergy Programme (NBP) 
viz. Waste to Energy Programme, Biomass Programme and Biogas 
Programme; Innovations and Achievements in Bioenergy Sector; etc.  
4. During the discussion, a power-point presentation was also made by the 
representative of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs which, inter-alia, 
covered India’s Urban Waste Generation projection till 2050, Major 
Technologies for processing of solid waste;  Waste processing infrastructure 
under Swachh Bharat Mission -Urban (SBM -U); Operational, under 
construction and planned plants of Bio -methanation; Waste to Electricity 
(WtE) plants; major budget announcements with regard to waste 
management and enablers for waste to energy; etc. 
5.  Thereafter, a representative of NITI Aayog made a power point 
presentation which, inter-alia, covered NITI Aayog’s initiatives on Bio -energy 
and Waste-to-Energy; Estimates of Bio energy and Waste -to-Energy potential; 
Issues & Challenges and the Way Forward; etc. 
6. The Committee, inter-alia, deliberated upon the following points with 
representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy , Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, NITI Aayog, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare: 
(i) Measures taken to reduce carbon emissions, as envisioned at CoP -
26 at Glasgow in 2021; 
(ii) Performance of Urban Local Bodies in waste management;  
(iii) NITI Aayog’s role in developing policy framework for Waste -to-
Energy (WtE); 
(iv) Need for innovative technologies and solutions to improve waste 
management; 

  56  
  
(v) Need for coordination between various Ministries and agencies in 
building and operating Waste -to-Energy and Bio -methanation 
projects; 
(vi) Need for increasing the number of Waste -to-Energy plants in big 
cities; 
(vii) Issues related to successful operation of Waste-to-Energy plants; 
(viii)Issues related to assured take off of power produced from Waste -
to-Energy plants; 
(ix) Environmental and safety  concerns o ver setting up or operation 
of Waste to Energy plants;  
(x) Need for change in land use norms for setting up Waste -to-Energy 
plants; 
(xi) Challenges being faced in supply chain management of dry and 
wet waste; 
(xii) Experience of developed nations in the area of Waste-to-Energy; 
(xiii) Strategy of Government to provide financial and other support to 
Waste-to-Energy projects; 
(xiv) Efforts being made to attract investment in the area of Waste -to-
Energy. 
 
7. The Members also sought clarifications on various other issues relating 
to the subject and  representatives of the Ministries  responded to the same. 
The Committee directed the representatives to furnish written replies to 
those queries which could not be fully responded within 10 days. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
The verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept for record.  
 
**** 
 
 

  57  
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON ENERGY (2022-23) HELD ON 1st JUNE, 2023, IN COMMITTEE ROOM D, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs to 1415 hrs 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal   -   Chairperson 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2  Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla 
3  Dr. A. Chellakumar 
4  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
5  Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
6  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
    7 Shri P. Velusamy 
RAJYA SABHA 
   8 Shri Gulam Ali 
   9 Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
10 Shri Javed Ali Khan 
11 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
12 Shri Krishan Lal Panwar  
13 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan          Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora        Additional Director  

  58  
  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Minis try of New and Renewable Energy, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ 
Welfare to the S itting and informed that the S itting had  been called for 
briefing on the subject ‘Bio - Energy and Waste to Energy – Recovery of Energy 
from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban 
Local Bodies in Energy  Management’. The Chairperson also apprised them 
about the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the 
Hon’ble Speaker.  
 
3. During the discussion, the representative of Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy  informed the Committee about their major programmes 
and initiatives which, inter-alia, included MNRE’s previous Bioenergy 
Programmes and their continuation; Major achievements in Bioenergy sector; 
Major policy changes under National Bioenergy Programme (NB P); Bioenergy 
sector for future development; Objectives and scope of different components 
of NBP viz. Waste to Energy Programme, Biomass Programme and Biogas 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
5  Shri Bhupinder Singh Bhalla Secretary 
6  Shri Pradip Kumar Das CMD, IREDA  
7  Shri Dinesh Dayanand Jagdale Joint Secretary 
MINISTRY HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS  
4 Ms. Roopa Mishra Joint Secretary 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS’ WELFARE 
5 Shri Rakesh Ranjan Additional Secretary 
6 Dr. P.K. Singh  Commissioner, Agriculture (DA&FW) 
7 Dr. Yogita Rana Joint Secretary (DA&FW) 

  59  
  
Programme; Convergence of MNRE’s Bioenergy programme with other 
Ministries’ programmes viz. GOBARd han of Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation 
(SATAT) of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Urban) 2.0 of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and National Mission on  
Co-firing of Biomass in Thermal Power Plants (SAMARTH Mission) of Ministry 
of Power; etc. 
 
 
4. Thereafter, the representative of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
apprised the Committee about the role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy 
Management; Intervention of Swachh Bharat Mission -Urban (SBM(U)); Waste 
processing infrastructure under SBM(U); Infrastructure proposals for waste 
processing to energy recovery under SBM(U) 2.0; Status of Bio -methanation 
and Waste to Electricity (WtE) plants; SBM initiative s in setting up Waste to 
Energy plants; etc. 
 
5.  Later, the representative of Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare  
briefed the Committee about the issue of paddy straw burning and their 
impact on air pollution over the northern belt of India; Features of the Central 
Sector Scheme on ‘Promotion of Agricultural Mechanization for In -Situ 
Management of Crop Residue in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh 
and NCT of Delhi’; Achievements of the scheme; Satellite based data on paddy 
residue burning events in 2022 season; etc. 
 
6. The Committee, inter-alia, deliberated upon the following points with 
representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy , Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare: 
i) Issues related to classification of different kinds of waste in India;  

  60  
  
ii) Weak implementation of laws/rules on management of different 
categories of waste; 
iii) Challenges being faced in enforcing behavior change around 
source segregation; 
iv) Issues related to scientific remediation of legacy dumpsites;  
v) Progress of decentralized facilities for processing fresh waste;  
vi) Status of operational and planned Waste to Energy (WtE) plants 
in the country; 
vii) Issues related to land, clearance, supply chai n, high cost of power 
etc. for Waste to Energy plants;  
viii) Concerns of residents over setting up or operation of W aste to 
Energy plants;  
ix) Need for close coordination between different 
Ministries/Departments for resolving the issues being faced by 
Waste-to-Energy plants; 
x) Need for upgradation in existing infrastructure for waste 
management; 
xi) Need for a fee-based model for landfill dumping;  
xii) Need for attracting financial and technical assistance from 
international lenders; 
xiii) Status of old biogas plants and Government subsidy for setting up 
new biogas plants; 
xiv) Need for popularizing flexible designs in small biogas sector;  
xv) Issues related to stubble burning in Punjab, Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh and NCT of Delhi and their impact on degra ding air 
quality; 
xvi) Issues related to In -Situ and Ex -Situ management of crop 
residues; 
xvii) Need for  periodic assessment of programmes for crop residue 
management;  
xviii) Reasons for poor state of Bio -fertilizers and Organic Fertilizers in 
the country; 

  61  
  
               xix) Issues related to 1st and 2nd generation of ethanol production; 
                xx) Challenges in biomass supply chain for ethanol production; 
               xxi) Fund sharing model of the 12 Ministries under GOBARdhan 
scheme.  
 
7. The Members also sought clarifications on various other issues relating 
to the subject and  representatives of the respective Ministries  responded to 
the same. The Committee directed the representatives to furnish written 
replies to those queries which could not be fully responded to within 10 days. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
The verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept for record.  
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  62  
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2022-23) HELD ON 15th JUNE, 2023 IN MAIN 
COMMITTEE ROOM, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs to 1315 hrs 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2  Dr. A. Chellakumar 
3  Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
4  Shri Kishan Kapoor 
5  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal  
6  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi (in the Chair) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
7  Shri Gulam Ali 
8  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
9  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
10  Shri Muzibulla Khan 
11  Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
12  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr. Ram Raj Rai Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan          Director 
3.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora        Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  63  
  
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
1  Shri Ajay Tewari Additional Secretary 
2  Shri Piyush Singh Joint Secretary 
3  Shri Hemant Kumar Pandey Chief Engineer 
CENTRAL ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY 
 
4  Shri Ghanshyam Prasad Chairperson 
5  Shri Praveen Gupta Member 
6  Shri Hemant Jain Chief Engineer 
NTPC LIMITED 
 
7  Shri Gurdeep Singh CMD 
8  Shri Ramesh Babu V.  Director 
DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION  
 
9  Shri R.N. Singh Chairperson 
10  Shri M. Raghuram Member 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
11  Shri Anandji Prasad Advisor 
NLC INDIA LIMITED 
 
12  Shri M. Venkatachalam Director 
 
2. Since the Hon’ble Chairperson could not attend the Sitting, Shri 
Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi, a Member of the Committee chaired the 
sitting in accordance with Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. At the outset, the acting Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Ministry of Power, Central Electricity 
Authority, NTPC Limited, Damodar Valley Corporation and NLC India Limited 
to the sitting and informed that the sitting had  been called for briefing on the 
subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy - Recovery of Energy from Urba n, 
Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in 
Energy Management’ . T he acting Chairperson also apprised them about the 
provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Hon’ble 
Speaker.  

  64  
  
4. During the discussion, a power -point presentation was made by 
representative of the Ministry of Power on the subject which, inter-alia, 
covered Enabling Policies, Introduction to Biomass Co -firing, Benefits for 
Stakeholders, Progress in Co -firing of Biomas s in TPPs, Progress in 
Procurement by different TPPs, Major Developments, On -going 
Transformational Initiatives, Constraints and Challenges to achieve desired 
Co-firing Levels, Way Forward, etc. 
 
5. A power-point presentation was also made by representativ e of the 
NTPC Limited on the subject which, inter-alia, covered Agro Residues – A 
Carbon Neutral Opportunity, Pelletized Biomass Requirements, NTPC 
Initiatives – Biomass Co -firing and Biomass Market Creation, Challenges and 
Support Required, NTPC Projects, Waste to Energy, Waste to Products, etc. 
 
6. Thereafter, a power-point presentation was made by representative of 
the Damodar Valley Corporation on the subject which, inter-alia, covered 
Biomass Co -firing Status in DVC TPPs, Development of Biomass Pellets , 
Municipal Solid Waste to Energy, Conversion of Food and Bio -waste to Energy, 
Challenges and Support Required, etc. 
 
7. Representative of NLC India also made a  power-point presentation  on 
the subject which, inter-alia, covered NLCIL Overview, Pan India Presence, 
Vision 2030 of NLCIL, Major Highlights of FY 2022 -23, Biomass Co -firing - 
NLCIL Progress and Status of Preparedness, etc.  
 
8. The Committee, inter-alia, deliberated upon the following points with 
representatives of the  Ministry of Power, Central Electricity Authority, NTPC 
Limited, Damodar Valley Corporation and NLC India Limited : 

  65  
  
i) Action plan, implementation strategy, current status and 
constraints in implementation of the Policy regarding use of 
Biomass in coal-fired thermal power plants; 
ii) Coordination M echanism to resolve the inter -ministerial issues 
and constraints; 
iii) Role and contribution of NTPC Limited, Damodar Valley 
Corporation and NLC India Limited in implementation of Samarth 
Mission; 
iv) Progress regarding mandated 5% blend of pallets  in thermal 
power plants; 
v) Comparative Green -House-Gas Emission from thermal power 
plants with and without co-firing of pallets; 
vi) Issues related to shortage of manufacturing capacity for pellets ; 
vii) Reasons for low participation of Private and State Sector with 
respect to this policy; 
viii) Incentives offered by the Government to increase the utilization of 
biomass in thermal power plants; 
ix) Issues related to eligibility for Carbon Credit, Renewable Ene rgy 
Certificates and Renewable Energy Obligation; 
x) Need to create a balance between the concerns of DISCOMs and 
successful offtake of power from Waste to Energy plants . 
 
9. The Members also sought clarifications on various other issues relating 
to the subject and representatives of the Ministry and concerned 
Organizations responded to the same. The Committee directed the 
representatives to furnish within 10 days, written replies to those queries 
which could not be fully responded to. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
The verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept for record.  
***** 
 
 

  66  
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2023-24) HELD ON 14th DECEMBER, 2023 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-3, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
LOK SABHA 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal   -   Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
2  Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
3  Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
4  Dr. A. Chellakumar 
5  Shri Kishan Kapoor 
6  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
7  Shri Jai Prakash 
8  Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
9  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
10  Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
11  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
12  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
13  Shri Muzibulla Khan 
14  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
15  Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
16  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
17  Shti K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora        Additional Director 
3.  Shri S. Lakshmikanta Singh Deputy Secretary 
             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee then took 
up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 

  67  
  
(i) Report on action taken by the Government on observations/  
recommendations contained in 34 th Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
(ii) Report on ac tion taken by the Government on observations/  
recommendations contained in 35 th Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Power. 
(iii) Report on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy - Recovery 
of Energy from Urban, I ndustrial and Agricultural Wastes/  
Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management’.  
 
3. After discus sing the contents of the Reports in detail , the Committee 
adopted the draft Report on ‘Action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations contained in 34 th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Minis try of New and Renewable Energy 
and draft Report on ‘Action taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in 35 th Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (20 23-24) of the Ministry of Power without any amendment/  
modification. The draft Report on the subject ‘Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy 
- Recovery of Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/ 
Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management’  was adopted 
with minor modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above -
mentioned Reports and present the same to both Houses of the Parliament  
during the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 