 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Power’] 
 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2024-25) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
6 

 
2 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Power’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2025 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
COE NO. 384 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and printed by_____________. 
  

 
4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
16 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
33 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
34 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
35 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Project-wise reason for the slippage of Hydroelectric 
projects (above 25 MW) included in the hydro capacity 
addition programme for the year 2019-20 to 2023-24 
36 
II Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Power to reduce the 
incidence of time and cost overruns in Hydro Power 
Projects 
40 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 30th July, 2025 43 
II Analysis of Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy. 
45 
         

 
5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25)   LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne – Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3. Shri Jagadish Chandra Barma Basunia 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Shri Shahu Shahaji Chhatrapati 
6. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
7. Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
9. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
10. Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
11. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
12. Shri Dulu Mahato 
13. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
14. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
17. Smt. Shambhavi 
18. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
19. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
20. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya* 
24. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
25. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
26. Shri R. Dharmar 
27. Shri N.R. Elango 
28. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
29. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
30. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
31. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary 
 
* Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 14th June, 2025. He has been re-nominated 
as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 24th July, 2025. 

 
6 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Sixth Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Power’. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 10th December, 
2024 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the 
Government to the observations/recommendations contained in this Report 
were received on 5th March, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 30th July, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
30th July, 2025 
8 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Shrirang Appa Barne 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 

 
7 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- 
taken by the Ministry of Power on observations/recommendations contained 
in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) 
of the Ministry of Power’. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 10th December, 
2024 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report 
contained 12 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12               Total – 12 
                                                       Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Nil                            Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Nil                                                                              Total– 00 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil                                                       Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
 

 
8 
4. The Committee desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
observations/recommendations in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or 
merit comments. 
 [ 
Recommendation No. 3 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that SC Sub-Plan (SCSP), Tribal Area Sub-
Plan (TASP) and other Special Component Plans have been introduced 
in order to ensure direct policy driven benefits for SCs, STs, Tribal 
Areas and North-Eastern Region Areas. Under these Plans, funds are 
earmarked for SCs, STs, etc. under separate budget heads for each 
Ministry of the Government of India. The allocation includes 
programmes benefitting SC/ST hamlets or designing of new 
appropriate development programmes. The Committee understand 
that the Schemes/Programmes which are being implemented by the 
Ministry are more centered around development of infrastructure, 
rather than being completely individual centric. Nonetheless, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should focus on maximum 
utilization of funds allocated for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other Socially Backward Groups as per the mandated requirement 
so that these groups get included in the development process of the 
Power Sector.” 
 
7. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
“The Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) was 
approved with an outlay of Rs. 3,03,758 crore and with a Gross 
Budgetary Support of Rs. 97,631 crore, for a period of five years from 
2021-22 to FY 2025-26. The RDSS has a universal coverage and is 
mainly focused on strengthening of distribution network for the benefit 
of all category of consumers. 
Under the RDSS, Projects worth Rs. 2.78 lakh crore for 
distribution infrastructure and smart metering works have been 
sanctioned, which besides Distribution Infrastructure works includes 

 
9 
smart metering of 19.79 crore consumers, 52.53 lakh Distribution 
Transformers (DTs) and 2.11 lakh Feeders. This also includes:  
a) Works amounting to Rs. 1,067 crores for extension/ 
strengthening of electricity infrastructure in the Northern Border areas 
for the five States/UTs of Himachal Pradesh, Ladakh, Uttarakhand, 
Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. 
b) Works worth Rs. 3,773 crore have been sanctioned for 
electrification of 8,21,529 nos. of households left out under Pradhan 
Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana (SAUBHAGYA) out of which 77,209 
nos. of households have been electrified. 
c) Works worth Rs. 516 crore for electrification of 1,29,269 nos. of 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG) households identified 
under Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM 
JANMAN) in 14 States out of which 85,984 nos. of households have 
been electrified. 
d) Works worth Rs. 39.34 crore under the Vibrant Village Program 
(VVP) have been sanctioned for the border villages in the States of 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Arunachal Pradesh. 
e) Works worth Rs. 209 crores for electrification of 42,852 un-
electrified tribal households and 1,193 public places identified under 
Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA-JGUA) have also been 
sanctioned in 6 States.  
The year-wise release of funds under SCSP and TASP heads 
under the RDSS is given below: 
HEAD 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilized 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilized 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilized 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Released 
(as on 
28.02.2025) 
SCSP - - 678.76 318.79  1,351.36 1,272.04 2,059.10 
TASP - - 388.74 194.73  899.25 763.36 933.09 
 
 
8. In their recommendation, the Committee rooted for maximum 
utilization of funds allocated for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes and other Socially Backward Groups as per the mandated 
requirement so that these groups get included in the development 
process of the Power Sector. 
In its action-taken reply, the Ministry has furnished that under 
RDSS, Projects worth Rs. 2.78 lakh crore for distribution infrastructure 
and smart metering works have been sanctioned, which includes works 
amounting to Rs. 1,067 crores for extension/strengthening of electricity 

 
10 
infrastructure in the Northern Border Areas for the five States/UTs of 
Himachal Pradesh, Ladakh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunachal 
Pradesh and works amounting to Rs. 4537.34 crores for electrification 
of households under Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha 
Abhiyan (PM-JANMAN), Vibrant Village Program, Dharti Aaba Janjatiya 
Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA-JGUA) and left-out households under 
SAUBHAGYA. The Committee appreciate the Ministry for extensive 
coverage of backward areas for strengthening of electricity 
infrastructure and electrification of households. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the district-wise details regarding 
strengthening of electricity infrastructure and electrification of 
households in all the aspirational districts of the Country. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that under Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti 
Yojana (DDUGJY) and thereafter, under Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har 
Ghar Yojana (SAUBHAGYA), all the States declared all the inhabited un-
electrified census villages across the Country, as electrified on 28th 
April, 2018 and all willing households as electrified on 31st March, 2019. 
While a total of 18,374 villages were electrified under DDUGJY, a total of 
2.86 crore households were electrified under the aegis of SAUBHAGYA. 
The Committee highly appreciate the fact that the Government of India 
stands committed to support all the States for electrification of 
households. Thus, electrification work of 8,00,552 left out households 
under SAUBHAGYA; 1,29,269 identified Particularly Vulnerable Tribal 
Group (PVTG) households under PM-JANMAN; 2,837 households 
located in remote, hilly and border areas identified under Vibrant 
Village Program and 3,030 households under Dharti Aaba Janjatiya 
Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DAJGUA), have been taken up under Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme. While applauding the Ministry for taking up 
the work related to electrification of a total of 9,35,688 households in 
various States of the Country, the Committee recommend that 
electrification of these households should be done on mission mode so 
that these households get electrified by the sun-set date of Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme i.e. 31st March, 2026.” 
 
 

 
11 
10. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“To ensure electricity access to each and every household in the 
country, the Ministry has undertaken the electrification of additional 
9,97,680 households, including Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group 
(PVTG) Households identified under PM-JANMAN, Vibrant Village 
Program (VVP) and Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA 
JAGUA) in remote areas, through Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme (RDSS). Out of the sanctioned household electrification works, 
electrification of 1,74,207 households have been completed as on date 
(16.01.2025). The Ministry has initiated a focused approach to expedite 
the process and is working closely in coordination with States and 
implementing agencies to ensure successful completion of works in a 
time-bound manner.” 
 
11. In response to the recommendation of the Committee about 
mission-mode electrification of households, the Ministry has submitted 
that out of the sanctioned 9,97,680 households, electrification of 
1,74,207 households have been completed as on 16th January, 2025 and 
the Ministry has been working closely in coordination with States and 
implementing agencies to ensure successful completion of works in a 
time-bound manner. 
Noting that more than 82% of the sanctioned households are left 
to be electrified with about 14 months to go for sun-set date of 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme i.e. 31st March, 2026; the 
Committee re-emphasize that the Ministry should make sustained 
efforts and ensure time-bound completion of sanctioned work. The 
Committee may also be apprised about the State/UT-wise updated 
status regarding electrification of households under Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme. 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that there is reduction in National Level 
AT&C Losses from the level of 27.8% during the year 2008-09 to 
15.37% in the year 2023. However, AT&C Losses have increased for the 
States of Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Mizoram and Telangana during the 
last 5 years. Further, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat (Uttar 

 
12 
Gujarat Vij Company Limited and Paschim Gujarat Vij Company 
Limited), Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh (MP-West), Maharashtra 
(MSEDCL), Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, Sikkim and Tripura have 
reduced their losses, but were not able to meet the targets for AT&C 
Losses in the year 2023. The Committee feel that increase in AT&C 
Losses in the States like, Maharashtra and Telangana is a cause for 
concern as this trend may hamper the reduction of AT&C Losses in the 
Country to the level of 12-15% by the stipulated date. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take this matter up 
with the concerned States/DISCOMs so as to avoid further 
deterioration of the condition related to AT&C Losses in these States.” 
 
13. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Increase in AT&C losses in some of the States is indeed a matter 
of concern. The reduction in the technical component of AT&C losses is 
being addressed by ensuring expeditious implementation of Loss 
Reduction works sanctioned under the Scheme. The Loss reduction 
infrastructure works include replacement of bare conductors with 
covered conductors, using LT AB cable and HVDC, upgradation/ 
augmentation of Distribution transformer/sub-stations, etc. In 
addition, the Smart Metering implementation under the Scheme is 
bound to address the commercial loss suffered by the DISCOMs. Smart 
pre-paid metering ensures automatic energy accounting and enhances 
billing and collection efficiency which would help in reduction in AT&C 
losses.  
To further ensure time bound implementation of Smart Metering 
in States, the Ministry has issued advisory in December, 2024 for 
implementing pre-paid smart metering. The advisory prescribes 
prioritizing smart metering for Government establishments and high-
load consumers such as commercial and industrial consumers; and 
thereafter transitioning to other category of consumers based on 
demonstration of benefits. In addition, Standard Operating Procedure 
(SoPs) for timely accounting and payment of subsidy have been issued 
to States, compliance to which will help improve AT&C losses.  
The Ministry intends to facilitate knowledge sharing and 
adoption of best practices from States that have successfully reduced 
their losses including Smart Metering and Loss Reduction initiatives.” 
 
14. In their recommendation, the Committee raised concerns 
regarding increase in AT&C losses in some of the States like 

 
13 
Maharashtra and Telangana. The Ministry, in its action-taken reply, has 
stated that the reduction in the technical component of AT&C losses is 
being addressed by implementation of Loss Reduction Works and Smart 
Metering would address the problem of commercial losses suffered by 
the DISCOMs. The Ministry has further submitted that advisory for 
implementing pre-paid smart metering and Standard Operating 
Procedure (SoPs) for timely accounting and payment of subsidy have 
been issued. The Ministry also intends to facilitate knowledge sharing 
and adoption of best practices from States that have successfully 
reduced their losses. The Committee would like to know about the 
impact of advisory issued in December, 2024 for time bound 
implementation of Smart Metering in the States and the Ministry may 
also apprise the Committee about the best practices/case-studies from 
the States that have successfully reduced their losses. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that a Smart Meter is an advanced version 
of Electronic Meter with two-way communication and remotely 
operated connect/ disconnect switch inside the meter. The main 
objective of Smart Metering is to enable near real time two-way 
communication between Smart Meter and Data Centre so as to enable 
remote reading, monitoring and control of meters at the consumer end. 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme envisages the installation of 25 
crore Smart Meters by the year 2025-26. The Committee also note that 
130.94 lakh Smart Meters have been installed in the Country so far. 
Considering the present pace of installation of Smart Meters, the target 
of installation of 25 crore Smart Meters by the year 2025-26 seems to 
be a difficult task. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
create awareness about Smart Meters among the masses as support of 
the people is of utmost importance in making implementation of a 
Programme successful. The Committee, therefore recommend that: 
i) The Ministry should closely monitor the progress of the work 
related to installation of Smart Meters and take prompt remedial action 
on various complaints and other related issues so that targets set in 
this regard are achieved without any delay.  

 
14 
ii) Awareness Programme, preferably in vernacular language, 
should be initiated in order to enhance awareness for adoption of 
Smart Meters at the consumer level.” 
 
16. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“The Ministry is committed to achieving successful 
implementation of smart metering. In this regard, regular review 
meetings are being taken by MoP with MD/CMDs of DISCOMs/AMISPs 
and stakeholders to closely monitor the progress of the work related to 
installation of Smart Meters. So far 104 such meetings have been 
convened to review smart metering and RDSS works. The Ministry in 
coordination with the States is ensuring identification and addressal of 
issues/challenges faced by the implementing agencies. Best practices of 
successful States such as Bihar and Assam related to implementation of 
Smart Meters have been demonstrated at various platforms. The 
Ministry has also issued various advisories and SoPs for 
implementation of pre-paid Smart meters. 
To create awareness about Smart Meters among the masses and 
as a confidence building measure for consumers, the Ministry has 
prioritized pre-paid smart metering for Government establishments 
and high-load consumers such as commercial and industrial 
consumers; and thereafter transitioning to other category of 
consumers based on demonstration of benefits. The Ministry has also 
issued specific advisory on implementation of Check Meters which 
would help build confidence among consumers. The SoP issued 
prescribes for regular consumer engagement to be conducted in 
respect of Smart Meters. 
The Ministry has also directed DISCOMs to set up effective and 
efficient consumer grievance redressal mechanism for prompt 
remedial action on complaints related to both pre and post installation 
of Smart meters. DISCOMs have been directed to create consumer 
awareness through various communication channels (including print 
and digital media) in vernacular language. Many States have already 
started the Consumer awareness program in vernacular language.” 
 
17. In response to the recommendation of the Committee about the 
need to take prompt remedial action on various complaints and other 
related issues regarding Smart Meters and initiation of Awareness 
Programme, preferably in vernacular language, in order to enhance 
awareness for adoption of Smart Meters at the consumer level, the 

 
15 
Ministry has listed various steps taken by it for successful 
implementation of Smart Metering Programme, like review meetings 
with stakeholders, identification and addressal of issues/challenges 
faced by the implementing agencies, demonstration of best practices of 
successful States such as Bihar and Assam, prioritization of pre-paid 
smart metering for Government Establishments and high-load 
consumers, advisory on implementation of Check Meters, direction to 
DISCOMs to set-up effective and efficient consumer grievance redressal 
mechanism, etc. In this regard, the Committee would like to know about 
the State-wise number and percentage of Government Establishments 
and High-Load Consumers, such as industrial and commercial 
consumers which have been shifted to pre-paid smart metering. 
Further, the Committee would like to be apprised about the Discom-
wise status regarding initiation of Consumer Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism for prompt remedial action on complaints related to both 
pre and post installation of Smart Meters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16 
CHAPTER – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Power is 
0.43 % of the total Budget (2024-25) of the Government of India. The 
Ministry had projected a demand of Rs. 26,083.90 crores, however a sum of 
Rs. 20,502 crores has been allocated to the Ministry for the Financial Year 
2024-25, which is 169.32 crores less than the previous year’s allocation. The 
Committee observe that the Ministry sought Rs. 20,337.66 crores for 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme, but it has been allocated Rs. 12,585 
crores for the same. Further, the Ministry did not demand any funds for 
Programmes like, North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project; 
Strengthening of Transmission System in the States of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Sikkim and Support for Flood Moderation Storage Hydro Electric Projects; 
however, Rs. 600.01 crores, Rs. 1315.01 crores and Rs. 449.25 crores have 
been allocated for these Programmes respectively. There seems to be a 
mismatch between the priorities of the Ministry and corresponding allocation 
of funds. The Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to be careful in 
estimation of its demands and also ensure that schemes/programmes do not 
suffer due to lack or under-utilization of allocated funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendation of the Committee. If the 
physical targets of the concerned schemes / projects require more funds due 
to better implementation, the Ministry shall try to mobilize additional funds 
through the (i) reallocation of funds within Ministry and (ii) Revised 
Estimate/Supplementary Demand for Grants. Further, best efforts are being 
made for better utilization of the allocated funds. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee note that the Budgetary Estimates of the Ministry for the 
financial year 2022-23 was Rs. 16,074.74 crores which was revised to Rs. 
13,106.58 crores and actual utilization was Rs. 9,312.98 crores. It means 
actual utilization was 57.94% of the Budgetary Estimates and 71.06% of the 
Revised Estimates. Nonetheless, the situation improved somewhat during the 
financial year 2023-24, as the actual utilization was 80.89% of the Budgetary 
Estimates and 94.82% of the Revised Estimates. During the financial year 

 
17 
2024-25, the Ministry has been able to utilize 60.06% of the Budgetary 
Estimates as on 30th September, 2024. Moreover, the scheduled capacity 
addition targets with respect to Thermal and Hydro Power could also not be 
achieved. The Committee feel that such under-utilization of funds and non-
achievement of scheduled targets will have an adverse effect on the future 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds 
and achievement of scheduled capacity addition targets in a time bound 
manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendation of the Committee. It is 
stated that as per the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme guidelines, a 
DISCOM will be eligible for release of 10% of the grant for Loss Reduction 
works as project advance after approval of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for Loss Reduction works. Accordingly, funds were released to DISCOMs after 
approval of the DPRs of DISCOMs by the RDSS Monitoring Committee. To 
ensure better utilization of funds, weekly review meetings are being held 
with Central Nodal Agencies (CNA) and respective State/DISCOMs Agencies 
(SA). 
Further, the following are the main reasons for not achieving the 
scheduled thermal power capacity addition target: 
i) Work slowed due to COVID pandemic; 
ii) Delay in supply of materials at site by equipment manufacturers; 
iii) Delay in land acquisitions and Disruption of works due to Local 
agitations; 
iv) Delay due to change in design to meet environmental norms; 
v) Delay in getting coal mines, coal linkages; 
vi) Delay in getting Environment Clearance; 
vii) Non availability of Experts, especially in case of foreign experts; 
viii) Contractual Issues/litigation/delay in payment to sub-contractors; 
ix) Delay in readiness of railway line/Railway sidings; 
x) Non-mobilization of funds and their payments; 
xi) Non sequential supply of materials at site; 
xii) Inadequate manpower mobilization at site; 
xiii) No proper mechanism to compensate hike in steel price; 
xiv) Limited vendor availability for BoP (Balance of Plants) packages. 
The following action/steps are taken to ensure timely completion of the 
under construction thermal power projects: 
• CEA monitors the progress of under-construction power projects through 
frequent site visits and interaction with the developers & other stakeholders. 

 
18 
CEA holds review meetings periodically with the developers and other 
stakeholders to identify and resolve issues critical for commissioning of 
Projects. 
• Regular reviews are also undertaken in MoP to identify the constraint 
areas to facilitate faster resolution of inter-Ministerial and other outstanding 
Issues. 
• In case of Central Power Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) projects, the project 
implementation parameters/milestones are incorporated in the annual MoU 
signed between respective CPSUs and Ministry of Power and the same are 
monitored during the quarterly performance review meetings of CPSUs and 
other meetings held in MoP/CEA. 
• Critical issues related with project implementation are being taken up 
with State Government/District Administration for facilitating the support in 
resolving the issues to the project implementing agencies. 
• As and when required, issues are also reviewed in the PRAGATI portal of 
PM for proactive governance and timely implementation. 
• For timely completion of thermal power projects, IT based project 
management i.e. PROMPT Portal (Portal for Online Monitoring of Projects-
Thermal) has also been developed and launched on 20-08-2024 for 
monitoring of under construction thermal power projects. It is designed to 
facilitate updated status, monitoring and analysis of thermal power projects. 
This online platform enables project managers and stakeholders to make 
informed decisions swiftly, ensuring that potential delays and issues are 
identified early and addressed promptly. 
Project-wise reason for the slippage of Hydroelectric projects (above 
25 MW) included in the hydro capacity addition programme for the year 
2019-20 to 2023-24 is enclosed as Annexure-I. 
The various steps taken/proposed to avoid slippage in hydro projects 
are as follows: 
i) Measures to reduce time and cost overrun has been notified by MoP 
vide OM no. 2/3/2016-NHPC dated 8-11-2019 (Annexure-II). 
ii) Dispute Avoidance Mechanism for avoidance and resolution of 
contractual disputes of contracts executed by hydro CPSUs at initial stage by 
engagement of an Independent Engineer has been devised vide MoP OM 
No.15-18/1/2020-HYDEL-II (MOP) dated 27-9-2021. 
iii) Dispute Resolution Mechanism for resolution of disputes of contracts 
executed by CPSUs/other organizations under MoP through Conciliation 
Committees has been devised vide OM dated 29-12-2021. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 

 
19 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note that SC Sub-Plan (SCSP), Tribal Area Sub-Plan (TASP) 
and other Special Component Plans have been introduced in order to ensure 
direct policy driven benefits for SCs, STs, Tribal Areas and North-Eastern 
Region Areas. Under these Plans, funds are earmarked for SCs, STs, etc. under 
separate budget heads for each Ministry of the Government of India. The 
allocation includes programmes benefitting SC/ST hamlets or designing of 
new appropriate development programmes. The Committee understand that 
the Schemes/Programmes which are being implemented by the Ministry are 
more centered around development of infrastructure, rather than being 
completely individual centric. Nonetheless, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should focus on maximum utilization of funds allocated for 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Socially Backward Groups as 
per the mandated requirement so that these groups get included in the 
development process of the Power Sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) was approved with an 
outlay of Rs. 3,03,758 crore and with a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 97,631 
crore, for a period of five years from 2021-22 to FY 2025-26. The RDSS has a 
universal coverage and is mainly focused on strengthening of distribution 
network for the benefit of all category of consumers. 
Under the RDSS, Projects worth Rs. 2.78 lakh crore for distribution 
infrastructure and smart metering works have been sanctioned, which 
besides Distribution Infrastructure works includes smart metering of 19.79 
crore consumers, 52.53 lakh Distribution Transformers (DTs) and 2.11 lakh 
Feeders. This also includes:  
a) Works amounting to Rs. 1,067 crores for extension/ strengthening of 
electricity infrastructure in the Northern Border areas for the five States/ 
UTs of Himachal Pradesh, Ladakh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunachal 
Pradesh. 
b) Works worth Rs. 3,773 crore have been sanctioned for electrification of 
8,21,529 nos. of households left out under Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har 
Ghar Yojana (SAUBHAGYA) out of which 77,209 nos. of households have been 
electrified. 
c) Works worth Rs. 516 crore for electrification of 1,29,269 nos. of 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG) households identified under 
Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM JANMAN) in 14 
States out of which 85,984 nos. of households have been electrified. 

 
20 
d) Works worth Rs. 39.34 crore under the Vibrant Village Program (VVP) 
have been sanctioned for the border villages in the States of Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Arunachal Pradesh. 
e) Works worth Rs. 209 crores for electrification of 42,852 un-electrified 
tribal households and 1,193 public places identified under Dharti Aaba 
Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA-JGUA) have also been sanctioned in 6 
States.  
The year-wise release of funds under SCSP and TASP heads under the RDSS is 
given below: 
HEAD 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilized 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilized 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Utilized 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Released 
(as on 
28.02.2025) 
SCSP - - 678.76 318.79  1,351.36 1,272.04 2,059.10 
TASP - - 388.74 194.73  899.25 763.36 933.09 
 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note that the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) 
has been formulated with the objective of improving the quality and 
reliability of power supply to consumers through a financially sustainable 
and operationally efficient distribution sector and it aims to reduce the AT&C 
Losses at pan-India level to 12-15% and Average Cost of Supply (ASC)– 
Average Revenue Realized (ARR) Gap to zero. The Scheme has an outlay of 
Rs. 3,03,758 crores with a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 97,631 crores from 
the Government of India over a period of five years from Financial Year 2021-
22 to 2025-26. The Committee observe that a total of Rs. 17,400 crores 
(Revised Estimates) have been allocated for Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme during the first 3 years of this Scheme i.e. from the Financial Year 
2021-22 to 2023-24. Out of this allocation, Rs. 13,616 crores could actually be 
utilized during these years i.e. 78.25% of the allocation. For 2024-25, Rs. 
12,585 crores have been allocated for this Scheme, out of which, Rs. 8517.38 
crores have been utilized as on 30th September, 2024. The Committee feel 
that utilization of funds under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme has 
been sub-optimal. The Committee further observe that around 51% of the 
sanctioned smart meters and 75% of the sanctioned infrastructure works 
have been awarded; however, only 12% of the overall physical progress has 

 
21 
been achieved till date and the balance works are under different stages of 
tendering process. Since only about 16 months are left as the sun-set date for 
this Scheme is 31st March, 2026; the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should expedite the implementation of the Revamped Distribution 
Sector Scheme so that stipulated targets are achieved within the given 
timeline. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power acknowledges the need for improvement in fund 
utilization and project progress under the Scheme. As on date (17.01.2025) 
out of BE of Rs. 12,585 crore for FY 25, a total of Rs. 11,951.23 crore has been 
released to various DISCOMs out of which Rs. 9,687 crore has been utilized 
by the DISCOMs so far. The release of funds, except 10% of Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS) in advance, is contingent upon DISCOMs/ Power Departments 
qualifying annual evaluations under the scheme and based on actual physical 
progress. The implementation of the projects was relatively slow during the 
initial years of the scheme and so was the utilization of funds due to reasons 
like delay in award of projects by the DISCOMs/Power Departments, 
administrative challenges etc. However, with regular review, the progress is 
now picking up. 
Considering that the sunset date for the Scheme is March 2026, the Ministry 
has increased the monitoring of physical implementation of works by the 
DISCOMs in coordination with Nodal Agencies. So far, about 71 review 
meetings at the level of Ministry (including 50 Meetings of the Monitoring 
Committee and about 21 reviews at the level of Minister of Power) have been 
held in last 1.5 years. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee note that under Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoti Yojana 
(DDUGJY) and thereafter, under Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana 
(SAUBHAGYA), all the States declared all the inhabited un-electrified census 
villages across the Country, as electrified on 28th April, 2018 and all willing 
households as electrified on 31st March, 2019. While a total of 18,374 villages 
were electrified under DDUGJY, a total of 2.86 crore households were 
electrified under the aegis of SAUBHAGYA. The Committee highly appreciate 
the fact that the Government of India stands committed to support all the 
States for electrification of households. Thus, electrification work of 8,00,552 
left out households under SAUBHAGYA; 1,29,269 identified Particularly 

 
22 
Vulnerable Tribal Group (PVTG) households under PM-JANMAN; 2,837 
households located in remote, hilly and border areas identified under Vibrant 
Village Program and 3,030 households under Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram 
Utkarsh Abhiyan (DAJGUA), have been taken up under Revamped 
Distribution Sector Scheme. While applauding the Ministry for taking up the 
work related to electrification of a total of 9,35,688 households in various 
States of the Country, the Committee recommend that electrification of these 
households should be done on mission mode so that these households get 
electrified by the sun-set date of Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme i.e. 
31st March, 2026. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To ensure electricity access to each and every household in the country, the 
Ministry has undertaken the electrification of additional 9,97,680 
households, including Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group (PVTG) 
Households identified under PM-JANMAN, Vibrant Village Program (VVP) 
and Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DA JAGUA) in remote 
areas, through Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS). Out of the 
sanctioned household electrification works, electrification of 1,74,207 
households have been completed as on date (16.01.2025). The Ministry has 
initiated a focused approach to expedite the process and is working closely in 
coordination with States and implementing agencies to ensure successful 
completion of works in a time-bound manner. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee note that there is reduction in National Level AT&C Losses 
from the level of 27.8% during the year 2008-09 to 15.37% in the year 2023. 
However, AT&C Losses have increased for the States of Jharkhand, 
Maharashtra, Mizoram and Telangana during the last 5 years. Further, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat (Uttar Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
and Paschim Gujarat Vij Company Limited), Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh (MP-
West), Maharashtra (MSEDCL), Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, Sikkim and 
Tripura have reduced their losses, but were not able to meet the targets for 
AT&C Losses in the year 2023. The Committee feel that increase in AT&C 
Losses in the States like, Maharashtra and Telangana is a cause for concern as 
this trend may hamper the reduction of AT&C Losses in the Country to the 

 
23 
level of 12-15% by the stipulated date. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take this matter up with the concerned 
States/DISCOMs so as to avoid further deterioration of the condition related 
to AT&C Losses in these States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Increase in AT&C losses in some of the States is indeed a matter of concern. 
The reduction in the technical component of AT&C losses is being addressed 
by ensuring expeditious implementation of Loss Reduction works sanctioned 
under the Scheme. The Loss reduction infrastructure works include 
replacement of bare conductors with covered conductors, using LT AB cable 
and HVDC, upgradation/augmentation of Distribution transformer/sub-
stations, etc. In addition, the Smart Metering implementation under the 
Scheme is bound to address the commercial loss suffered by the DISCOMs. 
Smart pre-paid metering ensures automatic energy accounting and enhances 
billing and collection efficiency which would help in reduction in AT&C 
losses.  
To further ensure time bound implementation of Smart Metering in States, 
the Ministry has issued advisory in December, 2024 for implementing pre-
paid smart metering. The advisory prescribes prioritizing smart metering for 
Government establishments and high-load consumers such as commercial 
and industrial consumers; and thereafter transitioning to other category of 
consumers based on demonstration of benefits. In addition, Standard 
Operating Procedure (SoPs) for timely accounting and payment of subsidy 
have been issued to States, compliance to which will help improve AT&C 
losses.  
The Ministry intends to facilitate knowledge sharing and adoption of best 
practices from States that have successfully reduced their losses including 
Smart Metering and Loss Reduction initiatives. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
The Committee note that a Smart Meter is an advanced version of Electronic 
Meter with two-way communication and remotely operated connect/ 
disconnect switch inside the meter. The main objective of Smart Metering is 
to enable near real time two-way communication between Smart Meter and 
Data Centre so as to enable remote reading, monitoring and control of meters 

 
24 
at the consumer end. Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme envisages the 
installation of 25 crore Smart Meters by the year 2025-26. The Committee 
also note that 130.94 lakh Smart Meters have been installed in the Country so 
far. Considering the present pace of installation of Smart Meters, the target of 
installation of 25 crore Smart Meters by the year 2025-26 seems to be a 
difficult task. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to create 
awareness about Smart Meters among the masses as support of the people is 
of utmost importance in making implementation of a Programme successful. 
The Committee, therefore recommend that: 
i) The Ministry should closely monitor the progress of the work related to 
installation of Smart Meters and take prompt remedial action on various 
complaints and other related issues so that targets set in this regard are 
achieved without any delay.  
ii) Awareness Programme, preferably in vernacular language, should be 
initiated in order to enhance awareness for adoption of Smart Meters at the 
consumer level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is committed to achieving successful implementation of smart 
metering. In this regard, regular review meetings are being taken by MoP 
with MD/CMDs of DISCOMs/AMISPs and stakeholders to closely monitor the 
progress of the work related to installation of Smart Meters. So far 104 such 
meetings have been convened to review smart metering and RDSS works. 
The Ministry in coordination with the States is ensuring identification and 
addressal of issues/challenges faced by the implementing agencies. Best 
practices of successful States such as Bihar and Assam related to 
implementation of Smart Meters have been demonstrated at various 
platforms. The Ministry has also issued various advisories and SoPs for 
implementation of pre-paid Smart meters. 
To create awareness about Smart Meters among the masses and as a 
confidence building measure for consumers, the Ministry has prioritized pre-
paid smart metering for Government establishments and high-load 
consumers such as commercial and industrial consumers; and thereafter 
transitioning to other category of consumers based on demonstration of 
benefits. The Ministry has also issued specific advisory on implementation of 
Check Meters which would help build confidence among consumers. The SoP 
issued prescribes for regular consumer engagement to be conducted in 
respect of Smart Meters. 
The Ministry has also directed DISCOMs to set up effective and efficient 
consumer grievance redressal mechanism for prompt remedial action on 
complaints related to both pre and post installation of Smart meters. 

 
25 
DISCOMs have been directed to create consumer awareness through various 
communication channels (including print and digital media) in vernacular 
language. Many States have already started the Consumer awareness 
program in vernacular language. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee appreciate that two Projects/Schemes have been initiated for 
strengthening of Transmission and Distribution Infrastructure in North-
Eastern States of the Country viz. ‘North Eastern Region Power System 
Improvement Project (NERPSIP)’ which aims to strengthen the Intra-State 
Transmission and Distribution Infrastructure in six States of North Eastern 
Region (Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura) and 
‘Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution 
System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim’. The Committee observe that the 
‘North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project’ got the approval 
of the Government in December 2014 and it is expected to get completed in 
December 2024. The estimated cost for this Project was Rs. 5,111.33 crores 
which has been revised to Rs. 6,700 crores in December 2020 i.e. a cost 
escalation of 31.08%. Similarly, the ‘Comprehensive Scheme for 
Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh 
and Sikkim’ got the approval of the Government in October 2014 and it is 
expected to get completed in March 2025. The estimated cost for this Project 
was Rs. 4,754.42 crores which has been revised to Rs. 9,129.32 crores in 
March 2021 i.e. a cost escalation of whopping 92.02%. The Committee feel 
that some time and cost escalations in these Projects may be attributed to 
difficult geographical conditions in the Region, but such a high cost escalation 
can not be justified. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry 
should ensure that these Projects get completed within their targeted 
schedule in order to avoid any further cost overrun. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. Further, 
it may also be stated that the major reasons for cost and time overrun in the 
North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project (NERPSIP) and 
‘Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution 
System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim’ are as follows: 

 
26 
 Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and 
Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim: 
a) Major reasons for revision in cost: 
i) Variation in prices of major indices such as Steel bloom, Aluminum, 
Copper, CRGO etc, during the implementation of the Scheme leading to Price 
variation in the Project Cost; 
ii) Increase in Compensation for Land, Forest, Crop & Tree based on 
actual/anticipated expenditure. Compensation towards tower base & line 
corridor based on diminution value of land in RoW corridor as per GoI/State 
notifications; 
iii) Compensation towards lines passing through USF/RF areas as notified 
by State Govt; 
iv) Increase in quantities of approved items due to increase in line length, 
addition of new scope as per CEA communications/ requirements of State 
Utilities of Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh etc.; 
v) Changes in taxes and duties due to the introduction of Goods & Services 
Tax; 
vi) Due to the non-performance of some of the executing agencies, some 
packages had to be annulled and re-tendered. 
b) Major reasons for extension in time:  
i) Due to non-availability of RoW (Right of Way) which is to be provided 
by the respective State Governments; 
ii) Change in scope specifications of the project based on the requirement 
of State Utilities; 
iii) Delay in award of majority of packages due to poor response and 
higher bid prices requiring resizing and retendering of various bids for 
works; 
iv) Delay in handing over of Substation land by the respective State 
Governments; 
v) Delay in providing Forest Clearance by the respective State Authorities 
for EHV and DMS lines; 
vi) Delay due to COVID-19 restrictions; 
vii) Flood in Sikkim during Oct’23 & again in June’24 affected the project 
activities. 
 North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project 
(NERPSIP): 
a) Major reasons for revision in cost: 
i) Variation in prices of major indices such as Steel bloom, Aluminum, 
Copper, CRGO etc, during the implementation of the Scheme leading to Price 
variation in the Project Cost; 

 
27 
ii) Increase in quantities of approved items due to increase in line length, 
addition of new scope as per CEA communications/requirements of 
respective State Utilities etc.; 
iii) Changes in taxes and Duties due to introduction of Goods & Services 
Tax. 
b) Major reasons for extension in time:  
i) Change in scope/specifications of the project based on the requirement 
of State Utilities; 
ii) Delay in award of majority of packages due to poor response and 
higher bid prices requiring resizing and retendering of various bids for 
works; 
iii) Delay in handing over of Substation land by the respective State 
Governments; 
iv) Incessant rain & unprecedented floods in July-Aug’24 also impacted the 
project works; 
v) Delay due to COVID-19 restrictions; 
vi) Delay due to CAA protests etc. 
Best efforts are being made to complete both the projects within the targeted 
schedule and project cost. Regular monitoring of the projects is being done at 
the level of Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Power 
(MoP). Regular interactions with State Government Authorities are being 
carried out by POWERGRID and MoP to resolve various issues pending with 
State Governments. POWERGRID deployed additional personnel in the 
project and separate setup created in POWERGRID for monitoring of 
NERPSIP. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
The Committee note that the Central Electricity Authority is a Statutory 
Organization originally constituted under Section 3(1) of the repealed 
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 since substituted by Section 70 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003. It plays an important role in development of Hydro 
Power Projects in the Country. The Committee observe that Central 
Electricity Authority has proposed the establishment of a Single Window Cell 
with officers from Central Water Commission (CWC), Geological Survey of 
India (GSI) and Central Soil and Materials Research Station (CSMRS) in order 
to streamline the concurrence process for Hydro Projects. Recognizing the 
need to provide a push to the Hydro Sector, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should consider the feasibility of creation of such Single Window 

 
28 
Cell in order to expedite the development of Hydroelectric Projects in the 
Country. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power noted the recommendations of the Committee. In this 
regard, a “Single Window Clearance Cell” was proposed to be created in 
Hydro Wing, Central Electricity Authority (CEA) to expedite the concurrence 
process of DPRs of HEPs/PSPs. Therefore, Central Water Commission (CWC), 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station (CSMRS) and Geological Survey of 
India (GSI) were requested to post officers (2 each from CSMRS, GSI and 5 
from CWC) in the cell from their organizations. 
Accordingly, two officers from GSI are nominated for attending the works 
pertaining to the “Single Window Clearance Cell” in CEA in addition to their 
present assignment. Further, regional and state unit centres of GSI had also 
been involved for the works pertaining to “Single Window Clearance Cell”. 
As expert reviewing will not be adequate/ effective/ practical with the 
proposed posting of 5 officers of CWC in CEA for appraisal of HEPs/PSPs, 
CWC proposed to continue with the present working system.  Subsequently, 
CWC nominated two nodal officers for clearance of DPRs within the timeline. 
Further, two more Design directorates of CWC were roped in for DPR 
clearance. 
Additionally, Secretary (Power) directed CEA to start process of calling 
Expressions of Interest for empanelling the Institute of National Importance 
for appraisal of DPR chapters related to Design Aspects for finalization of 
DPRs. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee note that the Bureau of Energy Efficiency could utilize only 
Rs. 77.16 crores, against the Budgetary Estimates of Rs. 197.82 crores and 
Revised Estimates of Rs. 145 crores during the Financial Year 2022-23. It 
means the expenditure was 39% of the Budgetary Estimates and 53.21% of 
the Revised Estimates. Out of the un-spent balance of Financial Year 2022-23, 
Rs. 56.92 crores were revalidated for expenditure during 2023-24. The 
Committee feel that the budgetary utilization by the Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency is not up to the mark. Further, the Committee observe that energy 
efficiency and energy conservation activities undertaken during the year 
2022-23, have resulted into total electrical savings of 306.55 Billion Units, 

 
29 
total annual energy savings of 50.98 Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent i.e. 
6.65% of total primary energy supply of the Country, total annual cost 
savings worth Rs. 1,94,320 crores approximately, equivalent reduction in 
CO2 emissions of around 306.40 Million Tonnes annually, etc. Appreciating 
the positive impact of energy efficiency and energy conservation activities in 
terms of saving of electrical energy and cost, the Committee recommend that: 
i) The Bureau of Energy Efficiency should gear itself up to ensure 
optimum utilization of the allocated amount. This requires greater efforts and 
better dynamism. 
ii) The Ministry should encourage all the States to establish Standalone 
State Designated Agencies (SDAs) dedicated solely to energy efficiency and 
conservation in order to provide a focused approach to implementation of 
energy conservation programs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During FY 2022-23, delay in fund utilization was mainly caused by Transition 
to Centralized Central Nodal Agency (CNA) structure in line with the revised 
Funds Procedure in the Public Financial Management System (PFMS).This 
transition required all 36 State Designated Agencies (SDAs) to obtain state 
approvals and open new CNA accounts, which delayed fund disbursements 
and utilization. 
The Bureau has implemented series of robust measures to facilitate efficient 
project execution, continuous monitoring and comprehensive review 
process. To ensure full utilization of the allocated funds following steps are 
being taken: 
a) Timely award of works to Implementing Agencies: BEE ensures 
prompt award of works to Implementing Agencies, including State 
Designated Agencies (SDAs) and other concerned agencies. 
b) Regular Monitoring of Activities: Monthly Reports are obtained from 
Implementing Agencies to closely monitor both physical and financial 
progress, to ensure that projects are on track and funds are properly and 
timely utilized, as intended. In addition, regular one to one meetings are 
organized to address issues or challenges faced during program 
implementation. This approach helps in identifying and resolving potential 
bottlenecks in timely manner. 
c) Review of Physical and Financial Progress of Activities: For SDAs, 
BEE organizes bi-annual national level meetings and quarterly regional level 
meetings to review the physical and financial progress of various activities, 
programs and schemes being implemented. Additionally, these meetings 
focus on sharing ‘Best Practices’ from SDAs, thus providing platform for 

 
30 
active Peer-Learning which enhances the effectiveness of program 
implementation across all SDAs. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee note that the Central Power Research Institute serves as a 
National Testing and Certification Authority for the purpose of certification of 
rating and performance to ensure availability of quality equipment for use 
under conditions prevalent in Indian Power Systems. It carries out testing 
and certifications for Distribution and Power Transformers, Switch Gear & 
Control Gears, Energy Meters and Smart Meters, Isolators, Lightning Arrestor, 
Capacitors, Cables and Conductors, Transmission Line Towers, Transformer 
Oil, LED etc. However, it has been submitted before this Committee that the 
certificates from Central Power Research Institute lack global acceptance. 
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should help Central 
Power Research Institute in this regard and take necessary action to ensure 
acceptance of its test certificates globally. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Committee. Ministry of 
Power has taken up the matter with the Ministry of External Affairs and 
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry to promote 
the acceptance of Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) Test Reports and 
Certificates internationally. 
Meetings were held with Indian Missions in Thailand, Bangladesh, Abu Dhabi, 
Kuwait, Accra, Muscat, Sharjah, Bahrain, Ghana etc. Also, CPRI participated in 
the 13th Joint Trade Committee (JTC) between India and Thailand, where 
CPRI officials successfully convinced the Thai Industrial Standards Institute 
(TISI) to accept CPRI Test Reports and Certificates. 
Subsequent to the above developments, currently, no challenges have been 
reported regarding non-acceptance of CPRI Test Reports with recent 
customers from the Middle East, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Africa, 
Brazil, USA, UK, France, and other regions. Overseas customers from various 
countries are now availing services of CPRI on regular basis. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
 
 
 

 
31 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee note that the National Power Training Institute was allocated 
an amount of Rs. 50 crores at the time of Budgetary Estimates during the year 
2022-23, which was reduced to Rs. 30 crores at the time of Revised 
Estimates. Against this allocation, the actual utilization was only Rs. 14.35 
crores i.e. 28.70% of the Budgetary Estimates and 47.83% of the Revised 
Estimates. Similarly, the Institute was allocated an amount of Rs. 35 crores at 
the time of Budgetary Estimates during the year 2023-24, which remained 
same at the time of Revised Estimates and it could utilize Rs. 22.94 crores i.e. 
65.54% of the Budgetary/Revised Estimates. The Committee feel that actual 
utilization of the budgetary allocations by the National Power Training 
Institute has been sub-optimal. The Committee were apprised that the 
Institute used to get Grant-in-Aid from the Ministry since its inception, but 
from the year 2004-05, it was declared as self sustained, which was 
maintained till 2018. Keeping in view the sub-optimal utilization of allocated 
funds by the National Power Training Institute and the fact that the Institute 
was self-sufficient for a long period of time and then it lapsed into 
dependence in 2018, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
take steps to ameliorate the reasons responsible for non-utilization of 
allocated funds by the Institute so that its funds absorptive capacity gets 
increased. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the steps 
taken by the Institute to regain its status of self sufficiency. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India allocate funds to National Power Training Institute 
(NPTI) for meeting the requirement of its pension liabilities and for creation/ 
upgradation of Infrastructure in its institutes spread across the country. In FY 
2022-23 (RE) as against budgetary allocation of Rs.30 crore, NPTI utilized Rs. 
14.35 crore out of which Rs. 12 crore was utilized for meeting pension 
liabilities and Rs. 2.35 crore for Infrastructure upgradation. Similarly, in FY 
2023-24 (RE) as against budgetary allocation of Rs. 35 crore, NPTI utilized 
Rs. 22.93 crore out of which an amount of Rs. 10 crore was utilized for 
meeting pension liabilities and Rs. 12.93 crore for Infrastructure 
upgradation.  
During the above mentioned period, NPTI proposed various works related to 
the upgradation of critical infrastructure of its institutes like construction and 
furnishing of hostel building etc. Due to considerable time taken by the 
institute in preparation and subsequent approval of Detailed Project Report 
(DPRs), the proposed works under them could not be executed and funds 
allocated to NPTI remained unutilized. 

 
32 
To enhance the absorptive capacity of the institution, the institute was 
advised by this ministry to submit proposals well in advance along with 
utilization certificates regularly so that funds could be released in time. With 
the help of these measures the utilization of funds under infrastructure head 
has improved in FY 2023-24 compared to FY 2022-23. 
NPTI is an autonomous institute registered under the Haryana Registration 
and Regulation of Societies Act of 2012. It has consistently maintained self-
sufficiency since 2004-05 and is bearing all recurring and non-plan 
expenditures, including the salaries of its employees, solely through its own 
revenue earnings. As mentioned above, the financial support of Ministry is 
limited to provide Grants for infrastructure development and towards 
pension liabilities. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2024-Budget, Dated: 05/03/2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
CHAPTER – III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's Replies 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
34 
CHAPTER – IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require Reiteration 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 

 
35 
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
30th July, 2025 
8 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Shrirang Appa Barne 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
  

 
36 
ANNEXURE - I 
Project-wise reasons for the slippage of Hydroelectric projects (above 
25 MW) included in the hydro capacity addition programme for the year 
2019-20 to 2023-24 
 
 
Hydro Capacity Addition during the Year 2019-20 
Sl. 
No. 
Particular Unit 
Nos. 
Capacity (MW) Commissioning  Remarks/  
Critical Issues Target Actual As 
Programmed 
Actual/ 
Anticipated 
A. Central Sector 
1 Kameng  
NEEPCO, 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4x150=600 MW 
 
Unit # 1 
Unit # 2 
Unit # 3 
Unit # 4 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
150 
Aug’19 
Aug’19 
Aug’19 
Aug’19 
 
03.02.2020 
10.02.2020 
Slipped 
Slipped 
Slipping to 
(March-21) 
-Seepage of water during 
welding affecting progress 
of works and causing delays. 
-Difficult approach and 
working condition. 
-Ventilation constrains 
Works affected due to heavy 
rains this monsoon. 
Sub- total (A) -- 600  300  -- -- -- 
B. State Sector 
2. Uhl – III 
BVPCL, H.P. 
3x33.33=100 
Unit # 1 
Unit # 2 
Unit # 3 
33.33 
33.33 
33.33 
-- Oct,19 
Nov,19 
Dec,19 
Slipping to  
(Dec,22) 
 
-Difficult approach  
-Delay in welding of liner in 
bend. 
- Rupture in Penstock in 
May,2020 
3 Sawra Kuddu 
HPPCL, H.P. 
3x37=111 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit # 2 
Unit # 3 
37 
37 
37 
-- Sep,19 
Oct,19 
Nov,19 
Slipping to  
(March,21) 
 
- Delay in completion of 
HRT works & associated 
transmission line. 
- During filling of water 
conductor system in May,20, 
leakage is observed in adit 
to HRT 
Sub- total (B) -- 211 -- -- -- -- 
C. Private Sector 
4. Bajoli Holi 
GMR,H.P. 
3x60=180 MW 
 
Unit # 1 
Unit # 2 
Unit # 3 
60 
60 
60 
-- Jan.,20 
Feb.,20 
Mar.,20 
Slipping to  
Dec 21 
 and  
efforts for 
June 21 
-Works affected due to 
heavy rainfall in August,19 
and inclement weather from 
early Dec,19. to end of 
Jan,20 
-Poor financial health of civil 
contractor. 
5. Singoli Bhatwari 
L&T, Uttarakhand 
2x33=99 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit # 2 
Unit # 3 
33 
33 
33 
-- Mar.,20 
Mar.,20 
Mar.,20 
Slipping to  
(Dec,20) 
 
-Poor geology in HRT. -
Agitation by local people. 
-Flash flood in June,2013. 
6. 
 
 
 
Sorang 
HSPCL 
Uttarakhand 
2x50=100 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit # 2 
 
50 
50 
-- Nov,19 
Dec.,19 
 Slipping to 
Dec,21 
- Poor planning of re-
erection of penstock works  
- Weather constraints. 
Sub- total (C) -- 379 -- -- -- -- 
Total (A+B+C) -- 1190 300 -- 
 
 
 
 
 

 
37 
Hydro Capacity Addition during the Year 2020-21 
Sl. 
No. 
Particular Unit 
Nos. 
Capacity (MW) Commissioning Remarks / 
Critical Issues Target Actual As 
Programmed 
Actual (A)/ 
Anticipated 
A. Central Sector 
1 Kameng  
NEEPCO, 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4x150=600 MW 
Unit #3 
Unit #4 
150 
150 
 
300 March,21 
March,21 
 
 
21.01.2021 
11.02.2021 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
 
Sub- total (A) -- 300 300 -- -- -- 
B. State Sector       
2 Sawra Kuddu 
HPPCL, H.P. 
3x37=111 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
Unit #3 
37 
37 
37 
111 (March,21) 
(March,21) 
(March,21) 
12.11.2020 
05.12.2020 
16.12.2020 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
Sub- total (B) -- 111 111 -- -- -- 
C. Private Sector 
3. Singoli Bhatwari 
L&T, Uttarakhand 
2x33=99 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
Unit # 3 
33 
33 
33 
99 March.,21 
March.,21 
March.,21 
19.11.2020 
18.12.2020 
25.12.2020 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
4. 
 
 
 
Rongnichu 
2x48= 96 MW* 
Madhya Bharat 
Power Corpn., 
Sikkim 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
 
48 
48 
-- March,21 
March,21 
To be 
commissioned 
in FY 2021-22 
with 17 MW 
enhanced 
capacity 
Land Acquisition 
Poor geology. 
Sub- total (C) -- 195 -- -- -- -- 
Total (A+B+C) -- 606 510 -- 
Hydro Capacity Addition during the Year 2021-22 
Sl. 
No. 
Particular Unit 
Nos. 
Capacity (MW) Capacity Addition  Remarks/ 
Critical Issues 
 
Target Actual  As 
Programmed 
Actual/ 
Anticipated 
A. State Sector 
1 Pallivasal 
KSEB, Kerala 
2x30=60 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit # 2 
30 
30 
-- December’21 
December’21 
 
2022-23 
2022-23 
1. Delay in land acquisition.  
2. Poor geology strata in 
HRT. 
3. Works stopped by 
contractor since 28.1.15 to 
11.04.2017 due to contractual 
issues. Contract terminated on 
13.09.2018 and re-awarded in 
August, 2019. 
2 Thottiyar 
KSEB, Kerala 
1x30+1x10=40
MW 
Unit #1 
Unit # 2 
10 
30 
-- December’21 
December’21 
 
2022-23 
2022-23 
1. Land acquisition issue. 
2. The works of weir and 
approach channel stopped 
from 2010 to 2012 by local 
people.  
3. The work stopped by 
Court from 12.12.2012 to 
April-2013.  
4.  Financial crunch with 

 
38 
contractor leading to 
foreclosure of contract in 
April, 2017 and balance 
works re-awarded in January, 
2018. 
Sub- total (A) -- 100 -- -- -- -- 
B. Private Sector 
3 Sorang 
HSPCL, H.P. 
2x50=100 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
50 
50 
 
100 
June’21 
June’21 
23.09.2021 
21.09.2021 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
 
4 Bajoli Holi 
GMRBHHPPL, 
H.P. 
3x60=180 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
Unit #3 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
60 
June’21 
June’21 
June’21 
25.03.2022 
27.03.2022 
28.03.2022 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
 
5 Rongnichu 
MBPCL, Sikkim 
2x56.5=113 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
56.5 
56.5 
113 May’21 
May’21 
25.06.2021 
30.06.2021 
Commissioned 
Commissioned 
 
Sub-total (B) -- 393 393 -- -- -- 
Total (A+B) -- 493 -- -- 
Hydro Capacity Addition during the Year 2022-23 
Sl. 
No. 
Particular Unit 
Nos. 
Capacity (MW) Capacity Addition  Remarks/Critical Issues 
 Target  Actual  As 
Programmed 
Actual(A)/ 
Anticipated 
A  Central Sector  
1 Naitwar mori 
2X30=60MW  
 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
30 
30 
-- Dec'22               
Jan'23   
Slipped to 
2023-24 
-COVID-19 related restrictions. 
- Delay in Environment 
Clearance for Quarry site. - 
2 Subansiri Lower  
8x250= 2000 
MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
250 
250 
-- Jan'23 
Feb'23 
 
Slipped to 
2023-24 
-Extended Monsoon & damage 
to protection wall of power 
house/collapse of DT-2 
3 Tehri PSS                     
4x250= 1000 
MW 
Unit #1 
 
250 
 
-- Mar'23 Slipped to 
2023-24 
-Geological constraints 
 
Sub-total (A) -- 810 -- -- -- -- 
B   State Sector  
1 Pallivasal 
KSEB, Kerala 
2x30=60 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
30 
30 
 Mar'23                       
Mar'23 
Slipped to 
2023-24 
-Extended Monsoon 
-Slow progress of works 
2 Thottiyar 
KSEB, Kerala 
1x30+1x10=40
MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
10 
30 
 Feb'23                       
Mar'23 
Slipped to 
2023-24 
-Extended Monsoon 
-Slow progress of works 
3 Vyasi                    
2x60=120 MW 
Unit #1 
Unit #2 
60 
60 
60 
60 
Apr'22                       
May'22 
May'22 (A)                    
April'22(A) 
-U#1 Commissioned on 
24.05.2022 
-U#2 Commissioned 
on 22.04.2022 
Sub- total (B) -- 220 120 -- -- -- 
C. Private Sector 
1 Tidong-I                    
2x50= 100 MW 
Unit #1 
 
50 -- Mar'23 Slipped to 
2023-24 
-Delay in clearance of 
transmission line 

 
39 
-Pressure shaft misalignment 
issues 
Sub- total (C) -- 50 -- -- -- -- 
Total (A+B +C) -- 1080 120 -- 
Note: UHL-III has slipped to FY 24-25. 
Hydro Capacity Addition Programme for 2023-24 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Project 
State 
implementing 
Agency 
Unit 
No. 
Capacity (MW) Capacity Addition Reason for slippage 
Target Actual As 
Programmed 
Actual(A)/ 
Anticipated 
A. Central Sector 
 
1 
Naitwar 
Mori 
2x30=60 
MW 
Uttarakhand 
/SJVNL 
U-1 
U-2 
30 
30 
30 
30 
June’23 
July'23 
24.11.2023 
04.12.2023 
Commissioned in 
Dec’23 
 
2 
Subansiri 
Lower 
8x250= 
2000 MW 
Arunachal 
Pradesh/NHPC 
U-1 
 
U-2 
 
250 
 
250 
 
-- Aug’23 
 
Sept’23 
 
Slipped to 
2026-27 
Slipped to 
2026-27 
 
Diversion tunnel-1 
collapsed. 
Slope stability of left 
bank. 
Erection of balance 6 
nos. of radial gates, DT 
plugging. 
Sub-total(A) -- -- 560 60  -- -- -- 
B. State Sector 
3 Pallivasal 
2x30=60
MW 
Kerala/ 
KSEB Ltd. 
U-1 
 
U-2 
30 
 
30 
-- Dec'23 
 
Dec'23 
Slipped to 
2024-25 
Slipped to 
2024-25 
 
Slow progress of works 
 
Slow progress of works 
 
4 
Thottiyar 
1x30+1x1
0=40MW 
Kerala/ 
KSEB Ltd. 
U-1 
 
U-2 
30 
 
10 
-- Dec'23 
 
Mar'24 
Slipped to 
2024-25 
Slipped to 
2024-25 
Slow progress of works 
 
Slow progress of works 
 
Sub-total (B) -- -- 100 -- -- -- -- 
Total (A+B) 660 60 -- 
Note: Tehri PSS has slipped to FY 2024-25 and Tidong-I has slipped to FY 2025-26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
40 
ANNEXURE - II 
Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Power to reduce the incidence of 
time and cost overruns in Hydro Power Projects 
i) Sunset Date: The provisions of CERC Regulations (2019-24) are 
applicable across all generating projects and provide the time for completion 
of balance works; hence the cut-off date defined in CERC regulations may be 
considered as sunset date for future hydro projects. 
ii) Preparation of Realistic Project Schedule: All hydro CPSUs may 
prepare more realistic project schedule based on past experience of projects 
in vicinity. Although, it may not be possible to foresee all the events causing 
delay in case of hydro projects, some margin, based upon the past experience 
of similar projects, may be built in project schedule to take care of 
contingencies. 
iii) All Hydro PSUs must use latest software tools for Project Monitoring on 
regular basis at CPSU level. Representative from the concerned State 
Government may also be invited for Quarterly review meetings at Ministry 
level to resolve the issues, if any, with the State Government. 
iv) If the project is not likely to be commissioned within the time limit 
approved by CCEA, the implementing Agency must seek prior approval of 
competent authority at least six months prior to the approved time limit on 
the following: 
a) Components of works as per approved DPR/RCE which would 
not be completed on Scheduled Date with reason thereof along with 
likely completion date and likely expenditure (cost overrun with time 
overrun). 
b) Segregation of Critical works and non-critical works for 
commissioning of the projects. 
v) As CERC regulation is already known in advance, the implementing 
agency must mention the “sun set date” in the DPR/RCE itself while 
indicating non-critical works which would not be completed on CoD. 
However, in case CoD is not likely to be adhered to as per original time line 
approved by CCEA, while taking prior approval of the competent authority as 
suggested at Sl. No. (a) above, the “sun set date” may also be mandatorily 
mentioned for non-critical works. 

 
41 
vi) Following measures are to be followed to reduce incidences of time 
overrun and cost overrun for hydro projects: 
a) One of the major reasons for stoppage of works is delay in 
payments and settlement of disputes with the contractor leading to 
liquidity crunch with the contractor. Therefore, time bound resolution 
of disputes and timely payment mechanism should be ensured. 
b) Delegation of Power should be reviewed by the CPSU to ensure 
that sufficient power is delegated at project level for timely decisions 
on various issues at the project. 
c) Adoption of international best practices for implementation of 
hydro projects including methodology to deal with the geological 
surprises. 
d) The availability of all resources, viz., equipment and manpower 
as per schedule should be ensured. 
e) Equipment should be maintained in good condition and AMC of 
the equipment should be given to OEM. 
f) The new equipment would be purchased by the developer on 
behalf of contractor and may be hypothecated in the name of the 
developer or may also be purchased by the Contractor as per need of 
the project. 
g) Settlement of contractor’s claim should be done in timely 
manner. The report/records should be kept in electronic form and 
need to be shared with the Head Quarter on real time basis. 
h) If the contractor wishes to raise a claim for any reason, such 
reasons/event should be notified by the contractors within 15 days of 
such event and claims should be raised by the contractor within 90 
days. If the contractor either fails to (i) notify the even or (ii) files the 
claim within 90 days, the claim made by him shall not be entertained. 
Thereafter, the claims should be settled within 45 days after receiving 
the same by the Engineer-in-charge (EIC) otherwise the claim made by 
contractor will be deemed to have been accepted. 
i) If the Contractor is not satisfied with EIC decision, he may 
approach Dispute Resolution Board (DRB) within 15 days from the 
decision of EIC. It was also decided that at least one member of DRB 
should be from Technical background for better appreciation of 
technical issues. DRB will take decision within 6 months. If decision of 

 
42 
DRB is not adhered by the Contractor, then EIC’s decision may be 
treated as final. 
j) Web based e-diary system shall be maintained to keep record of 
for all events in respect of under construction projects. The letters/ 
claims by contractor and response of the project in-charge should be 
entered in such system. All the letter/claims received from the 
contractor must be responded immediately to effectively counter his 
claim in the event of dispute. 
k) If work is stalled for any reason other than natural calamity, 
Management should take quick decision (within 60 days) to resolve the 
issue, e.g. facilitate resumption of work by contractor or cancellation of 
contract and rebidding of works or any other mechanism found 
suitable for quick resumption of work etc., and should ensure that work 
is not stalled for more than 60 days. The overall responsibility for 
stoppage of work beyond 60 days shall be upon Director-in-charge of 
the construction of the projects & CMD. 
l) Risk sharing mechanism for stoppage of work in situations, e.g., 
law and order problem, floods, earthquake, geological surprises, local 
resistance etc. should be well defined in contract document. 
m) CPSUs should devise the mechanism of incentivizing labour on 
achieving project milestones in time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
43 
APPENDIX - I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
MINUTES OF SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2024-25) HELD ON 30TH JULY, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-62, 
SAMVIDHAN SADAN, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
 
 MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne - Chairperson 
 
2.  Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
4.  Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
5.  Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
6.  Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
7.  Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
8.  Shri Dulu Mahato 
9.  Shri Ramprit Mandal 
10.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
12.  Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
 
13.  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
14.  Shri R. Dharmar 
15.  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 

 
44 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee 
then took up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Power’. 
(ii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
(iii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’. 
(iv) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 5th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee 
adopted the abovementioned draft Reports without any amendment/ 
modification. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses during the 
current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
 

 
45 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12  
Total:  12 
Percentage:  
 
100 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
 