           MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY   [Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy]   SEVENTH REPORT      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI    July, 2025/ Shravan, 1947 (Saka)    
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25) EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 7 

  Page 2    
SEVENTH REPORT  STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25)  (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)   MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY   [Action taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy]   
 
 Presented to the Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2025  Laid in the Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2025   
 
            LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  July, 2025/ Shravan, 1947 (Saka) 
 

  Page 3  
  
C O E NO. 385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by_____________. 
  

  Page 4  
  
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
16 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
35 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
36 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
37 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 30th July, 2025 38 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy. 
40 
                

  Page 5  
  
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25) 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne -  Chairperson  
2. Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3. Shri Jagadish Chandra Barma Basunia 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Shri Shahu Shahaji Chhatrapati 
6. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
7. Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
9. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
10. Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
11. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
12. Shri Dulu Mahato 
13. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
14. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
17. Smt. Shambhavi 
18. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
19. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
20. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya* 
24. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
25. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
26. Shri R. Dharmar  
27. Shri N.R. Elango 
28. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
29. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
30. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
31. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Madhumita Assistant Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
*Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha on 14th June, 2025. He has been re-nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 24th July, 2025. 

  Page 6  
  
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Seventh Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 10th December, 
2024 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the 
Government to the observations/recommendations contained in this Report 
were received on 4th February, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 30th July, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                Shrirang Appa Barne 
30th July, 2025                                     Chairperson, 
Shravan 8, 1947 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Energy 
 

  Page 7  
  
CHAPTER –I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- 
taken by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on  
10th December, 2024 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same 
day. The Report contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
                                                                                                  Total - 11 
                         Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Nil                            Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Nil                                                      Total - 00 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil                                  Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 

  Page 8  
  
4. The Committee further desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or 
merit comments. 
 [ 
Recommendation No. 1 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Ministry had projected the 
budgetary requirement of Rs. 12,001.70 crore for the financial year 
2024-25 and Rs. 21,230 crore has actually been allocated which is an 
increase of about 170% against Revised Estimates of last year. This 
amount includes Rs. 19,100 crore as Budget Estimates and Rs. 2,130 
crore from Sovereign Green Fund. The Committee observe that about 
87% budget of the Ministry is allocated for only one component i.e. 
Solar Energy. Under Solar Energy component itself, about 72% of the 
budget is for implementation of only one scheme i.e. PM Surya Ghar: 
Muft Bijli Yojana. About 4% of the budget has been allocated for 
clearing past liabilities related to wind and small hydro projects. 
National Bioenergy Programme has been allocated about 1% of the 
budget. National Green Hydrogen Mission and Green Energy Corridor 
have been allocated a budget of about 3% each. The remaining about 
2% of the Budget has been allocated for Establishment Expenditure, 
Autonomous Bodies and Support Programme including Research and 
Development. For 2024-25, the Ministry has been allocated a budget 
which is about 77% higher than its demand. This is the highest ever 
budgetary allocation for the Ministry till date. Since the Budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry for 2024-25 has been considerably enhanced 
as compared to the previous years, the Committee hope that the 
Ministry would increase its fund absorption capacity and focus on 
exhaustive utilization of the budgetary allocation in a timely manner.” 
 
7 . In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
has stated as under: 
 

  Page 9  
  
“Union Cabinet had approved the PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli 
Yojana on 29th February, 2024 with a total outlay of Rs.75,021 crore 
for installing rooftop solar for one crore households in the country by 
2026-27.  As the budget proposals for 2024-25 of the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy (MNRE) were formulated in Sep-Oct, 2023 i.e. 
long before the approval of the PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, 
enhanced allocation of Rs.21,230 crore was provided for MNRE in BE 
2024-25 including for PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana.   Under 
Revised Estimates 2024-25, the allocation of the Ministry has been 
kept at Rs.17,298.44 crore.   
The umbrella-wise details of Revised Estimates (RE) for 2024-25 
and no. of programmes covered under each umbrella are given below: 
Umbrella Schemes/programmes RE 2024-25 
(Rs. in crore) 
I. Solar 
Energy 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 11,100.00 
PM-KUSUM 2525.00 
Solar Power (Grid) (CPSU, Solar Park, 
Defence/Indo Park, PMDAP Ladakh,  
RPSSGP & Demo GBI, VGF, GCRT) 
1300.00 
Solar Power (Off-grid) 12.00 
Interest payment and issuing Expense on 
bonds 124.35 
II. Bio 
Energy 
Programme 
Bio Power (Grid) 0 
Bio Power (Off-grid) 125.00 
Biogas Programme 60.00 
III. 
Programme 
for Wind 
other 
Renewable 
Energy 
Wind Power (Grid) 800.00 
Hydro Power (Grid) 45.00 
Hydro Power (Off-grid) 1.00 
IV. Support Human Resource Development and 30.00 

  Page 
10 
 
  
Programme Training 
Research and Development 30.00 
Information & Public Advertising (I&PA 8.00 
Monitoring & Evaluation 0.01 
International Relations 3.00 
International Solar Alliance (ISA) 
Cooperation 100.00 
V. Hydrogen 
Mission National Green Hydrogen Mission 300.00 
VI. Storage 
and 
Transmission 
Green Energy Corridor 600.00 
VII. 
Autonomous 
Bodies 
Institutes 62.50 
VIII. 
Secretariat 
Economic 
Services 
Administrative Expenses 72.58 
Total 17298.44 
As on 31.12.2024, a total expenditure of Rs.10,510.34 crore has 
been incurred, which is around 61% of the total Revised Estimates 
(RE) allocation of the Ministry.    
The Ministry has duly noted the suggestions of the Committee to 
increase its fund absorption capacity.  The following steps have also 
been taken by MNRE in this regard: 
• All the Programme Divisions have been asked to work 
proactively with States/State Nodal Agencies (SNAs)/Central Nodal 
Agencies (CNAs) to ensure that bills are raised by them timely. 
• The expenditure status is regularly monitored at apex level.  It is 
also discussed in each Senior Officers’ meeting in the Ministry and 
necessary directions are given to all concerned to ensure that funds 
are released in time. 

  Page 
11 
 
  
• As and when need for amendment in the schemes guidelines to 
ensure smooth execution of any scheme is observed, it is being carried 
out as per prescribed procedure.” 
 
8. As per information provided by the Ministry, the Committee note 
that around 39% of the budget under Revised Estimates (RE) of the 
financial year 2024-25 remained to be spent during the last quarter of 
2024-25. The Committee are of the view that leaving such a high 
proportion of funds for expenditure during the last quarter is not a 
good budgetary management practice as it points towards the tendency 
of “March Rush”. At the same time, the Committee do recognize that 
most of the budget of the Ministry is disbursed as Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) to States/State Nodal Agencies (SNAs) for 
implementation of the schemes of the Ministry. This means that the 
disbursement of any amount by the Ministry is dependent upon the 
performance of the implementing agencies as it is linked to the scheme 
specifications viz. generation of bills, final inspection reports etc. The 
Committee also acknowledge the measures taken by the Ministry for 
ensuring timely generation of bills by implementing agencies and 
undertaking regular monitoring at apex level as well as carrying out 
amendments in scheme guidelines, when needed. However, given 
India’s ambitious commitments towards development of renewable 
energy, the Committee feel that the Ministry should supervise the 
implementation of its schemes/programmes in a more focused manner 
by closely engaging with the States/SNAs so that disbursement of CFA 
can be made timely. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that PM-KUSUM Scheme was launched in 
March, 2019 to provide financial support to the farmers for 
installation of standalone solar pumps, solarization of existing grid-
connected agriculture pumps and also to provide the farmers an 
opportunity to become solar entrepreneurs by installing solar power 
plants on their barren/fallow agriculture land. The Committee observe 

  Page 
12 
 
  
that targets under different components of the Scheme could not be 
achieved and hence its timeline has been extended till March, 2026. 
The Ministry has stated that the reasons for slow progress under the 
scheme include lack of financing to farmers under Component-A, delay 
in tendering process and lack of interest by States under Component-B 
and lack of interest by farmers in individual pump solarization under 
Component-C. To overcome these issues, the Ministry has undertaken 
certain measures like inclusion of Component-A under Agriculture 
Infrastructure Fund (AIF), allowing State-level tender for procurement 
of standalone pumps, including system integrators to work as vendors, 
solarization of agriculture feeders instead of individual pumps under 
Component-C etc. The Committee while acknowledging the 
developments made, would also like to recommend that:  
i) Component-A as part of the scheme should be revisited by the 
Ministry as the investment required to setup a 2MW solar power plant 
is around Rs. 9 crore which is huge by all means, especially for 
marginal and small farmers. Further, there is no subsidy on this 
component.  
ii) With regard to Component-B, the subsidy is only upto 7.5 
Horsepower (HP) solar pumps which is proving to be insufficient for 
farmers. Given the fact that many districts of India has become water-
deficient, 7.5 HP pump capacity is not suitable for all regions. 
Therefore, the Ministry may conduct a detailed study to understand 
the ground situation and accordingly modify the component. 
iii) With regard to Component-C, only around 37 thousand pumps 
have been solarised even though more than 33 lakh pumps have been 
sanctioned. Therefore, the Ministry may see to it that long gestation 
period of more than 18 months is reduced and the sanctioned pumps 
actually reach the farmers on time.” 
 
10. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
has stated as under: 
 
“The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has noted 
the valuable recommendations made by the Committee for compliance 
and efforts are underway to implement the same. Further to make PM 
KUSUM more accessible to farmers and to achieve targets set under the 
scheme following actions are being taken:  
(i) Under Component A of the scheme, solar plant can be installed by 
the farmers on his own land either directly by himself or in partnership 

  Page 
13 
 
  
with group of farmers/ cooperatives/ panchayats/ Farmer Producer 
Organisations (FPO)/Water User associations (WUA), or through a 
developer. Under this scheme, DISCOM is eligible to get Performance 
Based Incentive (PBI) @ Rs. 0.40 per unit purchased or Rs. 6.6 lakh per 
MW of capacity installed. 
Recently the Cabinet has approved the coverage of Component A 
of PM KUSUM under Agriculture Infrastructure Funds (AIF). This will 
further enable the access of easy and affordable finance to small and 
marginal farmers to install solar plants up to 2 MW under Component A 
of the scheme.  
(ii) During FY 2022-23, a proposal to increase the capacity up to 15 
HP under Component B of the scheme was submitted to Ministry of 
Finance, however the request of Ministry for allowing Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) for 15 HP capacity pumps in arid and semi-arid zones 
was not approved. However, CFA for pumps up to 15 HP was permitted 
for North-Eastern and Himalayan States, considering their topography 
and requirement of Community farming in High Water Table Areas, 
with the restriction that the total number of pumps up to 15 HP would 
not be more than 10% of the total allocation. The Ministry is taking 
steps to implement the scheme at faster pace.  For ease of 
implementation, the scheme guidelines were revised in January 2024.  
(iii) Under PM KUSUM, the progress is reviewed regularly and the 
capacities are reallocated to other States, if there is no progress or 
unsatisfactory progress. The scheme gestation period is 24 months out 
of which maximum of 18 months are given for installation work after 
issuance of Letter of Award. This has been done in accordance with the 
requests received from States, indicating the ground challenges for 
installation work due to land availability, right of way, monsoon period 
etc.  
However, the scheme has gained momentum and States have 
reported installation work. As on 31.12.2024, all the targeted quantities 
of 35 lakh pumps under Component C have beenallocated to States, 
tenders have been done and LOAs have been issued for all the 
capacities. States have reported that PPAs have been signed for 20.7 
lakh pumps, and more than 0.86 lakh pumps have been solarized so far. 
With ongoing progress, all efforts are made to ensure that installation 
would be completed before the scheme deadline and farmers would get 
assured daytime power under this Component.” 
11. The Committee note that the Ministry’s request for allowing 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for 15 horse power (HP) capacity 

  Page 
14 
 
  
pumps in arid and semi-arid zones was not approved by the Ministry of 
Finance during the financial year 2022-23. However, the same was 
allowed for North-Eastern and Himalayan States, subject to the 
condition that the total number of pumps up to 15 HP would not be 
more than 10% of the total allocation. The Committee have been 
highlighting the issue of dark zones i.e. areas where the ground water 
table has declined to lower levels, where the 7.5 HP water pumps have 
become ineffective. Therefore, the Committee would like to re-
emphasize their recommendation that a detailed study be carried out to 
understand the current situation of the ground water in different parts 
of the country, particularly the water-deficient areas. The results of the 
said study may be shared with the Committee as well. 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the National Bioenergy Programme 
has a provision of Central Financial Assistance for setting up of 
Bioenergy projects in the country under the three components of 
Biomass, Waste to Energy and Biogas Programmes. The Committee 
observe budgetary mismanagement under the programme whereby 
the allocation has been reduced at revised stage over the years. The 
reduction is significant in 2023-24 when the estimated amount of Rs. 
381.85 crore was reduced by a huge 80% to only Rs. 75 crore at 
revised stage. Even after this huge reduction, the entire amount was 
not utilized. Under-utilization has also been a persistent issue under 
this programme. The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend 
prioritization of this much needed programme and timely 
disbursement of the subsidy to encourage private developers to invest 
and develop Bioenergy sector. The Committee note that the increased 
prices of construction materials is proving costly for developing biogas 
plants in rural areas. The Committee feel that a part of the subsidy may 
be given in advance to encourage biogas development in rural areas. ” 
 
13. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
has stated as under: 
 
“Biomass and Waste to Energy Projects usually takes 2 to 3 years 
for completion. The Central Financial Assistance (CFA) is disbursed 

  Page 
15 
 
  
after commissioning of the plant, its performance inspection, and 
meeting other conditions of the Scheme guidelines. The Ministry is 
taking all possible steps to release the CFA claims in the shortest 
possible time. In order to ease out the process of CFA disbursal, 
revision of guidelines is under process. Besides the construction based 
model of biogas plants, there are flexible ready to install models 
available at reduced cost and time for installation. For installation of 
small biogas plants, CFA is released in advance to State Programme 
Implementing Agencies, so that there is minimum delay in disbursal of 
the CFA to beneficiaries of small biogas plants. In the current FY, the 
details of allocation and expenditure till 31.12.2024 is given below:’’ 
(Amount in Rs. crore) 
Scheme Allocation 
(Revised Estimates) 
Expenditure 
(till 31.12.2024) 
National Bioenergy 
Programme 
185.00 114.04 
 
14. The Committee note that the expenditure by the Ministry under its 
National Bioenergy Programme (NBA) during the financial year 2024-
25 has been dissatisfactory as around 39% of the budget remained to be 
spent during the last quarter of 2024-25. The Ministry has informed the 
Committee during February, 2025, that to ease out the process of 
disbursal of Central Financial Assistance (CFA) under NBA, it is 
undertaking revision of scheme guidelines and the Committee would 
like to appreciate the Ministry for the same. The Committee would also 
like to believe that since four months have passed since the Ministry 
informed the Committee about the revision process, the same may have 
been completed by now and therefore, the Committee expect disbursals 
under NBA during the current financial year of 2025-26 to move as per 
quarterly expenditure mandate of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
 
 
 

  Page 
16 
 
  
CHAPTER –II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Recommendation No. 1 
Budget Allocation and Utilization 
The Committee note that the Ministry had projected the budgetary 
requirement of Rs. 12,001.70 crore for the financial year 2024-25 and Rs. 
21,230 crore has actually been allocated which is an increase of about 170% 
against Revised Estimates of last year. This amount includes Rs. 19,100 crore 
as Budget Estimates and Rs. 2,130 crore from Sovereign Green Fund. The 
Committee observe that about 87% budget of the Ministry is allocated for 
only one component i.e. Solar Energy. Under Solar Energy component itself, 
about 72% of the budget is for implementation of only one scheme i.e. PM 
Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana. About 4% of the budget has been allocated for 
clearing past liabilities related to wind and small hydro projects. National 
Bioenergy Programme has been allocated about 1% of the budget. National 
Green Hydrogen Mission and Green Energy Corridor have been allocated a 
budget of about 3% each. The remaining about 2% of the Budget has been 
allocated for Establishment Expenditure, Autonomous Bodies and Support 
Programme including Research and Development. For 2024-25, the Ministry 
has been allocated a budget which is about 77% higher than its demand. This 
is the highest ever budgetary allocation for the Ministry till date. Since the 
Budgetary allocation of the Ministry for 2024-25 has been considerably 
enhanced as compared to the previous years, the Committee hope that the 
Ministry would increase its fund absorption capacity and focus on exhaustive 
utilization of the budgetary allocation in a timely manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Union Cabinet had approved the PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana on 29th 
February, 2024 with a total outlay of Rs.75,021 crore for installing rooftop 
solar for one crore households in the country by 2026-27.  As the budget 
proposals for 2024-25 of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) 
were formulated in Sep-Oct, 2023 i.e. long before the approval of the PM 
Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, enhanced allocation of Rs.21,230 crore was 
provided for MNRE in BE 2024-25 including for PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli 
Yojana.   Under Revised Estimates 2024-25, the allocation of the Ministry has 
been kept at Rs.17,298.44 crore.   

  Page 
17 
 
  
The umbrella-wise details of Revised Estimates (RE) for 2024-25 and 
no. of programmes covered under each umbrella are given below: 
Umbrella Schemes/programmes RE 2024-25 
(Rs. in crore) 
I. Solar Energy 
PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 11,100.00 
PM-KUSUM 2525.00 
Solar Power (Grid) (CPSU, Solar Park, 
Defence/Indo Park, PMDAP Ladakh,  
RPSSGP & Demo GBI, VGF, GCRT) 
1300.00 
Solar Power (Off-grid) 12.00 
Interest payment and issuing Expense 
on bonds  124.35 
II. Bio Energy 
Programme 
Bio Power (Grid) 0 
Bio Power (Off-grid) 125.00 
Biogas Programme 60.00 
III. Programme for 
Wind other 
Renewable Energy 
Wind Power (Grid) 800.00 
Hydro Power (Grid) 45.00 
Hydro Power (Off-grid) 1.00 
IV. Support 
Programme 
Human Resource Development and 
Training 30.00 
Research and Development 30.00 
Information & Public Advertising 
(I&PA 8.00 
Monitoring & Evaluation 0.01 
International Relations 3.00 

  Page 
18 
 
  
International Solar Alliance (ISA) 
Cooperation 100.00 
V. Hydrogen Mission National Green Hydrogen Mission 300.00 
VI. Storage and 
Transmission Green Energy Corridor 600.00 
VII. Autonomous 
Bodies Institutes  62.50 
VIII. Secretariat 
Economic Services Administrative Expenses 72.58 
 Total 17298.44 
As on 31.12.2024, a total expenditure of Rs.10,510.34 crore has been 
incurred, which is around 61% of the total Revised Estimates (RE) allocation 
of the Ministry.    
The Ministry has duly noted the suggestions of the Committee to increase its 
fund absorption capacity.  The following steps have also been taken by MNRE 
in this regard: 
• All the Programme Divisions have been asked to work proactively with 
States/State Nodal Agencies (SNAs)/Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) to ensure 
that bills are raised by them timely. 
• The expenditure status is regularly monitored at apex level.  It is also 
discussed in each Senior Officers’ meeting in the Ministry and necessary 
directions are given to all concerned to ensure that funds are released in 
time. 
• As and when need for amendment in the schemes guidelines to ensure 
smooth execution of any scheme is observed, it is being carried out as per 
prescribed procedure. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Budget Utilization Trends  
The Committee note that complete utilization of budgetary allocations by the 
Ministry over the years has not taken place. The utilization has been about 

  Page 
19 
 
  
88%, 82% and 83% in the years 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively. 
The major reasons cited by the Ministry for under-utilization of budgetary 
allocations include two consecutive waves of COVID and non-receipt of 
adequate proposals from Northeastern States. The Committee understand 
the difficulties faced by the Ministry in effective implementation of schemes 
during COVID waves. With regard to utilization in Northeastern areas, the 
Committee note the extremely poor utilization at about 13%, 2% and 4% in 
the years 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take concrete steps for 
proper utilization of budgetary allocations wherever there is a shortfall. For 
Northeast areas in particular, the Committee feel that it has huge potential for 
renewable energy and therefore, extra efforts need to be made by the 
Ministry for exhaustive utilization of funds allocated for its development. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry should hold regular meetings 
with the Governments of all Northeastern States as well as the stakeholders 
in renewable energy sector. The Committee feel that incentivization of 
renewable energy sector in these areas would provide additional impetus to 
developers to setup renewable energy projects there. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been duly noted. In order to provide 
additional impetus to developers to set up renewable energy projects in NER 
States, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy under its various ongoing 
schemes is providing higher subsidy to these States for installation of 
renewable energy projects than general category States, e.g., 10% higher 
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) under PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, 
20% higher CFA for component B and Component C of PM KUSUM scheme, 
and 20% higher CFA under Waste to Energy and Biogas programmes.  In 
order to enhance the fund absorption in the NER States, during the various 
review meetings taken by the Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region (DONER) also, MNRE has been requesting all the NER States to submit 
proposals under the different schemes and programmes of the Ministry.  
Hon’ble Minister of New and Renewable Energy in his letter dated 
30.12.2024 has also requested the Hon’ble Minister, Ministry of Development 
of North Eastern Region to request the NER States to submit proposals under 
the different schemes of MNRE, so that the allocation towards NER States 
could be fully utilized. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has organized 
Chintan Shivir in Bhubaneswar wherein a special session on Renewable 
Energy Integration in NE States was alsoheld on 15th November 2024. 
During December 2024, Hon'ble Minister of New and Renewable Energy 

  Page 
20 
 
  
visited Kolkata and Agartala and reviewed the progress of various renewable 
energy schemes in the NER region.   
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
PM-Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana 
The Committee note that PM-Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana has been launched 
with the aim of installing rooftop solar plants in one crore households. The 
total financial outlay for the scheme is Rs. 75,021 crore and is to be 
implemented till 2026-27. An allocation of Rs. 13,175.33 crore has been made 
for 2024-25. The Committee further note that before this scheme, the 
Ministry had been implementing the Phase II Rooftop Solar program which 
has been subsumed under the new scheme. The Committee observe that till 
date, the schemes for developing solar power has not performed that well, as 
against the solar potential of 7,48,990 MWp in the country, only 89,432 MW 
has been installed till 31.08.2024. With the launch of PM Surya Ghar, the 
Committee hope that the pace of solar installations will gain momentum and 
the target of 1 crore rooftop solar installations would be achieved. The 
Committee in their previous reports have often flagged the issues related to 
rooftop installations and urged the Ministry to take substantive steps to 
address them. The Committee, therefore, appreciate the Ministry for 
streamlining the process under PM Surya Ghar i.e. dedicated national portal, 
easy vendor registration, loan availability for consumers, deemed technical 
feasibility, time-bound inspection, online grievance redressal tools etc. 
However, the Committee would like to highlight the slow pace of 
installations, as only around 5 lakh installations have been done out of 
around 20 lakh applications made on the portal by October 2024. Out of this 
5 lakh installations, subsidy disbursal has been done for only around 3 lakh. 
The Secretary informed the Committee that the momentum of installation 
was reduced due to monsoons and it has picked up now. The Committee feel 
that the Ministry should make concerted efforts to popularize this laudable 
scheme further, especially highlighting its subsidy component so that large 
scale consumers are encouraged to adopt it. The Committee also recommend 
that apart from households and Government buildings, the Ministry may 
consider including schools, hospitals, small industries and other institutional 
buildings within the subsidy component of the scheme. This will not only 
increase the demand in the market but will also bring in private investments, 

  Page 
21 
 
  
encourage domestic manufacturing as well as create more job opportunities 
in solar sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has undertaken a 
multipronged approach to popularize the PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, 
utilizing all communication media like print, digital, outdoor, television, 
radio, etc., to maximize reach and awareness. This includes widespread 
newspaper advertisements in major vernacular languages, TV commercials 
on national and regional TV networks, extensive radio campaigns, and digital 
promotions via Google Display Network, website banners, etc. Additionally, 
consumer testimonials, interviews with banking partners, and engaging 
WhatsApp channels have been used for creating awareness amongst the 
citizens. The Ministry has also leveraged outdoor visibility through GIFs at 
railway stations, hoardings and digital cinemas. On-ground activations such 
as the ‘Run for Sun’ marathon, Solar Stop kiosks in malls, and Solar art 
competition have further fostered public engagement. Grassroots activities 
like Nukkad Nataks have helped spread awareness at the local level, ensuring 
the scheme reaches a wide and diverse audience across the country. 
In addition to the above, the Ministry has been organizing Regional 
Workshops for creating focused awareness about the components and the 
benefits of the scheme. The Ministry has also been handholding vendors to 
facilitate smooth implementation. Regular amplification and relaying of the 
scheme through social media channels has further broadened its reach. The 
Ministry has also formulated a Consultative Stakeholder group with eminent 
partners from Bloomberg, Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), Rocky 
Mountain Institute (RMI), World Bank, Asian Development Bank, etc. who are 
also assisting the Ministry in spearheading awareness component. 
For other sectors such as schools, hospitals, small industries, institutional 
buildings, etc, prevailing electricity tariffs are in range of Rs 7 to 9 per unit, 
whereas solar power tariff under RESCO mode would be around Rs 5 per 
unit. Thus, installation of rooftop solar plants in these sectors would be 
economically viable even without financial assistance from the Government. 
As on 31.12.2024, 97,864 MW solar power generation capacity has been 
installed in the country. 
 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
 

  Page 
22 
 
  
Recommendation No. 4 
Model Solar Village 
The Committee note that the scheme of PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana has 
a component of Model Solar Village whereby one village is to be selected from 
each district. This selection would be based on level of solarization within a 
given six month time and the village so selected will get a central financial 
assistance of one crore rupees. The Committee appreciate the Ministry for 
launching this new initiative which will encourage competition among the 
villages towards adoption of solar energy. However, the Committee are of the 
view that many districts in India are very large and selecting one village in 
such large area would not be helpful in creating enough awareness and 
enthusiasm among the local administration to solarise their villages. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may consider 
reducing the level for selection of Model Solar Village like that of a block 
instead of district. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, which was approved by the Cabinet 
on 29th February, 2024, one of the components of the scheme is to develop 
Model Solar Village in each district of the country. Ministry has already issued 
guidelines in this regard in August 2024. 
Most of the States have already initiated action for selection of Model 
Solar Villages as per these guidelines. Scaling-up of this component would 
require Cabinet’s approval. Since this component is already under 
implementation, it would be appropriate to get the results of the 
implementation and based on the learnings and feedback from the different 
stakeholders, a decision to further scale up of the component will be taken.      
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
PM-KUSUM  
The Committee note that PM-KUSUM Scheme was launched in March, 2019 to 
provide financial support to the farmers for installation of standalone solar 
pumps, solarization of existing grid-connected agriculture pumps and also to 
provide the farmers an opportunity to become solar entrepreneurs by 
installing solar power plants on their barren/fallow agriculture land. The 

  Page 
23 
 
  
Committee observe that targets under different components of the Scheme 
could not be achieved and hence its timeline has been extended till March, 
2026. The Ministry has stated that the reasons for slow progress under the 
scheme include lack of financing to farmers under Component-A, delay in 
tendering process and lack of interest by States under Component-B and lack 
of interest by farmers in individual pump solarization under Component-C. 
To overcome these issues, the Ministry has undertaken certain measures like 
inclusion of Component-A under Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF), 
allowing State-level tender for procurement of standalone pumps, including 
system integrators to work as vendors, solarization of agriculture feeders 
instead of individual pumps under Component-C etc. The Committee while 
acknowledging the developments made, would also like to recommend that:  
i) Component-A as part of the scheme should be revisited by the Ministry 
as the investment required to setup a 2MW solar power plant is around Rs. 9 
crore which is huge by all means, especially for marginal and small farmers. 
Further, there is no subsidy on this component.  
ii) With regard to Component-B, the subsidy is only upto 7.5 Horsepower 
(HP) solar pumps which is proving to be insufficient for farmers. Given the 
fact that many districts of India has become water-deficient, 7.5 HP pump 
capacity is not suitable for all regions. Therefore, the Ministry may conduct a 
detailed study to understand the ground situation and accordingly modify the 
component. 
iii) With regard to Component-C, only around 37 thousand pumps have 
been solarised even though more than 33 lakh pumps have been sanctioned. 
Therefore, the Ministry may see to it that long gestation period of more than 
18 months is reduced and the sanctioned pumps actually reach the farmers 
on time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has noted the valuable 
recommendations made by the Committee for compliance and efforts are 
underway to implement the same. Further to make PM KUSUM more 
accessible to farmers and to achieve targets set under the scheme following 
actions are being taken:  
(i) Under Component A of the scheme, solar plant can be installed by the 
farmers on his own land either directly by himself or in partnership with 
group of farmers/ cooperatives/ panchayats/ Farmer Producer 
Organisations (FPO)/Water User associations (WUA), or through a developer. 
Under this scheme, DISCOM is eligible to get Performance Based Incentive 

  Page 
24 
 
  
(PBI) @ Rs. 0.40 per unit purchased or Rs. 6.6 lakh per MW of capacity 
installed. 
Recently the Cabinet has approved the coverage of Component A of PM 
KUSUM under Agriculture Infrastructure Funds (AIF). This will further 
enable the access of easy and affordable finance to small and marginal 
farmers to install solar plants up to 2 MW under Component A of the scheme.  
(ii) During FY 2022-23, a proposal to increase the capacity up to 15 HP 
under Component B of the scheme was submitted to Ministry of Finance, 
however the request of Ministry for allowing Central Financial Assistance 
(CFA) for 15 HP capacity pumps in arid and semi-arid zones was not 
approved. However, CFA for pumps up to 15 HP was permitted for North-
Eastern and Himalayan States, considering their topography and requirement 
of Community farming in High Water Table Areas, with the restriction that 
the total number of pumps up to 15 HP would not be more than 10% of the 
total allocation. The Ministry is taking steps to implement the scheme at 
faster pace.  For ease of implementation, the scheme guidelines were revised 
in January 2024.  
(iii) Under PM KUSUM, the progress isreviewed regularly and the capacities 
are reallocated to other States, if there is no progress or unsatisfactory 
progress. The scheme gestation period is 24 months out of which maximum 
of 18 months are given for installation work after issuance of Letter of Award. 
This has been done in accordance with the requests received from States, 
indicating the ground challenges for installation work due to land availability, 
right of way, monsoon period etc.  
However, the scheme has gained momentum and States have reported 
installation work. As on 31.12.2024, all the targeted quantities of 35 lakh 
pumps under Component C have beenallocated to States, tenders have been 
done and LOAs have been issued for all the capacities. States have reported 
that PPAs have been signed for 20.7 lakh pumps, and more than 0.86 lakh 
pumps have been solarized so far. With ongoing progress, all efforts are made 
to ensure that installation would be completed before the scheme deadline 
and farmers would get assured daytime power under this Component. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
National Bioenergy Programme 

  Page 
25 
 
  
The Committee note that the National Bioenergy Programme has a 
provision of Central Financial Assistance for setting up of Bioenergy 
projects in the country under the three components of Biomass, Waste to 
Energy and Biogas Programmes. The Committee observe budgetary 
mismanagement under the programme whereby the allocation has been 
reduced at revised stage over the years. The reduction is significant in 
2023-24 when the estimated amount of Rs. 381.85 crore was reduced by a 
huge 80% to only Rs. 75 crore at revised stage. Even after this huge 
reduction, the entire amount was not utilized. Under-utilization has also 
been a persistent issue under this programme. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to recommend prioritization of this much needed programme 
and timely disbursement of the subsidy to encourage private developers to 
invest and develop Bioenergy sector. The Committee note that the 
increased prices of construction materials is proving costly for developing 
biogas plants in rural areas. The Committee feel that a part of the subsidy 
may be given in advance to encourage biogas development in rural areas.   
 
Reply of the Government 
Biomass and Waste to Energy Projects usually takes 2 to 3 years for 
completion. The Central Financial Assistance (CFA) is disbursed after 
commissioning of the plant, its performance inspection, and meeting other 
conditions of the Scheme guidelines. The Ministry is taking all possible steps 
to release the CFA claims in the shortest possible time. In order to ease out 
the process of CFA disbursal, revision of guidelines is under process. Besides 
the construction based model of biogas plants, there are flexible ready to 
install models available at reduced cost and time for installation. For 
installation of small biogas plants, CFA is released in advance to State 
Programme Implementing Agencies, so that there is minimum delay in 
disbursal of the CFA to beneficiaries of small biogas plants. In the current FY, 
the details of allocation and expenditure till 31.12.2024 is given below: 
(Amount in Rs. crore) 
Scheme Allocation 
(Revised Estimates) 
Expenditure 
(till 31.12.2024) 
National Bioenergy 
Programme 
185.00 114.04 
 

  Page 
26 
 
  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Wind Energy 
The Committee note the Ministry’s submission that the potential of offshore 
wind power in the country is around 70 GW in the two zones of Gujarat coast 
and Tamil Nadu coast. The first tender for development of 500 MW of 
offshore wind energy capacity off the coast of Gujarat supported by a Viability 
Gap Funding (VGF) scheme has been issued by the Government. The Ministry 
has informed the Committee that the tender for development of offshore wind 
energy capacity off the coast of Tamil Nadu will also be issued soon. The 
Committee also note that the Ministry’s plan of leasing out 4 GW equivalent of 
offshore wind seabed for studies/surveys in 2024-25 and subsequent project 
development under Open Access Mode. The Committee are aware that earlier 
the technology for developing offshore wind power was available only with 
developed countries and therefore, appreciate the Ministry for finally taking 
the leap towards developing offshore wind energy within the country. The 
Committee expect the development of offshore wind power to move as per 
plan without any further delay. The Committee urge the Ministry to dedicate a 
special team to closely monitor its development and resolve bottlenecks 
timely in order to achieve the targets on time. The Ministry has furnished that 
manufacturing capacity in wind is mature in the country with 14 big 
manufacturers capable of adding around 18 GW annually. However, the 
Committee note that critical components like gear box, bearings etc. are still 
being imported. The Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate 
measures be taken by the Ministry to facilitate the development and 
indigenization of entire technology related to offshore wind energy 
generation. Further, the Committee are of the view that evacuation and grid 
integration of this power should also be planned in advance by the Ministry. 
 

  Page 
27 
 
  
Reply of the Government 
A dedicated cell for offshore wind, i.e. Offshore Wind Energy Cell, has been 
constituted in the Ministry to perform/ carry out the following activities: 
a. Signing of Lease Agreements and management of the lease. 
b. Drafting of consenting and contractual documents such as Lease 
Agreement, Concessionaire Agreement, Project Implementation Agreement, 
Grid Connectivity Agreement, Transmission Service Agreement, etc. 
c. Coordination with Central Transmission Utility (CTU) for development 
of offshore and onshore power evacuation system and grid infrastructure 
planning. 
d. Drafting of guidelines for implementation of offshore wind projects 
(with or without financial support). 
e. Coordination with National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE) for 
Guidelines for study/survey and project clearances. 
f. Procedures for getting site clearances. 
g. Co-ordination with various ministries/departments for project 
clearances. 
h. Co-ordination with Port authorities for ports development. 
i. Monitoring the execution/milestones achievements of the offshore 
wind projects. 
j. Any other activities related to offshore wind. 
Ministry has issued a ‘Strategy for Establishments of Offshore Wind 
Energy projects’ indicating an auction trajectory of 37 GW capacity/sites by 
2030 under various business models for project development (Revision 
issued on 26 Sept 2023). This pipeline is expected to attract investment and 
create ecosystem in the country. In addition, Union Cabinet approved 
'Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme for 1 GW offshore wind energy projects, 
with a total outlay of ₹ 7453 crore, in order to create an ecosystem for 
development of offshore wind energy projects in the country including 
manufacturing of offshore wind turbines & its components and development 
of an offshore logistic infrastructure for handling very heavy and over 
dimensional cargos.  
Further, with regard to planning of evacuation and grid integration of 
offshore wind power, Central Transmission Utility (CTU) has planned to 
develop transmission and evacuation infrastructure up to the offshore 
substation (including the offshore substation) for initial 10 GW projects (5 
GW each off the coast of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu) under ISTS network.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 

  Page 
28 
 
  
Recommendation No.   8 
Small Hydro Power (SHP) 
The Committee note that small hydro power programme was discontinued 
w.e.f. 31st March, 2017 and since then, the budget allocations have been 
used to clear old liabilities only. The Ministry has submitted before the 
Committee that it has been trying to come up with a new programme for 
small hydro power since 2017 but the same could not materialize for one or 
the other reasons. This year again, the approval of the new SHP scheme, 
which has been recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), 
is awaited. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should 
critically review its performance under the previous small hydro power 
programme and ensure that the factors which hindered the implementation 
of the programme are properly addressed in the new scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
Note for approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on Small 
Hydro Power scheme was submitted to PMO and Cabinet Secretariat on 
21.10.2024.  A meeting was held with PMO and based on the discussions, a 
fresh Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memorandum is under 
preparation. Further, the recommendations of the Committee have been duly 
noted and suitable incorporations will be made in the proposed scheme. 
 [Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Green Energy Corridor (GEC) 
The Committee note that the Intra-State GEC project was started in 2015 with 
a total target of 9767 circuit kilometers (ckm) transmission lines and 22689 
mega-volt ampere (MVA) sub-stations. Phase-I of Intra-State GEC which is 
being implemented by the State Transmission Utilities (STUs) of 8 States has 
been delayed and given multiple extensions. The Committee observe that a 
total of 9135 ckm of transmission lines have been constructed and a total of 
21313 MVA substations have been charged as on 31st July, 2024. The 

  Page 
29 
 
  
Ministry has submitted that all the projects have been completed in 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh. The remaining States 
– Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra have requested for 
further extension up to December 2024 and Gujarat has requested for further 
extension up to March 2025. Since 9 years have lapsed after the start of the 
Project, the Committee hope that this will be the last extension and this 
Project will finally be completed by March, 2025. It has also been submitted 
that Phase–II of Intra-State GEC is being implemented by State Transmission 
Utilities of 7 States (Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh) for addition of 10753 ckm of transmission 
lines and 27546 MVA of substations and it is scheduled to be completed by FY 
2025-26. Further, the Ministry has furnished that an Inter-State 
Transmission System would be set up for power evacuation and grid 
integration of 13 GW RE projects along with 12 GWh Battery Energy Storage 
System (BESS) in Ladakh. The project is being setup by Power Grid 
Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL) at a total cost of Rs. 20,773.70 crore. 
Under this project, 1268 ckm transmission lines and two nos. of HVDC 
terminals of 5000 MW capacity each would be setup. The project is 
anticipated to be completed by FY 2029-30. In order to ensure that Phase-II 
of Intra-State GEC and Inter-State Transmission project in Ladakh do not get 
delayed like the Phase-I, the Committee recommend the Ministry to take into 
account the reasons for delayed implementation of Phase-I and proactively 
persuade the concerned States as well as other stakeholders from the initial 
stage itself to ensure timely completion of these projects. Being the dominant 
player in transmission sector, the Committee expect PGCIL to have the 
technological knowhow and manpower to execute the Ladakh project within 
the given budget and timeline. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
closely monitor both the projects for their timely completion. 
Reply of the Government 
The phase-I of Green Energy Corridor has been delayed in four States, 
namely, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra, due to 
various reasons such as Right of Way (RoW) issues, delay in issuing tenders 
because of delay in substation land acquisition, delay in award of works due 
to low bid turnout in various projects which resulted in retendering several 
times, court cases including Great Indian Bustard (GIB) matter, forest 

  Page 
30 
 
  
clearances, etc. The States of Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and 
Maharashtra have given further extension up to December 2024 and Gujarat 
has been given further extension up to March 2025. Andhra Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra have further sought extension upto June, 
2025 which is being considered in the Ministry.  The Ministry has been 
repeatedly impressing upon the States to expedite completion of the projects 
under this phase.  
Phase-II of GEC scheme is scheduled to be completed by FY 2025-26. So 
far out of total 91 packages, 72 packages have been tendered. Out of this, 51 
packages have been awarded. 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is closely monitoring the 
Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) for power evacuation and grid 
integration of 13 GW renewable energy projects along with a 12 GWh Battery 
Energy Storage System (BESS) in Ladakh, ensuring strict adherence to 
timelines. As of now, for HVDC terminal stations at Pang and Kaithal, the 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) was issued on July 18, 2024, with bid 
submission extended nine times, receiving no bids under Domestic 
Competitive Bidding (DCB). Now, Ministry of Power has provided approval to 
switch from DCB to Global Competitive Bidding (GCB) on December 27, 2024, 
and retendering is planned shortly. For the 220 kV AC line (Pang-Phyang) 
transmission line, NIT was issued on August 30, 2024. Land acquisition is 
underway, with 300 acres at Pang under possession. Strengthening of 
road/bridge infrastructure is being coordinated with Border Roads 
Organisation and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. LIDAR surveys 
are progressing, pre-engineered buildings at Pang are under construction, 
and weather acclimatization and mountaineering training programs have 
been planned to prepare manpower for harsh conditions. 
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
National Green Hydrogen Mission     
The Committee note that the National Green Hydrogen Mission has been 
approved with an outlay of Rs. 19,744 crore and an amount of Rs. 600 crore 
has been allocated for this Mission for financial year 2024-25. The Mission 
aims to make India a global hub for production, utilization and export of 
Green Hydrogen and its derivatives. It is expected to help India in becoming 

  Page 
31 
 
  
energy independent and in decarbonisation of major sectors of the economy 
thereby eventually facilitating the country to meet the target of Net-Zero by 
2070. The Committee note that the Mission aims to achieve 5 million metric 
tonnes per annum (MMTPA) of Green Hydrogen production capacity with an 
associated renewable energy capacity of about 125 GW by the year 2030. The 
Committee observe that the Mission is at a nascent stage with contracts being 
awarded and actual production has not started yet. The Committee, while 
appreciating the Government for launching this aspirational Mission, would 
like to recommend that advance planning for efficient resource utilisation like 
water should be ensured. Further, indigenisation of technology and processes 
should be the major goal to make green hydrogen truly affordable in the long 
run. 
Reply of the Government 
For the production of 1 kg of Green Hydrogen via electrolysis, around 8 to 10 
litres of de-ionised water is required. The objective of the mission is to 
produce at least 5 million metric tonnes per annum of Green Hydrogen by 
2030. This means around 50 billion litres of de-ionised water or around 75 
billion litres of fresh water will be required annually. This is a small fraction 
as compared to the fresh water potential of India which is estimated to be 
11,23,000 billion litres. This quantity of fresh water is same as the water 
needed for about 6 GW of thermal power plant. As on December, 2024, the 
total thermal power plant capacity in India is over 244 GW. 
Further, as per the industry feedback, most of the Green Hydrogen 
production plants are expected to come up near the ports, where desalinated 
sea water is likely to be used for Green Hydrogen production.  Furthermore, 
since water is a State subject, the project developers will have to comply with 
the State regulations for securing the water supply. 
To promote the indigenization of technology and processes, the 
Government has taken following steps: 
• Out of the 3,000 MW per annum of electrolyser manufacturing capacity 
awarded under the Strategic Interventions for Green Hydrogen Transition 
(SIGHT) Scheme, 700 MW per annum is for the indigenously developed stack 
technology. This accounts for around 23% of the total capacity awarded 
under the scheme. 
• 3 pilot projects have been awarded for use of hydrogen in the Steel 
sector. 
• 4 pilot projects have been finalized in the Transport sector to develop 
36 vehicles and 8 hydrogen re-fueling stations. 

  Page 
32 
 
  
• R&D Projects are being awarded to promote the research and 
development for Green Hydrogen technology in India.  
Above activities are expected to boost indigenization of technology and 
processes to make Green Hydrogen truly affordable in the long run.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
New Technologies, Research and Development in Renewable Energy 
Sector 
The Committee note that for undertaking research and development (R&D) 
and developing new technologies in Renewable Energy (RE) sector, BE of Rs. 
75 crore in 2021-22 was reduced to Rs. 27.50 crore at RE stage; in 2022-23, 
BE of Rs. 35 crore was increased to Rs. 45 crore and in 2023-24, BE of Rs. 70 
crore was reduced to a mere Rs. 4 crore. The Ministry has submitted that 
during 2023-24, a modified mechanism for research and development in 
Renewable Energy sector came into place that resulted in low utilization of 
funds as new projects could not be undertaken. The Ministry has further 
submitted that currently Renewable Energy Research and Technology 
Development Programme (RE-RTD) guidelines is being implemented with a 
total budget of Rs. 228 crore for the period of 2021-22 to 2025-26. The 
Committee would like to highlight the issue of reduced allocations coupled 
with lower utilization of funds in the important sector of R&D in Renewable 
Energy. During the last three years, the funds have not been fully utilized in 
even one year. The Ministry has submitted that improving Solar Photovoltaic 
efficiency; developing efficient and cost effective biogas plant designs; 
designing robust wind turbine systems; developing ultra-low head turbines; 
developing cost effective battery and pump storage systems and developing 
technologies in Geothermal, Tidal and Wave energy are some of its thrust 
areas. It is well known that to undertake substantive research and develop 
cutting edge technologies, sufficient funds and trained manpower is required. 
The Committee note the collaboration of the Ministry with premier 
institutions of India like IITs for undertaking research projects. The 
Committee also note the modification in R&D mechanism whereby the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy will work alongside Ministry of 

  Page 
33 
 
  
Power. The Committee while appreciating the changes brought to enhance 
efficiency in R&D, feel that the allocations need to be enhanced appropriately 
under RE-RTD programme. Further, the Committee are of the view that three 
dedicated institutions under the Ministry i.e. National Institute of Solar 
Energy (NISE), National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE) and National 
Institute of Bio Energy (NIBE) should have world class research facilities and 
qualified professionals to enable them to successfully develop and indigenize 
global renewable energy technologies. To reduce import dependency and 
develop large scale manufacturing like that of Solar cells and modules, 
technical collaboration at international level would help bring in investments 
as well as create large scale employment opportunities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry appreciates the Committee's valuable observations and 
recommendations regarding the Renewable Energy - Research and 
Technology Development (RE-RTD) Programme. The Ministry acknowledges 
the challenges highlighted by the Committee regarding reduced allocations 
and low utilization of funds in the past years. These issues were largely due 
to the integration of Renewable Energy (RE) R&D activities with the Ministry 
of Power’s Mission on Advanced and High-Impact Research (MAHIR). As 
noted, MAHIR’s focus is primarily power-centric, leaving critical gaps in the 
comprehensive development of RE technologies. This mismatch resulted in 
no R&D projects being sanctioned under the RE-RTD Programme since 
November 2022, and the consequent surrender of funds in FY 2023-24. The 
RE-RTD Programme has been reinitiated in July 2024 and two research 
projects on development of high-efficiency solar cells with a total cost of 
Rs.53.59 crore (MNRE share) have been sanctioned.  
R&D is a very critical need for atmanirbharta. While there is significant 
improvement in manufacturing capacity both in solar and wind, we are still 
dependent solely on foreign technology. To attain real self sufficiency and to 
capture a larger share of global manufacturing, we will need to promote 
much higher R&D for which significantly higher R&D budget would be 
required.The Ministry have taken a conscious decision that funds will be 
spent only on those projects which are important to the sector and will 
produce the desired results.  
MNRE has various technical collaborations at international level with 
various countries like USA, Germany, Norway and Iceland, etc. to promote 
research in the field of renewable energy.  Further, to reduce import 

  Page 
34 
 
  
dependency and develop large scale manufacturing like that of Solar cells and 
modules, MNRE has been implementing  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme ‘National Programme on High Efficiency Solar PV Modules’ for 
achieving manufacturing capacity of Giga Watt (GW) scale in High Efficiency 
Solar PV modules.  
[Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
O.M. No. 372-12/8/2017-PU, Dated: 04.02.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  Page 
35 
 
  
CHAPTER –III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's Replies 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Page 
36 
 
  
CHAPTER –IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require Reiteration 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

  Page 
37 
 
  
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                Shrirang Appa Barne 
30th July, 2025                                     Chairperson, 
Shravan 8, 1947 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 
 
  

  Page 
38 
 
  
APPENDIX - I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
MINUTES OF SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2024-25) HELD ON 30TH JULY, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-62, 
SAMVIDHAN SADAN, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
 MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne - Chairperson 
 
2.  Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
4.  Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
5.  Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
6.  Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
7.  Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
8.  Shri Dulu Mahato 
9.  Shri Ramprit Mandal 
10.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
12.  Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
 
13.  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
14.  Shri R. Dharmar 
15.  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee 
then took up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations contained in the 1st Report (18th 

  Page 
39 
 
  
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Power’. 
(ii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
(iii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’. 
(iv) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 5th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee 
adopted the abovementioned draft Reports without any 
amendment/modification. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses during the 
current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Page 
40 
 
  
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Energy 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
11 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
 
Total:  11 
Percentage:  
 
100 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 00 
 
 
 