 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’] 
 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2024-25) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
8 

 
2 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2025 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5th August, 2025 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
July, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
COE NO. 386 
 
 
Price: Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by_____________. 
  

 
4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
13 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
32 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
33 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
34 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on 30th July, 2025 35 
II Analysis of Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Energy. 
37 
                 

 
5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2024-25)   LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne – Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3. Shri Jagadish Chandra Barma Basunia 
4. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
5. Shri Shahu Shahaji Chhatrapati 
6. Captain Brijesh Chowta 
7. Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
9. Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
10. Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
11. Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
12. Shri Dulu Mahato 
13. Shri Ramprit Mandal 
14. Smt. Bijuli Kalita Medhi 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Kunduru Raghuveer 
17. Smt. Shambhavi 
18. Shri Chandubhai Chhaganbhai Shihora 
19. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
20. Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya* 
24. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
25. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
26. Shri R. Dharmar 
27. Shri N.R. Elango 
28. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
29. Shri Harsh Mahajan 
30. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
31. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary 
 
* Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent 
upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 14th June, 2025. He has been re-nominated 
as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 24th July, 2025. 

 
6 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Eighth Report on action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2025 
and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. Replies of the 
Government to the observations/recommendations contained in this Report 
were received on 22nd May, 2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 30th July, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of action-taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
30th July, 2025 
8 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Shrirang Appa Barne 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 

 
7 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action- 
taken by the Ministry of Power on observations/recommendations contained 
in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-
26) of the Ministry of Power’. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12th March, 2025 
and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report 
contained 12 observations/recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12               Total – 12 
                                                       Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Nil                            Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Nil                                                                              Total– 00 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil                                                       Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
 

 
8 
4. The Committee desire that Action-taken Statement on the 
observations/recommendations in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action-taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations that require reiteration or 
merit comments. 
 [ 
Recommendation No. 4 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Power has issued an 
advisory to all the coal/lignite based thermal power producers to 
provide Ash to the prospective user agencies through a transparent 
bidding process. It was submitted before the Committee during the 
evidence that there is a provision to reserve 20% of the Ash for 
allotment to local industries through separate auction. The Committee 
feel that there is a need to ensure proper disposal of Fly Ash generated 
by thermal power plants so that nearby areas do not get polluted. 
Keeping in view the fact that our Country has already been grappling 
with the issue of air pollution and there is a need to prioritize 
environmental well-being, the Committee recommend that the 
transportation of Ash should be done in body packed vehicles right 
from the loading end. The Ministry should also ensure strict 
compliance of the provision of limited auction to reserve 20% of the 
issuable quantity of Ash for allotment to local industries involved in 
manufacturing of ash-based products, by all the thermal power 
producers.” 
 
7. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
“Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
All thermal power plants are following Ministry of Power’s (MoP) 
guidelines dated 15.03.2024 & Ministry of Environment, Forest & 
Climate Change’s (MoEF&CC) guidelines dated 31.12.2021, 30.12.2022, 
01.01.2024. The dry fly ash is transported through closed container like 
bulker and through railway rake with tarpaulin covering after bagging 
in environment friendly manner. 

 
9 
 
As per MoEF&CC notification dated 31.12.2021 and its 
amendments dated 30.12.2022 & 01.01.2024 para-A (7): 
“Every coal or lignite based thermal power plant shall ensure that 
loading, unloading, transport, storage and disposal of ash is done in an 
environmentally sound manner and that all precautions to prevent air 
and water pollution are taken and status in this regard shall be reported 
to the concerned State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or Pollution 
Control Committee (PCC).” 
As per para 5 B (i) of MoP’s guidelines dated 15.03.2024: 
1:10 times of the Highest issued quantity up-to previous three years to 
MSE by the TPP or, in case of non-availability of previously issued 
quantities, 20% issuable quantity has been provided for first year of 
limited auction. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) under 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and the concerned 
State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or Pollution Control Committee 
(PCC) are the enforcing and monitoring authority for ensuring 
compliance of all the provisions and shall monitor the utilization of ash 
on quarterly basis.   
MoP’s guidelines, 2024 are advisory in nature. However, 
compliance thereof is subject to scrutiny by the appropriate 
Commission provided under para 6 of the Guidelines. For enforcement, 
monitoring etc. MoEF&CC Notification, 2021 relies on the Enforcement 
Agencies provided under the para-E. Further, CEA periodically holds 
meeting inter-alia persuading TPPs to comply with the provisions of 
the said guidelines.” 
 
8. In their recommendation, the Committee raised the issues related 
to safe transportation of Fly Ash and compliance of the provision of 
limited auction to reserve 20% of the issuable quantity of Ash for 
allotment to local industries. The Ministry, in its action-taken reply, has 
stated that all the thermal power plants are following the Ministry of 
Power’s guidelines dated 15.03.2024 and Ministry of Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change’s (MoEF&CC) guidelines dated 31.12.2021, 
30.12.2022, 01.01.2024. It has also been submitted that the dry fly ash 
is transported through closed container like bulker and through 
railway rake with tarpaulin covering after bagging in environment 
friendly manner. Further, the Ministry has furnished that the Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and the concerned State Pollution 

 
10 
Control Board (SPCB) or Pollution Control Committee (PCC) are the 
enforcing and monitoring authority for ensuring compliance of all the 
provisions and shall monitor the utilization of ash on quarterly basis. 
Acknowledging the claim of the Ministry that all the thermal power 
plants are following the concerned guidelines of the Ministry of Power 
and Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, the Committee 
would like to be apprised about the compliance status (plant-wise) 
regarding these guidelines in respect of all the thermal power plants 
managed by CPSUs falling under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Power. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Government has approved the 
Viability Gap Funding for development of Battery Energy Storage 
Systems (BESS). The Scheme had set a target of adding at least 4,000 
MWh of BESS by the financial year 2027-28 by providing a VGF of Rs. 
3,760 crores in the form of capital subsidy, however due to decline in 
prices of BESS in the recent past, enhanced capacity of 13,200 MWh is 
envisaged under the VGF Scheme. During the financial year 2024-25, an 
amount of Rs. 96 crores was allocated for this Scheme which got 
reduced to Rs. 46 crores at the time of Revised Estimates and the actual 
expenditure is zero till now. For the financial year 2025-26, an amount 
of Rs. 200 crores has been allocated. This Scheme is expected to not 
only enhance the integration of renewable energy into the electricity 
grid but also minimize wastage while optimizing the utilization of 
transmission networks, consequently reducing the need for costly 
infrastructure upgrades. Acknowledging the importance of Battery 
Energy Storage Systems in stabilization of the Grid, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take every possible step to ensure 
that the implementation of this Scheme remains on track and all the 
stipulated targets are achieved as per the prescribed timeline.” 
 
10. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the 
Committee. 

 
11 
a) Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme is proposed to have three 
components viz. Market component (1000 MWh under Tranche-I with 
VGF support Rs 46 lakh/MWh and 1200 MWh under Tranche-II with 
VGF support Rs 27 lakh/MWh), State component (6000 MWh with VGF 
support Rs 27 lakh/MWh) and CPSE component (5000 MWh with VGF 
support Rs 27 lakh/MWh). Operational Guidelines for State Component 
and CPSU Component have been issued separately. 
b) For disbursement of VGF amount through Market component 
(Tranche-I), Battery Energy Storage Purchase Agreement (BESPA) has 
been signed with successful bidders by NVVN, as the BESS 
Implementing Agency, for 1000 MWh of BESS capacity. 
c) Under the State component, Letter of Award (LoA) has been 
issued for 2500 MWh BESS capacity including 1000 MWh in Gujarat, 
500 MWh in Maharashtra and 1000 MWh in Rajasthan. 
d) Entire 13,200 MWh BESS capacity, allocated under the VGF 
Scheme, shall be awarded by June 2025 and all the BESS projects shall 
commission within 18-24 months from the date of signing of BESPA. 
e) The Ministry has also designated Grid Controller of India as CNA 
for the scheme for the VGF scheme to be implemented through 
Treasury Single Account. 
f) The overall monitoring of the scheme will be done through CEA, 
who will submit monthly progress in respect of physical and financial 
achievement vis-à-vis the agreed milestones. 
g) Besides, the overall monitoring of the scheme is also being 
carried out by MoP also on regular basis.” 
 
11. In response to the recommendation of the Committee about time 
bound implementation of Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Scheme for 
development of Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS), the Ministry 
has stated that the entire 13,200 MWh capacity, allocated under the VGF 
Scheme, shall be awarded by June 2025 and all the BESS projects shall 
commission within 18-24 months from the date of signing of BESPA. 
Since June 2025 is already over, the Committee would like to know 
about the present status (component-wise) regarding award of the 
13,200 MWh BESS capacity. 
 
 
 
 

 
12 
Recommendation No. 11 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the fundamental key to effective 
functioning of the Central Electricity Authority is the availability of 
comprehensive and qualitative statistics from all the stakeholders 
which would enhance the planning and operational interventions of 
CEA for coordinated development of the Power Sector. It is 
understandable that the subject ‘Electricity’ falls under the Concurrent 
List and Generation being the delicensed activity have resulted into 
innumerable stakeholders in this Sector. However, the Committee feel 
that delay in availability of data in the today’s technologically advanced 
time and age is incomprehensible. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that a dedicated online portal may be created at the 
earliest in order to ensure seamless submission, validation and 
monitoring of the data by all the stakeholders in order to ensure real-
time accessibility of desired statistics.” 
 
13. In its Action-taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
“Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
For online monitoring of under construction thermal power 
projects in the country, IT based project management i.e PROMPT 
Portal (Portal for Online Monitoring of Projects-Thermal) has been 
developed. It is designed to facilitate availability of online status and 
analysis of physical progress of under construction thermal power 
projects.” 
 
14. The Committee had recommended for creation of a dedicated 
online portal in order to ensure seamless submission, validation and 
monitoring of the data by all the stakeholders so as to ensure real-time 
accessibility of desired statistics. The Ministry, in its action-taken reply, 
has submitted that for online monitoring of under construction thermal 
power projects in the Country, IT based project management i.e. 
PROMPT Portal (Portal for Online Monitoring of Projects-Thermal) has 
been developed. In this regard, the Committee re-emphasize that in 
addition to thermal power projects, the online portal should also 
include other power generating projects, especially hydro and solar 
power projects. 

 
13 
CHAPTER – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power sought Rs. 35,877.88 crores 
for the financial year 2025-26, but the actual allocation as Gross Budgetary 
Support is Rs. 21,847 crores which is 60.89% of the demand posted by the 
Ministry. The most evident difference in demand and actual allocation 
pertains to the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme wherein the Ministry 
has been allocated Rs. 13,579 crores less than the demand. In order to make 
up for this shortfall, the Ministry has suggested that it may reallocate funds 
from other programmes where physical targets are not upto the desired level 
to the critical programmes, as per requirement. It means that one or the 
other Schemes/Programmes is liable to be impacted due to reallocation of 
funds within the Ministry and prioritization of one Scheme/Programme over 
the others. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that all the 
Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry should be given due priority so that 
achievement of targets under none of the Schemes/Programmes is hindered 
due to lack of available funds and the Ministry may seek additional funds as 
supplementary Grants, if required. The Committee may also be apprised 
about the reallocation of funds made within the Ministry (scheme/ 
programme wise) and its impact on the concerned Schemes/Programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee.  
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) is a reform-based result linked 
scheme and release of funds, except 10% of GBS as advance, under the 
scheme is contingent upon distribution utilities qualifying the annual 
evaluations for a particular financial year (FY) and based on the actual 
physical progress under the scheme. Even though the funds allocated as 
Budget Estimate (BE) is less than the demand sought for RDSS, additional 
fund shall be sought at Revised Estimate (RE) stage based on the then 
physical and financial progress of works under RDSS as per the scheme 
guideline. Similarly, reallocation of funds under RDSS through schemes/ 
Programmes shall also be decided during the end of FY 2025-26 as per the 
then current progress of the scheme and availability of funds under RDSS 
budget head.  
The orders of re-allocation of funds within the ministry (scheme/programme 
wise) are provided every year to the Standing Committee on Energy before 
the yearly meeting of Demand for Grants of Ministry of Power. Funds are re-

 
14 
allocated from one scheme/programmes where physical targets are not upto 
the desired level to the critical schemes / programmes, as per requirement. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee note that the Budgetary Estimates of the Ministry for the 
financial year 2023-24 was Rs. 20,671.32 crores which was revised to Rs. 
17,635 crores and actual utilization was Rs. 16,720.93 crores. It means actual 
utilization was 80.89% of the Budgetary Estimates and 94.82% of the 
Revised Estimates. During the financial year 2024-25 as on 31st January, 
2025, the Ministry has been able to utilize 85.80% of the Revised Estimates. 
The major part of the under-utilization of funds during the financial years 
2024-25 pertains to the Schemes/Programmes like, Energy Conservation, 
Strengthening of Transmission Systems in the States of Arunachal Pradesh 
and Sikkim, Power System Improvement in North Eastern States, Interest 
Subsidy to National Electricity Fund, Viability Gap Funding for development 
of Battery Energy Storage Systems, etc. The Committee observe that 
Budgetary Allocations of the Ministry have been revised downwards at the 
stage of Revised Estimates during the last three financial years which may be 
symptomatic of the specific structural or procedural challenges which have 
been causing under-utilization of funds. Hence, fund utilization by the 
Ministry for various Schemes/Programmes needs to be improved. 
Accordingly, the Committee, recommend that: 
i) The Ministry should take effective steps towards increasing its fund 
absorption capacity as under-utilization of allocated funds may impact on the 
future budgetary allocations. 
ii) The Ministry should introduce a quarterly Fund Utilization and 
Performance Report and also keep track of the fund usage efficiency of the 
concerned States with respect to Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
i) Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
The following steps are being taken for full utilization of funds under various 
schemes/programmes: 
(i) Reform-Linked Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS): Ministry of 
Power is taking all necessary actions to ensure optimum utilization of the 
budget allocated for RDSS. Monitoring and review of works sanctioned and 
utilization of funds is being done by the Ministry on a regular basis. Weekly 
meetings are also conducted by Ministry of Power with the States and the 
nodal agencies for expediting the progress of sanctioned works. Regular 

 
15 
review meetings are being undertaken by senior officials of MoP with Nodal 
Agencies and MD/CMDs of distribution utilities to ensure timely utilization of 
funds. With concerted efforts, the fund utilization in FY 2024-25 under RDSS 
was 100%. 
(ii) Energy Conservation Schemes 
The Bureau of Energy Efficiency has implemented series of robust measures 
in which limited resources were strategically managed by taking following 
steps like: - 
a) Timely award of works to Implementing Agencies: B.E.E. ensures 
prompt award of works to Implementing Agencies. 
b) Regular Monitoring of Activities/Tasks: - 
 Monthly Reports are being obtained from Implementing Agencies 
for close monitoring of physical and financial progress and its 
review at national and regional level together with direct 
meetings to address challenges in course of program 
implementation. 
 Sharing Best Practices from SDAs for active peer learning from 
exchange of knowledge and experiences. 
(iii) Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for the Development of Battery 
Energy Storage Systems: As per the Scheme, VGF for the Development of 
Battery Energy Storage Systems’ scheme support is to be provided for BESS 
projects sanctioned over three years (2023-26), i.e. 1,000 MWh in 2023-24, 
2,000 MWh in 2024-25 and 1,000 MWh in 2025-26. The VGF funds will be 
disbursed in five tranches: 10% upon financial closure, 45% upon 
commissioning and 15% year wise up to 3 years from the COD of the project.  
As per the approved year wise plan, the disbursement of funds would start 
from 2024-25 and extend upto 2030-31. 
It was estimated that BESS cost in 2023-24 shall be around Rs 2.4 
crore/MWh, resulting in an initial VGF allocation of Rs 0.96 crore/MWh (40% 
of Rs 2.4 crore/MWh), total VGF of Rs 960 crore for the 1000 MWh BESS 
capacity getting approved in 2023-24. Accordingly, a budget estimate of Rs 
96 crore was set for FY 2024-25, considering a 10% disbursement at financial 
closure. 
However, due to declining BESS costs, the VGF amount was revised from Rs 
0.96 Cr/MWh to Rs 0.46 crore/MWh for the 1,000 MWh capacity approved in 
2023-24 and BESS capacity of 13,200 MWh is envisaged under the scheme 
within the sanctioned scheme outlay. Accordingly, in the revised estimate, the 
VGF disbursement was reduced to Rs. 46 crore from Rs 96 crore. 
ii) Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) is incorporated in the Detailed 
Demand for Grant (DDG) FY 2025-26. Regular meetings are being held with 
all the DISCOMs/Power Departments of State govt./UTs and Implementing 

 
16 
Agencies (IAs) of Central Government to improve the fund usage efficiency of 
concerned states with respect to schemes/programmes. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note that during the financial year 2023-24, against the 
scheduled capacity addition targets of 14,700 MW of Thermal Power and 
2,880 MW of Hydro Power, the actual achievements were only 5,404 MW and 
60 MW respectively. Similarly, during the year 2024-25 (upto 31st January, 
2025), against the targets of 15,360 MW of Thermal Power and 1,730 MW of 
Hydro Power, the actual capacity additions were 1,380 MW and 40 MW 
respectively. This delay in commissioning of the Thermal and Hydro Capacity 
would ultimately lead to cost escalation, wherein Subansiri Lower, Parbati-II, 
Pakal Dul Hydro Projects and Barh, Buxar, Ghatampur, North Karanpaura 
Thermal Power Projects, etc. are cases in point.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should coordinate with concerned States and 
Implementing Agencies in order to ensure that the hindrances, if any, are 
timely catered to, so that scheduled capacity addition targets are achieved in 
a time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power (MoP) has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
(i) The following action/steps are taken to ensure timely completion of 
the under construction thermal power projects - 
a) Regular reviews are undertaken in Ministry of Power to identify the 
constraint areas to facilitate faster resolution of inter-Ministerial and other 
outstanding Issues. 
b) As and when required, issues are also reviewed in the PRAGATI portal 
of PMO for proactive governance and timely implementation. 
c) CEA monitors the progress of under-construction power projects 
through frequent site visits and interaction with the developers & other 
stakeholders. CEA holds review meetings periodically with the developers 
and other stakeholders to identify and resolve issues critical for 
commissioning of Projects. 
d) In case of Central Power Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) projects, the 
project implementation parameters/ milestones are incorporated in the 
annual MoU signed between respective CPSUs and Ministry of Power and the 
same are monitored during the quarterly performance review meetings of 
CPSUs and other meetings held in MoP/CEA. 

 
17 
e) Various matters related with project implementation are being taken 
up with State Government/District Administration for facilitating the support 
in resolving the issues to the project implementing agencies. 
f) For timely completion of thermal power projects, IT based project 
management i.e. PROMPT Portal (Portal for Online Monitoring of Projects-
Thermal) has also been developed and launched on 20-08-2024 for 
monitoring of under construction thermal power projects. This online 
platform enables project managers and stakeholders to make informed 
decisions swiftly, ensuring that potential delays and issues are identified 
early and addressed promptly. 
(ii) The following action/steps are taken for achieving scheduled hydro 
capacity addition targets in a time-bound manner are as follows: 
a) IT based monitoring system introduced for close monitoring of the 
hydro projects. The IT portal has been prepared and tested during August’22 
and presently training to developers and filling of data is in progress. 
b) Measures to reduce time and cost overrun has been notified by 
Ministry of Power (MoP) vide OM dated 8-11-2019.  
c) Dispute Avoidance Mechanism for avoidance and resolution of 
contractual disputes in hydro CPSU’s at initial stage of construction by 
engagement of an Independent Engineer has been devised vide MoP OM 
dated 27-9-2021. 
d) Dispute Resolution Mechanism for resolution of disputes for contracts 
being executed by power sector CPSU’s/ other organizations through 
Conciliation Committees has been devised vide OM dated 29-12-2021. 
e) Guidelines for early settlement of disputes and to minimize the arbitral 
claims/ disputes have been issued by MoP vide OM dated 22-03-2022.  
f) To prevent contractual disputes with respect to price variation 
calculation in case of change of Wholesale Price Index (WPI) series, 
Guidelines for 'Price Variation Calculation in case of Change/ Discontinuation 
of Wholesale Price Index Series during execution of the contract' were issued 
by MoP on 04.05.2022. 
g)  Review/Monitoring Meetings are regularly organized by Ministry of 
Power/Central Electricity Authority (CEA) to sort out the critical issues on 
Quarterly Basis. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power has issued an advisory to all 
the coal/lignite based thermal power producers to provide Ash to the 
prospective user agencies through a transparent bidding process. It was 

 
18 
submitted before the Committee during the evidence that there is a provision 
to reserve 20% of the Ash for allotment to local industries through separate 
auction. The Committee feel that there is a need to ensure proper disposal of 
Fly Ash generated by thermal power plants so that nearby areas do not get 
polluted. Keeping in view the fact that our Country has already been 
grappling with the issue of air pollution and there is a need to prioritize 
environmental well-being, the Committee recommend that the 
transportation of Ash should be done in body packed vehicles right from the 
loading end. The Ministry should also ensure strict compliance of the 
provision of limited auction to reserve 20% of the issuable quantity of Ash for 
allotment to local industries involved in manufacturing of ash-based 
products, by all the thermal power producers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
All thermal power plants are following Ministry of Power’s (MoP) guidelines 
dated 15.03.2024 & Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change’s 
(MoEF&CC) guidelines dated 31.12.2021, 30.12.2022, 01.01.2024. The dry fly 
ash is transported through closed container like bulker and through railway 
rake with tarpaulin covering after bagging in environment friendly manner. 
As per MoEF&CC notification dated 31.12.2021 and its amendments 
dated 30.12.2022 & 01.01.2024 para-A (7): 
“Every coal or lignite based thermal power plant shall ensure that loading, 
unloading, transport, storage and disposal of ash is done in an environmentally 
sound manner and that all precautions to prevent air and water pollution are 
taken and status in this regard shall be reported to the concerned State 
Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or Pollution Control Committee (PCC).” 
As per para 5B(i) of MoP’s guidelines dated 15.03.2024: 1:10 times of the 
Highest issued quantity up-to previous three years to MSE by the TPP or, in 
case of non-availability of previously issued quantities, 20% issuable quantity 
has been provided for first year of limited auction. The Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) under Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change and the concerned State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or Pollution 
Control Committee (PCC) are the enforcing and monitoring authority for 
ensuring compliance of all the provisions and shall monitor the utilization of 
ash on quarterly basis.   
MoP’s guidelines, 2024 are advisory in nature. However, compliance thereof 
is subject to scrutiny by the appropriate Commission provided under para 6 
of the Guidelines. For enforcement, monitoring etc. MoEF&CC Notification, 
2021 relies on the Enforcement Agencies provided under the para-E. Further, 

 
19 
CEA periodically holds meeting inter-alia persuading TPPs to comply with the 
provisions of the said guidelines. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee note that the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme has been 
formulated to improve the operational efficiencies and ensure financial 
sustainability of the Distribution Sector. It aims to reduce the AT&C Losses to 
12-15% and the gap between Average Cost of Supply and Average Revenue 
Realized to zero. The Scheme has an outlay of Rs. 3,03,758 crores with a 
Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 97,631 crores from the Government of India 
over a period of five years from the financial year 2021-22 to 2025-26. The 
Committee observe that a total of Rs. 30,065 crores (Revised Estimates) have 
been allocated for Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme during the first 4 
years of this Scheme i.e. from the financial year 2021-22 to 2024-25. Out of 
this allocation, Rs. 25,664 crores could actually be utilized during these years 
till 10th February, 2025. Further, the physical achievement with respect to 
loss reduction works is only 25.3% and against 9,97,680 households 
sanctioned for electrification; 1,80,070 households could be electrified till 9th 
February, 2025. The Committee observe that the accumulated losses of 
Discoms have been continuously increasing as losses were Rs. 5,45,418 
crores in financial year 2020-21 which increased to Rs. 5,84,071 crores in 
2021-22, Rs. 6,47,913 crores in 2022-23 and Rs. 6,92,269 crores in 2023-24. 
Further, the Billing and Collection Efficiencies of the Discoms are not very 
impressive and the gap between Average Cost of Supply and Average 
Revenue Realized has been fluctuating and is far from zero. It was submitted 
before the Committee during the evidence that the deadline for 
implementation of the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme will be 
extended by two years. Keeping in view the physical progress in first four 
years under this Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
conduct a comprehensive review of this Scheme on the basis of its experience 
of past four years in order to remove the bottlenecks so that intended targets 
are achieved atleast by the proposed extended deadline and Distribution 
Sector becomes operationally efficient at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 

 
20 
RDSS is a result linked scheme launched to assist distribution utilities for 
improving their operational performance and financial efficiency. However, 
the losses in utilities (operational and financial) is a function of various 
parameters, some of which are highlighted below:  
• Non cost reflective tariff due to regulatory disallowance of 
expenses incurred by Distribution Utilities including other 
comprehensive income which are unrealized gains or losses. 
• Continued ACS-ARR gap especially in FY 23 on account of non-
recovery of power purchase cost in full owing to non-implementation 
of FPPCA (Fuel and power Purchase Cost Adjustment). 
• Delayed receipt of subsidy dues from the State Governments. 
• Outstanding electricity bill dues of the State Government 
Departments. 
Further, the Accumulated losses also includes further adjustments other than 
operational income in the form of Other Comprehensive Income (OCI), etc. 
which are in the nature of expenses, gains, revenues and losses incurred in 
the past excluded from net income of that year. Thus, they are not a reflection 
of annual operational performance of a particular year. 
Government of India is supplementing the efforts of State Government and 
their distribution utilities under RDSS to improve their financial 
performance. With the concerted efforts and as a result of reform measures 
undertaken, the annual financial loss of utilities has decreased from Rs 
44,614 crore (in FY21) to Rs 25,553 crore in FY 24. Further, the AT&C loss at 
the national level has reduced from 21.91% in FY21 to 16.28% in FY24 and 
ACS-ARR Gap has reduced from Rs. 0.69/kWh in FY21 to Rs. 0.19/kWh in 
FY24.This indicates the positive impact of RDSS and other concurrent reform 
initiatives.  
A robust monitoring and review mechanism is already in place under RDSS. 
Weekly meetings are also conducted by Ministry of Power with the States and 
the nodal agencies for expediting the progress of sanctioned works. An inter-
Ministerial committee headed by Secretary (Power) regularly reviews and 
monitor implantation of the scheme. Further, Review Planning and 
Monitoring (RPM) meeting and Power Ministers’ Conference under the 
chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power are held with all administrative 
heads of Power Departments/ DISCOMs of States to review the progress of 
works. At the state level, periodic discussions and visits are carried out by the 
nodal agencies to ensure hand holding and close monitoring of progress of 
the scheme. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 

 
21 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee note that Smart Metering supports Distribution Utilities in 
improving their financial viability through benefits such as improvement in 
billing and collection efficiency, automatic energy accounting, improved load 
forecasting, optimized power purchase costs and renewable energy 
integration through net metering. The Government has set a target of 
installing 25 crore Smart Meters in the Country by March 2025, against which 
only 2.08 crore Smart Meters have been installed in the Country as on 10th 
February, 2025. The Committee feel that there is a need to make all out 
efforts in order to achieve the targets regarding installation of Smart Meters 
by the extended deadline.  It was submitted before the Committee during the 
evidence that installation of Smart Meters in the Country has picked up pace 
with present installation of eighty thousand Smart Meters per day and 
expected installation of one lakh Smart Meters per day. Since, there is going 
to be massive installation of Smart Meters in the Country during the coming 
years, the Committee recommend that: 
i) The Ministry should focus on Cyber Security aspect of Smart Meters; 
ii) Cases of complaints regarding faulty meters should be addressed on 
priority with installation of check meters in respect of all the complaints to 
verify the readings of the faulty Smart Meter; and 
iii) Independent Third Party Verification of installed Smart Meters and 
Awareness Campaigns may also be initiated in order to boost confidence of 
the Consumers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
(i) Cyber Security: The Standard Bidding Document (SBD) for selection of 
Advanced Metering Interface Service Provider (AMISP) under RDSS, apart 
from covering other key facets of smart metering implementation, also covers 
the Cyber Security related aspects. SBD contains various clauses related to 
cyber security and establishes secure transfer of data between smart meter, 
Data Concentrator Unit (DCU), Head-End System (HES) and Meter Data 
Management (MDM) using encryption and other appropriate methods. All the 
smart meters have to conform to the Indian standards and as per IS 15959, 
the confidentiality of data communicated between smart meter and the user 
is to be handled by the encryption mechanism. There shall also be 
authentication for any type of data transport. In addition to the above, 
detailed requirements and terms and conditions for Network Protection & 
Security, Cyber Security and Data Privacy have been mentioned in the AMISP 
contract for adherence by the selected Bidder. 

 
22 
In order to further strengthen the Cyber Security aspects of the smart 
metering works, additional provisions have been incorporated in the SBD. 
(ii) Check Meters: Advisories have been issued for Installation of check 
meters for up-to 5% of the Smart meters installed and mandatorily in case of 
complaints related to Smart meters. States are being pursued to comply with 
the SOP issued for installation of check meters and is being reviewed on 
weekly basis by the Nodal Agency. In addition, advisories have been issued to 
take regular feedback from consumers pre and post installation of smart 
meters.  
(iii) Third Party Verification: Ministry has issued broad Term of 
Reference (ToR) for Third Party Verification of smart meters installed to be 
conducted on pilot basis in 2 States.  Smart meter advisories and Standard 
operating Procedures (SoPs) prioritizing installation of Smart meter in 
Government Establishments, Government colonies and Industrial and 
commercial category of consumers and other high load consumers. Based on 
successful demonstration in above category of consumers, Smart meter 
installation may be rolled out for other consumers. SoP also prescribes for 
regular consumer engagement exercise in respect of Smart meters and its 
benefits so as to build consumer confidence. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
The Committee note that out of 446 elements in six States under ‘North 
Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project’, 443 elements are 
completed and remaining 3 elements are targeted to be completed by June 
2025. Similarly, out of 294 elements under ‘Comprehensive Scheme for 
Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh 
and Sikkim’, 182 elements are completed and remaining 112 elements are 
targeted to be completed by March 2025. The Committee observe that it has 
been more than 10 years since these two Projects got the approval of the 
Government and their completion is still due. The reasons cited by the 
Ministry for delay in completion of these Projects are the typical issues like, 
heavy rain-fall and lack of connectivity in North-Eastern Region, delay in land 
acquisition, delay in forest clearance, Right of Way and compensation issues, 
land sliding, poor financial condition of contractors, etc. The Committee feel 
that difficult terrain, heavy rainfall, lack of connectivity, etc. in the North-
Eastern Region are the issues that are obvious and very much known from 
the start. Due to these very reasons, this Region remained low on 
development for so long, therefore there is a need to stop looking at these 

 
23 
aspects as justifications for time and cost over-runs and instead efforts 
should be made in finding the solutions. In view of the above, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry and Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
should expedite and focus on completion of ‘Comprehensive Scheme for 
Strengthening of Transmission and Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh 
and Sikkim’ and ‘North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project’ 
by March and June, 2025 respectively on priority basis so that these Projects 
are not delayed further. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
(i) North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project 
(NERPSIP): 
Apart from challenges related with geographical terrain and inclement 
weather, POWERGRID encountered several other issues during 
implementation of NERPSIP which could not be envisaged during the initial 
stage of the scheme such as:  
a) Annulment & re-award of several packages due to poor financial health 
of contractors and some contractors entered NCLT proceedings.  
b) Delay in handing over land for sub-stations. 
c) Change in scope of work: During the implementation of the scheme, 
several changes in scope (addition/modification) have been made by 
beneficiary States as per their requirement and actual site conditions which 
resulted in delay in execution of the said work. 
d) Changes in applicable taxes and duties in July 2017 with respect to the 
rates as envisaged at the time of DPR preparation. 
e) Delay in forest clearances. The issue was taken up with concerned 
authorities on a regular basis. 
f) Severe Right of Way issues in all 6 States. 
g) Demand for higher land and crop compensation. 
h) No work could be carried out during COVID 19 restrictions for several 
months. Some other issues such as movement of labor, and anti CAA protests 
hampered project progress. 
i) Law and order issues. 
j) Non-readiness of downstream network by State utilities. 
Presently, with support of the State Governments of six States & Ministry of 
Power, most of the issues are sorted out and 444 out of 446 elements have 
been completed and balance are expected to be completed by June 2025.  
(ii) Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and 
Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim (CSSTDS): 

 
24 
In CSSTDS scheme, apart from challenges related with geographical terrain 
and inclement weather, POWERGRID encountered several other issues 
during implementation of the scheme such as:  
• Arunachal Pradesh: 
a) Delay in Forest clearance for Extra High Voltage (EHV) & Distribution 
Management System (DMS) Lines, which was to be arranged by the State 
Government. 
b) Unlike other states, a unique policy for compensation to forest dwellers 
towards land diminution value and surface damage was introduced in July 
2021 and August 2023 for Unclassed State Forest (USF) & Reserve Forest 
(RF) areas, respectively, apart from the payment to the Forest Department as 
per Forest diversion rules.  
c) Further, one time ex gratia amount at par with USF for Forest Dwellers 
was also approved by the State Cabinet on 25th February 2025 and 
notification of the same is expected shortly.   
d) There were substantial delays in provisioning of the Right of Way by 
the Arunachal Pradesh govt through Compensation Assessment & 
Disbursement in the lines passing through USF/RF area as per above policy. 
e) Annulment & re-award of several packages due to poor performance of 
the agency. 
f) Additional scope for high altitude (Tawang) region along with delay in 
permission for placement of award of 88 elements after approval of Revised 
Cost Estimate-I in March 2021.  
g) Delay in handing over land for sub-stations. 
h) Severe Right of Way (RoW) issues by local public for most areas. 
• Sikkim: 
a) Severe Flood in Oct’23 and June’24: Due to severe flood, works under 
North Sikkim were almost held up. The road connectivity to Chungthang & 
Lachen areas is not yet restored. 
b) Resistance by the locals in Dzumsa Area. 
c) Transportation of the Transformers affected due to load 
restriction/collapse of several bridges in Sikkim. 
d) Severe ROW in the construction of transmission lines under Namchi 
district.  
e) Demand for higher land and crop compensation. 
• Other reasons common to Arunachal Pradesh & Sikkim: 
a) Law and order issues. 
b) Some other issues such as COVID restrictions impacted the works for 
several months, movement of labor and anti CAA protests hampered project 
progress intermittently. 
c) Non-readiness of downstream network by State utilities. 

 
25 
As on 28.02.2025, 182 elements out of assigned 294 elements in the states of 
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim have been completed. Most of the work in the 
state of Sikkim has been completed with only 14 elements remaining to be 
completed.  
Best efforts are being made to complete the project within the targeted 
schedule and project cost.  Regular monitoring of the projects is being done at 
the level of concerned Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary in Ministry of 
Power (MoP). Regular interactions with State Government Authorities by 
POWERGRID and MoP to resolve various issues pending with State 
Governments are being done. POWERGRID deployed additional manpower in 
the project and a separate set up created in POWERGRID for monitoring of 
CSSTDS.  
Due to unprecedented delay in provisioning of the RoW by the State Govts as 
referred above second Revised Cost Estimate of the Comprehensive Scheme 
is under review with the Ministry of Power. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee observe that the issues regarding compensation for Right of 
Way, delay in Land Acquisition and Forest Clearances, etc. are the constant 
contributors to the cost over-runs and delays in completion of Power Projects 
across the Country. These issues deserve some serious consideration in order 
to create a balance between infrastructure development and impact on 
communities and environment. The Committee therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should consult the States, concerned Departments/Agencies and 
other Stakeholders so as to reach at an amicable solution so that cost and 
time over-runs may be avoided without compromising on the environment 
and interests of the People. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
Hydro Power projects: Hydro power projects require considerably large 
amount of land for reservoir, quarry for raw material, dump yard for 
excavated wastes, rehabilitation and resettlement, construction of roads & 
bridges, afforestation site, shifting of local infrastructure viz. Govt. buildings, 
schools, hospitals etc. 
The process of land acquisition begins with the project proponent submitting 
a formal request to the Deputy Commissioner (DC) of the respective district. 
Before acquisition, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) is conducted to evaluate 

 
26 
displacement, livelihood loss, and environmental impact. Based on the SIA 
report, a Preliminary Notification (Section 11) is issued, allowing affected 
landowners to file objections within 60 days. Following the public hearing, a 
joint survey of the land and standing assets (structures, crops, etc.) is carried 
out to determine compensation and rehabilitation requirements. Once 
objections are resolved, a final declaration (Section 19) is issued, confirming 
the acquisition. The Land Award (Section 23) is then issued by the DC, 
specifying the compensation amount based on market value, solatium (extra 
compensation) and the resettlement benefits. After the Land Award, the 
possession of land (Section 38) is taken by the government, but only after full 
payment of compensation, implementation of Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (R&R) measures (Section 31-42), including alternative land, 
employment opportunities, housing, and other livelihood restoration 
measures. 
The acquisition of private and Govt. land involves active support from State 
Govt./local administration along with coordinated action from developer. 
Presently, issues encountered in land acquisition that require assistance or 
intervention from the Central/ State Government and other agencies are 
reported on PMG (Project Monitoring Group) portal of the DPIIT, Ministry of 
Commerce, GoI for timely resolution.   
The Ministry of Power, actively monitors the progress of hydro power 
projects by project reviews, CAPEX reviews etc.  
Transmission projects: Ministry of Power (MoP) issued RoW compensation 
guidelines on 14.06.2024 which contain provisions for compensation for 
tower base @ 200% and RoW corridor @30%. The said guidelines also 
mention that States can decide higher rates of compensation as per the 
requirement of the concerned area and urgency of work. Further, States may 
adopt the guidelines in totality or with modifications as deemed fit. Many 
States have framed their own RoW guidelines. 
Subsequently, MoP after consulting with various States (Haryana, Rajasthan, 
Gujarat, Karnataka and Delhi) brought out supplementary guidelines to ease 
out RoW related issues in the implementation of Transmission Lines, vide 
order dated 21.03.2025. As per these supplementary guidelines, the 
compensation shall be calculated based on market rate (to be determined by 
a Market Rate Committee (MRC) based on the valuation by independent land 
valuers) instead of circle rate. Further, the compensation amount for Right-
of-Way (RoW) corridor have now been revised as under (for ISTS lines): 
(i) 30% of the land value in rural areas. 
(ii) 60% of the land value in municipal corporations and metropolitan 
areas notified by the State Government. 

 
27 
(iii) 45% of the land value for municipalities, nagar panchayats and all 
other urban planning areas notified by the State Government. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
The Committee note that the Government has approved the Viability Gap 
Funding for development of Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS). The 
Scheme had set a target of adding at least 4,000 MWh of BESS by the financial 
year 2027-28 by providing a VGF of Rs. 3,760 crores in the form of capital 
subsidy, however due to decline in prices of BESS in the recent past, 
enhanced capacity of 13,200 MWh is envisaged under the VGF Scheme. 
During the financial year 2024-25, an amount of Rs. 96 crores was allocated 
for this Scheme which got reduced to Rs. 46 crores at the time of Revised 
Estimates and the actual expenditure is zero till now. For the financial year 
2025-26, an amount of Rs. 200 crores has been allocated. This Scheme is 
expected to not only enhance the integration of renewable energy into the 
electricity grid but also minimize wastage while optimizing the utilization of 
transmission networks, consequently reducing the need for costly 
infrastructure upgrades. Acknowledging the importance of Battery Energy 
Storage Systems in stabilization of the Grid, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should take every possible step to ensure that the 
implementation of this Scheme remains on track and all the stipulated targets 
are achieved as per the prescribed timeline. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
a) Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme is proposed to have three 
components viz. Market component (1000 MWh under Tranche-I with VGF 
support Rs 46 lakh/MWh and 1200 MWh under Tranche-II with VGF support 
Rs 27 lakh/MWh), State component (6000 MWh with VGF support Rs 27 
lakh/MWh) and CPSE component (5000 MWh with VGF support Rs 27 
lakh/MWh). Operational Guidelines for State Component and CPSU 
Component have been issued separately. 
b) For disbursement of VGF amount through Market component 
(Tranche-I), Battery Energy Storage Purchase Agreement (BESPA) has been 
signed with successful bidders by NVVN, as the BESS Implementing Agency, 
for 1000 MWh of BESS capacity. 

 
28 
c) Under the State component, Letter of Award (LoA) has been issued for 
2500 MWh BESS capacity including 1000 MWh in Gujarat, 500 MWh in 
Maharashtra and 1000 MWh in Rajasthan. 
d) Entire 13,200 MWh BESS capacity, allocated under the VGF Scheme, 
shall be awarded by June 2025 and all the BESS projects shall commission 
within 18-24 months from the date of signing of BESPA. 
e) The Ministry has also designated Grid Controller of India as CNA for the 
scheme for the VGF scheme to be implemented through Treasury Single 
Account. 
f) The overall monitoring of the scheme will be done through CEA, who 
will submit monthly progress in respect of physical and financial 
achievement vis-à-vis the agreed milestones. 
g) Besides, the overall monitoring of the scheme is also being carried out 
by MoP also on regular basis. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee note that the Government of India has been helping the 
North-Eastern States through its various Schemes including Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana, Saubhagya and Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme. During the last three financial years, Rs. 2,497.03 crores have been 
allocated for North-Eastern Region under Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme. Further, the Government of India has approved the Scheme for 
providing Central Financial Assistance to the State Governments of North 
Eastern Region towards their equity participation for development of Hydro 
Electric Projects in the Region through joint ventures between concerned 
State Governments and Central Public Sector Undertakings with an outlay of 
Rs. 4,136 crores for cumulative hydro capacity of about 15000 MW. 
Additionally, Funds have also been allocated by the Government for Flood 
Moderation with respect to Dibang Multipurpose Project and Downstream 
Protection works of Subansiri Lower Project in Arunachal Pradesh. However, 
it has been submitted before the Committee that no project developers in 
North Eastern Region has availed the grant under the Scheme of Budgetary 
Support towards Enabling Infrastructure, such as Roads/Bridges so far, 
which in itself is quite ironical given the condition of such infrastructure in 
the Region. Nonetheless, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
continue to ensure that the mandated atleast 10% of its Gross Budgetary 

 
29 
Support is not only earmarked for development of Power Sector in the North-
Eastern Region, but the same is actually utilized for the intended purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
In FY 2024-25, out of total allocation of Ministry of Power of Rs. 19845 crore 
(Revised Estimate), Rs. 2650.66 crore earmarked for North Eastern Region 
and actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 2240.93 crore.  
As per guidelines issued by Ministry of Power (MoP) vide OM dated 
28.09.2021 for budgetary support towards cost of enabling infrastructure i.e., 
roads/bridges, all large hydropower projects wherein the letter of award of 
first major package is awarded after 08.03.2019 are eligible for budgetary 
support. The budgetary support shall be in the form of reimbursement after 
achievement of 25% financial progress with respect to approved/original 
project cost. The grant of budgetary support for a defined part/full length of 
eligible roads shall be reimbursed in two stages. The first stage is after 
operationalization of Motorable road (construction of kachha/unpaved road) 
while the second stage is after black-topping/metalling/finishing works. The 
grant of budgetary support for eligible bridges shall be reimbursed only after 
complete construction of the bridge. The scope for budgetary support has 
been subsequently widened to include the cost incurred for the construction 
of: (a) transmission line from power house to the nearest pooling point 
including upgradation of pooling substation of State/Central Transmission 
Utility, (b) ropeways, (c) railway siding, and (d) communication 
infrastructure. 
The Dibang Multi Purpose Project (MPP) was the only project in the North 
Eastern Region whose first major package was awarded after 08.03.2019. 
However, as of the present date, the project has not achieved the requisite 
25% financial progress. Consequently, no project developer in the region is 
currently eligible to avail the grant for the cost of enabling infrastructure. 
Furthermore, in addition to the Dibang MPP, developers of upcoming projects 
in the North Eastern Region, viz. Heo, Tato-I, Etalin, Attunli, Kamala, etc., will 
become eligible to receive budgetary support for enabling infrastructure only 
after achieving 25% financial progress in relation to their approved project 
costs. 
Government of India has notified the scheme of Budgetary Support for flood 
Moderation with objective to reduce tariff of the projects by ensuring that 
consumers are charged cost related to power component only. Till date an 
amount of ₹595.24 Crore towards Budgetary Support for Flood 
Moderation/Storage Hydro Electric Projects has been released for Dibang 
MPP (2880 MW) in Arunachal Pradesh. 

 
30 
In accordance with MoP O.M. dated:08/10/2024, the Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA) would be released in four instalments of 25% each during 
the construction of the projects based on the achievement of the certain 
milestones by the developers i.e. (i) achievement of river diversion for 
construction of dam/barrage (ii) excavation of Power House (iii) concreting 
of Dam/Barrage till spillway crest level from foundation level, and (iv) 
concreting of Dam/Barrage till 80% of Dam/Barrage height from foundation 
level. Currently no project developer in the region is eligible to avail the grant 
for the cost of enabling infrastructure. 
Further, as per recommendation of Delegated Investment Board 
(DIB) chaired by Secretary (Power), in its meeting held on 09th December 
2021, the grant of Rs. 188.24 crore to NHPC Ltd. towards cost of balance 
downstream protection works of Subansiri lower hydroelectric project in 
Arunachal Pradesh was recommended. The approval of the competent 
authority was conveyed to NHPC Ltd. on 03.01.2022. An amount of Rs. 175.03 
crores has been released till date. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee note that the fundamental key to effective functioning of the 
Central Electricity Authority is the availability of comprehensive and 
qualitative statistics from all the stakeholders which would enhance the 
planning and operational interventions of CEA for coordinated development 
of the Power Sector. It is understandable that the subject ‘Electricity’ falls 
under the Concurrent List and Generation being the delicensed activity have 
resulted into innumerable stakeholders in this Sector. However, the 
Committee feel that delay in availability of data in the today’s technologically 
advanced time and age is incomprehensible. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that a dedicated online portal may be created at the earliest in 
order to ensure seamless submission, validation and monitoring of the data 
by all the stakeholders in order to ensure real-time accessibility of desired 
statistics. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
For online monitoring of under construction thermal power projects in the 
country, IT based project management i.e PROMPT Portal (Portal for Online 
Monitoring of Projects-Thermal) has been developed. It is designed to 
facilitate availability of online status and analysis of physical progress of 
under construction thermal power projects. 

 
31 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee note that the Budgetary Estimates for National Power 
Training Institute have been substantially decreased at the time of Revised 
Estimates, barring the financial year 2023-24. The allocations were reduced 
by about 68.47% during the financial year 2020-21, about 77% during 2021-
22, about 40% during 2022-23 and about 50% during 2024-25. The 
Committee observe that the NPTI has not been able to fully utilize even the 
decreased allocations during these financial years. The Government of India 
provide funds to NPTI for meeting the requirement of its pension liabilities 
and for creation/upgradation of infrastructure in its Institutes spread across 
the Country. Finding it strange that funds remain un-spent by NPTI which 
needs to act as a resource centre for Training and Capacity Building in highly 
dynamic Power Sector, the Committee recommend that the NPTI should 
ensure exhaustive utilization of the allocated funds for creation and 
upgradation of its training facilities and infrastructure in order to get the 
required workforce trained, equipped and prepared to steer the Power 
Sector forward. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
Government of India provide funds to NPTI to meet the requirement of its 
pension liabilities and for creation/upgradation of Infrastructure in its 
institutes spread across the country. Due to Covid Pandemic the allocated 
funds at Budget Estimate (BE) stage were not fully utilized and subsequently 
decreased at RE stage during the years 2020-21 and 2021-22. Further, due to 
delay in conceptualization and preparation of DPR of the new projects, the 
allocations were reduced during the year 2022-23 and 2024-25.  Although 
the allocations had been reduced at the RE stage, the overall expenditure by 
the institute has been considerably increased from Rs 14 crore in 2022-23 to 
Rs 23 crore in 2023-24 and to Rs 25 crore in 2024-25 respectively.  
Moreover, to ensure full utilization of the allocated funds, Ministry of Power 
has advised the institute to submit proposals well in advance along with 
utilization certificates regularly so that funds could be released in time. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2025-Budget, Dated: 22/05/2025] 

 
32 
CHAPTER – III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's Replies 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
CHAPTER – IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require Reiteration 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 

 
34 
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
30th July, 2025 
8 Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Shrirang Appa Barne 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Energy 
 
  

 
35 
APPENDIX – I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
 
MINUTES OF SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ENERGY (2024-25) HELD ON 30TH JULY, 2025 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-62, 
SAMVIDHAN SADAN, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
 
 MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Shrirang Appa Barne - Chairperson 
 
2.  Shri Shyamkumar Daulat Barve 
3.  Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
4.  Shri Malaiyarasan D. 
5.  Dr. Shivaji Bandappa Kalge 
6.  Dr. Kirsan Namdeo 
7.  Shri Nilesh Dnyandev Lanke 
8.  Shri Dulu Mahato 
9.  Shri Ramprit Mandal 
10.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
12.  Shri Abhay Kumar Sinha 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
 
13.  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan  
14.  Shri R. Dharmar 
15.  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Director 
3. Shri Ajitesh Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Deepika Under Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 

 
36 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee 
then took up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Power’. 
(ii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 2nd Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
(iii) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 4th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Power’. 
(iv) Report on ‘Action-taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 5th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy’. 
 
3. After discussing the contents of the Reports in detail, the Committee 
adopted the abovementioned draft Reports without any amendment/ 
modification. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above-
mentioned Reports and present the same to both the Houses during the 
current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 

 
37 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Energy 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
12 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12  
Total:  12  
Percentage:  
 
100 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total:  Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil  
Percentage: 
 
00 
 