 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Power] 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2023-24) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
40 

  2  
  
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Power] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2023 
 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


  3  
  
 
C O E NO. 374 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by_____________. 
  

  4  
  
 
 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) 5 
Introduction 6 
Chapter I Report  7 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
16 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
47 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
48 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
49 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I MoP’s letter to States/UTs regarding attendance of Chief 
Engineer/Executive Engineer/ Project Director in DEC 
meetings  
50 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of Sitti ng of the Committee held on 14 th  
December, 2023 
56 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-
Fifth Report (1 7th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Energy. 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  5  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY (2023-24) 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal -  Chairperson 
 
2. Shri Gurjeet Singh Aujla  
3. Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
5. Dr. A. Chellakumar 
6. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
7. Shri S. Gnanathiraviam 
8. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
9. Shri Kishan Kapoor 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
11. Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete 
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad 
13. Shri Gyaneshwar Patil 
14. Shri Jai Prakash 
15. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
18. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
20. Shri P. Velusamy 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Gulam Ali 
23. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
24. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
25. Shri Javed Ali Khan 
26. Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
28. Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
29. Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar 
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora Additional Director 
3. Shri S. Lakshmikanta Singh Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Madhumita Assistant Committee Officer  
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13 th 
December, 2023 consequent upon his resignation from membership of the Lok Sabha. 
 

  6  
  
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Energy, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Fortieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Power. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 21st 
March, 2023  and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day . 
Replies of the Government to the observations/recommendations 
contained in this Report were received on 8th June, 2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 14th December, 2023. 
 
4. An Analysis of action -taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                           Jagdambika Pal 
14 December, 2023                       Chairperson, 
Agrahayana 23, 1945 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Energy 
 
 

  7  
  
CHAPTER –I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Energy deals with action - 
taken by the Ministry of Power on Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth L ok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Power. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on  
21st March, 2023 and was laid on table of the Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
The Report contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 1,  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 
18 
                                                                                                  Total - 18 
                         Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Nil                            Total - 
00 
Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Nil                                            Total– 
00 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil                        Total - 
00 
Chapter-V 

  8  
  
 
4. The Committee further desire that Action -taken Statement on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this  
Report be furnished to the Committee within three mo nths of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
5. The Comm ittee will now deal with action -taken by the Government 
on some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration 
or merit comments. 
 [  
Recommendation No. 3 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:  
 
“The Committee note that the Budgetary Estimate of the 
Ministry of Power for the year 2022 -23 was Rs. 16,074.74 crore. 
However, the same was Revised to Rs. 13,106.58 crore. The actual 
utilization upto 31.01.2023 is Rs. 9,439.21 crore which is 58.7% of 
the BE and 72% of RE. The Committee observe that the performance 
of the Ministry of Power in regard to the utilization of allocated fund 
(except for the year 2020 -21 due to COVID -19) has been goo d. In 
2021-22, the financial performance of the Ministry was 117% of their 
Budgetary Estimates. The Committee would expect that fund 
utilization for 2022-23 will not lag and the tempo will be maintained.  
The Committee recognizing the importance of the Power Sector 
has been advocating for higher budgetary allocation for the Ministry. 
As the Ministry has been allocated the highest -ever budgetary 
provision of Rs. 20,671.32 crore for the year 2023 - 24, now the onus 
falls on them to ensure that the enhanced allocation is fully utilized 
for achieving the targets envisaged under various schemes and 
heads. Since the utilization of budgetary allocation of the Ministry 
depends heavily on the progress made by the States, the Committee 
are of the view that regular m eetings with the States, closer 
monitoring and their hand -holding in critical areas could be the key 
to ensure timely implementation of Schemes.” 
 
7 . In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
 
“Steps being taken by Ministry of Power for utilization of 
budget allocated for better implementation of various schemes are 
given below: 
(a) The Ministry has a robust mechanism at various levels to 
ensure that the enhanced allocation is fully utilized for achieving the 

  9  
  
targets under distribution sector schemes. The monitoring and 
review of fund allocation and utilization is being done by the 
Ministry on a regular basis. A weekly/bi -weekly meeting is 
conducted under the chairmanship of Secretary (Power) along with 
nodal a gencies (PFC and REC), to monitor the progress of works 
sanctioned under the schemes. An inter -Ministerial committee 
headed by Secretary (Power) regularly reviews and monitor 
implantation of the scheme. Further, a Review Planning and 
Monitoring (RPM) meeti ng under the chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Minister of Power is held on a regular basis with all administrative 
heads of Power Departments/ DISCOMs of states to review the 
progress of works. At the state level, periodic discussions and visits 
are carried out by the nodal agencies to ensure hand holding and 
closer monitoring of progress for timely implementation of the 
schemes. 
(b) Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) in collaboration with 
Ministry of Power aimed to undertake the following actions during 
FY 2023-24: 
a) Biannual National level meetings and Quarterly Regional level 
meetings will be organized with respective State Designated 
Agencies (SDAs) to monitor and review the  progress of various 
activities/ programmes/schemes being implemented by them and 
utilization of funds thereof. 
b) In addition to reviewing the physical and financial progress of 
SDAs, above meetings also focus on discussing the “best practices” of 
some of the SDAs, thereby providing to all the SDAs, a platform for 
active peer learning for enha nced and effective implementation of 
different activities /programmes. 
c) Regular one -to-one meetings will be convened to address the 
issues/ challenges in programme implementation being faced by the 
SDAs, wherein they would be provided with necessary advo cacy and 
handholding, particularly in critical areas viz. innovative 
demonstration projects, manpower support, State Energy 
Conservation Fund (SECF), etc. 
d) A report on implementation of different activities 
/programmes by SDAs is being obtained from them  on monthly 
basis to monitor their physical and financial progress.  
(c) In order to strengthen the intra -state transmission system as 
well as distribution system of the North East Region and to improve 
connectivity of the upcoming load centers with the Nat ional Grid to 
achieve affordable and reliable 24X7 power supply to all categories 
of end consumers in NER States, Government of India (GoI) 

  10  
  
approved the following schemes which is being implemented by 
POWERGRID: 
 
(a) North-Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project 
(NERPSIP); 
(b) Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and 
Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim 
(Comprehensive Scheme) 
Higher provision of Rs. 2387 crore has been kept in Bud get Estimate 
2023-24 for above p rojects based on balance works to be executed 
under the projects. Efforts shall be made to meet the budgetary 
estimates for FY 2023-24. 
The recommendation of Hon’ble Committee for closer monitoring to 
ensure timely implementation of schemes is noted. ” 
 
8. The Committee while recognizing the highest ever budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 20,671.32 crore for the Ministry of Power in BE 2023 -
24, also reminded the Ministry about their responsibility of full and 
timely utilization of the allocated fund. The Committee also desired 
the Ministry to work in close coordination with the States, as the 
utilization of budgetary allocation was heavily dependent on the 
performance of the States. In response, the Ministry has described 
about its mechanism at various levels for fu ll utilization of its 
enhanced allocation. The Ministry has also provided details of the 
monitoring and review systems in place for the Ministry, its 
organizations and State nodal agencies. The Committee appreciate the 
mechanisms put in place by the Ministry to achieve the full utilization 
of allocated funds as well as the systems to monitor and review this 
utilization. However, the Committee are of the view that strict 
adherence to these mechanisms are constantly  required to ensure 
actual and proper utilization of the allocated funds. The Committee 
would again like to highlight the need for being closely associated 
with States on a regular basis to ensure that the States work in 
consonance with Centre when it comes to the development of Power 
Sector of the Country. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
ensure that the officials of the Nodal Agencies who hold the 
discussions and make visits to the States are qualified appropriately 
and trained adequately to handle the complexities. 
 

  11  
  
Recommendation No. 8 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:  
 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Power has initiated a 
new Scheme ‘‘Viability Gap Funding’ for the development of Pump 
Storage Plants and Battery Energy Storage Systems. The Committee 
further note that the estimated Capital Cost of the scheme is Rs 
9,400 crore with gross budgetary support of Rs. 3,760 crore. The 
Ministry has stated that the VGF support will bring down the tariff 
from storage at acceptable levels to DISCOMS/consumers. The 
Committee find only a token provision has been made for 2023 -24 
under this Scheme. The Ministry of Power, however, had posted a 
demand of Rs. 96 crore for the Scheme. Due to the advent of variable 
and intermittent renewable energy into the power system in a big 
way, the need for Pumped Storage Plants/Battery Storage is being 
felt for balancing the demand and supply fluctuations in the Grid. 
The Committee, therefore, welcome this initiative and believe that 
this Scheme will also provide impetus for the growth of t he 
Hydropower Sector (Pumped Storage Projects). The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should monitor the development 
of such projects and provide necessary assistance, if required. The 
Committee expect the Ministry to post additional Demands u nder 
this head at the stage of Revised Estimates as per the progress of 
work in this regard and also spell out as to how the VGF allocation 
will be used. The Committee also expect that VGF support should be 
leveraged to increase our understanding of the te chnology and 
application and should not be considered as a continuous tool for 
support.” 
 
10. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
 
“Ministry of Power had sought ‘in -principle’ approval of 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in June, 2022 for 
initiating a new scheme for meeting the Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
requirements in the Energy Storage System for Power Sector for 
development of 4,000 MWh of Battery Energy Storage Systems and 
5,000 MW of Hydro Pump Storage Plant. Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance in July, 2022 conveyed its ‘in -principle’ approval 
for support to Battery Energy Storage System of 4000 MWh invo lving 
a VGF of ₹ 2,940 crore and support to Pump Storage Plant for 
projects of 3000 MW involving a VGF of ₹ 3,000 crore. However, later 
on a conscious decision was taken by the Government to work 

  12  
  
separately on a comprehensive policy for PSP which would cov er VGF 
requirements for PSP. Accordingly, the scheme was formulated for 
Viability Gap Funding for development of Battery Energy Storage 
Systems of 4,000 MWh capacity only. 
Ministry had sought budgetary support of ₹ 96 crore for the 
proposed Scheme titled ‘ Viability Gap Funding for development of 
Battery Energy Storage Systems’ in FY 2023 -24 as the Scheme was 
proposed to be approved and operationalized in the Financial Year 
(FY) 2022 -23 and as such the disbursement of funds for BESS 
projects was to commence in FY 2023 -24 with budgetary 
requirement of ₹ 96 crore. However, the VGF Scheme is yet to be 
approved by the competent authority. The Scheme is likely to be 
approved and operationalized by June, 2023 and first bidding for 
BESS projects may commence by July  2023. The fund requirement 
shall arise from FY 2024 -25 onwards only. Hence, the proposed 
Scheme doesn’t entail any disbursement in FY 2023 -24 and the 
Ministry can proceed with the envisaged timelines with the token 
amount available. 
The criteria for disbursement of funds of VGF for BESS is as under: 
Disbursement Plan of VGF for BESS: 
Disbursement of VGF for BESS % (Percentage) 
1. On financial closure subject to bank 
guarantee and possession of 90 % of the total 
land required for the project by the developer 
 
10 
2. On COD 45 
3. Completion of 1st year from COD 15 
4. Completion of 2nd year from COD 15 
5. Completion of 3rd year from COD 15 
Total 100 
The underlying challenge in rapid adoption of BESS is that presently 
the BESS manufacturing capacity is limited, and therefore costs are 
high. Recently, the Ministry concluded bids for a pilot project of 1 
GWh BESS, and the discovered levelized cost of storage was above 
₹10/kWh, which is very high. It is expected that the costs will come 
down wit h increasing volumes. For the first few bids, Viability Gap 
Funding will be required. As volumes grow, the costs may come 
down and VGF may not be required. Therefore, VGF support is to be 
leveraged to increase understanding of the technology and 
application and not envisaged as a continuous tool for support .” 

  13  
  
11. The Committee had expressed surprise over the token provision 
made in Budget 2023-24 for the scheme ‘Viability Gap Funding’ for the 
development of Pump Storage Plants and Battery Energy Storage 
Systems, even though the estimated Capital Cost of the scheme was Rs. 
9,400 crore with gross budgetary support of Rs. 3,760 crore . The 
Ministry of Power had posted a demand of Rs. 96 cr ore for the scheme 
and hence, the Committee expected the Ministry to post additional 
Demands under this head at the stage of Revised Estimates as per the 
progress of work in this regard  and also  spell out the mechanism of 
utilization of this allocation.  In response, the Ministry has informed 
the Committee that after receiving “in -principle” approval for both 
Battery Energy Storage System and Pump Storage Plant from the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, the Government took 
a conscious decision to work separately on a comprehensive policy for 
PSP which would also cover VGF requirements for PSP. Accordingly, 
the scheme was formulated for Viability Gap Funding for development 
of Battery Energy Storage Systems of 4,000 MWh capacity only.  The 
new scheme titled ‘Viability Gap Funding for development of  Battery 
Energy Storage Systems was proposed to be approved and 
operationalized in the Financial Year 2022 -23 and as such , the 
disbursement of funds for Battery Energy Storage System projects was 
to commence in FY 2023 -24 with budgetary requirement of ₹ 96 
crore. However, the VGF scheme had still not been approved by the 
competent authority  and hence, the proposed scheme didn’t entail 
any disbursement in FY 2023 -24. The Committee note that as p er the 
Ministry’s reply, the VGF scheme was likely to be approved and 
operationalized by June, 2023 and the first bidding for Battery Energy 
Storage System  projects was likely to commence by July, 2023. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the curren t status of this 
scheme along with the budgetary demand that the Ministry is likely to 
place in FY 2024 -25. The Committee expect the Ministry to adhere to 
the revised timeline of the scheme and place a strong case for its 
budgetary allocation before the De partment of Expenditure. The 
Committee understand the challenges associated with developing 
Grid scale battery storage but if the country has  to successfully 
balance the variable and intermittent renewable energy into the 
power system, then energy storage systems, including Grid scale 

  14  
  
battery storage must be adequately developed. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised about the status  of the PSP policy as well as its 
timeline of operation.  
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“As innovations are coming up across the Globe at a faster pace, 
research activities especially in the Power Sector is required not 
only to ensure that the nation does not lag in the know -how but also 
provide an opportunity for our Nation to take a lead role in 
Technology Innovations across the world. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that every possible effort should be made to promote 
Research and Development in the Power Sector. They also 
recommend that the budgetary provision of Central Power Research 
Institute (CPRI) shall be reviewed as per the changing scenario and 
the growing needs of the Power Sector. It should also be ensured 
that whatever funds are allocated to them are effectively utilized .” 
 
13. In its action-taken reply, the Ministry of Power has stated as under: 
 
“Research and development for the Indian power sector is one 
of the prime areas of focus for the Ministry of Power. With the rapidly 
changing technological landscape, it is essential that our country stay 
at the forefront of innovation to remain competitive  globally. To 
support research and development in the power sector, the Ministry 
has approved continuation of the "R&D schemes of Ministry of Power 
being implemented through CPRI" with a total outlay of Rs 112 
crores for the period of 2021 -26. The preparat ion of the National 
Electricity Plan (NEP) (2022 - 27) is in its concluding phase and 
chapter 11 of the NEP outlines the key areas of research that will be 
emphasized over the next 5 years and supported under the R&D 
scheme. This scheme is overseen by the S tanding Committee on R&D 
(SCRD), chaired by Chairperson, Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 
and includes senior representatives from the Industry, Academia, 
Utilities, and the Ministry. The committee is aided by four Technical 
Committees, headed by eminen t professors from IITs, which provide 
guidance to the project team to ensure that the outcomes are 
beneficial for the Indian power sector. 
CPRI periodically calls for proposals for indigenous 
development of the latest technologies that can help our nation gain 
knowledge and create opportunities to lead in technology 

  15  
  
innovations worldwide. The institute has supported projects in areas 
such as cyber security, energy storage, solar panels, data analytics, 
co-firing of bio -mass in Thermal Power plants and nano -materials. 
CPRI also monitors the latest trends and needs of Indian 
manufacturers and is augmenting and establishing new test facilities 
in line with national requirements. The progress of CPRI is 
periodically monitored by the Standing Committee chaired by  
Additional Secretary, Power, and also by the Governing Council 
chaired by Secretary (P) to ensure adequate funding is available to 
support the CPRI activities and also monitor the effective utilization 
of the funds.” 
14. In their recommendation, t he Commi ttee had exhorted the 
Ministry to undertake every possible effort to undertake Research 
and Development (R&D) in the Power Sector in order to take a lead 
role in Technology Innovations across the world. The Committee also 
desired that the budgetary provisi on of CPRI be reviewed as per the 
changing scenario and growing needs of the Power Sector and 
effective utilization of the allocated fund be ensured. In its response, 
the Ministry informed the Committee about the approved 
continuation of the "R&D schemes o f Ministry of Power being 
implemented through CPRI" with a total outlay of Rs . 112 crore for the 
period of 2021-26. The Committee while appreciating the Ministry for 
continuing this scheme also feel that the allocated fund be fully 
utilised for high-tech R&D for the next five years.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  16  
  
CHAPTER –II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Recommendation No. 1 
Budgetary Allocation 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power has been allocated Rs. 
20,671.32 crore for 2023-24 which is 29% more than the previous year’s 
allocation of Rs. 16,074.74 crore. This allocation of the Ministry is 0.46 % of 
the total Union Budget (2023 -24), which for this year is the highest ever 
and has decisively breached the budgetary allocatio n range of 15 -16,000 
crore for the Ministry of Power which was continuing for years. The 
Committee treat this improvement as reflective of better budgetary 
planning of the Ministry when better financial projections have been made 
against which the Ministry  of Finance has been convinced to provide more 
allocation for the Ministry and hope that similar approach will be 
maintained in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Finance, Government of India has allocated a sum of ₹20671.32 
crore in Budget Estim ate (BE) for FY 2023 -24 to implement the ongoing 
schemes/ projects of the Ministry. This includes ₹ 16108.92 crore for 
Schemes/projects of the Ministry of Power and ₹ 4312.48 crore is for 
meeting the Non scheme Expenditure and Establishment expenditure of Rs 
249.92 crore. Power Sector is the backbone of all industrial/ economic 
activities of the country. The Budget allocation will be utilised in the 
schemes of Ministry of Power namely Reform Linked Distribution Sector 
Scheme, Transmission and Strengthening of Power System in the country. 
The objectives of these schemes of Ministry of Power are to provide 24*7 
uninterrupted Power Supply to all the households and for Industrial 
activities. In this Financial Year (FY), Rs. 14456.60 crore has been allocated 
to t hese schemes which is 70% of the total BE. As on 06.06.2023, Rs. 
2334.05 crore has been released under these schemes. Monitoring of the 
expenditure of allocated budget in various major schemes are being done 
by Hon’ble Minister of Power and NRE and Secreta ry (Power) on weekly / 
fortnightly basis. 
 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 

  17  
  
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee observe that the budgetary allocations to the Ministry of 
Power are being utilized for many important programmes  being run by the 
Ministry to develop the sector to fulfil the present, as well as the future, 
need for electricity in the country. Programme such as Revamped Reforms -
based and Results -linked, Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) is aiming to 
bring down high AT&C losses in the country, Energy Conservation and 
Efficiency programmes help in avoiding billions of units of electricity. The 
Committee, therefore, have been emphasizing the need for due attention of 
the Government for the development of the Power Secto r and 
recommending adequate budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Power. 
Taking into account the importance of the Power Sector in the overall 
development of the socio -economic conditions of the people of the country 
and the fund absorptive capacity of the Ministry, the enhanced budgetary 
provisions for the Ministry is a welcome step. The Committee desire that 
the trend of higher budgetary allocation for the Power Sector should 
continue. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Power to post next 
year’s budgetary demands as per the actual requirement of the Sector for 
its desired growth with a concrete utilization plan to justify the higher 
budgetary allocation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power is committed to meeting the fund utilization targets as 
per the stipulated milestones. The budgetary demands under Revamped 
Reforms-based and Results -linked, Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) are 
worked out on the basis of scheme guidelines and expected progress of 
projects sanctioned under the schem e in order to reduce the AT&C losses 
to pan-India levels of 12 -15% and Average Cost of Supply (ACS) - Average 
Revenue Realized (ARR) gap to zero by 2024-25. 
 
Further, the schemes on “Promoting Energy Efficiency activities in different 
sectors of Indian eco nomy” and “National Mission on Enhanced Energy 
Efficiency” have been approved for the period from FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025-
26. The estimated fund required for Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
schemes is Rs. 435.48 crore till 2025 -26. The major activities of BEE are 
related to policy formulation, regulating instruments and capacity building, 
therefore the available funds are adequate to promote energy efficiency in 
targeted sector. The consumers/industries do their own investments to 
avail benefits of Energy Efficiency. 

  18  
  
 
Funds for strengthening of the transmission and distribution network in 
North Eastern region shall also be required till FY 2025 -26. So, provisions 
of budget are in tune with the long term objectives and planning of the 
power sector. 
 [Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Past performance of Ministry 
 
The Committee note that the Budgetary Estimate of the Ministry of Power 
for the year 2022 -23 was Rs. 16,074.74 crore. However, the same was 
Revised to Rs. 13,106.58 crore. The actual utilization upto 31.01.2023 is Rs. 
9,439.21 crore which is 58.7% of the BE and 72% of RE. The Committee 
observe that the performance of the Ministry of Power in regard to the 
utilization of allocated fund (except for the  year 2020-21 due to COVID -19) 
has been good. In 2021 -22, the financial performance of the Ministry was 
117% of their Budgetary Estimates. The Committee would expect that fund 
utilization for 2022-23 will not lag and the tempo will be maintained.  
 
The Committee recognizing the importance of the Power Sector has been 
advocating for higher budgetary allocation for the Ministry. As the Ministry 
has been allocated the highest -ever budgetary provision of Rs. 20,671.32 
crore for the year 2023 - 24, now the onu s falls on them to ensure that the 
enhanced allocation is fully utilized for achieving the targets envisaged 
under various schemes and heads. Since the utilization of budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry depends heavily on the progress made by the 
States, the Committee are of the view that regular meetings with the States, 
closer monitoring and their hand -holding in critical areas could be the key 
to ensure timely implementation of Schemes. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Steps being taken by Ministry of Power for utilization of budget allocated 
for better implementation of various schemes are given below:  
(a) The Ministry has a robust mechanism at various levels to ensure that the 
enhanced allocation is fully utilized for achieving the targets under 
distribution sector schemes. The monitoring and review of fund allocation 
and utilization is being done by the Ministry on a regular basis. A 
weekly/bi-weekly meeting is conducted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Power) along with nodal agencies (PFC and REC), to mon itor 

  19  
  
the progress of works sanctioned under the schemes. An inter -Ministerial 
committee headed by Secretary (Power) regularly reviews and monitor 
implantation of the scheme. Further, a Review Planning and Monitoring 
(RPM) meeting under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Power is 
held on a regular basis with all administrative heads of Power 
Departments/ DISCOMs of states to review the progress of works. At the 
state level, periodic discussions and visits are carried out by the nodal 
agencies to ensure hand holding and closer monitoring of progress for 
timely implementation of the schemes. 
 
(b) Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) in collaboration with Ministry of Power 
aimed to undertake the following actions during FY 2023 -24: 
 
a) Biannual National level meeting s and Quarterly Regional level 
meetings will be organized with respective State Designated 
Agencies (SDAs) to monitor and review the progress of various 
activities /programmes/ schemes being implemented by them and 
utilization of funds thereof. 
b) In addition to reviewing the physical and financial progress of SDAs, 
above meetings also focus on discussing the “best practices” of some 
of the SDAs, thereby providing to all the SDAs, a platform for active 
peer learning for enhanced and effective implementation of  
different activities /programmes. 
c) Regular one -to-one meetings will be convened to address the 
issues/ challenges in programme implementation being faced by 
the SDAs, wherein they would be provided with necessary 
advocacy and handholding, particularly in c ritical areas viz. 
innovative demonstration projects, manpower support, State 
Energy Conservation Fund (SECF), etc. 
d) A report on implementation of different activities /programmes by 
SDAs is being obtained from them on monthly basis to monitor 
their physical and financial progress. 
 
(c) In order to strengthen the intra-state transmission system as well as 
distribution system of the North East Region and to improve connectivity 
of the upcoming load centers with the National Grid to achieve affordable 
and reliable 24X7 power supply to all categories of end consumers in NER 
States, Government of India (GoI) approved the following schemes which 
is being implemented by POWERGRID: 
 

  20  
  
(a) North-Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project (NERPSIP);  
(b) Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and 
Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim (Comprehensive 
Scheme) 
 
Higher provision of Rs. 2387 crore has been kept in Budget Estimate 
2023-24 for above projects based on balance works to be executed 
under the projects. Efforts shall be made to meet the budgetary 
estimates for FY 2023-24. 
 
The recommendation of Hon’ble Committee for closer monitoring to 
ensure timely implementation of schemes is noted.  
 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 4 
Quarterly Expenditure 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic 
Affairs has prescribed that each Ministry/Department shall prepare the 
Monthly/Quarterly (Plan). It has also been stated that not more than 33% 
and 15% expenditure of Budget Estimates (BE) shall be permissible in the 
last quarter and last month of the financial year respectively. The 
Committee further note that the fund utilization by the Ministry of Power 
during the Qtr.1, Qtr.2, Qtr.3 and Qtr.4 of fiscal 2022 -23 have been 8.78%, 
24.92%, 20.2% and 4.81% (upto 31.01.2023) of the BE of Rs. 16,074.74 
crore. Even as per the Revised Estimate of Rs. 13,106.58 for the year 
2022-23, they still have a balance of Rs. 3,667.37 crore (28% of RE) which 
is to be utilized in the remaining two months o f the current fiscal. The 
Committee also note that the Ministry during the year 2021 -22 also had 
utilized as much as 63.5% of their BE and 52.8% of RE in the last Qtr.4 
contrary to laid out guidelines. The Committee are of the view that the 
disciplined qua rterly utilization of fund especially in the first quarter 
greatly helps in optimum utilization of fund allocated for the financial year 
without resorting to ‘March Rush’ at the end of the fiscal, which may 
impair the implementation of Programmes/Schemes. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend a more consistent and regimented quarterly 

  21  
  
utilization of fund by the Ministry particularly for the First and the Last 
Quarter of the financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is aligned with the view of the  Hon’ble Committee to have a 
uniform quarterly utilization instead of a staggered utilization in the year 
end. Steps are also being taken for various major schemes as given below:  
 Under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme(RDSS), funds are 
released to the b eneficiaries as per scheme design and on the basis 
achieving stipulated milestones and annual evaluation.  
 Bureau to Energy Efficiency (BEE) develops a comprehensive 
budget utilization plan for each program with specific allocation for 
each quarter every ye ar. To prevent last minute March rush, earlier 
deadline are set for the programs and funds will be prioritize 
accordingly. With consistent and disciplined approach, the 
implementation of programs and schemes will be implemented 
effectively and efficiently leading to optimum utilization of funds.  
 Under Strengthening of the transmission and distribution network 
in North Eastern region, based on balance works under the project, 
quarterly provisions are kept for the expenditure to be incurred 
under various contract packages, working season etc. 
 
The recommendation by the committee for a more disciplined and 
consistent approach to utilizing funds allocated for the financial year is 
noted. 
 [Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS)  
 
The Committee note that the objective of Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme (RDSS) is to improve the quality, reliability and affordability of 
power supply to consumers through a financially sustainable and 
operationally efficient Distribution Sector. It also aims to reduce the 
AT&C losses to Pan -India levels of 12 -15% and Average Cost of Supply 
(ASC) – Average Revenue Realized (ARR) gap to zero by 2024 -25. The 
Scheme has a total layout of Rs.3,03,758 crore including Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS) of Rs. 97 ,631 crore. As per the Expenditure Finance 

  22  
  
Committee note of the Scheme the year -wise phasing of GBS for the year 
2021-22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 had to be Rs. 7,500 crore, Rs. 10,000 
crore and Rs. 25,800 crore, respectively. Against this, the Ministry had 
made provisions of Rs. 1,000 crore and Rs. 7,565 crore for the year 2021 -
22 and 2022 -23 whereas the actual utilization has been Rs. 814 crore 
and Rs 4,555.94 crore (upto 20.02. 2023) respectively. For the year 
2023-24, the Scheme has been allocated Rs. 12,07 1.60 crore. Juxtaposing 
the budgetary allocation so far with the initial trajectory drawn for the 
tenure of the Scheme, it appears that the funds budgeted may prove to be 
inadequate. The Committee would expect the Ministry to leave no stone 
unturned in ens uring that the Scheme is implemented within the 
targeted timeline. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should 
impress upon the States to expeditiously complete the tendering process 
of the envisaged works under the Scheme. They also recommend th at the 
fund allocation for this important program may, if needed, accordingly be 
suitably enhanced next year with a view to avoid any delay in 
implementation of this programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme(RDSS), Ministry of Power has 
already sanctioned projects worth Rs. 2.54 Lakh Crores with GBS of about 
Rs. 1.0 Lakh Crores for Smart metering and Loss Reduction works. The 
prime responsibility of issuing of tenders, awarding the works and 
implementation of the pro jects under RDSS lies with the respective 
distribution utilities. However, Ministry of Power is regularly following up 
with the states/DISCOMs on the progress of tendering and award of 
sanctioned works. Most of the states have issued tenders and are in var ious 
stages of award of works. Fund requirement for next year will be worked 
out on the basis of expected progress of works on the basis of scheme 
guidelines. 
Further, in order to monitor the timely implementation of approved 
projects under RDSS, an inter -ministerial Monitoring Committee has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Power which 
holds the meetings regularly. 
 

  23  
  
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Smart Meters 
The Committee note that the RDSS  Scheme envisages the installation of 
25 crore Smart Meters  at consumer, DT,  and feeder level  by the year  
2025-26. Smart metering  projects are envisaged to be implemented in 
Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) mode through 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP). The  Committee also note that  so far 
only 70 lakh Smart Meters have  been installed. Out of this, only 10 lakh 
are Pre-Paid Meters. Considering the  present pace of installation  of 
Smart Meters, the target of ins tallation of 25 crore Smart Meters by the 
year 2025 seems to be a herculean  task. The Ministry, however, has 
stated that the pace of installation of Smart Meters will  accelerate in the 
coming years as the work related to it is at various stages of the 
tendering process. Nonetheless, the Committee would like to recommend 
the Ministry to  closely monitor the progress of the work related to 
installation of Smart Meters and take  prompt remedial action on the 
related issues so that targets set in this regard are achieved without any 
delay. They also desire that the Ministry should ensure that there is  no 
constraint in the supply of  technologically updated  and good quality 
Smart Meters in  the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Smart metering works of states amounting to Rs. 1.35 Lakh crores covering 
more than 20.5 crore consumers have been approved till April, 2023. This 
is one of the largest initiatives taken by the Ministry. Ministry is regularly 
following up with the states/DISCOMs on the progress of tende ring and 
award of works for smart metering works. Further, the Ministry is 
continually engaging with the nodal agencies and states to resolve issues, if 
any, related to implementation. A bi -weekly review meeting is conducted to 
undertake structured review of the smart metering works being 
undertaken by the states under chairmanship of Secretary (Power), 
Government of India. 

  24  
  
Till date, States like Assam, Bihar, Gujarat and MP have already awarded 
the works. Most of the remaining states have also issued tenders and are in 
various stages of award of works. 
To ensure that there is no constraint in the supply of technologically 
updated and good quality smart meters, an Expert Group of Smart Metering 
(EGSM) has been created to engage with the states as well a s the industry 
to ensure smooth roll out of smart metering implementation plan under the 
scheme. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) losses 
The Committee note that there are 10 States/Union Territories where 
Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) losses, instead of decreasing, 
have rather increased during the last five years. In Maharashtra, the 
AT&C losses which were 14.38% in 2017 -18 have jumped to 26.55% in 
the year 2020-21. Similarly, Chandigarh was having only 4%  AT&C losses 
in 2017 -18 but it increased to 11.89% in 2020 -21. In Nagaland and 
Jammu & Kashmir, AT&C losses are as high as 60%. These figures do not 
augur well for the aim of  the Government to contain AT&C losses in the 
country to the level of 12-15%. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should urgently find  out the reasons for the increase in AT&C 
losses in these States and help the concerned States/DISCOMs to  make 
customized plans  to arrest deterioration  of the condition.  The 
Committee would  also like to be apprised of the findings/outcome of 
such exercise by the Ministry at the  stage of furnishing action taken 
notes. 
Reply of the Government 
Collection efficiency in  FY 2020 -21 was primarily affected for many 
states owing to COVID 19.  This has negatively affected the AT&C losses 
for FY 2020 -21. Preliminary analysis shows that  AT&C losses have 
reduced by 5% from  21.5% in FY 2020 -21 to ~16.5%  in FY 2021 -22 

  25  
  
and most of the states have s hown improvement in AT&C losses. 
Reduction in AT&C loss is a key  objective under RDSS.  This scheme 
ensures100% payment of Government department dues and subsidy as 
a pre -qualification criterion which coupled with the prepaid smart 
metering works  will greatly improve the collection efficiency of the 
states. Further, under the scheme, all DISCOMs/ Power Departments 
(PDs) have yearly targets of AT&C loss reduction which forms  basis for 
evaluation and qualification of fund disbursal. Loss reduction works 
proposed under RDSS will also improve the operational efficiency. It is 
expected that by FY 2024-25 the AT&C loss at national level will reduce 
to 12-15%. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No.   8 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power has initiated a new 
Scheme ‘‘Viability Gap Funding’ for the development of Pump Storage 
Plants and Battery Energy Storage Systems. The Committee further note 
that the estimated Capital Cost of th e scheme is Rs 9,400 crore with gross 
budgetary support of Rs. 3,760 crore. The Ministry has stated that the 
VGF support will bring down the tariff from storage at acceptable levels 
to DISCOMS/consumers. The Committee find only a token provision has 
been m ade for 2023 -24 under this Scheme. The Ministry of Power, 
however, had posted a demand of Rs. 96 crore for the Scheme. Due to the 
advent of variable and intermittent renewable energy into the power 
system in a big way, the need for Pumped Storage Plants/Ba ttery Storage 
is being felt for balancing the demand and supply fluctuations in the Grid. 
The Committee, therefore, welcome this initiative and believe that this 
Scheme will also provide impetus for the growth of the Hydropower 
Sector (Pumped Storage Proje cts). The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should monitor the development of such projects and 
provide necessary assistance, if required. The Committee expect the 
Ministry to post additional Demands under this head at the stage of 
Revised Est imates as per the progress of work in this regard and also 

  26  
  
spell out as to how the VGF allocation will be used. The Committee also 
expect that VGF support should be leveraged to increase our 
understanding of the technology and application and should not be  
considered as a continuous tool for support.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power had sought ‘in -principle’ approval of Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of  Finance in June, 2022 for initiating a new 
scheme for meeting the Viability Gap Funding (V GF) requirements in the 
Energy Storage System for Power Sector for development of 4,000 MWh 
of Battery Energy Storage Systems and 5,000 MW of Hydro Pump Storage 
Plant. Department of  Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in July, 2022 
conveyed its ‘in -principle’ approval for support to  Battery Energy 
Storage System of 4000 MWh involving a VGF of ₹ 2,940 crore and 
support to  Pump Storage Plant for projects of 3000 MW involving a 
VGF of ₹ 3,000 crore. However, later on a conscious decision was taken 
by the Government to work separately on a comprehensive  policy for 
PSP which would cover VGF requirements for PSP.  Accordingly, the 
scheme was  formulated for  Viability Gap Funding for  development of 
Battery Energy Storage Systems of 4,000 MWh capacity only. 
Ministry had sought budgetary support of ₹ 96 crore for the proposed 
Scheme titled ‘Viability Gap Funding for development of Battery Energy 
Storage Systems’ in FY 2023 -24 as the Scheme was proposed to be 
approved and operationalized in the Financial Year ( FY) 2022-23 and as 
such the disbursement of funds for BESS projects was to commence in FY 
2023-24 with budgetary requirement of ₹ 96 crore. However, the VGF 
Scheme is yet to be approved by the competent authority. The Scheme is 
likely to be approved and op erationalized by June, 2023 and first bidding 
for BESS projects may commence by July 2023. The fund requirement 
shall arise from FY 2024 -25 onwards only. Hence, the proposed Scheme 
doesn’t entail any disbursement in FY 2023 -24 and the Ministry can 
proceed with the envisaged timelines with the token amount available.  
The criteria for disbursement of funds of VGF for BESS is as under: 
Disbursement Plan of VGF for BESS: 

  27  
  
Disbursement of VGF for BESS % 
(Percentage
) 
1. On financial closure subject to bank 
guarantee and possession of 90 % of the 
total land required for the project by the 
developer 
 
10 
2. On COD 45 
3. Completion of 1st year from COD 15 
4. Completion of 2nd year from COD 15 
5. Completion of 3rd year from COD 15 
Total 100 
 
The underlying challenge in rapid adoption of BESS is that presently the 
BESS manufacturing capacity is limited, and therefore costs are high. 
Recently, the Ministry concluded bids for a pilot project of 1 GWh BESS, 
and the discovered levelized cost of storage was above ₹10/kWh, which 
is very high. It is expected that the costs will come down with increasing 
volumes. For the first few bids, Viability Gap Funding will be required. As 
volumes grow, the costs may come down and VGF may not be required. 
Therefore, VGF support is to be leveraged to increase understanding of 
the technology and application and not envisaged as a continuous tool 
for support. 
 [Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
The Committee note that over the years the Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) has not been able to fully utilize the allocated fund. In the year 
2020-21 against the allocated fund of Rs. 213 crore the actual utilization 
was Rs. 61 crore (28% of BE). In 2021 -22, against the BE of Rs. 197 crore, 

  28  
  
the actual utilization was Rs. 155 crore (78% of BE). In the current fiscal 
also, against the BE of Rs. 180 crore, only Rs. 71 crore (39.4% of BE) 
could be utilized so far (upto 20.02.2023). The Committee further note 
that for the year 2023 -24, no fund is allocated under the head BEE, 
however, under a new head 'Scheme for Promoting Energy Efficiency 
activities in different sectors of Indian Economy' a provision of Rs. 
103.80 crore has been made. Also, for Energy Conserv ation Rs. 30.90 
crore has been allocated. The Committee also observe that Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation initiatives have resulted into enormous 
saving of electricity and brought down the Energy Intensity to 0.22 Mega 
Joule/Rupee in 2019 -20. The Commit tee further note that as per the 
assessment made, the energy saving potential of the country is estimated 
to be 86.9 Mtoe under the moderate savings scenario and 129 Mtoe 
under the ambitious saving scenario by the year 2031. The Committee, 
therefore, recom mend that the Ministry in collaboration with the other 
concerned Ministries and Agencies chalk out a comprehensive plan to 
realise the massive energy -saving potential in the country. The 
Committee expect the Ministry to provide all possible assistance to t he 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) in overcoming the constraints being 
faced by the energy efficiency sector like shortage of adequate funds for 
Energy Service Companies (ESCO), hesitancy of Industry/Banks to invest 
in the Energy Efficiency, States not h aving Stand-Alone State Designated 
Agencies, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
During the Conference of Parties (COP -26) held in Glasgow, UK, India 
announced its enhanced  Nationally Determined Commitments (NDCs). 
One of the targets was to achieve 45% emission - intensity reduction  by 
2030. To  achieve this enhanced  target, Ministry of  Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) had requested that all the 
Climate change Missions be revised to ensure fulfilment of the 
commitments made by India under the NDCs. BEE has prepared a  
document entitled “Roadmap Of Sustainable and Holistic Approach to 
National Energy Efficiency” (ROSHANEE) in a broader version of the 
Mission and includes all the current and  potential areas of energy 
efficiency in each sector to consolidate energy related mitigation 
actions and align them with the larger objectives of India’s NDCs.To 

  29  
  
develop a strategic plan to  contribute towards  India’s NDCs  by 2030  
through a systemic Energy Transition programme,  Inter Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) was formulated. The analysis by the committee 
indicates that  absolute emissions by 2030 are required to be limited 
around 4584 MtCO2e. This means that the overall emissions in the 
economy would have to be reduced by 3753 MtCO 2e (over the  baseline 
scenario of 2005 level) to successfully meet our revised NDC 
commitment. 
 
The main sectors which will contribute in this regard are Industry, 
Transport and Buildings which  together shares  90% of the estimated 
emission reduction of  740 MtCO 2 to achieve 45% from  2005 level. 
Therefore, these three sectors are considered focused areas for 
coordination at Inter–Ministerial level.  
 
The targeted emission reduction from these sub sectors through key 
interventions and related programmes  are given in the table below:  
Estimation of emission reduction for key sectors (tentative plan) 
through Energy effective measures.  

  30  
  
 
The sector wise CO2 saving plan through Energy Efficiency improvement 
are given in the table below: 
Estimation of emission reduction for industrial sectors  
 
Sector 
Emission 
Reduction 
Targets(MtCO2) 
 
Programme/Scheme Nodal Ministry/ 
Department 
 
Key intervention 
  NationalSteelPolicy,   
Iron&Steel 144 PATScheme MinistryofSteel  
Cement 32 PATScheme DPIIT  
Aluminum 30.32 PATScheme MinistryofMines  
  RefineryImprovement   
Petroleum 
Refinery 24.77 Programme&PAT Scheme MoPNG  
    
(Energy Efficiency 
improvement, Fuel Pulp&Paper 32.01 PATScheme DPIIT 
 substitution, clean 
 
S. N. 
 
Sector 
 
Activity Area 
BAU 
Emission 
(2030) 
Target 
Emission 
(2030) 
CO2 
Emission 
reduction 
 
Programme 
 
1 Industrial 
(including 
MSME) 
Energy  intensity 
improvement in large 
industry, Use of clean tech 
in MSMEs 
 
1622 
 
1310 
 
312 
PAT Scheme SME 
Progarmme Tech. 
Upgradation 
 
 
2 
 
 
Transport 
Improving fuel efficiency of 
vehicles, Adoption of EVs, 
Modal shift from road to 
rail 
 
 
806 
 
 
619 
 
 
187 
Fuel efficiency norms 
Electric Mobility 
Net zero Railway / 
Modal Shift 
 
3 
 
Domestic 
Deployment of LEDs, Use
 of efficient 
appliances, 
Energy efficient homes 
 
659 
 
543 
 
116 
UJALA 
Star Rated Appliances 
ECO Niwas Samhita 
 
4 
 
Commercial 
Energy efficient
 /NZ buildings, 
Use of efficient 
appliances 
 
305 
 
230 
 
75 
ECBC , Net Zero Campus 
Star Rated appliance 
 
5 
 
Agriculture 
Solarization of Diesel 
Pumps, Promoting Star 
Rated pumps 
 
262 
 
229 
 
33 
KUSUM 
DSM 
 
6 
 
Municipal 
Deployment of energy 
efficient streetlights and 
pumps 
 
95 
 
78 
 
17 
SLNP 
DSM 
 Sub-total 3749 3009 740  

  31  
  
 
Textile 
 
5.03 
Technology Upgradation, 
PAT Scheme 
 
MinistryofTextile 
technology) 
ChlorAlkali 6.65 PATScheme 
Departmentof 
 
 Chemicals 
&Petrochemicals 
 Petrochemicals 
(Crackerunits) 21.72 PATScheme 
SteelRe-rolling 
(SME) 9 Technology Upgradation, 
Fuel switching, 
Ministry of 
Medium,Small 
and Micro 
Enterprises 
 
Foundry(SME) 3.9 REdeployment  
Forging(SME) 2.6   
Total 312    
 
BEE under the Ministry of Power developed various energy savings 
estimate to realize the savings potential of the country. To promote Energy 
Efficiency in large commercial buildings, BEE has initiate implementation 
of Energy Services Companies (ESCO) business model in large commercial 
buildings in India. A standard guideline is prepared to implement projects 
including supply, installation, testing, commissioning and operation & 
Maintenance for a period of 5 years at identified  buildings through 
Investment Grade Energy Audit (IGEA). 
 
To promote energy efficiency financing, a scheme entitled “Assistance in 
Deploying Energy Efficient Technologies in Industries & Establishment 
(ADEETIE)’’ has been prepared by BEE. This scheme aims to strengthen the 
financing in energy efficiency sector by creating conductive regulatory and 
policy regime through interest subvention and credit guarantee 
component. Ministry of Finance has conveyed the in – principle approval to 
the proposal of ADEETIE (Assistance in Deploying Energy Efficient 
Technologies in Industries & Establishment) with the total outlay of Rs. 
2000 crore. ADEETIE scheme would cover only 2.5 % of investment 
potential (2.5 % of Rs. 6,01,210 crore) estimated for industries by way of 
investment of about Rs. 10000 crores. 
 
Hon’ble Union Minister of Power and New & Renewable Energy has written 
to Hon’ble Chief Minister of all States requesting for establishment of 
Standalone SDA in their State/UT and reiterated this direction during his 
meetings with Senior Officers of States/UTs. However, the Standalone SDA 
has been already established at 2 states viz. Andhra Pradesh & Kerala. BEE 
has also sent reminders to Addl. Chief Secretary / Principal Secretary / 
Secretary (Energy/Power) to take nece ssary actions for the establishment 
of Standalone SDA in their State/UT. Some States/UTs viz. Chandigarh, 

  32  
  
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have initiated 
the process of establishment of Standalone SDA.  
 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Central Power Research Institute (CPRI)  
As innovations are coming up across the Globe at a faster pace, research 
activities especially in  the Power Sector is required not only to  ensure 
that the nation does not  lag in the know -how but also provide an 
opportunity for our Nation to take a lead role in  Technology Innovations 
across the world. The Committee, therefore, desire that every  possible 
effort should be made to promote Research and Development in the 
Power Sector. They also recommend that the budgetary provision of 
Central Power Research  Institute (CPRI) shall be reviewed as per the 
changing scenario and the growing needs of  the Power Sector.  It should 
also be ensured  that whatever funds a re allocated to them are 
effectively utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Research and development for the Indian power sector is one of the 
prime areas of focus for the  Ministry of Power. With the rapidly changing 
technological landscape, it is essential that our country stay at  the 
forefront of innovation to  remain competitive globally.  To support 
research and development in the power sector, the Ministry has 
approved continuation of the "R&D schemes of Ministry of Power being 
implemented through CPRI" with a total outlay of Rs 112  crores for  the 
period of  2021-26. The preparation  of the National Electricity Plan 
(NEP) (2022 - 27) is in its  concluding phase and  chapter 11 of the NEP  
outlines the key areas of research that  will be emphasized over the next 
5 years and supported under the R&D scheme. This scheme is overseen 
by the Standing Committee on R&D (SCRD), chaired by Chairperson, 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) and includes senior representatives 

  33  
  
from the Industry, Academia, Utilities, and the Ministry. The committee is 
aided by four Technical Committees, headed by  eminent professors from 
IITs, which provide guidance to the project team to ensure that the  
outcomes are beneficial for the Indian power sector. 
CPRI periodically calls for proposals for indigenous development of the 
latest technologies that can help our nation gain knowledge and create 
opportunities to lead in technology innovations  worldwide. The institute 
has supported projects in areas such as cyber security, energy storage,  
solar panels, data analytics, co -firing of bio -mass in Thermal Power 
plants and nano -materials. CPRI also monitors the latest trends and 
needs of Indian manufacturers and is augmenting and  establishing new 
test facilities in line with national requirements. The progress of CPRI is 
periodically monitored by the Standing Committee chaired by Additional 
Secretary, Power, and  also by the Governing Council chaired by 
Secretary (P) to ensure adequate funding is available to support the 
CPRI activities and also monitor the effective utilization of the funds. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
National Power Training Institute (NPTI) 
NPTI has submitted that there are areas such as Cyber Security, Smart 
Distribution Sector, etc. where the shortage of trained manpower is being 
felt. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that there is a need for a 
thorough review of the mandate and functio ning of NPTI to rediscover its 
role in the rapidly changing Power Sector scenario. Their budgetary 
allocations and performance should correspond to the ensuing 
requirements. 
Reply of the Government 
NPTI has been given a mandate for Training & Certification in the area of 
Cyber Security, Capacity Building Under Revamped Distribution Sector 
Scheme, Training & Certification of Load  Despatch Personnel. The 

  34  
  
outcome of these new courses will cope up the shortage of trained  
manpower. 
 
NPTI is making all out effort s to train and certify power professionals on 
Cyber Security. Till now more than 1500 professionals have been trained. 
In order to create trained manpower in this  sector, Post Graduate 
Diploma is also being started by NPTI.  Training programs in the area of  
Smart Distribution were also conducted by NPTI and a National SCADA 
Resource Centre led by PFC is being established. 
 
NPTI has submitted proposal for funds for establishment of Renewable 
Energy Labs and also to establish modern hostel facilities for the trainees 
for the financial year 2023 -24. Funds for these  project are catered in 
Budget Estimate (BE) for the FY 2023-24. 
 
The affairs of NPTI are managed, administered, directed and controlled by 
the Governing Council chaired by Secretary (Power), Government of India. 
The Governing Council from time to time reviews the functioning of NPTI, 
budgetary allocations and Annual Budget of NPTI is also  discussed in the 
Governing Council meeting 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Strengthening of Power System 
The Committee note that there are two programmes for the North -
Eastern Region namely, ‘North Eastern Region Power System 
Improvement Project (NERPSIP)’ for six States Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram , Tripura and Nagaland for strengthening of the 
Transmission and Distribution Systems (33kV and above) and 
‘Comprehensive Scheme for Strengthening of Transmission and 
Distribution System in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim’. The scrutiny of 
financial provision s for these Schemes by the Committee has revealed 
that the estimated cost of ‘Power System Improvement in North Eastern 
States excluding Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim’ was Rs. 5,111.33 crore 

  35  
  
which has been revised to Rs.6,700 crore. Similarly, the original 
estimation of Rs. 4,754.42 crore for 'Strengthening of transmission 
System in the States of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim' has been revised 
to Rs.9,129.32 crore with an increase of 92%. The Committee have been 
appreciative of these programmes as they would immensely help in 
strengthening the Power System in the North -Eastern Region. The 
Committee do understand that due to the difficult geographical 
conditions in the region there is a possibility of time and cost variation, 
however, such a high cost escalatio n is not acceptable. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that it must be ensured that these programmes are 
properly executed within their targeted timelines to avoid any further 
cost overrun. The Committee also desire that Detailed Projects Reports 
(DPRs) of other projects of the Power Sector shall also be prepared 
meticulously and examined thoroughly by the agencies concerned to rule 
out major deviations at the time of execution of the projects.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of Hon’ble Committee  for due diligence during 
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) to avoid such cost & time 
overrun in future power sector schemes is noted.  
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of projects for North -Eastern Region 
namely, ‘North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project 
(NERPSIP)’ for six States Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura 
and Nagaland for strengthening of the Transmission and Distribution 
Systems (33kV and above) and ‘Comprehensive Scheme for 
Strengthening of Transmission and Distribut ion System in Arunachal 
Pradesh and Sikkim’was prepared based on information available at that 
particular point, prevailing norms for Land &RoW Compensations etc. 
The major reasons for cost and time overrun in these projects are given 
below: 
 Retendering / re-award of works due to poor response from 
bidders leading to time- overrun 
 Higher prices discovered through competitive bidding  
 Additions / changes in scope during execution stage as intimated 
by various State Govts. 
 Higher payment for Land and RoW compensation based on 
demands from State revenue authorities; 

  36  
  
Best efforts to complete the projects within t heir targeted timelines will 
be made. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Smart Grid Mission 
The Committee note that under Smart Grid Mission works such as 
Deployment of Smart Meters and Advanced Metering Infrastructure, 
Development of medium sized micro grids upto 1 MW, Real time 
monitoring and control of Distribution transformers, Creation of EV 
charging infrastructure for supporting proliferation of Electric Vehicles, 
etc. are being carried out. The Smart Grid project will also go a long way in 
integration of Renewable Energy. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to ensure that the funds  under the Scheme are fully and 
effectively utilized so that the important works envisaged under the 
Scheme can be accomplished at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Smart Grid Mission (NSGM) funds utilization is linked to the 
milestones achievement by the project implementing utilities. As there 
are delays seen in the field implementation which in turn delays the 
claims of the utilities thereby resulting in l ow expenditure. However, all 
sincere efforts are being put in for implementation of projects in faster 
pace and optimum fund utilization through regular reviews at NSGM and 
at Ministry of Power. Further, in the current extension period (April 
2021 to March  2024), NSGM focus is on completion of sanctioned and 
ongoing projects, training and capacity, technical assistance to utilities 
through online tools developed by NSGM, handholding of DISCOMs on 
their Smart Grid preparedness, developing Smart Grid roadmaps , 
establishing new processes for distribution system efficiency & 
effectiveness improvement, reliability improvements and data analysis 
etc. Further, NSGM has also been made part of an expert committee and 
shall act as secretariat of the said committee to recommend a complete 

  37  
  
framework of Smart Grids. In the previous Financial year (FY2022 -23), 
more than 90% utilization has been achieved (₹25.765 Crores was 
utilized out of ₹28.56 Crores allotted as RE).  
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
District Electricity Committees 
The Committee note that an instruction was issued by the Ministry of 
Power in September, 2021 for the constitution of 'District Electricity 
Committees' by all the States/UTs to ensure the involvement and oversight 
of the people over all the Government of India schemes and to 
institutionalize the system of consultation with public representatives. 
However, the Committee have observed instances of no meeting or very 
few meetings being held by  these Committees. The Ministry has submitted 
that a circular to all the States calling for regular meetings of these 
Committees has been issued. Nonetheless, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to issue another circular to the States with the instruction th at 
apart from holding regular meetings of these Committees, it may also be 
ensured that the senior level Executives/Officers should attend those 
meetings for swift and proper resolution of issues related to the 
implementation of the various programmes bein g run by the Ministry. The 
Committee expect that the Ministry would provide a copy of 
communication sent to the States in this regard at the stage of furnishing 
action-taken notes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Power had issued a letter dated 25.01.2023 (attached at 
Annexure 14.1) to the  States/UTs, wherein it was decided that the 
executing agencies inter-alia shall ensure the attendance of concerned 
Chief Engineer/Executive Engineer/Project-Director in the DEC 
meetings, whenever it is convened to review and coordinate overall 
development of power supply infrastructure in the district in 
accordance with the Gol schemes by the Committee. 

  38  
  
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Supply of Power 
The Committee note with satisfaction that the Peak Shortage of power 
which was 4.7% in the year 2014-15 came down to 0.4% in the year 2020 -
21. Similarly, the Energy Shortage which was 3.6% in the year 2014 -15, 
came down significantly to 0.4% in 2021 -2022. The Ministry has stated 
that they are expecting a peak of 2.30 lakh Mega Watt during April, 2023, 
therefore, necessary arrangements including running of gas -based power 
stations have been made to meet the peak demand. However, instances of 
shortages in the sup ply of power despite having more than 4 lakh MW of 
installed generation capacity, is a cause of concern for the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that apart from making ad hoc 
arrangements to meet the peak demand, there should be comprehensive  
planning to fully meet the peak as well as the energy demand in the 
country by optimal utilization of the generation resources. The Committee 
also expect that the endeavour of the Ministry to achieve 24x7 power 
supply in the country will be fructified soo ner than later. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The details of  All India Power Supply Position both in terms of  Energy 
(MU) and Peak (MW)  during the  period 2014-15 to 2021 -22 with the 
respective growth on year to year basis, have been given below: 
ENERGY 
 
Year Energy Requirement Energy Supplied Energy Not 
Supplied 
(MU) % Growth (MU) % Growth (MU) (%) 
2014-15 1,068,923 (+) 6.7 1,030,785 (+) 7.4 38,138 3.6 
2015-16 1,114,408 (+) 4.3 1,090,850 (+) 5.8 23,558 2.1 
2016-17 1,142,928 (+) 2.6 1,135,332 (+) 4.1 7,596 0.7 
2017-18 1,213,326 (+) 6.2 1,204,697 (+) 6.1 8,629 0.7 
2018-19 1,274,595 (+) 5.0 1,267,526 (+) 5.2 7,070 0.6 
2019-20 1,291,010 (+) 1.3 1,284,444 (+) 1.3 6,566 0.5 
2020-21 1,275,534 (-) 1.2 1,270,663 (-) 1.1 4,871 0.4 
2021-22 1,379,812 (+) 8.2 1,374,024 (+) 8.1 5,787 0.4 

  39  
  
PEAK 
Year Peak Demand Peak Met Demand Not Met 
(MW) % Growth (MW) % Growth (MW
) 
% 
2014-15 148,166 (+) 9.0 141,160 (+) 8.7 7,006 4.7 
2015-16 153,366 (+) 3.5 148,463 (+) 5.2 4,903 3.2 
2016-17 159,542 (+) 4.0 156,934 (+) 5.7 2,608 1.6 
2017-18 164,066 (+) 2.8 160,752 (+) 2.4 3,314 2.0 
2018-19 177,022 (+) 7.9 175,528 (+) 9.2 1,494 0.8 
2019-20 183,804 (+) 3.8 182,533 (+) 4.0 1,271 0.7 
2020-21 190,198 (+) 3.5 189,395 (+) 3.8 802 0.4 
2021-22 203,014 (+) 6.7 200,539 (+) 5.9 2,475 1.2 
The break-up details of All India installed capacity as on 28.02.2023 is 
given below: 
Ownership 
/ Sector 
Mode wise breakup (in MW) Grand 
Total 
(MW) 
Thermal Nuclear Hydro RES* 
(MNRE) Coal Lignite Gas Diesel Total 
State 66738 1150 7012 280 75180 0 27254 2491 104925 
Private 73198 1830 10574 309 85911 0 3931 117990 207832 
Central 64500 3640 7238 0 75378 6780 15665 1632 99455 
Total 204435 6620 24824 589 236469 6780 46850 122113 412212 
*Break up of RES capacity (in MW) as on 28.02.2023 is as under: 
 
Small Hydro 
Power Wind 
Power 
BM Power 
/Cogen. 
Waste to 
Energy Solar Power Total RES 
Capacity 
4943 42015 10218 556 64381 122113 
 
As per LGBR 2023-24 i.e resource adequacy plan for year 2023-24, the 
month-wise details of Anticipated All India Energy Requirement and Peak 
Demand for the year 2023-24 is as under : 
Month All India 
Energy 
Requirement 
(in MUs) 
All India Peak 
Demand (in 
MW) 
April,2023 142,097 229,018 
May,2023 141,464 218,609 
June,2023 139,860 224,173 
July,2023 133,967 205,846 
August,2023 137,992 212,057 
September,2023 133,159 217,326 
October,2023 121,305 214,382 
November,2023 117,049 205,128 
December,2023 127,735 217,694 
January,2024 130,739 227,236 
February,2024 122,093 219,345 

  40  
  
March,2024 142,413 228,403 
TOTAL 2023-
24 
1,589,873 229,018 
(Maximum) 
 
In order to meet the peak demand arising during year 2023-24, Ministry 
of Power has made the arrangements as given below: 
a) Measures have been taken to  ensure the  availability of  the 
generation capacity.  The generators shall complete the 
maintenance work of their plants well before the period of  high 
demand. Ministry of Power has directed thermal power plants not 
to undertake any planned outage during April and May 2023. 
b) Power Plants under long outage/likely to be decommissioned 
would be operationalized before the high demand period. 
c) All captive coal blocks to maximize the coal production to 
supplement the coal supply from domestic coal companies (CIL 
and SCCL). 
d) Ministry of Power vide order dated 20.02.2023 has issued 
directions to Imported Coal  Based Power Plants under Section 11 
of Electricity Act to operate and generate power to their full 
capacity. 
e) Ministry of Power vide order dated 09.01.2023 directed 
Central/State Gencos and IPPs to take necessary actions to import 
coal for blending at the rate of 6% by weight so as to  have 
sufficient stock at their power plants for smooth operations till 
September 2023. 
f) Availability of NTPC Gas Based Power Plants during crunch period 
(April-May 2023). 
g) Ministry of Power has directed NTPC Vidyut Vyapar Nigam 
Limited (NVVN) for operation of  Gas based power Utilities other 
than NTPC through competitive bidding for  market based power 
sale in the crunch  period in summer 2023 to  support the peak 
demand. 
h) All Central, State Gencos have been advised to ensure availability of 
their Gas based  Power Plants during the crunch period. Additional 
arrangement for gas for running gas  based stations has been 
planned from GAIL, during high power demand months. 
i) Reservoir level of Hydro Stations are getting monitored for 
optimum utilization  of water. All hydro plants have been 
instructed to operate in consultation with RLDCs/ SLDCs to  
optimize water utilization in current month for better availability 

  41  
  
in next month. 
j) The Electricity Amendment Rule,  2022 has been notified on 29 th 
December 2022 which  mandate preparation of resource adequacy 
plan so as to successfully meet the power  demand of the 
consumers. 
k) High Price – Day Ahead Market and Surplus Power Portal 
(PUShP) have been launched  on 9 th March, 2023.  This will help 
the needy States to buy power during high demand  period. 
                                                                                                          [Ministry of Power 
                                                 O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
Hydropower 
The Committee note that there are two Schemes viz. ‘Support for Cost of 
Enabling Infrastructure i.e., roads/ bridge’ and ‘Support for Flood 
moderation storage Hydro Electric Projects' to promote the growth of the 
hydropower sector in the country. Under 'Support for Cost of Enabling 
Infrastructure i.e., roads/ bridge' only a total of Rs. 10 crore could be 
utilized under this Scheme. Further, there is a budgetary provis ion of Rs. 
10 crore for 2023 -24 for this Scheme. The Committee also note that the 
total assessed hydropower potential in the country including Pumped 
Storage is to the tune of 2,50,000 Mega Watt. Despite the enormous 
potential, we have been able to develop  only 46,850 MW of large hydro 
(above 25 MW) and 4,940 MW of small hydro. The Committee have 
observed that in recent years, the Government has been making sincere 
efforts to give a fillip to this Sector. These efforts have started showing 
results at the gr ound also. The Ministry has submitted that hydropower 
capacity of 12,000 MW is under construction and will be completed by 
2026. The Committee would expect that the initiatives taken will bear 
fruit as per the timeline fixed. The Committee believe that in the emerging 
scenario of the Power Sector, Hydropower and Pumped Storage would 
have an important role in grid balancing and power storage and therefore, 
their timely development would greatly benefit the power sector. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should continue their 
earnest efforts to further develop this Sector. 
 
 

  42  
  
Reply of the Government 
An amount of Rs. 10 crore for the Financial Year (FY) 2022-23 was 
allocated for the 'Support for Cost of Enabling Infrastructure i.e., roads/ 
bridge'. Further, based on the budgetary estimates provided by 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA), the amount has been released by the  
Ministry for the said purpose. 
 
Further, Government of India has taken several initiatives to tap  the 
hydro potential and to boost hydropower development in the country. 
The details are given below: 
 
(i) Initiatives to reduce time and cost overruns in hydro projects: 
 
a. Measures to reduce time and cost overrun has been notified by 
Ministry of Power (MoP) vide OM dated 8-11-2019. 
b. Dispute Avoidance Mechanism for avoidance and resolution of 
contractual disputes in hydro CPSU’s at initial stage of construction 
by engagement of an Independent Engineer has been devised vide 
MoP OM dated 27-9-2021. 
c. Dispute Resolution Mechanism for resolu tion of disputes for 
contracts being executed by power sector CPSU’s/ other 
organizations through Conciliation Committees has been devised 
vide OM dated 29-12-2021. 
d. Guidelines for early settlement of disputes and to minimize the 
arbitral claims/ disputes h ave been issued by MoP vide OM dated 
22-03-2022. 
e. IT based monitoring system is being introduced for close 
monitoring of the hydro projects. The IT portal in this regard has 
been prepared and tested during August’22 and presently training 
to developers and filling of data is in progress. 
f. Measures on the 'Possible Measures which can help reduce the 
occurrence and impact of Geological Uncertainties in Hydroelectric 
Projects' was prepared by CEA. 
g. To prevent contractual disputes with respect to price variation 
calculation in case of change of Wholesale Price Index (WPI) series, 
Guidelines for 'Price Variation Calculation in case of Change/ 
Discontinuation of Wholesale Price Index Series during execution 
of the contract' were issued by MoP on 04.05.2022.  
h. Time bound appraisal norms have been evolved for examination of 

  43  
  
DPRs in CEA within a period of 150 working days.  
i. Review/ Monitoring Meetings regularly by Ministry of Power/ 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) to sort out the critical issues on 
Quarterly Basis. 
 
(ii) GoI Policy Measures to promote Hydro Power Sector: 
Government of India has approved a number of measures for promoting 
hydro power sector as given below: 
a. Declaring Large Hydro Power (LHPs) (> 25 MW projects) as 
Renewable Energy 
b. Hydro Purchase Obligation (HPO) as a separate entity within Non-
solar Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO). 
c. Tariff rationalization measures for bringing down hydro power 
tariff. 
d. Budgetary Support for Flood Moderation/Storage Hydro Electric 
Projects (HEPs). 
e. Budgetary Support to Cost of Enabling Infrastructure, i.e. 
roads/bridges 
(a) Rs. 1.5 crore per MW for projects upto 200 MW; 
(b) Rs. 1.0 crore per MW for projects above 200 MW. 
 
These measures would reduce the capital cost as well as the project tariff 
in initial years which would improve project viability & saleability. 
Hydropower Purchase Obligation (HPO) trajectory has been notified on 
29.01.2021 and varies from 0.18% to 2.82% for the period of 2021 -22 to 
2029-30 respectively. Guidelines for Budgetary Support for Flood 
Moderation/Storage Hydro Electric Projects (HEPs) and towards Cost of 
Enabling Infrastructure have also been notified on 28.09.2021.  
(iii) Salient features of proposed Hydro Power Policy- 2023: 
 
a. A single window system for clearances, thereby reducing the time 
spent in taking clearances from various Ministries/Departments;  
b. Transparent selection procedure/ criteria to be followed by the 
States for awarding sites to developers. 
c. Constitution of a National Committee on Hydro Power (NCHP), 
having representation from various Ministries/Departments and 
with powers to accord investment approvals for projects, where no 
investment from Government exchequer is involved.  
d. Extension of certain dispensations available for Small Hydro 

  44  
  
Projects concerning Environment Clearances and Fores t clearances 
for Large Hydro Projects. 
e. Notification of “Benchmark Tariff for Hydro” based on the 
prevailing and past Average Power Purchase Cost (APPC) to ensure 
that only viable projects are developed. 
f. Encouraging State Governments to form Joint Ventures with the 
CPSUs to ensure professional management and timely completion 
of projects with the GoI infusing 26% equity of the State as Grant 
for the North-Eastern Region of the country. 
g. State Governments shall complement the financial support from 
Government of India through waiver/stagger quantum of free 
power, reimburse SGST as well as avoid levies and cess.  
h. Encouraging Financial Institutions to provide long term soft loans 
as hydro power has already been recognized as renewable source 
of energy. 
i. Waiver of Inter-State Transmission charges as provided to other 
renewable sources . 
j. Operation of hydro power plants focusing on supplying peaking 
power and balancing support to integrate large amounts of 
intermittent Solar/Wind power. 
 
(iv) Basin Wise Indication of stalled HE Projects in Arunachal 
Pradesh: Due to uncertainties and the long gestation period associated 
with the construction of hydropower, private investments in the hydro 
sector have not taken off. Many Projects allotted to Private  developers by 
the Government of Arunachal Pradesh in past have not been taken 
forward for many years. These stalled projects have been holding up the 
potential of Arunachal Pradesh in  developing HE Projects. The same is 
required to be taken forward for completion in the interest of the State 
and the Power  sector. Government  of India, Ministry of  Power in 
consultation with  the State Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh, indicated Basin 
wise 29 HE Projects, having Installed  Capacity of 32415 MW in 
Arunachal Pradesh on 22-12-2021 to Hydro CPSUs. 
 
(v) Pumped Storage Projects Guidelines -2023: Ministry of Power, 
Government of India has  finalized the “Guidelines to promote the 
development of Pumped Storage Projects” on 10.04.2023. Salient 
features of the guidelines are as under: 
a. Provision for allotment of project sites to CPSUs/ State PSUs on 
nomination basis for prompt development of capacity. 

  45  
  
b. Transparent selection procedure/ criteria to be followed by the 
States for awarding sites to private developers. 
c. Exemption from free power to home state. 
d. Exemption from LADF obligation. 
e. Market Reforms to monetization of ancillary services provided by 
PSPs. 
f. Rationalization of Environmental Clearances for off-river PSP sites. 
g. Utilization of exhausted mines for development of PSPs. 
 
As per recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee, Ministry of Power 
will continue its initiatives and make earnest efforts to further develop 
the Hydro-power Sector in the country. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
Electrification of left out villages/hamlets  
The Committee expect that the Ministry would proactively engage with the 
concerned States to identify un -electrified villages/hamlets in the country 
which were left out in DeenDayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) 
so that their electrification can be ensured at the earliest. The Committee 
also expect the Ministry to furnish details of such identified 
villages/hamlets at the time of furnishing action -taken notes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India is committed towards providing electricity access to 
left out unelectrified  households in the country. The Monitoring 
Committee of RDSS has already approved the norms  for electrification of 
left out households. States have advised to submit the proposal to the 
Nodal Agencies as the approved norms and scheme guidelines.  Further, 
Nodal Agencies, after due  appraisal of the proposal received from Sates, 
will submit it to the Monitoring Committee for  approval. 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
New National Electricity Policy 

  46  
  
The Committee note that the present National Electricity Policy was 
adopted in the year 2005. The Committee observe that the present Policy 
no longer reflects the aspirations, challenges and dynamics of the fast -
changing electricity sector. This Committee had reviewed the subject 
'National Electricity Policy' way back in 2017 and in their 30th Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) had opined that it should be amended  at the earliest by 
taking into account a holistic view of the sector. Further, in their 7th 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry of Power’, the Committee had again recommended formulation of 
a New Electricity Policy exp editiously. As the Policy serves as a beacon 
light for the Power Sector as a whole and lays a coherent trajectory for its 
future growth and development, therefore, the Committee would reiterate 
that the new Electricity Policy may be finalized and notified at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Electricity Policy was notified by the Central Government under 
Section 3 of Electricity  Act, 2003 on 12 th February, 2005. Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Energy recommended  that Central Government 
may bring out a new National Electricity Policy. Accordingly, an Expert  
Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Power under the 
chairmanship of Shri Gireesh B.  Pradhan, ex-Chairperson, Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission, to prepare and recommend 
National Electricity Policy (NEP). The Expert Committee held 
consultation with States, experts and other stakeholders and submitted 
its Report to the Ministry. Based on the  report submitted by the Expert 
Committee, draft NEP  was circulated to the State Gove rnments and 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) seeking comments on the same. After 
incorporating the  suggestions/comments, suitably,  draft NEP,  2023 has 
been circulated on 26.4.2023 for Inter Ministerial Consultation. 
 
[Ministry of Power 
O.M. No. 10/1/2023-Budget, Dated: 08.06.2023] 

  Page 47  
  
CHAPTER –III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's Replies 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Page 48  
  
CHAPTER –IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require Reiteration 
 
 
Nil 
 
  

  Page 49  
  
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                       Jagdambika Pal 
14 December, 2023                                                                                Chairperson, 
Agrahayana 23, 1945 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Energy  

  Page 50  
  
Annexure 14.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  Page 51  
  
 


  Page 52  
  
  

  Page 53  
  
  

  Page 54  
  
  

  Page 55  
  
 
  

  Page 56  
  
APPENDIX - I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
MINUTES OF EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENERGY 
(2023-24) HELD ON 14th DECEMBER, 2023 IN COMMITTEE ROOM-3, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours 
LOK SABHA 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal   -   Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
2  Shri Chandra Sekhar Bellana 
3  Shri Pradeep Kumar Chaudhary 
4  Dr. A. Chellakumar 
5  Shri Kishan Kapoor 
6  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
7  Shri Jai Prakash 
8  Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
9  Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
10  Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
11  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
12  Shri Javed Ali Khan 
13  Shri Muzibulla Khan 
14  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
15  Shri Krishan Lal Panwar 
16  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
17  Shti K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora        Additional Director 
3.  Shri S. Lakshmikanta Singh Deputy Secretary 
             

  Page 57  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda of the sitting. The Committee 
then took up for consideration and adoption the following draft Reports: 
(i) Report on action taken by the Government on observations/  
recommendations contained in 34 th Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy. 
(ii) Report on action taken by the Government on observations/  
recommendations contained in 35 th Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Power. 
(iii) Report on the subject ‘Bio -Energy and Waste to Energy  - 
Recovery of Energy from Urban,  Industrial and Agricultural 
Wastes/ Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy 
Management’. 
 
3. After discus sing the contents of the Reports in detail , the Committee 
adopted the draft Report on ‘Action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations contained in 34 th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
and draft Report on ‘Action taken by the Government on observations/ 
recommendations contained in 35 th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (20 23-24) of the Ministry of Power without any amendment/  
modification. The draft Report on  the subject ‘Bio -Energy and Waste to 
Energy - Recovery of Energy from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/ 
Residues and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management’  was adopted 
with minor modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the above -
mentioned Reports and present the same to both Houses of the Parliament  
during the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

  Page 58  
  
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide Introduction of the Report) 
Analysis of action-taken by the Government on Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Energy  
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
18 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been  
accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 , 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 
and 18 
 
Total:  18 
Percentage:  
 
100 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies: 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(iv)
  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the  
Committee and which require reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
 
Total:  Nil 
Percentage: 
 
00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
 
Sl. No. Nil  
Total: Nil 
Percentage: 00 
 