 
14 C.P.U.No.  900 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2006-2007) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA – NATIONAL 
HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (NHDP), PHASE- I. 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  08-12-2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  08-12-2006 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2006 / Agrahayana 1928(S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  CONTENTS 
  
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-2007)  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  (vi) 
PART – A 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER   l OVERVIEW  1 
CHAPTER   lI  IMPLEMENTATION OF NHDP 
A. Genesis 
B. Implementation 
 
4 
4 
5 
 
CHAPTER   III DELAY IN COMPLETION OF NHDP PHASE - I 
A. Reasons for Delay 
B. Accountability 
C. Corrective Measures 
D. Quality of Work Executed 
E. Synchronization of Activities 
F. Role of Government 
G. Loss in Vehicle Operating Cost 
H. Delay on account of Land Acquisition 
 
8 
8 
9 
10 
12 
14 
18 
18 
21 
 
CHAPTER   IV CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTORS 
     A.  DPRs and DPR Consultants 
     B.  PSCs 
C. Contractors 
 
26 
26 
28 
32 
CHAPTER   V STANDARDIZATION OF STRETCHES 
A. Standardization of Bills of Quantities 
 
33 
34 
CHAPTER   VI TENDER EVALUATION SYSTEM 
A. Bidding 
B. Custom/Excise Duty 
 
36 
36 
37 
CHAPTER   VII CONTRACT MANAGEMENT 
A. Bank Guarantees 
B. Price Escalation 
C. Consultancy Charges 
D. Release of Retention Money 
E. Key Personnel 
41 
41 
42 
45 
46 
46 
 
 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER   VIII 
TOLL REVENUE 
A. Delay in Toll – Notification  
B. Leakages in Collection of Toll Revenue   
C. Foreclosure of Contract with Toll-collecting Agency 
 
48 
48 
49 
52 
CHAPTER   IX RESTRUCTURING OF NHAI  54 
CHAPTER   X PROJECT MONITORING AND INFORMATION SYSTEM 58 
CHAPTER   XI ACCOUNTING PRACTICES  60 
 
 PART – B 
 
Recommendations / Observations of the Committee  
 
 
62-88 
 Glossary of Technical Terms 89 
Annexures  
I Highlights of the Audit Report 92 
II List of Contractors whose Contracts have been Terminated 95 
III Tabular Description of Sub-standard Work 96 
IV Amendments Suggested by NHAI 98 
V Restructuring of NHAI as suggested by Ministry 104 
VI Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee  107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2006-2007) 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal   - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
9. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Kashiram Rana 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri Rishang Keishing  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
19. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
20. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
21. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P.Sharma Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Malvika Sharma Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

  
INTRODUCTION  
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fourteenth Report on National Highways Au thority of India – National Highways 
Development Project, Phase-I.  
 
2. The Committee’s examinat ion of the subject was based on the Report of the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India-Union Government No. 7(Commercial) of 
2005.  
 
3. The Committee had a technical brie fing by the officials of C&AG on 25 th July 
2006. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of National 
Highways Authority of India on 22
nd August 2006 and Ministry  of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways on 7th September 2006. 
 
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2006-07) considered and adopted the 
Report at their sitting held on 6th December 2006.  
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
National Highways Authority of India and Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport 
and Highways for placing before them th e desired material and information in 
connection with the examinat ion of the subject. The Committee also place on 
record their appreciation for the assistance rendered by the officials of the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India. They would also like to place on record 
their appreciation for the invaluable assist ance rendered to them by the officials 
of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been pr inted in bold letters in Part-B of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND PAL  
6th December, 2006                CHAIRMAN  
15 Agrahayana, 1928 (S)      CO MMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

  List of Abbreviations – NHAI 
 
1.  ADB Asian Development Bank 
2.  BC Bituminous Concrete.  
3.  BGs Bank Guarantees. 
4.  BIS Bureau of Indian Standards  
5.  BM Bituminous Macadam 
6.  BOQ Bills of Quantities. 
7.  BOT Build, Operate, Transfer. 
8.  CAGR Cumulative Annual Growth Rate. 
9.  CCEA Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs 
10.  CCTV Closed Circuit Television  
11.  CO Commercial Operation  
12.  COPA Conditions of Particular Applications. 
13.  COS Committee of Secretaries  
14.  CPIS Computerized Project Information System 
15.  CRF Central Road Fund. 
16.  CRRI Central Road Research Institute. 
17.  CTUS Cement Treated Upper Sub-base. 
18.  CWIP Capital Work In Progress 
19.  DBM Dense Bituminous Macadam. 
20.  DOPT  Department of Personnel & Training 
21.  DoRTH Department of Road Transport & Highways 
22.  DPRs Detailed Project Reports. 
23.  EDMS Electronic Drawing Management System. 
24.  EIL Engineers India Limited 
25.  EOT Extension of Time. 
26.  EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
27.  FIDIC International Federation of Consulting Engineers. 
28.  GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Practices 
29.  GDP Gross Domestic Product  
30.  GIS Geographical Information Systems. 
31.  GQ Golden Quadrilateral  
32.  GSB Granular Sub-Base 
33.  HRMS Human Resource and Inventory Management Systems. 
 
 
(vi) 

 
34.  IDC Interest During Construction. 
35.  IDFC Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation  
36.  IMG Inter –Ministerial Group 
37.  IRC  Indian Road Congress  
38.  JBIC Japan Bank of International Cooperation. 
39.  LA Land Acquisitions 
40.  LAN Local Area Network 
41.  LD Liquidated Damages. 
42.  MIS Management Information System. 
43.  MoEF Ministry of Environment & Forests 
44.  MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
45.  MOSRTH Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways. 
46.  MSA Million Standard Axles  
47.  NHAI National Highways Authority of India  
48.  NHDP National Highways Development Project 
49.  NHs National Highways. 
50.  NSEW North-South and East-West Corridor. 
51.  OMT Operate, Maintain & Transfer  
52.  PCC Profile Correction Course. 
53.  PD Project Directors. 
54.  PFMS Project Financial Management System. 
55.  PIB Public Investment Board 
56.  PIUs Project Implementation Units 
57.  PLI Professional Liability Insurance. 
58.  PPP Public –Private Partnership  
59.  PSCs Project Supervision Consultants  
60.  PWD Public Works Department 
61.  QCBS Quality and Cost Based Selection 
62.  RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete. 
63.  ROBs Rail Over Bridges 
64.  SG Steering Group  
65.  SPVs Special Purpose Vehicles. 
66.  TFCS Toll Fee collection Software  
67.  WAN Wide Area Network  
68.  WMM Wet Mix Macadam. 
69.  WPI Wholesale Price Index  

PART – A 
 
REPORT 
 
I.  OVERVIEW 
 
1.1 The Audit Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India - Union 
Government (Commercial) - No. 7 of  2005 examined the construction of 
highways by National Highways Author ity of India (NHAI) under National 
Highways Development Project (NHDP ) Phase-I including its planning and 
funding mechanism. This project envisaged up-gradation to four /six lane of the 
existing two lane wide National Highways on Golden Quadrilateral linking the four 
metro cities of Delhi-Mumbai-Chennai-Kolkata, North-South Corridor linking 
Srinagar and Kanyakumari and East-Wes t Corridor connecting Silchar and 
Porbandar. 
1.2 The Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) was engaged as the 
technical consultants for the review. Th e report was based on records furnished 
by the NHAI and test checks carried out by C&AG of 32 stretches spread over 12 
states covering 21 PIUs (Project Implem entation Units), inputs including CRRI 
Reports and the discussions held with the management of NHAI and the Ministry. 
1.3 NHDP Phase-I comprised 6,359 km of road length at an estimated 
construction cost of Rs. 30,300 crore and was schedul ed to be completed by 
June 2004.  Largely, it comprised the completion of the Golden Quadrilateral.  
According to the Audit Repor t, NHAI could complete works to the extent of   
1,846 km (29 percent) up to June 2004.  T he corridor-wise achievement of Delhi-
Mumbai, Mumbai-Chennai, Chennai-Kolkata, and Kolkata-Delhi up to June 2004 
including partially completed stretches  was 82 percent, 46 percent, 45 percent 
and 25 percent respectively.  
1.4 According to the latest position submitted by Audit while briefing the 
Committee on 25th July 2006, as on 30 th April 2006, works for a length of 4,026 km 
were fully completed and 1,298 km were partially completed (83.71%).  The 

extended target date of December 2005 was also not achieved.  As on 30 th April 
2006, 45 stretches for a total length of 1, 764 km were delayed ranging from 6 to 
54 months.   
1.5 The NHAI in this regard has submitted that: - 
“92.6% of the Golden Quadrilateral (connecting 4 metro cities of Delhi-
Mumbai-Chennai-Kolkata) has since been completed. Works in the 
balance length of about 437 km is to be completed. 96% of the Golden 
Quadrilateral is targeted for completion by December 2006. The 
balance works are targeted for comple tion by December 2007, except 
for few packages which are likely to be completed by December 
2008……” 
 
1.6 NHAI further stated that: - 
“The approved cost of NHDP Phas e-I was Rs.30, 300 crore (1999 
prices) which was exclusive of escalation and interest during 
construction. The actual expendi ture on implement ation of NHDP 
Phase-I (up to June 2006) is within the approved cost allowing for 
escalation as per the increase in WPI (as per the conditions of 
contracts with contractors and consul tants). An amount of Rs.2, 128 
crore has been paid on account of e scalation for the increase in WPI / 
to compensate for inflation in a ccordance with the conditions of the 
contract for the project cycle of each contract.” 
 
1.7 The salient features of observati ons made by Audit are as follows: - 
(a). NHAI did not complete the implementation of NHDP, Phase-I in a 
time and cost bound manner.  The Au thority did not standardize its 
procedures and contract documents. The inconsistencies and infirmities in 
the contract conditions led to cont ractual complications, over payments 
and delays. NHAI also did not ensure enf orcement of contract provisions 
for quality assurance and project managem ent. This resulted in execution 
of sub-standard works in seven stretches test checked for quality out of 32 
stretches examined in audit. 
(b). NHAI did not standardize the l ength of stretches for award of 
contracts to facilitate cost comparison for award and execution of work nor 
did it devise any more robust and cost  effective control mechanism as an 

alternative. This resulted in variat ion in cost per km of contiguous 
stretches from Rs.1.86 crore to Rs.4.20 crore per km. 
 
(c). NHAI lost an opportunity to generat e toll revenue of at least Rs. 560 
crore due to the delay in completion of the highways. 
(d). NHAI did not address the ri sk associated with the terms of 
contracts and performance of DP R Consultants and PSCs, which 
ultimately became the primary reason for time and cost overrun. 
(e). Deficient internal control and accountability system within NHAI 
was responsible for loss of Rs.24.44 cr ore in the sample stretches only on 
account of non-recovery of amounts fr om the contractors. NHAI failed to 
verify the authenticity and validity of the bank guar antees provided by the 
contractors. 
(f). Accounting practices adopted by  NHAI were not in consonance 
with the Generally Accepted Accounting Practices. 
 A copy of Highlights of t he Audit Report is given at Annexure-I.  The 
various acts of omissions revealed by  the Audit in the above Report have been 
dealt with by the Committee in detail in the succeeding chapters. 
 

II.  IMPLEMENTATION OF NHDP 
 
A. Genesis  
2.1 The Audit has stated that the Na tional Highways (NHs) comprised only 
two per cent of the total r oad network in India but carried over 40 per cent of the 
total traffic. Of the total length of NHs of 58,112 km about 25,000 km was under 
severe strain due to high volume of tra ffic coupled with insu fficient maintenance 
resulting in poor riding quality. The Govern ment, therefore, took up prioritization 
of projects for upgradation of NHs and launched the Na tional Highways 
Development Project in October 1998.  
 
2.2 In this connection, the NHAI stated that: - 
“According to the National Hig hways Act, 1956, the Central 
Government is responsible for development and maintenance of the 
roads declared as National Highways and can direct the respective 
State Government or any authority sub-ordinate to the Central 
Government to exercise these functions. Over the years, the 
development and maintenance of Na tional Highways was carried out 
through the agency State Governments. Ho wever, it was felt that there 
should be a central agency to handle these responsibilities so that 
there could be uniformity in development, maintenance and 
management of National Highways in the country.” 
 
2.3 Thus, the National Highw ays Authority of India was constituted under the 
National Highways Authority of India Act 1988 (68 of 1988) as a Central Authority 
for the development, maintenance and management of the National Highways 
and associated facilities. The Authority (NHAI) became oper ational in 1995 with 
the appointment of a full time Chairman and Members.  
 
2.4 The Ministry of Shipping, R oad Transport and Highwa ys further added in 
their written replies that: -  
“Ministry had been concerned about t he upgradation of the National 
Highways network for a long time but  the same was not possible due 
to paucity of funds.  During 9 th Plan document preparation, it was 
estimated that an investment of  Rs. 74,500 crore (at 1996 prices) 

would be required to remove the exis ting deficiencies.  Ministry had 
also undertaken a study in early 1990s for planning of Expressways in 
the country.  Around the same time in early 1990s, Government’s 
policy gave thrust to economic li beralization and to improve the 
infrastructure.  Roads are important  infrastructure to facilitate the 
economic development.  In this background, the then Government 
decided to undertake massive upgr adation programme of high traffic 
density corridors of National Highways in the country.”   
 
2.5 Accordingly, the NHDP was launched to remove deficiencies of the 
existing National Highways and to offer better riding quality to the road users of 
the National Highways. 
B. Implementation  
2.6 A brief summary of events leading to the implementation of the NHDP as 
stated by the Ministry is given below: - 
 “In October 1998, the Government  announced upgradation of stretches 
of National Highways under ‘North-South and East-West Corridor’. A 
Task Force was constituted under the Chairmanship of Dy. Chairman, 
Planning Commission with following members: - 
 
¾ Minister of Surface Transport 
¾ Minister of Civil Aviation 
¾ Chairman, IDFC 
¾ Managing Director, Mahindra Ford 
¾ Secretary, Road Transport & Highways 
¾ Secretary, Civil Aviation 
¾ Secretary to Prime Minister as Member Secretary 
 
  The Government decided to launch the programme quickly and 
accordingly 20 projects were identifi ed to start with.  The North South 
Corridor was launched on 6.1.99 by the then Hon’ble Prime Minister. 
The Task Force decided to include t he National Highways connecting 
four major cities of the country viz Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata 
and named it Golden Quadrilateral as  part of the overall upgradation 
programme. The name given to the total programme was ‘National 
Highways Development Project (NHDP)’ .  The Ministry then started 
evolving the implementation methodol ogy and preparation of Cabinet 
Note for requisite approvals. 
 
   
 

In the year 2000, the Cabi net gave ‘in principle approval’ to NHDP as 
per following details: - 
 
• Four laning of 10,500 km of Nati onal Highways at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 42,000 crores and c onstruction of 1,500 km of 
expressways on new alignment / or  6 laning at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 12,000 crore. 
 
• 4/6 laning of around 1,000 km  of other National Highways 
(notably roads connecting to majo r ports) at an estimated cost 
of Rs. 4,000 crore. 
 
• NHAI allowed to take investm ent decisions for individual 
projects within the overall pr ogramme approved by PIB/CCEA 
and to award contracts. 
 
• NHAI to follow innova tive implementing mechanism like Annuity 
/ Shadow Toll based projects. 
 
• NHAI Board restructured with Chai rman, NHAI of the rank of 
Secretary to Govt. of India, five full time members of NHAI of the 
rank of Joint Secretary (now upg raded to Additional Secretary) 
to Government of India, four  part time members including 
Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure), 
Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport (Deptt. of Road 
Transport & Highways), Secretary Planning Commission and 
Director General (Road Development) and Additional Secretary. 
 
In December 2000, CCEA gave approval for: - 
 
• Undertaking 40 sub-projects of 4/6/8 laning in a length for 4659 
km during two years 2000-2001 and 2001-2002.  Investment of 
Rs. 30,300 crore on undertaking 40 sub projects. 
 
• Up gradation of NH-2 between Agra and Barwa-Adda to 4/6 
lane with World Bank Assistance at an estimated cost of 
Rs.2,763 crore. 
 
• Contracts for year 2001-02 be awar ded to the extent possible in 
BOT /Annuity method. 
 
• Investment decisions subject to the guidelines specified by PIB. 
 
  Phase II of NHAI comprising mainly North-South and East-West 
corridor was approved in December 2003. Government constituted 

Committee on infrastructure under t he Chairmanship of Hon’ble Prime 
Minister which considered further phases of NHDP.” 
2.7 NHAI followed an implementation m odel, which was tried and tested 
earlier by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  It was decided to continue 
with the same implementation model as  was being followed for the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) funded projects entrusted to NHAI as well as the 2 nd 
World Bank project implemented by the Mi nistry through State PWDs.  The three 
most important features of the implementation model were outsourcing of 
services, International Competitive Bidding (ICB) procedure and FIDIC system of 
contracts. Accordingly, the work of  project preparation,  supervision and 
construction of works were outsourced to consultants and NHAI confined itself to 
procurement, payment, and monitoring the targets. 
 
2.8 Under this implementation model,  DPR Consultants were appointed 
through a competitive selection procedur e for preparation of Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) and the bid documents in cluding the bill of quantities (BOQ). 
Based on the experience of the projects already under  implementation at that 
time, it was expected that the DPRs would be completed in around 12 months 
and construction would be completed in about 36 mont hs with the pre-
construction activities undertaken concurr ently. FIDIC (‘Federation Internationale 
des Ingenieurs Conseils’) is the French ac ronym of International Federation of 
Consulting Engineers. As per this FI DIC system of Contra cts, Supervision 
Consultants, who were declared ‘E ngineer’, were appoi nted through a 
competitive selection procedure.  The Engineer administered the contracts. Day-
to-day activities like monitoring the pr ogress and quality, meas urement of works, 
certification of payment, etc. were perfo rmed by them. In addition, the Engineer 
recommended extension of time and variati on to the contracts, took over the 
work on completion, issued defect liability  certificates, and acted as the first step 
in dispute resolution process by decidi ng the disputes, which could eventually be 
referred to arbitration.  

III.  DELAY IN COMPLETION OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
 
A.  Reasons for Delay 
3.1 According to Chapter 2 of t he Audit Report, NHDP Phase-I was 
sanctioned by the Government in as ear ly as October 1998 and 90 per cent of 
the land was already acquired. NHAI was to  complete the award of contracts for 
execution of works for a total l ength of 6,359 km by March 2002 and the 
execution of the works were to be co mpleted by June 2004. As against this 
target, NHAI could award contracts only fo r a total length of 4,863 km (76.47 per 
cent) as on 31 March 2002 and could comple te the works for a total length of 
1,846 km (29 per cent) till June 2004. Thus the achievement was far less than 
the targeted one. As a result, the corri dor concept where t he entire road length 
joining the metros becomes a fast lane with no bottlenecks was not achieved.  
Further, out of 32 stretches selected by Audit for test check, in eight stretches the 
delay was attributable to inability of the contractors to synchronise resources, 
ineffective contract management by NH AI and Project Super vision Consultants 
(PSCs), faulty and incorrect contract cl auses. Incorrect and incomplete data in 
the DPRs also led to delay in taking decision, which ultimately resulted in delay in 
execution as analysed in t he audit report.  As per t he latest position as on 30 th 
April 2006 indicated by t he Audit, works for a length of 4,026 km were fully 
completed and 1,298 km were partially completed. This works out to 83.71 per 
cent. Thus even the extended target date of end of December 2005 was not 
achieved. As on 30 April 2006, 45 stretches  for a total length of 1,764 km were 
delayed ranging from 6 to 54 months.  
3.2 When asked to reply on the above-m entioned observations of Audit, NHAI 
put forth the following written reply: - 
 
“It may be mentioned here that the Government accorded the 
approval for NHDP Phase-I only in December 2000 (and not in 
October 1998 as pointed out by the Auditors) …The broad reasons 
for delay in completion of some of the projects are as under- 
 

(a) There were inordinate delays in acquisition of land due to 
procedural formalities, litigation and court cases, etc. 
 
(b) There were considerable delays in getting the forest clearance. 
 
(c) There were delays in obtaini ng clearances/approvals from the 
Railways for construction of Rail Over Bridges (ROB). Also, in 
packages where ROBs were cons tructed by the Ministry of 
Railways themselves, progress was not satisfactory leading to 
delays in completion of the projects. 
 
(d) There were delays in shifting of utilities like, electric lines, water 
pipelines, sewer lines, etc. 
 
(e) In many states, works were  affected due to adverse law and 
order conditions and activities of  anti-social groups. Further, 
stoppage of work by the local po pulation demanding additional 
underpasses/bypasses, flyovers, service roads, was also 
frequent.” 
 
B.  Accountability 
 
3.3 When asked whether any respons ibility had been fixed against the 
persons accountable for the delays, NHAI stated that: - 
 
“…the delays were mostly related to pre-construction activities like land 
acquisition, shifting of utilities, delay in approval of design and 
drawings from Railways for which responsibility cannot be fixed on any 
individual. However in case of delays attributable to the Contractors, 
NHAI has taken prompt actions to terminate the contracts and also 
notify seventeen non-performing C ontractors (a list is at Annexure- II ) 
who have not been allowed to participat e in future bids invited by 
NHAI.”  
 
3.4 On being asked whether any responsib ility for the delay in execution of 
work was/has been fixed on any contract or/PSC and whether any penalty was 
imposed on the erring parties, NHAI submitted the following reply: -  
 
“Where the delays were attributable to the contractors (such as tardy 
implementation by the contractors) , NHAI has taken action against the 
contractors including levy of liquidated damages and termination of 
contracts.  

 
The contracts prescribe for im position of liquidated damages only 
where the delay is solely attributable to the contractors.  
 
The contracts which have been terminated by NHAI or where 
liquidated damages have been levied du e to delay in progress or 
delays in completion are as under- 
 
Contracts which have been terminated 
(a)  Ganjam to Icchapuram section of NH-5 in the State of Orissa 
(b)  Etawah Bypass on NH-2 in the State of Uttar Pradesh 
(c)  Shikohabad to Etawah on NH-2 in the State of Uttar Pradesh 
(d)  Chitradurga Bypass on NH-4 in the State of Karnataka 
(e)  Srikakulam to Champavati on NH-5 in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh  
(f)  Six laning of  Panchi Gujran to Kamas pur (Sonepat) in the State 
of Haryana 
(g)  Eight laning of Haryana/Delh i Border to Mukaraba Chowk in 
Delhi 
(h)  Lucknow-Kanpur Section of NH- 25 in the State of Uttar Pradesh 
(i)  Nagpur-Hyderabad section of NH-7 in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh 
(j)  New Mangalore Port Road connectivity proj ect in the State of 
Karnataka 
 
Contracts where liquidated damages have been levied 
(a) Westerly Diversion Project outside Pune City on NH-4 in the 
State of Maharashtra. 
(b) Dehri-Aurangabad Section of NH-2 in the State of Bihar. 
(c) Mohania-Sasaram Section of NH-2 in the State of Bihar. 
(d) Lucknow-Kanpur Section of NH-25 in the State of Uttar Pradesh 
(e)  Guwahati Bypass on NH-37 in the State of Assam 
(f)  Namakkal Bypass in t he State of Tamilnadu.” 
 
C. Corrective Measures 
3.5 When asked as to what  lessons have been learnt by the NHAI to ensure 
that such type of delays do not recur during the execution of subsequent phases 
of NHDP, NHAI replied that: -. 
“…..As regards the lessons learnt dur ing implementation of the project 
and the corrective actions taken so far, it is submitted that-  
 

• With a view to remove discrepancies in Conditions of 
Contract, NHAI has already circulated standard bidding 
document for adoption in all future NHAI funded projects.   
 
• NHAI has taken major initiati ves for standardization and 
improvement of DPRs such as Peer review and proof 
checking procedures, deposit of performance security, 
penalties for delay and vari ation exceeding +/- 15%, 
debarment of key persons leaving the project midways, etc. 
 
• Deterrent action against defaul ting consultants has also 
been prescribed. A Standing Committee of three Chief 
General Managers of NHAI has also been formed to look 
into all such cases. 
 
At the same time learning from the past experiences, several 
actions to remove the bottlenecks hav e already been init iated.  With 
introducing the following specific measures, progress is expected to 
speed up: 
 
(a) Department of Road Tr ansport and Highways has been 
authorized by the Government  to issue notification for 
land acquisitions subject to  certain standard conditions 
without reference to Ministry of Law.   
 
(b) The problems of land acquisition and other coordination 
matters with State Governments and other agencies, 
such as Railways, MoEF are being taken up at the level 
of Committee of Secretaries headed by Cabinet 
Secretary, wherein the Chief Secretary or other senior 
officials from the State Government/Railways, MoEF, etc 
are being invited to solve the problems. 
 
(c) The system of review at regular intervals by Nodal 
Officers of the State Govern ments for solving problems 
like land acquisition, removal of utilities, forest and 
environmental clearances, etc which was already in place 
has been revitalized.  More frequent meetings are now 
taking place to sort out problems. 
 
(d) The work of shifting of utilities is now being got done 
though the civil work contract ors/concessionaires at the 
estimated cost given by concerned utility department 
under their supervision. 
 

(e) A Director level officer of  Railways has been posted in 
NHAI on deputation to liaise with various Zonal Railways 
to expedite approval of ROBs. 
 
(f) The status of pre-construction activities is being reviewed 
and monitored in NHAI HQ on a fortnightly basis.” 
 
D.  Quality of Work Executed 
 
3.6 The Audit in Para 2.5 had observed that the quality of the construction 
was not found to be as per the technical s pecifications. In a test check of seven 
stretches by the technical audit team, the following deficiencies were noticed: - 
 
Sl. No. Nature of Defect No. of 
Stretches 
1 Reinforced Cement concrete work in retaining wall and cement 
concrete kerb were sub-standard. 
2 
2 Weep holes provided in retaining walls for allowing water to 
escape without damaging the structure were not provided as per 
technical specifications. 
4 
3 Various road layers were not compacted to the required degree 
and their thickness was also less than the required.  
In some 
cases 
4 River Shingles used in wet mix macadam for service lane did not 
meet the technical specification.  
1 
5 Longitudinal drains were not provided. 3 
6 Works executed by the contractors for a value of Rs. 40 crore 
were not confirming to the specifications such as non-provision 
of wearing course, premature distress due to unsuitable mix, 
inadequate strength for cement treated sub-base, construction of 
tilt/shift beyond the tolerable limits and use of inferior grade of 
Geo-textile Material. 
5 
 
3.7  It was reported that NHAI had got  conducted quality audit in respect of 
works executed by the contractors (Tabular  description of sub-standard work is 
given in Annexure-III). On being asked about the scope and methodology 
adopted by NHAI for these quality audits, it has been submitted that: - 
 
“The scope of audit involves qualit y audit and surve illance works of 
Highways & Bridges under National Highways Development Project 
(Golden Quadrilateral and North-South & East-West Corridor Projects) 

to confirm that the work has been executed as per specified 
parameters and quality system adopted for the execution of the 
projects. M/s Engineers India Ltd. (EIL) was awarded the contract for 
conducting such quality audits, init ially for 38 packages, which was 
further extended for another 39 pac kages. They have conducted 
quality audit for 70 packages till date. Another contract has been 
awarded to M/s Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara for 
3 packages in Gujarat. 
As far as the methodology is concerned, M/s EIL is required to 
interact with the officers of NHAI, prepare audit plan and check list 
based on contract documents betw een NHAI & the C ontractors and 
NHAI & the Supervision Consultants, to carry out quality audit in the 
office of the Contractors and Super vision Consultants and submit the 
initial report to NHAI, the Contractor and the Supervision Consultant to 
enable them to take up the corrective actions based on the non-
conformities pointed out by the audit team.  
On receipt of the confirmation fr om Project Directors (NHAI) in 
respect of the rectifications of the deficiencies carried out by the 
contractors, a follow up audit is conduc ted by the Auditors to review 
the same and the final report is s ubmitted for closure of the audit 
cycle.” 
 
3.8 On being asked in how many case s, deficiencies in the quality of 
construction were noticed by these quality auditors, NHAI replied: - 
 
“Some defects / deficiencies / non-c onformities were observed by the 
audit team in about 20 stretches (such as Jallandhar Bypass section of 
NH-1, Mukarba Chowk to Mall Road on  NH-1, Agra-Gwalior section of 
NH-3, Sikandara-Bhaunti section of NH-2, Bhaunti- Fatehpur section of 
NH -2, Varanasi-Mohania secrtion of NH 2, Mohania-Sasaram section 
of NH-2, Dehri-on-sone to Au rangabad on NH-2, Aurangabad-Barwa 
Adda section of NH-2, JNPT Pkg-1,  Vizag Port Road project, Eluru-
Ravalaplem, Jaipur Bypass on NH- 8, Bhilwara Bypass, , Kolaghat-
Kharagpur section of NH-6, Lax mannath-Kharagpur, Nasirabad-
Gulabpura, Bhilwara Bypass-Chi ttorgarh,  Palikonda-Ranipet and 
Dharwad-Belgaum section of NH-4, etc.).” 
 
3.9  On being asked about the action taken by the NHAI/Ministry against the 
concerned contractors and the PSCs resp onsible for execution and supervision 
where poor quality of work was noticed, NHAI stated: - 

“All the non conformities/defects as pointed out by the audit team 
during their audit have been rectified by the Contractor and the 
Consultants, except in 4 cases where follow-up audit to verify the 
rectifications carried out is in progress.” 
 
3.10  On being asked as to what corrective action was taken to raise the quality 
of road construction to the r equisite optimum level, what were the costs involved 
to set right these deficiencies and by whom such costs were made good, NHAI 
submitted that: - 
“In order to exercise an effective control on the quality of the road 
construction, guidelines have been issued to all the Project 
Implementation Units covering t he general types of deficiencies 
observed during the audit for taking corrective actions. The costs of 
setting right the deficiencies are bor ne by the contractors and are not 
paid by NHAI.” 
 
3.11 The Ministry in their written r eply stated on the same issue that: - 
 
“Under the FIDIC terms of work execution, contractor is responsible for 
the quality of work executed.  This is also ensured through supervision 
consultant.  Now NHAI has also adopt ed the practice of quality audited 
by a third party external agency.” 
 
 
E.  Synchronization of Activities 
 
3.12 According to Audit, there was no syn chronization of activities and there 
was ineffective coordination with other agencies like shifti ng of utilities, cutting of 
trees, etc. When the reasons for incorre ct and incomplete data in the DPRs, 
delay in finalization of DPRs and award of work were asked, NHAI has replied: - 
“It may not be correct to conclude t hat there was no synchronization of 
the activities and that there was i neffective coordination with other 
agencies for land acquisition, shifting of  utilities, cutting of trees, etc. It 
may be appreciated that the program of this magnitude was 
unprecedented. The scale and quantum of pre-cons truction activities 
required for these projects was unmatched to any project implemented 
in the past. It was not possible to under take the activities in a serial 
manner, that is to say, complete t he pre-construction activities in the 
first instance and only then undertake  the construction activities. It 
was, therefore, decided to take up the pre-construction as well as 
construction activities simultaneously, but matching with the sequence 

of the construction activities of t he contractors. Moreover, the entire 
site was not envisaged to be handed over at the time of 
commencement of work but in phases. On hindsight, it can be said that 
it was not a wrong decision. Even today, about 2 % of the land 
acquisition remains to be completed while nearly 93 % of GQ is 
already complete. Had the activities been taken up serially, the benefit 
of GQ, which is being derived today, would have been denied all these 
years. Since most of the pre-cons truction activities depended upon the 
cooperation of the res pective state government s, there were delays 
where such cooperation was not fort hcoming. To undertake work of 
this magnitude, not only the suppor t of the State Governments was 
very vital, but also they required physical and manpower resources to 
undertake this type of work at the pace required for im plementation of 
NHDP. Most of the State Governm ents were not equipped with the 
resources required for undertaking such huge pre-construction works. 
It needs to be noted that land acquisi tion, which is considered very 
critical for these projects, got affected due to non-availability and non-
updation of the land records by the State Governments. It was only 
due to the effective coordination by NHAI and due to supplementing 
the resources of the State Govern ments; NHAI could complete these 
pre-construction activities.  
 
As regards DPR, despite all efforts some discrepancies in the 
DPRs cannot be ruled out. Further , some DPRs got prepared by the 
State PWDs were also adopted by NH AI in which a large number of 
discrepancies were observed. It has been the experience that the 
assessment of the pre-construction activities, especially with respect to 
land acquisition, requires updat ed and correct land records which 
normally was not available with most of the State Gove rnments. As a 
result of the complex land acquisit ion process, where certain areas 
were in the process of consolidation or under disputes in the Courts of 
Law, it was not possible for the DP R consultants to ensure complete 
accuracy of the LA plans at the ti me of preparation of DPRs. The DPR 
consultant carried out survey of t he alignment but due to the reasons 
explained above, there were differences in the LA plan s and the actual 
site condition. These discrepancies were possible to be rectified only at 
the time when the Revenue Author ities started acquiring the land 
under the NH Act. The discrepancies in the DPRs were also due to the 
issues which came up during the im plementation of the projects such 
as requirement of addi tional underpasses, by passes, avoidance of 
certain areas for minimizing the cutti ng of trees, structures, properties, 
etc. While it did not imply that DPR consultants did not carry out 
intensive consultations at the time  of DPR preparations, the change in 
some of the provisions was necessitated due to the reasons explained 

above and hence, was required to be accommodated during the 
course of implementation.  
 
Moreover, the shifting of utilities is also linked to the process of 
land acquisition. Only after acquiri ng the land, it was possible for the 
utility agencies to commence the shifti ng work. Further, the possibility 
of uncharted utilities ou tside the utility relocati on plan submitted by the 
DPR consultants and found during the course of actual execution 
cannot be ruled out. 
 
 These factors led to a delay in finalization of some of the DPRs.” 
 
3.13 From the Audit Report, it was noticed that planned construction period 
ranged from 30 to 36 months for each st retch depending upon the work involved 
in the length of the stretches  and number of bridges, culverts etc. In this regard, 
the NHAI was asked to state the reasons for abnormal delays in completion of 
the work. NHAI furnished the following reply: -  
 
“Generally, the implementation of a project takes about 30-36 months 
(in some cases even 42 months) depending upon the work and the 
complexities involved in the project. However, this is also subject to the 
condition that the pre-construction activities (such as land acquisition, 
utility shifting, etc.) are completed well  in time so as not to affect the 
construction program. 
 
NHAI had to face a number of constraints in implementation, 
which affected the progress of the projects. These are- 
 
(a) There were inordinate delays in acquisition of land due to 
procedural formalities, litigat ion and court cases, delays 
in disbursement of com pensation by the Competent 
Authority to the beneficiaries although NHAI had 
deposited the compensation well in advance, etc. 
           
  
(b) There were considerable delays in getting the forest 
clearance. Further, besides t he conditions stipulated by 
the Central Government in first stage clearance, the 
State Forest Departments also imposed certain additional 
conditions, which were, at  times, unreasonable and 
difficult to meet. 
 

(c) There  were delays in obtaining clearances/approvals 
from the Railways for construc tion of Rail Over Bridges 
(ROB). Also, in packages where ROBs were constructed 
by the Ministry of Railways themselves, progress was not 
satisfactory leading to delays in completion of the 
projects. 
 
(d) There were delays in shifting of utilities like, electric lines, 
water pipelines, sewer lines, etc. Moreover, shifting is 
also associated with acquisition of land and hence, there 
were delays in shifting of utilities due to delays in 
acquisition of land. 
 
(e) In many states, works were affected due to adverse law 
and order conditions and activiti es of anti-social groups. 
Further, stoppage of work by the local population 
demanding additional underpasses/bypasses, flyovers, 
service roads, were also frequent. 
 
All the above issues delayed the construction work, which were 
beyond the control of the construc tion agencies and hence, affected 
the completion of the project.” 
  
 
3.14 On being asked as to why the revi sed target date of end of December 
2005 could not be adhered to, NHAI stated that: - 
“While a majority of the projects have been completed by December 
2005, some of the projects could not be completed due to the following 
reasons- 
 
(a) Some of the projects under the assistance of the World Bank 
could be awarded only in 2004 after completion of all the 
formalities including obtaining necessary no-objection / 
clearances of the World Bank. These projects would normally 
require about 30 months’ time for completion. 
 
(b) In some of the projects, where the performance of the 
contractors was poor or where t he bank guarantees were found 
to be forged, the contracts were  terminated and fresh contracts 
could be awarded only in 2005 (some in early 2006), due to 
consequent protracted litigation/ arbitration, with a completion 
period of about 24 months. 
 
(c) In some of the projects, the progress was poor due to tardy 
implementation by the contractors. Seventeen contractors have 

been declared non-performers. The completion of works in 
these projects has been delayed. 
 
(d) Frequent stoppages of work by the local populat ion demanding 
additional underpasses/bypasses, flyovers, service roads, have 
also contributed for delay in completion of the projects. 
 
(e) There were inordinate delays due to land acquisition, shifting of 
utilities, tree cutting, adverse climatic conditions, etc. These 
affected the progress of the projects.”  
 
F.  Role of Government 
3.15 When asked whether t he Government had monitor ed the progress of the 
work and issued any instructions to the NHAI in respect of slow progress, NHAI 
on their part replied that: - 
 “The implementation of t he projects was reviewed on a periodical basis 
by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways at the level of the 
Hon’ble Minister and Secretary (R T&H) so as to take immediate 
measures to remove bottlenecks and to ensure the speedy progress of 
the projects. Further, the monitorable targets as per the program 
approved by the Government as also  as per the Annual Plans were 
reviewed in various meetings held in the Planning Commission, 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highwa ys and Ministry of Statistics and 
Program implementation. The decisions taken in such meetings were 
followed by NHAI.” 
 
3.16 On the above issue, the Ministry has stated as under: - 
“Ministry has a separate zone to deal with the matters relating to NHAI.  
NHAI furnishes its monthly progress report to all concerned including 
Ministry of Statistics and Progr amme Implementation, Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance.  Besides, each and every project 
is periodically reviewed by Secretary as well as Minister.  Interaction 
with NHAI is constantly maintained, more so on issues such as 
representation from public on matters  relating to land acquisition, 
coordination with external  lending agencies and issues arising due to 
procurement procedure.  If the need arises suitable instructions to 
NHAI are issued by the Ministry on technical, administrative and 
procurement issues.” 

G.  Loss in vehicle operating cost 
3.17 The Audit in Para 2.2 of the Report has observed that the delay in 
completion would also result in non-a ccrual of perceived benefits in terms of 
vehicle operating cost to the extent of Rs. 4, 289 cr ore (ending December 2005) 
to the road users and loss of savings  in time and avoidance/reduction in 
accidents.   
3.18 In this connection, NHAI was ask ed to tender their justification on the 
matter. NHAI submitted: - 
“Over the years, the industrial and agricultural growth of the country led 
to a growth in traffic of about 8-12% per year on many sections of the 
national highways. While traffic on t he national highways grew rapidly, 
it was not possible for the Go vernment to ensure the proper 
development and maintenance of the national highways for want of 
matching funds due to competing demands  from other priority sectors. 
This led to serious deficiencies in the network, which affected the 
economy badly. In order to achieve an average GDP growth rate of 
about 8% per annum, a good national highway network was a sine qua 
non. 
 
In view of this and to give a boost to the economy, there was an 
emergent need to take up implementation of a m ega project covering 
6,359 km. Implementation of NHDP in a time fr ame of about 3-4 years 
was a mammoth task. A project of this size and complexity was 
unprecedented in the hist ory of the road developm ent in the country. 
Not many countries in the World have ventured into such a massive 
task to be completed in such a short time. 
 
The overall performance of NHDP Phase-I suffered in the initial 
stages due to problems on account of land acquisition, utility shifting 
and getting forest/environmental clear ances, etc. Moreover, during the 
initial stages, NHAI did not possess t he requisite infrastructure and the 
wherewithal to undertake a projec t of this magnitude. However, 
concerted efforts were made to re solve the issues relating to pre-
construction activities as also  to introduce robust systems and 
procedures. Deficiencies in planni ng and contract management, which 
had crept into the initial stages mainly on account of lack of experience 
of handling projects and program of this magnitude, have since been 
considerably removed. 
 
A project of this si ze and scale is bound to  encounter practical 
difficulties, which cause delays. T he factors causing delays were even 

beyond the control of NHAI. However,  NHAI has always been vigilant 
about the delays and has been taking all possible steps to control 
slippages so that the projects are completed as per schedule. 
 
While there are several economic and social benefits of good 
road network which include saving in  fuel, saving in vehicle operating 
cost and maintenance of vehicle, saving in time; it would not be proper 
to compute loss on these counts due to delay in completion of the 
project and hold NHAI responsible for this. A successful completion of 
the project depends largely on various factors including factors, which 
are beyond the control of NHAI. Had NHAI taken up the work only after 
completion of the pre-construction activities, there would have been a 
further delay in implementation and hence, lesser benefits. However, 
by taking up both pre-construction and construction activities 
simultaneously, the benefits would be  more as compared to the 
previous situation. 
 
Hence, the delay in implementation of t he project which is 
mainly due to reasons beyond the c ontrol of NHAI has delayed accrual 
of perceived benefits.”  
 
3.19 During evidence of the Authority, when queried on the issue of delay of 
NHDP, Phase-I, the Chairman, NHAI stated: - 
“Sir, about the points raised by t he Hon’ble Chairman, I would like to 
say that the chief hurdles as on dat e in the operations of our National 
Highways are land acquisition, cutti ng of the trees, shifting of the 
utilities, local problems, shifting of the religious struct ures and law and 
order problem in certain areas. They still remain as the chief hurdles. I 
am to say that the hurdle s that were there at th e time of Phase-I still 
remain. Though the Committee set up at  the Cabinet Secretary level 
for Inter-Ministerial coordination, Centre-State coordination has 
resolved this issue to some extent yet we still face problems in land 
acquisition in different States. Someti mes, the land acquisition officers 
are transferred frequently or are not available. We have been 
requesting the State Government to lay special emphasis on land 
acquisition for the National Highway Pr ojects so that we can expedite 
work. Then comes the disbursal of compensation after it is deposited 
with the competent author ity within the shortest possible time. The 
point is that people wil l not leave their land unless compensation is 
paid to them. So, once that is delayed, the land acquisition process is 
delayed. Once the land acquisition process gets delayed, then the 
whole thing gets stalled. Hence, the chief hurdles still remain.”   
 
 

3.20 It was added by a representative of NHAI, that: - 
 “There was a question regarding the s hortage of construction material.  
Here I would like to add that we  are preparing our DPR and we do the 
survey of the locality where the minerals, quarry, sand, stones and 
other things are available.  Th is has been duly considered while 
floating the work to contractor and that whatever materials to be 
required are made available.  What happened is that when the contract 
is awarded and the work starts taki ng place, then sometimes with the 
State Government’s legislation or  maybe local problems or maybe 
some forest problem, most of th e quarries, which have been identified 
by the contractor and by NHAI, are not  available to us.  This creates 
some problems.  It happened in the case of a project in Orissa and 
also in some other projects while we were doing the Golden 
Quadrilateral project.  But by and la rge, unless there is some change 
of legislation and things are not available, we do not face this type of 
problem.  This may cause delay if th ings are not available as per the 
contract.” 
 
3.21 The Chairman, NHAI further added: - 
 
 “There is another aspect, which I fo rgot, that is, regarding why delays 
take place. In quite a number of pl aces, we find there is a lot of 
demand from the local population fo r additional under-passes, change 
in design, additional ramps, grade separators, etc., which involve 
additional cost. So, whenever there is  a change in scope, there will be 
change in cost also. So, escalation will take place. That is, by owing to 
popular demand wherever we find that there is a necessity, sometimes 
change in design has been effect ed with consequent variation and 
escalation cost. That has happened. In Surat-Manor’s case, this has 
happened.” 
 
H.  Delay on Account of Land Acquisition  
 
3.22 According to the C&AG Report, 90% of the land was already acquired as 
on October 1998, when the NDHP Phase- I was sanctioned by the Government. 
However, according to NHAI, one of the ma in reasons for delay in completion of 
NHDP has been due to the dela y in acquisition of land on account of procedural 
formalities, litigation in court cases, fore st clearance, approval from Railways for 
Rail Over Bridges (ROBs), shifting of utilities, adverse law and order conditions in 
some States, etc. In this regard the Mini stry was asked to state as to what was 

the factual position regarding the said ob servation of C&AG and if this was 
correct, then how the project got delayed on the above mentioned accounts.  It 
was also asked what role was played by the Government for removal of the 
above-mentioned obstacles and also to  coordinate matters with State 
Governments and other agencies like Railwa ys, Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, etc. to solve the problems. 
 
3.23 The Ministry replied the following: - 
  
“The actual execution of the project is the respons ibility of NHAI which 
is a statutory body.  NHAI had repor ted that approximately 90% of the 
land was available but the remaining 10% was quite critical for 
completion of the project.  Four and Six laning facility had/ has to have 
a particular cross section which r equired/ requires adequate width to 
be available in order to execute the work.  Wherever the required width 
was not available it was not possible to take up the work.  This had 
caused delays despite NHAI pursuing the matter relating to land 
acquisition, utility shifting etc. with State Govt. vigorously.   
 
Ministry also pursued with concerned State Governments.  A 
number of letters at the level of Hon’ ble Minister to Chief Minister of 
concerned States were wri tten.  The letters were also got written from 
Prime Minister to Chief Minister of  some States where the problems 
were more acute.  As a result of this, following actions materialized for 
facilitating the speedy decision involv ing number of States and other 
Central/State agencies: 
 
(i) Committee of Secretaries cons tituted under Cabinet Secretary 
to resolve Centre-State and In ter-Ministerial issues with 
periodical meetings; 
 
(ii) A Nodal officer appointed in ev ery State to coordinate and to 
solve problems relating to land acquisition, removal of utilities, 
forest and environment clearances etc.  
 
(iii) Allocation of Business Rules modified so that DORTH 
authorized to issue notification for LA without reference to 
Ministry of Law. 
 
(iv) Periodic review meetings were earlier held between Secretary 
and Member Engineering, Railw ay Board on the issue of 
speedy approvals for ROBs. Now, a Director level officer of the 

Railways has been posted in NHAI on deputation for liaisoning 
with various zones of Railways to expedite approval of ROB.   
 
(v) M/o Environment & Forest ha s simplified the procedure of 
speedy clearance by having frequent meeting of their 
committees.” 
 
3.24 The Secretary, Ministry of Shi pping, Road Transport and Highways further 
added during the evidence that: - 
“ …..As far as land acquisition is concerned, it is a matter of great 
concern to the Ministry.  It is also something with which the Ministry is 
closely involved because the issues vary  from State to State.  In fact, 
the Minister himself has been visi ting State Capi tals and hold 
meetings.  Recently, I accompanied him to Lucknow for a meeting with 
the State Chief Minister because of  the problems of delay in the 
acquisition in U.P.  I myself went to Chennai the other day to attend the 
meeting convened by the Chief Secretary of all land acquisition officers 
so that all our works could be s peeded up.  So, we certainly do follow 
this very closely with the agencies concerned.  It is not that any 
individual State gets more attention than any other.  We try to look at 
the States where, in fact, the land acquisiti on has been delayed and 
we address those on priority.  As far as the Land Acquisition Act is 
concerned, in fact the NH Act does provide for its own acquisition.  But 
there is nothing to preclude the app lication of the Land Acquisition Act 
of 1984.  Actually Stat e Governments ask us for clearance under that 
Act, to which we have no objection.  In fact, at present for the East-
West Corridor, Assam has asked for permission to acquire under the 
Land Acquisition Act, to which we have agreed to.  Jammu and 
Kashmir has its own Land Acquisition Act.  It does not use either of 
these two Acts.  Clearance has been given to them also.  So, we are 
absolutely open on this matter.” 
 
3.25 On being enquired by the Committee as  to whether any delay occurred on 
account of inaction by the State Governments in respect of land acquisition, utility 
shifting, etc and if so, whether such inst ances were brought to  the notice of the 
Central Government, and the remedial role, if any, played by the Central 
Government, NHAI replied as under: -   
 
“Yes, the delay occurred on acc ount of inaction by the State 
Governments in respect of land acquisition and utility shifting, etc. Most 
of these pre-construction issues  relate mainly to the State 
Governments and were being tak en up with the concerned State 

Governments from time to time. All the concerned States were 
requested to nominate a se nior officer as the Nodal Officer for NHDP, 
which was done. The Nodal Officer was expected to coordinate various 
matters relating to the programme  with the departments of the state 
government and also hold periodic m eetings to review all issues 
affecting the progress of works such as  acquisition of land, shifting of 
utilities, forest clearance, tree cutting, law and order, etc. This 
arrangement facilitated resolving large number of issues at the field 
level. The matter was also taken up by the Hon’ble Prime Minister and 
Hon’ble Minister (RT&H) with t he concerned Chief Ministers. In 
addition, to resolve the issues related to Central – State and Inter-
Ministerial coordination and for ex pediting the pending cases which 
were affecting the progress of work, a Committee of Secretaries (COS) 
was constituted headed by  the Cabinet Secretar y.  The outstanding 
issues related to land acquisition were raised before the COS.”  
 
3.26 In their post evidence note, NHAI put forth their suggestions about 
bringing the following amendments in the National Highways Act, 1956 in respect 
of land acquisition: - 
“Amendment required for Land Acquisition:  
To facilitate the acquisition of  land expeditiously for the NHAI 
projects, the following needs to be added under Sub-section 7 of 
Section 3-G NH Act, 1956:  
 
(1) In addition to the market value of the land,  the Competent 
Authority or the Arbitrator shall in every case award a sum of 30 
per centum on such market val ue, in consideration of the 
compulsory nature of the acquisition. 
 
(2) The 1956 Act does not specifically  provide for a time limit for 
initiating the arbitrati on proceeding challenging the 
compensation determined by the Competent Authority. There 
have been instances where intere sted persons have challenged 
the awards determined by the competent authority after two 
years which not only delays the completion of the LA process 
but also creates administrative problems.  It may be better to 
prescribe a time limit for the in terested persons for challenging 
the compensation award before the Arbitrator. Following need to 
be added in the NH Act: - 
 
“Provided that every such application shall be made - 
 

Within six months fr om the date of the Co mpetent Authority’s 
determination.” 
 
(3) To include acquisition through mu tual consent to a limited extent 
only in the following cases: 
  
(a) Missing plots which are left out from the bulk acquisition. 
(b) Additional land r equired due to alterati on of alignment at 
implementation stage. 
 
To adopt this process, adequate protective mechanism would 
be put in place for ensuring transparency in the rates and for 
establishing rightful ownership. 
 
(4) Explore the possibility of invoki ng urgency clause, as in case of 
LA Act, for faster LA process in some special cases.” 
 
  
 

 
IV. CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTORS  
 
 
A.  Detailed Project Reports  (DPRs) and DPR Consultants 
4.1 A three-stage procedure was uniformly adopted by NHAI in evaluating the 
proposals received for selection of DPR Consultants through competitive bidding 
using Quality and Cost Based Selection (Q CBS). As pointed out by Audit, DPRs 
were found deficient in te rms of precise determination of quantities and nature of 
the items of works, land to be acquired, sub-soil investigation, bridge design, 
correct technical specifications, number of  trees to be felled, services/utilities 
required to be shifted,  and designs of various key it ems of work. The inaccuracy 
in the quantities of wor ks upset the competitive rates of the bidders, which 
formed the basis of award of contracts in one case.  
 
4.2 When asked about this issue, NHAI subm itted in their written replies that: - 
 
“The agreements have since been stan dardized and the following 
penalty / deterrent provisions hav e been included in the standard 
contracts- 
 
• An amount equivalent to 5% of the contract value is retained at the 
end of the contract for accuracy of  design and quantities submitted 
and the same is released after the completion of Civil Contract 
Works (Clause 7.2).  Further as per Clause 7.3.1, if variation in any 
of the main quantities of work like earth wo rk including sub grade, 
GSB, WMM, Bituminous works (BM/DBM/BC), drains, total 
concrete quantities and reinforcing steel in bridge wo rks or overall 
project cost, found during execution is more than +/- 15%, the 
penalty equivalent to 5% of the contract value shall be imposed.  
For this purpose retention money equi valent to 5% of the contract 
value will be forfeited. This shal l exclude any additional/deletion of 
items/works ordered during the execution.  
 
• In case of delay in completion of services due to reasons 
attributable to the Consultant, a penalty equal to 0.05% of the 
contract price per day subject to  a maximum 5% of the contract 
value can also be imposed and s hall be recovered from payments 
due/performance security. 
 

• In addition to the penalty as mentioned above, warning may be 
issued to the erring consultants for minor deficiencies as per 
Clause 7.4.2 of DPR Consultancy C ontract.  In the case of major 
deficiencies in the Detailed Projec t Report involving time and cost 
overrun and adverse effect on r eputation of NHAI, other penal 
action including debarring for certain period may also be initiated as 
per policy of NHAI. 
 
• To prevent frequent changes of key personnel by the Consultants, 
a contract condition has now been provided where the upper limit of 
substitutions has been fixed at 25 % of total key personnel. For any 
substitution beyond this limit, penalty is imposed in the form of 
reduction in remuneration of the new key person proposed. 
 
• Submission of performance security has been made mandatory, 
which is retained till the completion of the Civil Works.” 
 
4.3 During the evidence of  the representatives of  NHAI, the Chairman, NHAI 
also submitted the following: - 
“The other thing is, whether appointment of consultants has been done 
in following a proper proc edure and all that. I woul d like to submit that 
we have followed well laid-out pr ocedures for appointment of DPR 
Consultants as well as Project S upervision Consultants. You will 
realise our difficulty because when we took up this massive project, 
there was a real dearth of such c onsultants and such expertise in our 
country. So, that has been a bottleneck in Phase-I. We have faced this 
difficulty because this expertise has to be developed. Suddenly there 
was a large requirement  of Highway Engineers, Bridge Engineers, 
Quality Surveyors etc. So, it was very  difficult to get so many people at 
the same time, but we had well laid -out procedures for appointment of 
DPR Consultants.” 
 
4.4 In the post evidence note submitt ed by NHAI, further clarification was 
forwarded by the Authority regarding lacunae found in the work of the DPRs: - 
“The contract prices going up due to variations ei ther by increasing the 
quantities of work or by getting additi onal items of work executed is 
one area, which gives rise to the su spicion that the contractor has 
been favoured. The fact, however, is otherwise. There are many 
reasons for such variations, such as  (a) quantities in highway projects 
cannot be estimated with full accuracy,  (b) the site conditions dictate 
some changes from the original quantities, (c) at times additional 
facilities are created due to public pressure, (d) additional items are 
included from operational and safety  considerations not envisaged at 

DPR stage. In addition, as stated earlie r, in a number of cases, the 
bids were called with out DPR being ready on approximate quantities. 
As a result, the quantities increase or decrease with respect to the 
contract quantities.  The test whet her such increase or decrease has 
been made with the intention of giving any undue benefit to the 
contractor would lie in determining (i) whether the variations were 
justified or not, and (ii) whether t hese variations have been costed in 
accordance with the laid down procedure or not.  It may be stated that 
NHAI has considered the instances of  these variations at the highest 
level in the management and applied due diligence in approving these 
variations. There have been instanc es where DPRs have been found 
wanting and actions have been ta ken against the defaulting DPR 
consultants. The value for money has been secured. 
 
The system has since been further streamlined by tightening the 
system of DPR preparation, providing for peer review of DPRs and 
associating the field officers of NHAI in preparation of DPRs.” 
 
4.5 When questioned about their role in monitoring this issue, the Ministry in 
their written reply answered that in the year 2001, they appointed a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of the then DG (R D) for standardizing some documents 
and procedures relating to procurement of services of consultants and evaluation 
etc and also that Detailed Project Reports are now subjected to Peer Review by 
experts; that major structures are also proof checked.  
 
B. Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs) 
 
4.6 Audit in Para 7.2 has brought out the following defic iencies on the part of 
the Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs): - 
a) Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs) failed to  demonstrate efficient 
contract management abilities as non-compliance to contractual 
provisions resulted in losses and extra payments.  
b) Despite contractual requirement fo r recovery of liquidated damages for 
delayed execution attributable to the contractors, the recovery was not 
proposed resulting in non-levy of Rs.51.49 crore. 
c) The PSCs ordered execution of variat ion items in respect of two stretches 
without the prior approval of NHAI and also at rates higher than those 

subsequently approved by NHAI, resulting in overpayment of Rs.5.89 
crore which could not be recovered from the contractors. 
d) The PSCs did not conduct 8 out of  14 mandatory tests in two stretches. 
The modified bitumen used at site fa iled in four out of seven tests 
conducted by technical audit. 
e) The PSCs were contractually bound to obtain quality assurance plan/ 
procedure from the civil contractor and ensure its execution but the PSC 
failed in his duty in this regard. 
 
4.7 When asked to comment on the above-mentioned Audit observations, 
NHAI in their written reply submitted the following: - 
“Specific views on each of the observations are given below: 
 
(a) Though conceded that there were some instances of non-
compliance, but a sweeping gener alization would be unfair, 
especially keeping in view the fa ct that many projects were 
completed almost in time and with in cost, and in some cases the 
contractors got bonus also for early completion. 
 
(b) Audit’s observation about the loss is based on the premise that the 
extension granted to the contractors was not at all due. However, 
this position has been contested by NHAI in various references 
stating that there were various events which were beyond the 
control of the contractors and henc e, as per the conditions of the 
contract, extension of time wa s granted. As regards non-levy of 
Rs.51.49 crore, it ma y be stated that in one case, involving 
Rs.19.86 crore, the matter is pending outcome of arbitration. In 
another case where Rs.11.09 crore is to be recovered, the amount 
is secured by extended BGs fu rnished by the contractors pending 
outcome of the arbitration process.  In the remaining, the extension 
of time was justified and hence, liquidated damages were not 
leviable. 
 
(c) This has already been referred to  Arbitration and the outcome of 
this is awaited. 
 
(d)  The main observation relates to testing of bitumen. In NHAI’s reply 
earlier, it had been clarif ied that while penetration and softening 
point tests were carried out, for other tests manufacturers’ 
certificate was relied upon. Mor eover, testing done by CRRI was 

done on a sample after considerable lapse of time since actual 
laying. Due to ageing, the characteristic of Bitumen would change. 
 
(e) On earlier observation of the A udit, NHAI had clarified that the 
quality assurance manual was subm itted by the contractor along 
with the tender. Besides this, PSCs also prepared a quality 
assurance plan for im plementation and quality control of the work 
was carried out as per that plan, in association of the contractor. 
The same position is reiterated.” 
 
4.8 In this connection, w hen asked what were the contractual provisions 
entered into by NHAI with the PSCs, NHAI stated: - 
“….as per contractual provision under the Supervision Consultancy 
contracts, the Consultants are requi red to administer the civil works 
contracts as per provisions of thos e contracts as well as the specific 
contract between the Consultant  and NHAI. As per civil works 
contracts, the Consultants are to give commencement orders, review 
the contractor’s work plan, monitor the progress as per the programme 
and pinpoint the delays, approve c onstruction drawings, check the 
measurements of work, certify the monthly payments due to the 
contractor, approve variations, appr ove extension of time, decide on 
the claims made by the contract ors including those on which he 
intends to go for arbitrat ion, certify the statement  at completion, certify 
the final payment certificate, ensur e compliance of the defect liability 
and issue defect liability certificate. The agreements limit the role of the 
Consultant in respect of such ma tters, which have direct financial 
implications, such as extension of time and approval of variations, in 
which the Consultant is required to take the approval of the client, i.e. 
NHAI. The earlier contracts with s upervision consultants did have 
some weaknesses inasmuch as the requirements of seeking client’s 
approval were not very clearly spelt out.  These weaknesses have now 
been removed and the standard contract documents for civil contracts 
as well as consultancy c ontracts have made explicit  provisions in this 
regard.” 
 
4.9 When asked about what mechanism was / is ava ilable with th e NHAI to 
ensure compliance of the contractual provisions with the PSCs they stated: -  
“The contracts with PSCs will be enforced and where they are found to 
be in breach, remedies available in the contract will be resorted to. The 
remedies are encashment of bank guarantees, recourse to 
Professional Liability Insurance. Beyond the contractual provisions 
also, action can be taken against erring consultants as per the policy 
recently formulated by NHAI. As per  the policy, the performance of the 

consultants is reviewed and those whose performance is lacking can 
be warned, debarred for a period of one year or more depending upon 
the severity of the non-compliance.” 
 
 
4.10 On being asked about the quantum of  net losses incurred by the NHAI on 
account of failure of some PSCs to disc harge their obligations satisfactorily in 
accordance with the contract agreement, the Authority stated: -  
 
“Generally, no loss was allowed to  be incurred on account of any 
failure on the part of the PSCs. Wherever the work did not conform to 
the specifications, either suitable  recoveries were made from the 
contractors or the defects were got re ctified by the contractors at their 
cost.” 
 
 
4.11 When asked about the deficient role  of the PSCs, the Chairman, NHAI, 
during evidence replied thus: - 
“The same thing has been done in the appointment of Project 
Supervision Consultants where t heir key personnel is the most 
important factor because they are the people who really supervise the 
work at site, approve the work plan,  give day-to-day guidance to the 
contractor to undertake t he project as well as see that all the records 
and measurement books are properly k ept to be again checked by the 
concerned Project Director. For that, we see that the key personnel are 
not shifted very often. We have restrictions on that. We have restriction 
which says that they should not be shifted beyond 25 per cent. If they 
are shifted and that shifting ranges from 25 per cent to 33 per cent, 
then 5 per cent remunerat ion is reduced, if the shifting ranges from 33 
per cent to 50 per cent, 10 per cent remuneration is reduced and if the 
shifting goes beyond 50 per cent, we start action for issuing show-
cause notice and debarring. So, it is  very stringently specified that our 
quality of work should not be affected due to change of personnel. 
 
So, I would like to submit that we have followed very well laid-
out guidelines in spite of the difficulties in  getting so many DPR 
Consultants and Project Supervision  Consultants in one go, but we 
have followed well laid-out procedures which have been outlined in our 
note for selection of these people. Bu t it has been a fact that some of 
them had not performed to our satisfaction. In all such cases, wherever 
we have found such cases we have  taken action for the debarring of 
the Consultants or imposing financial penalties on them.” 

C.  Contractors  
 
4.12 NHAI was asked that bef ore awarding the contract s, how was it ensured 
that the concerned contractor  had the ability to mobili ze the required resources 
for executing the work in the light of the obs ervations made by the Audit?  In 
reply, they stated as under: - 
 “The contracts are awarded by NHAI by adopting the following 
procedure: 
 
(a) Pre-qualification of Bidders based on clearly laid down criteria of 
experience & turnover, pers onnel capability,  equipment 
capability, financial capability, bid capacity, litigation history, etc. 
(b) Invitation of Bids (Technical Bi ds & Financial Bids) from eligible 
pre-qualified Bidders. 
(c) Opening of Technical Bi ds and their evaluation. 
(d) Opening of Financial Bids of those whose Technical Bids have 
been found responsive and evaluation of financial bids. 
(e) Work awarded to L1 Bidder as per CVC guidelines. 
 
As can be seen from above, the cr iteria for pre-qualification of 
bidders establish ability of the C ontractor to mobilize the required 
resources for executing the work.” 

V.  STANDARDIZATION OF STRETCHES 
 
5.1 According to the Audit observation cont ained in Para 4.2, the cost in nine 
contracts in three sets of contiguous stretches awarded concurrently varied 
widely from Rs.1.86 crore to Rs.4.20 cr ore per km. This indicated deficient 
contract system, non-standar disation of contract pric e per unit length under 
similar site conditions etc., and was against Government directive, which 
mentioned that NHAI should co mpare cost of the stretches on a like to like basis 
and analyse the reasons for substantiv e variation. In the absence of 
standardisation of stretches, NHAI should have devised effective cost control 
system to address such variations.  Fu rther, as per the la test information 
available with the Audit, NHA I was yet to standardise the stretches or the Bill of 
Quantities (BOQ). 
5.2 When asked to comment on the above observation by Audit, NHAI in their 
written reply stated: - 
 
“NHAI had expressed reservations about the feasibility of 
implementation of C& AG’s observations on  standardization of 
stretches.  While standardization has  been achieved to the extent 
feasible by following a unifo rm policy on design standards and 
specifications in the field of hi ghway construction issued by IRC, 
MoSRT&H, BIS, etc., st andardization of the stre tches on per km basis 
is not possible because of a large number of variables involved in the 
cost estimation of the project such as variation in number of major 
bridges/structures, length of service roads, composition of carriageway 
owing to terrain and soil conditi ons, traffic volume, distance from 
source of materials, local constraint s in construction, etc. Similarly the 
project length also can not be st andardized because it depends upon 
the distance between important places, capacity of the Contractors and 
need for a variety in contract packaging so as to offer an opportunity to 
contract executing firms having varying capacities and capabilities.  
 
Standardization of stretches is al so not in vogue in States PWD 
or in respect of works awarded by Ministry.” 
 

5.3 The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways also replied in the 
same vein as NHAI and stated the following: - 
“Standardization of stretches is technically not possible for highway 
projects.  However, these were identified keeping in view the 
importance of connecting cities, ease of execution and technical/ 
financial capabilities of construction industry.” 
 
A. Standardization of Bill of Quantity 
 
5.4 The Audit in Chapter-5 has observed that, in 23 stretches test checked, 
quantities per km of bituminous course an d shoulders varied wi dely from 4 per 
cent to 1,280 per cent. The non- standardisation resulted in extra expenditure of 
Rs.260.98 crore.  It was m entioned in the Memorandum  of Important Points 
furnished by the C&AG that NHAI was yet to standardise the Bill of Quantities. 
5.5 When asked about the reasons for such variation and corrective action 
proposed by NHAI for standardizing of Bill of Quantities, the NHAI in their written 
reply mentioned-: 
“It is not feasible to standardize the per km quantity of the bituminous 
work, as bituminous pavement th ickness depends on various design 
parameter such as traffic density, ty pe of terrain, soils, CBR (California 
Bearing Ratio-parameter for soil strength), climatic condition etc.  Thus 
uniformity in thickness of bituminous layer in different packages cannot 
be achieved.  Moreover the pavem ents are made as per actual 
quantities executed in different packages and there is no extra 
payment made to the Contractor. Further, assuming the lowest 
quantity per km in a particular stretch as a standard is quite misleading 
and would lead to unfair co mparison.  As such, quantification of losses 
accrued on account of variation in cost of construction of similar kind of 
stretches may not be feasible. 
 
At the same time, learning fr om the past experiences, DPR 
preparation exercise has been stream lined and the projects are being 
got Peer reviewed by experts before initiation of bidding process. The 
major structures are also got proof  checked. Further, penalty clauses 
have been introduced in DPR consultancy contracts in case a variation 
exceeding + 15%.  In addition, the Variation Committee of NHAI at 
apex level examines and ensures that the variation in quantities is 
based on reasonable assessment and is allowed only if required.” 
 

5.6 The NHAI also stated that: - 
“The model contract documents relating to execution of Civil Works 
Contracts have already been finalized adopted in NHAI. However…. it 
is not feasible to standardize the Bill of Quantity as envisaged by the 
Auditors.  
 
The Standard bidding document stipulates (CoPA Clause No. 
52.2) that “No change in the rate or  price for any item contained in the 
BOQ shall be considered unless the act ual quantity of work executed 
under the item exceeds due to any r eason the quantity set out in the 
BOQ by more than 25% and if the cost  of the additional quantity at the 
BOQ rate exceeds by 1% of the initial contract price, the Engineer shall 
fix the new rate to allow for t he change in the quantity subject to 
restrictions under Sub-Clause 2.1, which requires the ‘Engineer’ to 
obtain specific prior appr oval of NHAI for issue of variations. The new 
rate fixed by the Engineer shall be applicable only to the quantity 
exceeding 1.25 times the BOQ quantity.  Further, the possibility of 
fixation of new rate in case of reduction in quantities of existing BOQ 
items has been deleted. 
The Engineer is now authorized to issue variation order upto 
25% of the value of individual BOQ item or 1% of contract Value, 
whichever is less and he shall obtain prior permission from and specific 
approval of the Employ er before issuing a variation under clause 51 
except if such variation would be wi thin the limits indicated above. It is 
added that as per clause 51.2 in GCC,  no instruction for variation is 
required for increase or decrease in the quantity of any work if such 
increase or decrease is the result of  the quantities exceeding or being 
less than those stated in the BOQ; however this has been deleted from 
the above sub-clause in COPA in the standard bidding document being 
now followed.” 
5.7 In their post evidence note on the issue of stan dardization of Bill of 
Quantity, the NHAI further submitted that: - 
“The BOQ in which every bidder filed the rate of the item was at the 
heart of the bidding process. The quant ities indicated in the BOQ were 
prepared by the DPR co nsultants on the basis of estimation of 
quantities of each item after preparing the Detail ed Project Report. In 
some cases of the earliest projects, the bids were invited even before 
the DPRs were prepared and the quantities indicated in the BOQ were 
approximate. The reason for doing this was that NHDP was to be 
launched in January 1999 after its announcement in October 1998 and 
there was not enough time to have the DPRs prepared.” 

VI.  TENDER EVALUATION SYSTEM 
 
A. Bidding  
6.1 According to Audit, NHAI did not  follow uniform system for tender 
evaluation. It awarded two bids  to second lowest bidder s at their bid prices not 
following its practice to urge the second lowest bidders to match their rates with 
the lowest bidders who could not qualify due to lack of bid capacity. This 
departure from normal practice resulted in excess cost of Rs.16.95 crore.  
 
6.2 In this connection, NHAI in t heir written reply submitted that: - 
“The Audit observations relate to packages I, II, and III of Surat-Manor 
project which were ADB funded proj ects. As per conditions stipulated 
in the bid, none of the bidders was elig ible for award of more than one 
contract package simultaneously. One contractor was L-1 in all the 
three packages. The lowest bidder wa s eligible for aw ard of only one 
package irrespective of being lowe st in other packages since he did 
not possess bid capacity for other packages. Accordingly, the contracts 
were awarded to L2 bidders who were deemed to be the lowest 
bidders in respect of those packages. The entire procurement was 
done as per the procurement guidelines of the ADB and the 
provisions for evaluation of bids  prohibit negotiations with the 
contractors. ADB approved the award of works. It may be mentioned 
that the contracts were  awarded under the ‘ least-cost’ to NHAI 
method taking into account the three packages as a whole and there 
was no loss to NHAI.” 
6.3 NHAI further added the following in their post –evidence note: -  
 
“The straitjacketed view that contra cts must invariably be awarded to 
the lowest bidder, and award to any bidder other than the lowest bidder 
must have been due to corruption motives needs to be rejected. It is 
not only the cheapest price that one looks for while awarding the 
contracts, but also the capability and capacity of  the bidder to execute 
the contract. If a bidder does not meet the requirements clearly and 
comprehensively set forth in the bid documents, he has to be declared 
non-responsive and the lowest price quotation by a non-responsive 
bidder is of no significance. Therefor e, the next lowest bidder does not 
have to match his price with that of the so-called lowest bidder.   
  

One can argue that bid conditions can be specified in a manner, 
which leaves scope for manipulating the process of award and favour 
some bidder. It is categorically stated that NHAI only adopted the ICB 
procedure already being followed and did nothing of substance to 
change the ICB procedures.   
 
The submission being made in the following sub-paras is that as 
per the prescribed procedure award of  contracts did not necessarily 
have to be made to the lowest bidder.    
 
(a)  Inadequate bid capacity 
ICB procedures required the bidders to possess a certain 
minimum experience, financial strengt h, and available capacity to bid 
for the work. As per the procedure,  no work could be awarded to a 
bidder if his bid capacity was less t han the cost of the work for which 
bids were invited, even if the bi dder happened to be the lowest bidder. 
In such cases the bidder was to  be considered a non-responsive 
bidder and his lower bid price did not entitle him to the award of work. 
In award of multiple packages, sometimes it so happened that some 
bidders quoted for more than one package and offered the lowest 
price, but could not be awarded all the pack ages for lack of bid 
capacity. In such an event the bi dding procedure required that such 
bids be declared non-responsive and the next lowest responsive 
bidder be considered for award. The procedures did not permit that the 
second lowest bidder be asked to match his price with the lowest 
bidder.  The logic of this is that once the lowest bidder is declared non-
responsive, the price quoted by hi m is of little significance in 
determining the market price. There is  a strong merit in this provision; 
otherwise some unscrupulous non-seri ous bidders could subvert the 
bidding process by quoting unrealisti cally low price difficult to be 
matched by the next lowest responsive bidder.    
 
(b)  Domestic Price preference 
The bid conditions of the externally aided projects provided for a 
domestic price preference clause  whereby a domestic bidder was 
entitled to award of cont ract if his price was wit hin 7.5 % of the lowest 
foreign bidder. As a result, in some cases work was awarded to a 
bidder who was not the lowest. In the absence of any provision in the 
bid conditions for the winning bidder  to match the bid price with the 
lowest bidder, the work was awarded to the second lowest bidder at 
his cost. On hindsight the provis ion of domestic price preference 
leading to award of wo rk at a cost higher t han the lowest price may 
look incongruous. However, in t he past this provision had been made 
as a matter of policy only to protect the domestic bidders in an 
international competitive proce ss, and even the external lending 

agencies had accepted this.  NHAI had simply followed the same 
conditions.   
 
(c)  Provisional sums and day work 
As per ICB procedures, certain item s were to be included in the 
bid as ‘Provisional Sums’ and ‘Day Works’. The bidders were required 
to quote rates against these items and the employer was at liberty to 
get these items executed in full or in  part or not at all. As per bid 
conditions, the prices quoted against these items were not supposed to 
be reckoned in the evaluatio n of bids. In some cases it turned out that 
the bidders ranking changed if the quotations of provisional sums were 
taken into account. That was ignored because this was not as per bid 
conditions.  There is a sound basi s for not including provisional sums 
in the evaluation process. If the conditions stipulated in the bid 
documents have been followed, it is not correct to view the award of 
such contracts as irregular just on the basis that the ranking of the 
bidders changed after taking into account the provisional sums items. 
 
The instances cited above woul d give the impression that 
irregularities have been committed in award of contracts, which might 
be with corrupt motives. However, as  explained above, so long as the 
bid conditions were followed strictly, motive of corruption would not 
hold. It may further be stated that such conditions were not imposed by 
NHAI themselves, but were already a part of ICB procedures, which 
NHAI had to invariably follow in case  of externally aided contracts. 
Keeping in view the fact that these procedures were in vogue 
internationally, NHAI adopted them in  non-externally aided contracts 
as well.”  
 
B. Customs/ Excise Duty 
6.4 As stated by Audit, the Governm ent exempted (August 1995) all goods 
supplied and machinery us ed in projects approved by it and funded by 
multilateral lending agencies like the Wo rld Bank and Asian Development Bank 
from levy of customs/excise duties. While calling for bids for stretches funded by 
the World Bank, NHAI failed to include a clause in the Notice Inviting Tenders 
that the bidders should quot e the prices excluding cu stoms/excise duties as 
exemptions were available to them.  This resulted in  undue benefit of Rs.30.69 
crore to five contractors. 
 

6.5 On being asked to comment on this  serious observation, NHAI in their 
reply stated: - 
“As per the Government of India’ s policy, certain exemptions have 
been granted by the Government of India in respect of duty free import 
of goods, removal of goods without pay ment of excise duty, etc., for 
use of such goods for execution of  the projects funded by the World 
Bank / Asian Development Bank and approved by the Government of 
India. As per this poli cy, exemption is availabl e to all those who meet 
the requirements prescri bed in the Government of India’s exemption 
notification irrespective of any specific mention in the contract awarded 
by NHAI. Moreover, these exempti ons already existed before the 
contracts were awarded to the contract ors. It would, t herefore, not be 
legal for NHAI to recover the benefit availed by the contractors in view 
of the exemption notifications of t he Government of India since NHAI’s 
action would restrict the benefit given by the Sovereign.” 
 
6.6 In their post evidence r eply, NHAI further added that: - 
“….No bidder would risk loading his bid with these duties, which are 
exempt, and loose his competitive position with respect to other 
bidders. As such, the alleged overpay ment arising out of this alleged 
act of omission has no sound basis.” 
 
6.7 In this regard, the Ministry in  their post- evidence reply stated: - 
“As per the Government of India’ s policy, certain exemptions have 
been granted by the Government of I ndia in respect of duty free import 
of goods, removal of goods without pay ment of excise duty, etc., for 
use of such goods for execution of  the projects funded by the World 
Bank / Asian Development Bank and approved by the Government of 
India. As per this poli cy, exemption is availabl e to all those who meet 
the requirements as prescribed in the Government of India’s exemption 
notification irrespective of any specific mention in the contract awarded 
by NHAI.  Accordingly, when the bids  were invited, the exemption was 
already available in a ccordance with the Government of India’s Policy 
and as long as there was no ment ion in the contract / bidding 
document that the exemption as per the Government of India’s Policy 
would not be available to the bidder s, the bidders were entitled for 
such benefit. Moreover, in the pre-bid meeting held with the 
prospective bidders, it was made clear to them that excise and custom 
duty exemption on all the material and equipment to be used for the 
project will be applicable as per the rules and concerned clause 73.4 of 
the Condition of Part icular Application (COPA).  As such, the 
bids/costing of the bidders were bas ed on the fact that the custom and 
excise exemption as per the Government of India’s notification would 

be available to them. Further, this  was also the basis on which the 
certificates were issued to the cont ractors of projects funded by World 
Bank/ADB to avoid the custom and excise duty exemption. The 
exemptions already existed before t he contracts were awarded to the 
contractors.   
 
Accordingly, it cannot be said that the action of NHAI resulted 
into excess payment to the contract ors.  Further, since the contractors 
availed the benefits as per the policy of Government  of India, existing 
prior to entering into contract; it would not be legally tenable to deny 
this to the contractor.” 

VII. CONTRACT MANAGEMENT 
 
A.  Bank Guarantees (BGs) 
 
7.1 The Audit in Chapter 7 of the Report had observed that the system of 
obtaining and verifying the Bank Guar antees (BGs) was not  strong enough to 
ensure invoking BGs when required. NHAI had lost money in two cases. In this 
regard, the NHAI was asked to explain the purpose of obtaining the Bank 
Guarantees, how this system works for safeguarding the inte rest of NHAI and 
further, what justification NHAI had to offer on this observation of the Audit. In 
their written reply, NHAI stated that: -   
 
“In order to safeguard/pr otect the interests of the client (i.e., NHAI) 
from various risks/eventualities, cond itions for submission of various 
bank guarantees (BG) exist in the c ontract. The types of the bank 
guarantees and the purpose for which they are asked to be submitted 
by the contractors/consultants are as under- 
 
Type of Bank Guarantee Purpose 
Performance Security  This is required to be submitted to NHAI 
guaranteeing the successful performance by 
the contractors/consultants under the contract, 
failing which NHAI can invoke the bank 
guarantees to recover the damages suffered 
due to non-performance of the 
contractors/consultants.  
Mobilization and Equipment 
Advance Bank Guarantees  
Under the contracts, different upfront advances 
are required to be paid by NHAI, subject to 
recovery out of future running bills/invoices. 
Accordingly, these advances are paid against 
bank guarantees as security so as to protect 
NHAI in the event of default in repayment by 
the contractors/consultants. 
Retention Money This is required as security for release of 
retention money in cash and to protect NHAI in 
the event of non-rectification of defective works 
to be carried out by the contractors. 
Bid Security This is required to be submitted along with the 
bid so as to protect NHAI in the event of the 
successful bidder backing out and not signing 
the contract to execute the work.  
 

In the present case, the bank gu arantees were submitted by the 
contractors. However, later on t he bank guarantees submitted in the 
case of six projects were found to  be forged. When the matter came to 
the notice of NHAI, the contract s were terminated and NHAI, apart 
from filing FIR, initiat ed legal actions for recovery from the contractors 
against the forged bank guarantees. The matter is currently pending in 
Arbitration.” 
 
7.2 On being asked what steps hav e since been taken by the NHAI to 
strengthen the system of obtaining and verifying the Bank Guarantees (BGs)/ the 
NHAI replied that: - 
 “NHAI has since institutionalized a full proof system of verifying bank 
guarantees. Guidelines for strengthening the system of verification of 
the bank guarantees have been issued.  As per the instructions, the 
issuance of bank guarantees (BG) is verified from the issuing branch 
as also from the controlling branch. As a matter of a full proof system, 
the issuance of the bank  guarantees is got personally verified by an 
officer of NHAI before it’s acc eptance. Thus, a robust system of 
verification of the bank guarantees is in place. Since introduction of 
these measures, no case of forged BGs has been noticed.” 
 
B.  Price Escalation 
7.3 According to Audit observation in Pa ra 7.1.2, the contra ct provisions in 
respect of 17 contracts in respect of the regulation of pr ice adjustment due to 
escalation were inconsistent with the gener al conditions of contracts. In eleven 
contracts, the escalation was provided on all permanent works,  variation items 
and day works. In two contracts esca lation was provided for permanent and 
variation items and in fifteen contracts, escalation was prov ided for variation 
items only. NHAI erred in making different  provisions in the contracts by not 
adhering explicitly to standard conditions. The ambiguity in the contract clauses 
in these contracts led to different interp retations. NHAI initially withheld the price 
escalation claims but subsequently released Rs. 120.08 crore as price escalation 
against receipt of BGs. The price escalation was paid with total disregard to the 
opinion of Ministry of Law (April 2004) that no price e scalation was payable in 
these contracts. Similarly,  NHAI allowed price escalation in 17 stretches in unit 
rates without deducting the profit elements from these rates due to defects in the 

contract clauses, which result ed in avoidable overpayment  of Rs.4.57 crore.  As 
per the latest position indicated by the Audit, NHAI has standardized the clause 
70.3 of Condition of Particul ar Applications (COPA), which regulates the price 
variations.  In respect of recovery of Rs.120.08 crore, NHAI could collect only 
11.52 crore and the balance is yet to be recovered (June 2006). 
 
7.4 When asked why there were deviati ons in the contract clauses, NHAI 
replied that: - 
“The bidding documents were prepar ed based on the international 
standard bidding document similar to  ADB / World Bank. This was 
adopted to have a uniform bidding o ffer from the Contractors from 
different countries as bids were being called at International level.  
 
Since a number of Consultants were involved in the preparation 
of DPR for the various projects, t he escalation payment clauses in the 
bid-documents were worded differently  in the draft bidding documents. 
Accordingly, in 15 of the civil works contracts falling under the 
Chennai-Kolkata section of NH-5 (Golden Quadrilateral), the escalation 
was not payable on permanent works as per the provisions of the 
contracts signed.” 
 
7.5 NHAI also stated that: - 
“The total amount paid to the Cont ractors against price escalation 
under the above 15 contracts works out to Rs.77.71 crore (and not 
Rs.120.08 crore as pointed out by the Auditors). Out of this, an amount 
of Rs.11.73 crore have already been recovered and balance amount of 
Rs.65.98 crore (and not Rs.108.56 crore pointed out by the Auditors) is 
to be recovered.”   
 
7.6 When asked what opinion was t endered by the Law Ministry on price 
escalation, NHAI submitted that: - 
“The Law Ministry opined t hat price variation is not available in those 
agreements where it is not found in the express language. As per the 
Law Ministry, every word in the contract has to be ascribed a meaning. 
Similarly, an agreement cannot be re-written by addition of any word 
and nothing more can be added to the agreement. 
NHAI paid price escalation to the Contractors pending opinion of 
the Ministry of Law, with the c ondition that the same would be 
recovered in the event of denial by the Ministry of Law. 

However, after the opinion of the Law Ministry was received, 
NHAI took an immediate decision to recover the amounts already paid. 
Guidelines were issued to secure the price escalation and for recovery 
of amounts already paid once 75% progress is achieved subject to the 
condition that the entire recovery is completed by the time 90% 
progress of the work is achieved.  
 
Accordingly, NHAI did not pay the price escalation in 
disregard to the advice of the Law Ministry.” 
 
7.7 On this issue, the Chairman, Audit Board stated: -  
“Regarding payment of Excise Duty, it  is not anybody’s case that Duty 
should be paid. But the net effect of what has happened is that the 
contractors have received Duty from the Authority and also they again 
received the fund from the revenue aut horities. So, they have really 
gained and the Authority has los t. The Authority has made payment 
which is not due because there is no exemption. This is what has 
happened. It has been our experience t hat this provision is a routine 
provision in case of Duty exem ption and then the contractors are 
expected to refund to the Body who has  initially paid it. It is a simple 
thing. There is no legal complicati on and things like that. I thought, it 
should be clarified and later on t he Government can clarify it……..On 
the ground the contractor s got the Duty exempti on from the Authority 
and then they got the refund also. That  is how it appears to me unless 
there is a very different kind of clar ification. Secondly , regarding this 
case our only point was that this  decision to pay could perhaps have 
been deferred…….” 
 
7.8 When it was asked by the Committ ee whether the Ministry and the NHAI 
could assure them that t he amount would be fully recovered with interest, the 
Secretary Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, replied: -  
“Observation of the CAG is that this  situation would not have arisen if 
the NHAI had adopted uniform and unambiguous cont ract provisions.  
This situation has actually aris en because the contract documents 
were imperfect.  There was a flaw in it because of which the situation 
has arisen.  This has come up bef ore the Ministry on a number of 
occasions and the subsequent contra ct agreement drawn up by NHAI 
for the works which they are now executing would take care of 
recurrence of such matters.  I thin k these took place in the earlier 
period of Golden Quadrilateral Projects .  I do not think it would recur 
again.   As far as this specific issue is concerned, every effort would be 
made by the Government.  We would not  want to put any rider in this 

regard.  We would do our best to recover it.  It need not be stated that 
anything we do is subject to Court Orders.” 
 
C.  Consultancy Charges  
7.9 The Audit in Para 7.1.4 has observ ed that the Government had instructed 
(December 2000) NHAI to restrict consultancy charges to six per cent of contract 
price.  However, NHAI did not evolve  standardized price evaluation criteria 
resulting in failure to restrict the cost of supervision consultancy to six per cent. 
The actual percentage ranged between 1.49 and 11.16 in 32 cases. Higher cost 
of supervision consultancy in excess of Government’s approval resulted in extra 
cost of Rs.22.35 crore in 12 stretches wo rked out with reference to the ceiling of 
six per cent. 
7.10 NHAI in their written reply to this query clarified that: - 
“While according the approval for implementation of NHDP Phase-I, an 
overall estimated cost of Rs.30, 300 crores was approved by the 
Government (i.e., the approval did no t contain project-wise approval). 
The overall estimate of Rs.30, 300 crore included a provision for 
supervision consultancy @ 6% of the cost of civil works.  
 
The cost of supervision consultancy across the projects, 
however, generally vary depending upon the size of the team required 
to be deployed, type of key-per sonnel required to be deployed, 
presence of international staff as par t of the team (thi s is mandatory in 
the case of projects funded by the World Bank/Asian Development 
Bank/Japan Bank for International Cooperation) and the cost of the 
project. Accordingly, whil e in majority of the projects, the cost of 
supervision consultancy for each proj ect has been less than 6% of the 
cost of civil works, in the case of  some of the projects, the same is 
more than 6% of the cost of civi l works for the reasons explained 
above. 
 
However, the overall cost of su pervision consultancy is within 
6% of the overall cost of civil works (i.e., against a provision of Rs.1649 
crores, being 6% of the ov erall awarded cost of ci vil works, the actual 
awarded cost of supervision consultan cy is Rs.879 crore resulting into 
a saving of Rs.770 crore). Accordingly, this is within the approval of the 
Government.” 
 
 
 

D.  Release of Retention Money 
7.11 Audit in Para 7.1.6 has observ ed that NHAI allowed the release of 
Retention Money without adjusting the se cured advances and without imposing 
interest. 
 
7.12 When asked to comment on this obs ervation of the Audit, NHAI stated 
that: - 
 “The contracts signed between NHAI and the contractors provide for 
deduction of retention money at a specified percentage of the work 
done, to be released at the stages defined in the contracts. It was 
observed that different provisions existed for release of retention 
money. While some contracts prescr ibed for release of retention 
money secured against a bank guarantee at the option of the 
contractor, other contracts prescribed for release in only two stages 
after the completion of the project. This was unintentional. The matter 
was examined in detail by NHAI and it was felt that: - 
 
(a) There was a necessity to bring in uniformity for release of 
retention money against bank guarantees. 
 
(b) It was observed that the projects require adequate liquidity for 
keeping the progress of the proj ect at a desired level after the 
recovery of the mobilization advances start. Accordingly, 
release of money at that point of time would help in improving 
the cash flow for the project. 
 
(c) Since NHAI is already accepting various bank guarantees as 
security under the contract, it was considered that the release 
of retention money against bank guarantee(s) would in no way 
dilute the issue of security available with NHAI. 
 
Accordingly, uniform provision for release of retention money at 
different intervals was prescrib ed. The release was made against 
submission of bank g uarantees by the contra ctors. Subsequently, the 
release also attracted interest @ 6% pa.” 
 
E.  Key Personnel 
7.13 Audit in Para 7.2.5 has observed that the key personnel  mentioned in the 
bid documents were changed frequently.  The Mi nistry in their latest reply to 

Audit has stated that additional security provisions including penalty were being 
introduced. 
7.14 NHAI further clarified that: - 
“For any replacement of personnel (except for the reason other than 
death/extreme medical grounds/on client’s written request), the 
remuneration to be paid to any of the key personnel provided as a 
replacement shall be 95% of the re muneration which would have been 
payable to the key personnel replaced .  Further for total replacement 
up to 33% of key personnel remunerat ion shall be reduced by 5%, for 
total replacement between 33% and 50%, remuneration shall be 
reduced by 10% and for total replacement beyond 50% of the total of 
key personnel, action for terminati on/debarment of such Consultants 
for future projects of NHAI may be initiated.  
 
Further if it is found that t he key personnel has left the project 
on his own at any stage, a show cause notice is issued by NHAI and 
thereafter the key personnel is debarred for future projects of NHAI for 
a period of at least one year.” 
 
 

 
VIII.  TOLL REVENUE 
A. Delay in Toll- Notification 
8.1 According to Audit, there was a loss of toll revenue of Rs.42.23 crore in 
respect of four stretches due to delay in  issue of Gazette Notification (Rs.4.62 
crore), late handing over of site (Rs.4.05 cr ore), non-finalisation of site for the toll 
plaza (Rs.30.75 crore) and law and order problem (Rs.2.81 crore). 
 
8.2 When asked why there were abnormal delays in getting toll- Notifications 
by NHAI or issue of Gazette Notification by the Ministry, NHAI replied that: - 
“It may be appreciated that tolling is  an entirely new concept in India 
and to operationalize and streamline t he same, initially it needed some 
time. Initially, at the time of in troduction of toll, there were some 
procedural delays in the issuance of the Gazette notifications. Toll 
notifications are based on the input provided by NHAI, which have 
since been standardiz ed except certain specific project 
details/clarifications which vary from project to project.  Presently, the 
system has been streamlined and NHAI has been ensuring that the 
required notifications for levy of to ll are published well in advance and 
fee collection is started as per the schedule without  any loss of 
revenue, unless there are justified/unavoidable reasons.” 
 
8.3 It was also asked what steps were being taken by NHAI to get timely toll 
Notification and arrangements made to coll ect the toll with no loss of time.  In 
reply, NHAI submitted: - 
 “Advance action is being taken in  NHAI based on the anticipated 
completion date and it is  followed up vigorously with the respective 
Project Directors of NHAI to submit proposal for issuance of fee 
notification at least 150 days in advance before completion of the 
project. Even after the submission of the draft notification, it is followed 
up both in the DoRT&H, Ministry of Law and Ministry of Law (OL) wing. 
A Nodal Officer has also been appointed in NHAI (in the rank of GM) to 
make necessary follow up regardi ng the fee notifications with the 
DoRT&H and the Ministry of Law.” 
 
 
 

8.4 Regarding procedural safeguards since been evolved by NHAI for non-
recurrence of lapses in future, they submitted as under: - 
“As regards procedural safeguards,  various guidelines have been 
issued to streamline various processe s, which include guidance to the 
PIUs for submission of fee notification within a st rict time schedule and 
in the prescribed format. The locations of the toll plaza and the tollable 
length have also been finalized fo r GQ. For NSEW, the same is under 
finalization. For construction of toll plaza, various guidelines have been 
issued so that the same is complet ed along with the co mpletion of the 
tollable stretch. Thus a robust system has been introduced with 
respect to collection of toll so that the toll collection st arts without loss 
of time and revenue.” 
 
B. Leakages in Collection of Toll Revenue 
 
8.5 On the problem of leakages in collection of toll revenue and measures 
taken to check it, NHAI further replied in their post-evidence note that: - 
“The leakage in departmental fee collection has always been a matter 
of concern for NHAI. NHAI has made continuous serious efforts in this 
area by taking various steps. Cons idering problem of leakage of 
revenue in departmental collection system, fee collection was switched 
over through Private Contractor. However, the experience in this 
system has not been encouraging as  large number of complaints 
started coming from road users regarding overcharging/harassment. 
Accordingly, matter has been reviewed  in Ministry and it was decided 
on 04.05.2006 to revert back to depar tmental collection primarily 
through DGR agencies as an interim m easure. Ministry also issued 
guidelines for implementation of Operate, Maintain and Transfer (OMT) 
contracts. In OMT, pr ivate entrepreneur is selected on the basis of 
competitive bidding, who would be responsible for maintenance, 
operation and toll collection against payment of a fixed sum to NHAI 
periodically or upfront against retent ion of toll. The Model Concession 
Agreement for OMT is under consider ation of Inter Ministerial Group 
(IMG). Till implementation of OMT, departmental collection through ex-
servicemen is to be continued as directed by Ministry.” 
 
Measures Taken To Check Leakages 
To prevent leakages, NHAI has adopted a 3 tier system in which 
various control measures are underta ken at field, HQ and Vigilance 
levels detailed as under: 
 
i) Checks organized/undertaken at Field Level 

a). NHAI, vide Circular no. NHAI/Commercial Operation/47 dated 
19.10.2004, for the purpose of conducting frequent surprise 
checks, has authorised Project Directors at field level to conduct 
following checks by hiring outside agency in order to improve 
administration of user fee collection: 
1. Discreet counting and recording of vehicle at some 
distance from plaza and comparing with actual vehicles 
recorded by collecting agency. 
2. Sending decoy customer. 
3. On the spot observation of  fee collection for 72 hours 
continuously. 
b). Further, as per circular no. NHAI/Commercial Operation/54 
dated 09.02.2005; Project Direc tors have been authorized to 
engage local fee auditors through co mpetitive bidding.  Scope 
of work of local fee auditors in cludes complete checking of all 
financial transactions, review of existing collection system, on 
the spot observation of collectio n of user fee, conducting at 
least four surprise verifications  in a month mainly targeting 
towards cash verification, det ecting use of forged tickets, 
noting down registration on num ber of vehicle crossing the 
plaza from some distance and company with actual record. 
c). Engagement of round the clock supervision for supervising toll 
collection activities at the to ll plaza is another mechanism 
adopted for improving revenue admini stration.  It is normally a 
part of supervision consultancy contracts.  In case, supervision 
consultant is not engaged on a particular stretch, Project 
Director is authorized to engage round the clock supervisors 
through Charted Accountant firm/secu rity agency.  It is critical 
control mechanism in departmental collection as it involves a 
continuous control over the activities of the booth operators.   
ii) Checks organized/undertaken at HQ Level: 
Following checks are conducted from HQ level: 
a) 72 hours plus spot study of fee collection:  Earlier, such checks 
were undertaken either for 72 hours or for 7 days through 
PricewaterhouseCoopers.  Now, a panel consisting of three 
firms finalized after competitive bidding has been formed who 
undertake these studies in two phases. In Phase I, 100 % 
collection is observed (with or without video or mechanical 
recording, as instructed) wit h analysis, com parison with past 
trends and conclusion and in Phas e II, depending upon findings 
of Phase I, matter is referred to legal advice for finding out the 

further course of action like reco veries etc within the contractual 
framework. 
b) Study of discreet observations : Three firms after competitive 
bidding have been engaged  to undertake this study. In this, the 
representatives of the agencies try to cross the plaza for a 
number of times by offering less  amount than notified user fee 
and record their findings. In additi on, they also try to record the 
number of vehicles passing through the plaza during a brief time 
frame. This study gives an idea of  prevalence of malpractices at 
the plaza. Based on which, ch eck of continuous observation as 
detailed under Para (a) above, is conducted to find out the 
extent of leakage. After deta iled analyses of reports, short 
collection is calculated and reco vered from the fee collecting 
agencies.  
 
c) From time to time, officers of Commercial Operation (CO) wing 
also visit plazas for acquaintance and gathering first hand 
information about working of various plazas and carrying out 
some preliminary checks.  
 
iii)  Control Measures by Vigilance Division:  
 
The Vigilance Wing has taken a pr oactive role in monitoring of 
the Toll Plazas and taken a nu mber of steps enumerated as 
under:  
  
a) A separate post of Manager and Assistant Manager has been 
created to handle the toll matters. This new activity has taken 
shape in the month of June 2006.  
 
b) As a preliminary six Toll Plazas have been inspected by the 
Vigilance Wing in the month of  June 2006 and July 2006. The 
inspections have focused on discreet observation of traffic 
crossing the Toll Plazas and actual working of staff.  
 
c) In order to have more focus ed inspections and scrutiny, based 
on the preliminary inspections proformas have been devised for 
calling statistics and data from t he Toll Plazas. The data so 
collected would be analyzed further  to see the trend of Toll fee 
collection and to recommend corrective steps where necessary.  
 
d) A database of Toll Plazas is being created to have a complete 
profile of the Toll Plazas and its performance in toll fee 
collection so that they are monitored in terms of their 
performance.  
 

e) The Vigilance Wing is active ly involved in the process and 
monitors the progress through periodic meetings with the 
technical division and the IT Division at Headquarters. 
 
 Further, to minimize leakages, th ere is continuous emphasis for 
full computerization of the Toll Pl azas to improve their performance 
and to offer better service to the users. The NHAI has computerized 42 
Toll Plazas out of 53 publicly fun ded Toll Plazas. Here the Tickets are 
generated on computer at the Toll Booths and the transactions are 
recorded in servers. As on date only at 11 locations, the work is being 
done manually and these are in the process of computerization. These 
are scheduled to be computerized by Oct’2006 end. In order to achieve 
better benchmarks, many new initiati ves have been taken. All the Toll 
Plazas are being connected through LAN/WAN with a central database 
at Headquarter. This will give a ccess to user fee information to 
Headquarters on real time basis. A new Toll fee collection software 
(TFCS) developed by M/s CMC Ltd. is gradually being introduced in all 
the Toll Plazas to make the syst em more transparent and secure. 
These Toll Plazas will also have CCTV systems installed to have better 
monitoring of the Toll Booths at ground level.”  
 
C.  Foreclosure of Contract with Toll-collecting Agency 
8.6 According to Audit, NHAI did not take timely acti on in foreclosure of the 
contract with a toll-collect ing agency that def aulted in its payments as per the 
terms of agreement. This resulted in non-recovery of Rs.31.26 crore. When 
asked to explain, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence replied: -  
 
 “In this case, the contractor himself w ent to the court.  I think this case 
is perhaps related to Ganapathy Toll which is operat ing in Kotputli 
Jaipur Section.  He went to the c ourt where he lost in our favour.  He 
went to the double bench where the judgement was against NHAI.  
Then NHAI went to the Supreme Court.  Because of this litigation and 
as per the advice given by the Additional Solicitor General  at that time, 
we were not in a position to foreclose the contract because in any case 
the contract was for two years ti me. Since the detailed hearing had 
taken place in the honourable Supr eme Court, that was the reason 
why we were not in a position to foreclose the contract.  The moment 
the contract period was over, the co llection operation were taken over 
according to the contract provisions .  As per the directions of the 
Supreme Court arbitration proceedi ngs are on and based on that, 
recovery would be made.” 

8.7 When the Committee asked the representatives of the Ministry whether 
any responsibility was fixed by them in this regard and that  had the NHAI and 
Ministry appropriately and properly monitored, this would not have happened, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways replied: - 
“No. We have not fixed any respons ibility so far though the Ministry 
does monitor the progress of NHAI.  I could not say that each and 
every occurrence of this kind results in litigation is dealt with 
immediately.  At some stage, it co mes to the notice of the Ministry 
when it goes to the court but the Ministry is not in a position to take 
preventive action.  As far as this ma tter is concerned, we will go into it 
and if we feel that there is negligence or anyone  is responsible, we will 
take suitable steps.”
 

IX. RESTRUCTURING OF NHAI  
 
9.1 Prior to the launching of NHDP, NHAI undertook small-scale projects. 
Only when the NHDP was launched, the scope of NHAI was expanded to a much 
larger level. In this connection, NHAI stated that: - 
“In 1995, when the Aut hority (NHAI) was set up, its mandate was 
limited to implementation of a few ADB assisted works. Between 1995-
1998, a few more projects were entrusted to NHAI by MoRT&H. It was, 
however, in 1998 that the mandate was enlarged exp onentially. In 
order to cope with the expanded m andate, the following steps were 
taken- 
• It was decided to continue with t he same implementation model 
as was being followed for the ADB funded projects entrusted to 
NHAI as well as the 2 nd World Bank project implemented by the 
Ministry through State PWDs. The model is based on the 
outsourcing of various activities (design, construction, 
supervision, etc.) rather than under taking all activities through 
its own staff. This would result  in a lean structure of the 
organization and leverage ma rket resources for DPR 
preparation, construction and day to day supervision lead to 
faster decision making critical for timely implementing the 
ambitious project of NHDP. This  system of implementation was 
discussed in detail in the meetin g taken by Secretary, Planning 
Commission on 14.09.99 as the Department of Economic 
Affairs; Ministry of Finance had in its comments on the cabinet 
note for the NHDP highlighted the need for deciding the manner 
of implementation of th is gigantic project. Supervision by State 
PWDs was ruled out. It was felt that a new kind of construction 
culture was being adopted by NHAI and this should be given a 
try. The minutes of the abov e discussion were appended with 
the cabinet note that was a pproved by the Cabinet on 5
th April 
2000. 
• The Board of NHAI was restructured with the approval of the 
Cabinet in April 2000 with a view  to ensuring participation at 
Secretary level from the Depar tment of Expenditure, Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Ro ad Transport & Highways. The 
Authority was delegated substantial powers to enable 
expeditious approval of the pr ojects without compromising due 
diligence. This was also aimed at empowering the Authority 
sufficiently to substitute EFC/PIB for various approvals 
regarding NHDP. 

• It was not feasible for NHAI to create a cadre of it’s own in such 
a short time and therefore, experienced and skilled officers were 
recruited from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
various PWDs and other relat ed organizations on deputation 
basis. Special exemption was also sought from the DoPT for the 
rule of immediate absorption fo r such officers. The authority 
created posts and made appointments thereon from time to time 
keeping in view the requirements for undertaking the works of 
NHDP.  
• In order to assess the requirem ent of personnel, the norms for 
various positions (such as GMs, DGMs, Managers, etc.) were 
fixed and approval was obtained in the 27th meeting of the NHAI 
Board on 25 th January 2000. Based on the norms, the 
manpower strength was augmented from time to time. 
• Norms were fixed for creation of the Project Implementation 
Units (PIUs) for an effective implementation of the projects. 
• For further strengthening of NH AI and to equip to meet the 
challenges ahead, the Authorit y appointed (May 2002) Price 
Waterhouse Coopers-Inter Continental Technocrats Ltd. (PWC-
ICT) (Joint Venture) as consul tant to advise on institutional 
strengthening. M/s PWC-ICT pr epared a number of detailed 
reports containing specific recommendations on organization 
development, human resource management, strengthening of 
processes and systems, information technology, etc. These 
have been debated internally wi thin NHAI and a number of 
actions have already been initiated.  
• A Steering Group (SG) under Shri S.C. Sharma, Ex-DG (RD) & 
AS was subsequently constituted in 2001 by the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways to wo rk on the standardization of 
procedures, documents and manuals for implementation of 
NHDP. A Committee was also set up by NHAI under a Member 
(Tech.) including outside experts for standardization of 
documents.  Most of the doc uments for procurement of 
contractors and consultants have been standardized on the 
basis of Committee’s recommendations. 
• NHAI had also set up an internal committee to study the lessons 
learnt in the light of  the experience of the implementation of the 
first phase of NHDP in order to refine the process of 
procurement for civil works and supervision consultants. 
As explained above, NHAI was in a mission mode to complete 
the task assigned to it and adequat e steps were taken to enhance the 
capacity, as and when required. No w, with the increased mandate and 
challenges of handling projects on Pu blic-Private Partnership (PPP), 

NHAI is gearing up by re-structuri ng by making it a multi-disciplinary 
body with high quality financial management and contract 
management expertise. Proposal fo r re-structuring of NHAI has 
already been finalized by the Inte r-Ministerial Committee constituted 
for this purpose. In the proposal  there is a focus on creating 
specialized cells for Planning and Quality assurance, Research and 
Development, Standardization and Project Appraisal.” 
 
9.2 In this regard, the Mi nistry submitted that: - 
 
“…In the year 2000…NHAI Board wa s restructured with Chairman, 
NHAI of the rank of Secretary to Govt. of India, five full time 
members of NHAI of t he rank of Joint Secr etary (now upgraded to 
Additional Secretary) to Govern ment of India, four part time 
members including Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of 
Expenditure), Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport (Deptt. Road 
Transport & Highways), Secret ary Planning Commission and 
Director General (Road Development) and Additional Secretary.” 
 
9.3 On being asked whether they w ould need a fresh amendment to the 
existing Act in order to provide the requi site impetus and support to complete the 
NHDP, the Chairman, NHAI during evidence replied: - 
 “As far as the problem of fresh legal framework is concerned, we are 
operating under the National  Highways Authority of  India Act of 1988.  
As far as the proposal for going in  a larger way with the private 
participants in road projects is concerned, I would submit that there is a 
necessity for reorienting the total organisation towards undertaking the 
PPP type of projects. For this, the expertise which is lacking in the 
NHAI has to be developed. I mean the expertise for project appraisal of 
PPP Projects, expertise on contra ct management which still becomes 
very critical when you are giving the project to the concessionnaire 
over a period of 25-30 years. So , contract management becomes a 
very key element as also the type of contracting we do under the PPP 
Projects.  The expertise has to be developed. So, in the process of 
institutional strengthening, it has been thought of how to strengthen the 
NHAI to undertake such massive proj ects right up to Phase-VII as has 
been shown in the slide.  For that purpose, we are thinking of setting 
up the Project Appraisal Cell, the Contract Management Cell, 
Standardisation and R&D Ce ll. Standardisation is  also an important 
area. It has been pointed out in the Audit Repor t. So, we will do our 
best regarding that. Then, a lot of lega l and arbitration cases are likely 
to come up. So, there should be a separate Legal and Arbitration Cell 
which will take care of that.   

  
Then, there is the issue of road safety because there are a lot of 
accidents likely to happen. So, ther e should be a Road Safety Cell.  
Like that, we should have an Internal  Audit Cell. We have started the 
process of internal audit in a big way. We have sent audit teams to all 
our PIUs to audit the expenditure incurred at the PIU level. So, we 
want to strengthen this. This is one of the things. 
 
 The other thing at the corporat e level is this. Following the 
principle of corporate governance, we have to set up Audit Committee. 
It should be under an independent member. So, the Audit Committee 
should be set up. That wil l require that the B oard of NHAI should be 
expanded suitably which also finds  a reflection in the report on 
institutional strengthening.” 
 
9.4 In their post evidence note, NHAI stated that: - 
“Keeping in view the enhanced mandat e and change in focus from the 
EPC contracts to PPP projects, NHAI is in the process of strengthening 
the institution. A proposal of restructuring of NHA I has been prepared 
by Inter-Ministerial Committee, which has subsequently been 
discussed in the meeting of Committ ee of Secretaries. Some of the 
recommendations in the report would require amendment in the NHAI 
Act, 1988 (68 of 1988) and amendment to the NHAI (the Term of Office 
and Other Conditions of Service of Member) Rules, 2003.”   
 
The amendments as suggested by NHAI are enclosed in Annexure-IV.   
The main points of the Report on restructuring of NHAI as given by the Ministry in 
their written reply are enclosed in Annexure-V. 

X. PROJECT MONITORING AND INFORMATION SYSTEM 
 
10.1 On being asked whether  the NHAI has maintained  any Project Monitoring 
and Information System in order to keep tr ack of important details like number of 
projects delayed beyond schedule and the period of delay, number of revisions 
made in the target date fo r completion of a project, co mparative data of physical 
and financial achievements to facilitate initiation of decisions and corrective 
action at appropriate time and avoiding de lays in raising of claims with funding 
agencies; NHAI stated in their written reply that:- 
“Several initiatives have been taken in NHAI for introduction and 
implementation of different IT  applications. These include, 
Computerized Project Information S ystem (CPIS), Project Financial 
Management System (PFMS), Road In formation System (RIS), Toll 
Fee Collection Software, etc. 
 
At present, Project Management S ystem is being used to keep 
a track of the details of  implementation of each project by NHAI which 
includes, (i) details of the stretch,  (ii) name of the construction agency 
and supervision consultants, (iii) estimated cost of project, (iv) awarded 
cost of project, (v) target and act ual physical progress of the projects, 
(vi) actual expenditure, (vii) orig inal completion period and date, (viii) 
revised completion date, (ix) broad reasons for delay in implementation 
of the project, etc. The information is used for decision making and 
taking appropriate corrective measur es regarding implementation of 
projects including coor dination with State Governments, providing 
appropriate support to the contractors and consultants, etc. 
 
Further, Project Finance and M anagement System (PFMS), a 
multi-user integrated co mputerized system, is al so being implemented 
which enables financial accounting, recording of expenditure, analysis 
of budget v/s actuals, generation of project monitoring reports (PMR) 
and financial monitoring reports (FMR), etc. 
 
However, a Computer ized Project Information System (CPIS) 
has been got developed by NHAI. The system is under testing. The 
features of CPIS are as under- 
 
(i) Online (intranet) and real-time project monitoring system for use 
through wide area network (WAN) at the Head Office and the 
Project Implementati on Units (PIUs) of NHAI, Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport & Highways. 
 

(ii) Enables collection of details of physical and financial progress in 
respect of each project which includes details of pre-
construction activities (like DPR consultancy, land acquisition, 
tree cutting, shifting of utilitie s, procurement of civil works 
contractors and supervision consult ants, etc.) and construction 
activities (like contract details, completion schedule, cost of the 
project and expenditure incurred so far, variations, extension of 
time, etc.).  
 
(iii) Enables tracking of each pr oject with a view to analyze the 
reasons for delay in implemen tation of projects and take 
corrective/appropriate measures. 
 
  However, the scope of NHDP is being expanded to include 
various other phases like Phase-III (10,000 km on BOT), Phase-IV (2-
lane and paved shoulders of 20,000 km), Phase-V (6-laning of 6,500 
km), Phase-VI (1000 km Expressw ays) and Phase-VII (Ring Roads, 
Flyovers, etc.). Accordingly, to track the implementation of these 
projects, various information would need to be stored including the 
details regarding land acquisition, procurement of services, financial 
close, etc., which would force the volume of data growing very fast and 
therefore, the information system would need to be upgraded.  
Therefore, NHAI is considering im plementation of ERP (Enterprise 
Resource Planning).” 
 
 

 
XI. ACCOUNTING PRACTICES 
 
11.1 Regarding accounting practices, Audi t in Chapter-11 has submitted that 
NHAI as a corporate body was required to  maintain its accounts on commercial 
principles. But in respect of the followin g cases, the accounting policies followed 
by it were not in cons onance with the Generally Acce pted Accounting Principles, 
pending decisions by the Administrative Ministry. 
1. NHAI was only an implementing agency to carry out NHDP by the 
Government. As on 31 March 2004, there were 39 completed stretches for 
a total length of 880.21 km valuing Rs . 3079.65 crore. These works were 
continued to be exhibited as Capital Works in Progress (CWIP) in the 
accounts. 
2. The Administrative Ministry had so  far not given any direction to NHAI 
about the ownership of the assets ac quired during the construction such 
as PIU Buildings, guesthouses, computers, cell phones etc. 
3. NHAI had earned interest  by depositing the unutil ized money received for 
the project and this interest was credited to the capital account. This 
interest income was not an income of NHAI. Treatment of interest income 
as capital instead of reducing it fr om the CWIP is not an accepted 
accounting principle.   The consult ants appointed by NHAI had given their 
report and the same is under consideration by the NHAI Management. 
11.2 In reply to this, NHAI submitted: - 
“In accordance with section 4 of  the National Highways Act, 
1956, the national highways vest with the Government of India (GoI). 
Various sections of national highways have only been entrusted to the 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) wit h the primary 
responsibility of development, maintenance and management of such 
sections of the national highways entrusted to NHAI. While NHAI is 
only an implementing agency of the Go vernment of India (GoI) to 
implement the highway projects on behalf of and out of the funds 
provided by GoI, the assets vest  with GoI. Moreover, the assets 
created in future will also vest wit h GoI. Since the ownership of the 
assets has not been transferred to NHAI, the expenditure incurred on 

the implementation of the projects  has not been capitalized in the 
books of accounts of NHAI. 
 
However, the matter regarding the capitalization of the 
expenditure, charging of depreciation and treatment of toll revenue as 
the income of NHAI in the books of NHAI is under the c onsideration of 
the Department of Road Transport & Hig hways, Ministry of Shipping, 
Road Transport & Highways (MoSRT&H). As and when a decision is 
taken regarding transfer of ownership of the assets to NHAI, necessary 
compliance will be made as per t he decision and directions of 
MoSRT&H. 
 
Pending above, the ex penditure on the comp leted sections of 
the national highways has been reflected separately as ‘Expenditure 
on completed projects awaiting capitalization/transfer’ in the accounts 
for the year 2005-06.” 
 
 

PART - B 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Delay in Completion of NHDP, Phase-I 
 The Committee note that ‘in principle approval’ for NHDP, Phase-I 
was given by the Government in December 2000, covering a road length of 
6,359 kms.  NHAI was mandated to carry out  this task with the target date 
for completion as June 2004.  However, as on this target date, the NHAI 
could complete only 29% of the total work.  Thus, the achievement was far 
less than the targets fixed.  The target  date was subsequently revised to 
December 2005, overshooting the orig inal schedule by 18 months.  
However, even the extended completion date of December 2005 could not 
be achieved by NHAI.  As per the la test position made available to the 
Committee, 92.6% of the Go lden Quadrilateral has been completed and the 
few balance portions of the work ar e likely to be stretched even to 
December 2008. 
In this regard, the Committee note with concern that work on a few of 
the stretches out of the total of 175 st retches into which the entire project 
was divided, could start only after June 2004, which was the initial target 
date set out for completion of the entire project.  Further, according to 
Audit observation, NHAI wa s required to award cont racts for the entire 
Phase-I by March 2002.  However, agai nst this target, NHAI could award 
contracts only for a length of 4,863 km (76%) up to March 2002 and 5,628 
km (88.5%) up to March 2004 whereas c ontracts for 380 km were not even 
awarded by June 2004, which was th e originally scheduled date for 
completion of the entire Phase-I of NHDP.  According to Audit, NHAI 
delayed the award of cont racts after receipt of bids by 2 to 17 months 
beyond the bid validity periods. 

Analyzing the reasons for delay in  completion of NHDP Phase-I, the 
Committee note that the delays o ccurred broadly on account of pre-
construction activities.  These include acquisition of land due to procedural 
formalities, litigation and court cases;  getting forest clearance; obtaining 
clearance/approvals from Railways for construction of Rail Over Bridges; 
shifting of utilities like electric lines, water pipe- lines, sewer lines etc; 
Factors like poor performance of the contractors, frequent stoppage of 
work by local population demandi ng additional underpasses/bypasses, 
flyovers, etc. also contributed to th e delay.  The Committee also take into 
account the observation of the Audit that  at the time of sanction of NHDP 
Phase-I, 90% of the land was already acquired.  However, factors like 
inability of contractors to synchroni se resources, ineffective contract 
management by NHAI and Project Supervision Consultants, faulty and 
incorrect contract clauses, incorrect and incomplete data in the Detailed 
Project Reports also contributed to the delay. 
 The Committee note that the NHAI has justified the delay on the 
ground that a programme of this magnitude was unprecedented and the 
quantum of pre-construction activities involved in the project were 
unmatched to any project implemented in the past.  Further, most of the 
pre-construction activities depended upon the cooperati on of the State 
Governments, which was not forthcom ing, and most State Governments 
were ill-equipped with the resources required for such huge pre-
construction activities.  Thus, the progress of the NHDP was dependent on 
the cooperation by the State Governm ents, which was beyond the control 
of NHAI.  However, where the delays were  attributable to the contractors, 
NHAI had taken action against them by levying liquidated damages and 
terminating their contracts. 
 The Committee, therefor e, are of the view that  the main factor, which 
has contributed to the delay in impl ementation of Phase-I of the NHDP, is 
the slow process of land acquisition prim arily caused due to the inaction 
on the part of the State Governments.  From the status report as on 31 July, 

2006 furnished by NHAI, 9.15% in Tamil Nadu, 4.83% in Maharashtra, 4.62% 
in West Bengal, 2% in Jharkhand, 1. 57% in Karnataka, etc. (totalling 2.21% 
of the entire land to be acquired under NHDP Phase-I) of balance land is yet 
to be acquired from these State Governments.  In this regard, the 
Committee note that the Ministry have now taken a number of measures for 
expeditious completion of Phase-I of the NHDP and its subsequent phases.  
These measures include authorizing the Department of Road Transport to 
issue land acquisition Notifications with out reference to Ministry of Law by 
amending the Allocation of Business Ru les; constitution of a Committee of 
Secretaries (COS) headed by Cabinet Secretary to resolve Centre-State 
issues and Inter-Ministerial coordination; appointment of Nodal officers to 
coordinate various matters for so lving problems like land acquisition, 
shifting of utilities, forest and environmental clearance, posting of a 
Director level officer of Railways on deputation basis to NHAI for 
expediting approval of Rail Over Bridg es, and reviewing th e status of pre-
construction activities in NHAI Headquarters on a fortnightly basis. 
 The Committee are of the vi ew that roads are important 
infrastructure to facilitate economic development of the nation.  The NHDP 
has been undertaken as a massive upgrad ation programme of high traffic 
density corridors of National Highways in the country.  Therefore, the 
timely implementation of NHDP Phase-I is of utmost importance for smooth 
transportation of goods as well as offe ring safe and better riding quality to 
road users of the National Highways.  Unfortunately, the delay factor has 
adversely affected toll revenue, traffic synchronization, and benefit to the 
road users as projected at the ti me of project approval. Though the 
Government/NHAI have sought to justify the delay, the fact remains that 
there were avoidable lapses on the part of the NHAI as well as the 
Government, which resulted in enormo us delay in timely completion of 
NHDP Phase-I.  In this direction, th e Committee note with concern that the 
much-hyped Committee of Secretaries (COS) constituted to resolve Centre-
State issues and Inter-Ministerial coordination held its first sitting only on 1 

April, 2005 i.e. after five years of the launch of NHDP Phase-I.  As per the 
information furnished to the Committee, as on 31.7.2006, the said 
Committee has held only one further si tting on 3.11.2005.  This is a serious 
reflection on the monitoring role of the Government for ensuring timely 
implementation of NHDP and removal of impediments.  For instance, in the 
case of Tamil Nadu, 9.15% of the la nd as on 31 July 2006 was yet to be 
acquired.  The same is the case with few other States also.   
In the context of the above background, the Committee recommend 
that the following urgent steps be taken  to ensure that the delay occurred 
in NHDP Phase-I is not repeated in subsequent phases of NHDP: - 
(i) NHAI should prepare monthly progress reports for each 
project/sub-project indicating clearly, the target date of 
completion, delay if any, reasons  for delay, status of land 
acquisition, rehabilitation & resettlement, shifting of utilities, 
obtaining of environmental clearances, progress of litigation if 
any, the officers/agencies res ponsible for these activities, 
names of the state nodal officers and the officers/agencies 
associated with the sub-project. 
(ii) The above mentioned mont hly progress reports should be 
considered by the NHAI Board where the areas of concern 
shall be identified along with the remedial measures to be 
taken.  Thereafter, the said repor ts along with the action taken 
notes should be forwarded to the Ministry and the main 
highlights be brought to the notice of the Committee of 
Secretaries (COS). 
(iii) The Committee of Secretari es (COS) headed by the Cabinet 
Secretary should hold review meetings more frequently, say at 
least every quarter, so as to serve any useful purpose and 
address the issues requiring immediate Government attention.   
 
 

(iv) The nodal officers appointed by the concerned State 
Governments for coordinating and resolving the various 
problems relating to the land ac quisition progress and other 
matters  
(v) should furnish progress reports  on monthly basis for review 
by the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States.  
(vi) The existing procedures relating to land acquisition, shifting of 
utilities, obtaining forest clear ances, etc. should be reviewed 
and updated on a continuous basis in the light of experience 
gained during implementation of various phases of the NHDP. 
(vii) A time limit for processing of bids for award of contracts must 
be fixed and should be strictly adhered to in order to avoid any 
delay in the award of contracts. 
(viii) The performance of contractors must be monitored on day-to-
day basis and stiffer penalty be imposed if the contractors 
underperform and cause delay.   
(ix) The monitoring role of Proj ect Implementation Units of NHAI 
should be strengthened and addi tional responsibilities be 
entrusted to them to cut short an y sort of avoidable delays on 
account of any shortcomings on the part of Design 
Consultants, Project Supervision Consultants and the 
contractors etc. 
(x) For expeditious acquisition of land, the National Highways Act, 
1956 may be suitably amended prescribing inter-alia a time-
limit for initiating the arbitr ation proceedings; acquisition 
through mutual consent to a limited extent; possibility of 
invoking an urgency clause as is available in the Land 
Acquisition Act for faster land acquisition process in some 
special cases, etc. 

Recommendation No. 2 
Performance of Detailed Project Report (DPR) Consultants 
 The Committee note that the execution of any project initially starts 
with the preparation of the Detailed Project Report.  The Detailed Project 
Report primarily consists of desi gns, quantities of works and cost 
estimates etc. involved in the executi on of a project.  With this sole 
purpose, the DPR Consultants are appointed by NHAI for preparing various 
Detailed Project Reports.  The Audit h as pointed out that  the NHAI did not 
address the risks associated with the terms of contracts and performance 
of DPR Consultants with adequate a ttention, which ultimately became the 
prime reason for time and cost overru n in execution of Phase-I of NHDP.  
The Audit has further pointed out that DPRs were deficient in terms of 
precise items of works; land to be acq uired; sub-soil investigations, bridge 
design; correct technical specifications; shifting of  utilities and designs of 
various key items of works etc. 
 The NHAI has tried to justify the deficiencies in DP Rs on the grounds 
that – quantities in highways proj ects cannot be estimated with full 
accuracy; the site conditions dictate some changes from the original 
quantities; additional facilities ar e created due to public pressure and 
additional features are included for saf ety considerations which might not 
have been envisaged at the DPR stag e etc.  The NHAI has, however, 
admitted that there have been inst ances where DPRs have been found 
wanting and the action has been taken against the defaulting DPR 
consultants.  The Committee fully agree with the recommendations made 
by the Audit in their Report that – NHAI needs to frame and issue 
guidelines/ policy directives to the DPR consultants to ensure uniform 
design practices, to initiate action ag ainst the DPR consultants in case of 
deficiencies due to negligence and to  install a system where DPRs are 
reviewed before commencement of tendering process to avoid large 
variations etc. 

 In this direction, the Committee note with satisfact ion that NHAI has 
since strengthened the system by revamping the system of DPR 
preparation, providing for peer revi ew of DPRs and asso ciating the Field 
Officers of NHAI in preparation of DPRs.  The performance of DPR 
consultants is now watched carefully and apart from performance security, 
provisions have also been made for penalty/debarment in case of delay in 
preparation of DPRs; variation in DPRs and actual quantity; proof checking 
of major structures etc.  Further, DPR consultants are now required to 
furnish an Indemnity Bond to take care of any shortcomings.  The 
Committee while approvin g the above-mentioned remedial measures 
recommend that the same should be reviewed periodically during the 
implementation of subsequent phases of NHDP. 
 

Recommendation No. 3 
Performance of Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs) 
 Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs) are responsible for the 
overall supervision of the works relate d with project implementation.  The 
PSCs are appointed by NHAI through a competitive selection procedure.  
The PSCs administer the contracts.  Day to day activiti es like monitoring 
the progress and quality, measurement of works, certification of payment 
etc. are performed by them.  In addition, the PSCs recommend extension of 
time and variations to the contracts etc. 
 The Committee note that the Audit in their report has pointed out that 
NHAI did not address the risk associated with the terms of contract and 
performance of PSCs with adequate a ttention which resulted in time and 
cost-overrun.  The NHAI failed to de termine comprehensively the terms of 
reference of the PSCs, which did not provide for performance warranty and 
penalties for underperformance.  The performance of PSCs was also found 
wanting in overall supervision of the projects, in following quality 
assurance procedures, verification of works and bills, variations in the 
works, determination of rates of payment for varied quantities, approval of 
the sub-contractors, recommendations  on Extension of Time (EOT) and 
compliance to the terms of contract by the civil contractors. 
 In this context, the Committee not e that NHAI has admitted to the 
existence of certain shortcomings in the contract documents entered into 
with the PSCs inasmuch as the require ments of seeking client’s approval 
were not very clearly spelt out.  As such, various consultants took varying 
stands on the interpretation of clauses relating to variations and 
extensions of time and interpretation of the ground conditions leading to 
inefficient contract management and non-compliance of the contract 
provisions.  In many cases, the items were approved by the Consultants 
without obtaining prior technical approval from NHAI. As regards the action 
initiated by the NHAI against the e rring PSCs, the Committee observe that 

based on the severity of non-complia nce, punitive measures have been 
undertaken by NHAI including deba rment of the consultants for 
participating in future contracts and for recovering damages for negligence 
and misconduct. 
 The Committee note that as per the reply of NHAI, the above 
shortcomings have now been prope rly addressed and the standard 
contract documents for civil contract s as well as consultancy contracts 
now contain explicit provisions in this  regard.  Now, in case of breach of 
contract provisions by PSCs, vari ous remedies like encashment of bank 
guarantees and recourse to Professiona l Liability Insurance will be 
resorted to.  Further, NHAI has recently formulated a policy according to 
which the performance of the consulta nts is reviewed and in cases where 
the performance is found lacking, the erring consultants would be warned 
and even debarred for a period of one year or more depending upon the 
severity of the non-compliance. 
 The Committee observe that NHAI has miserably failed in lot of areas 
concerning Project Supervision. The Committee recommend that overall 
mechanism of Supervision of project s/works should be strengthened and 
be given a radical reorientation to make it more effective. 

Recommendation No. 4 
 
Quality of Work Executed 
 
 The Committee note that as per the Audit observations, NHAI did not 
ensure compliance to the quality assurance procedures by the Project 
Supervision Consultants.  The lapses on  the part of PSCs include – failure 
to obtain quality assurance plans from contractors; not carrying out quality 
control checks; incomplete documentation on quality control etc.  The 
independent quality checks in seven stre tches carried out by the Central 
Road Research Institute engaged by Audit revealed many works not 
conforming to the specifications.  As per the information furnished by NHAI 
to the Committee, M/s Engi neers India Limited were awarded the contract 
for conducting Quality Audits.  The defe cts/ deficiencies/ non-conformities 
observed by the said audit team were rectified by the concerned 
contractors and the PSCs. 
 The Committee feel that adherence to quality assurance procedures 
is vital for the success of the entire NHD P.  The fact that some tests on the 
material used for road construction failed indicates the unsuitability of the 
material used and deficient quality of road construction.  Such projects of 
international repute must match the well laid down global standards in 
terms of quality.  The situation becomes grimmer in the light of the fact that 
NHAI did not react to the quality audi t reports endorsed to them by the 
Audit.  To quote a glaring instance, in the case of Gorhar-Barwa Adda 
stretch, Audit observed that the geo-textile material valued at Rs. 5.79 crore 
used between sub-grade and granul ar sub-base was not even approved 
material. The Committee feel pert urbed at the response of the 
Ministry/NHAI who had stated th at the said quality check work was 
entrusted to IIT Delhi but due to non-availa bility of the testing facilities in 
the Institute, NHAI failed to ascertain th e suitability of the material used.  
This issue raises a very serious doubt over the overall ability of the NHAI to 
ensure quality assurance of the execute d work.  The NHAI have tried to 

defend themselves by submitting that guidelines have been issued to all 
Project Implementation Un its of NHAI covering the general deficiencies 
observed by Audit, for taking correcti ve action.  Even M/ s Engineers India 
Limited (EIL) engaged by NHAI have poi nted out several deficiencies in the 
quality assurance procedures such as – (i) Quality Assurance Plans 
prepared by contractors were bei ng submitted in pi ecemeal (ii) Plans 
prepared by PSCs were differing from the plans prepared by the 
contractors (iii) the test results of materials tested  in outside laboratories 
were being received by the contractor s and not by the consultants; (iv) 
routine tests were not witnessed by the Supervision Consultants (v) road 
tests were not carried out and the work was allowed to  go ahead (vi) in the 
case of Built Operate Transfer (BOT) projects, the concessionaire did not 
give due regard to the instructions i ssued by the independent consultants; 
in some cases the jobs were sub-let even without the approval, etc.  This 
speaks volumes about the overall quali ty of execution of work on various 
undergoing phases of NHDP.  The only positive thing done by NHAI on the 
said observations of EIL is that they  circulated these observations to all 
their Project Implementation Units with  the request to bring them to the 
attention of the contractors and S upervision Consultants for discussion 
and taking preventive and remedial measures for assuring the desired 
quality vide NHAI communication dated 12 July, 2003. 
 In the light of the above backd rop, the Committee agree with the 
recommendations of the Steering Group (SG) constituted by the Ministry in 
the year 2001 which inter-alia provide for; (i) requirement of external quality 
audit system for highway projects; (i i) preparation of a panel of pre-
qualified quality auditors; (iii) instead of engaging a single institution for 
carrying quality audit, the system s hould be more broad based involving a 
number of institutions/individuals; (i v) the quality audit should be done at 
intervals of 6 months and by rotating the auditing agencies; and (v) the 
quality audit should also keep in view  the conditions of the consultancy 
contract of the Project Supervis ion Consultants.  The Committee 

recommend that NHAI should follow th ese recommendations in letter and 
spirit and should not compromise on an y aspect of quality of the executed 
works.  The Committee further note that there is a proposal for creation of a 
Quality Assurance Cell in NHAI with key responsibilities for promotion of 
quality assurance initiatives, quality checks through inspection of the 
ongoing works including quality audi t through external professional 
agencies.  In this regard, the Commi ttee recommend that the said proposal 
needs to be expedited and implemente d at the earliest.  The Committee are 
of the view that if good quality of road construction is ensured at the initial 
stage itself, then it would definitely  minimize the subsequent maintenance 
costs. 

Recommendation No. 5 
Standardization of Stretches  
 The Audit in their report has pointed out that NHAI did not 
standardize the length of stretches for award of contracts to  facilitate cost 
comparison for award and execution of work nor did it devise any more 
robust and effective cost control me chanism as an alternative.  This 
resulted in variation in cost per km of contiguous stretches from 1.86 crore 
to Rs. 4.20 crore per km.  In this regard, the Committee note that both the 
Ministry as well as NHAI have express ed reservations on the possibility of 
standardization of stretches.  It h as been submitted that the same is not 
possible because of a large number of variables like variations in number 
of major bridges/stretches, length of service roads, terrain and soil 
conditions, traffic volume, etc. 
In this connection, the Committee note that according to the 
guidelines specified by the Public Invest ment Bureau (PIB) for scrutiny of 
individual sub-projects under NHDP by NHAI Board, it has specifically been 
inter-alia included that the proposals for the investment decisions of the 
sub-projects should contain the details of the costs of 4/6 laning along with 
the comparative cost of latest approved/awarded projects on a like to like 
basis.  In case of substantive varia tions, specific justification should be 
given.  However, no information either by  the NHAI or by the Ministry has 
been furnished to the Committee suggesting that any attempts have been 
made to compare the cost on a like to like basis as indicated in the said 
guideline.  In this regard, the Commi ttee feel that now after a lapse of 
almost 6 years since launching the NHDP, enough experience and 
technical data is available with NHAI and the same is required to be put into 
use to take care of the reservations  expressed by the NHAI regarding 
standardization of the stretches.  In addition to this, the NHAI should also 
explore the possibility of devising alte rnative cost control system so that 
the kind of variance pointed out by the audit could be addressed. 

Recommendation No. 6 
Preparation of Contract Documents 
 The Committee note that NHAI did not prepare the contract 
documents with due care and there were inconsistencies in various 
clauses in respect of Conditions of Pa rticular Application (CoPA), price 
escalation clause, recovery clause for Mobilization Advance and 
Standardization of Bills of Quanti ties (BoQ) in respect of Bituminous 
Course.  Regarding the Bills of Quantities, the Audit has pointed out that an 
extra cost of Rs. 260.98 crore was in curred with reference to the lowest 
quantities of bituminous work in the 23 stretches for which the analysis 
was made.  In these stretches, the qua ntities per km of Bituminous Course 
varied widely from 4% to 1280%.  The Committee note that as remedial 
measures, the Conditions of Particul ar Application in respect of price 
variation clause and recovery clause fo r Mobilization Advance in the bid 
documents have since been standardized vide NHAI circular dated 27 
August, 2004.  The Committee note with  satisfaction that the same has 
been verified and found correct in the follow-up audit conducted by the 
C&AG. 
 As regards standardization of Bills  of Quantities, the NHAI has stated 
that it is not feasible to standardize the per km quantity of bituminous work 
as bituminous pavement thickness depe nds on various parameters such 
as traffic density, type of terrain , soil, climate conditions etc.  The 
Committee are not satisfied with this sort of response from NHAI.  Though 
it may be correct that the thickness of bituminous layer may depend on the 
above parameters, but these paramete rs do not undergo abrupt changes 
for similar type of stretches.  Further, laying of bituminous course 
commences only after the completion of the sub-base and base courses, 
which ensure evenness of the surface.   As informed by Audit, the 
maximum thickness of the Bituminous Course should be 40 mm only (up to 
100 msa-million standard axles).  In view of this, the Committee 

recommend that NHAI must explore the possibility of standardization of 
Bituminous Course to the best possible ext ent in view of data collected so 
far in this regard.  Further, collecti ve views of the DPR consultants along 
with the in-house expertise available with NHAI may also be put into use to 
achieve this objective besides making its whole set of operations more 
transparent and accountable. 

Recommendation No. 7 
Overpayments made to the Contractors on account of Excise and Customs 
Duty Exemptions. 
 The Audit in their report has ob served that while calling bids for 
stretches funded by the World Bank, NH AI failed to include a clause in the 
Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) that the bidders should quote the prices 
excluding customs/excise duti es, as exemptions were available to them.  
Also, the provisions for payment of price escalation incorporated in the 
agreements did not provide for exclus ion of excise duty element from the 
basic price of raw material agreed to.  According to Audit, the omission has 
resulted in NHAI not getting the benefi t of duty element and resultant lower 
cost.  Further, NHAI issued exemption certificates to five co ntractors, after 
finalizing the contract for availing the duty exemption but could not recover 
the proportionate duty element from th e bills of contractors in the absence 
of necessary stipulation.  This resulted in undue benefit of Rs. 30.69 crore 
to these five contractors. 
 The NHAI/Ministry have sought to justify their position by submitting 
that such exemptions were already in existence before the contracts were 
awarded to the contractors.  It would,  therefore, not be legal for NHAI to 
recover the benefit availed by cont ractors in view of the exemption 
Notifications of the Government of Indi a since NHAI’s acti on would restrict 
the benefit given by the Sovereign.   
 The Audit has, however, countered the above contention on the 
ground that the Government of India vi de their Notification No. 108/95-C.E. 
dated 28.8.1995 issued in exercise of powers conferred by Section 5A (1) of 
the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 read with Section 3(3) of the 
Additional Duties of Excise (Good of Special Importance) Act, 1957, 
exempted from payment of  excise duty all goods that are supplied to the 
projects financed by United Nations or International Organizations and 
approved by the Government of Indi a.  As such, the duty exemption is 
available to the projects and not to the contractors.  Audit was not provided 

any documentary evidence that the excise/customs duty elements were 
duly factored in at the time of award of contract.  In the absence of any 
clear stipulation in this regard in th e contract, what c ould happen is that 
the contractors would receive full payments inclusive of the duty element 
and they would receive the refund from revenue authorities and not pass 
on the same to NHAI.  In this way th e contractors would gain and NHAI 
would loose.  Normally, the provis ion relating to duty exemptions should 
be a routine provision incorporated in the Notice Inviting Tenders and then 
the contractors are expected to pay back to the client (NHAI, in this case) 
the duty refund received by them from  the revenue authorities.  NHAI 
should have exercised due professional care in ensuring and documenting 
this aspect before releasing the Duty Exemption Certificate.  
 Taking into consideration the above-mentioned positions taken by 
the Ministry/NHAI vis-à-vis the C&AG’s contention, the Committee feel that 
the whole issue needs to be looked into.   

Recommendation No. 8 
System of obtaining/revalidating Bank Guarantees 
 According to the Audit observation,  the NHAI did not have a reliable 
system/mechanism of verifying the cred entials of the bidders and keeping 
the Bank Guarantees valid through pe riodical renewals to avoid their 
expiry.  This resulted in legal compli cations and contributed towards loss.  
On these accounts, the NHAI could not r ecover a total of Rs. 24.44 crore 
from two contractors. 
 In this regard, the Committee note that various Bank Guarantees like 
performance security, mobilization and equipment advance Bank 
Guarantees, retention mone y etc. are obtained from the contractors to 
safeguard the interest of the client i.e, NHAI.  However the whole purpose is 
likely to be defeated if the Bank Guar antees so furnished by the contractor 
are not verified or periodically rene wed to prevent their expiry.  The 
lackadaisical manner in which the Bank Guarantees were handled is 
revealed from the fact that in the case  of six projects, the Bank Guarantees 
furnished by the contractors were found to be forged.  This raises a very 
serious question on the overall system of engaging high profile firms/ 
contractors by the NHAI to carry out  execution of such big projects.  
Submitting forged bank guarantees is definitely a criminal offence and 
should have been dealt with equal sev erity.  Further, had there been a 
robust system of timely renewal of bank guarantees in place, the recovery 
could have been affect ed without loss of time/interest and legal 
complications.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
responsibility must be fixed on the concerned officers of NHAI who were 
responsible for verification and timely  renewal of bank guarantees in view 
of the losses suffered by NHAI on th ese counts.  Further, the NHAI must 
put into place a fool proof and r obust system of handling the Bank 
Guarantees.   

Recommendation No. 9 
Payment of Escalation  
 The Audit has observed that there were ambiguities/inconsistencies 
in the contract clauses in respect of 15 contracts.  This had led to different 
interpretations with regard to admissibility of price adjustment under 
various categories.  NHAI initially with held the price escalation claims but 
subsequently released payments of Rs. 77.71 crore to 15 contractors as 
price escalation against receipt of Bank Guarantees.  Further, the said price 
escalation was paid with total disregar d to the opinion of the Ministry of 
Law and Justice that no price escalation was payable as per the provisions 
of the agreement. 
 In this regard, the Committee not e that the NHAI/Ministry have 
admitted that the contract conditions  for 15 out of 28 contract packages 
relating to payment of escalation were worded differently leading to the 
inadmissible payment of escalation.  As regards the releasing of such 
escalation amount to the contractors pending opinion of the Law Ministry, 
the Committee are not at all convinced with the justification of the NHAI 
that this step was taken in view of the representations made by the 
Contractors’ Federation pleading that this was an unintentional 
discrepancy in the wording of cont ract conditions in these particular 
contracts vis-à-vis the other contracts and that the payment was made 
against the Bank Guarantees.   The Co mmittee feel that such a step by a 
professional organization like NHAI was totally against the concept of 
sound business principles and prudent commercial practices as it has 
jeopardized its own financial interests.  The Committee do not find that any 
urgency was involved for release of payments pending decision of the Law 
Ministry, which have now become diffi cult for NHAI to recover and are 
being litigated in the courts.  In fact , such a situation would not at all have 
arisen had NHAI adopted uniform and unambiguous contract provisions for 
all the contracts.  While observing th at NHAI has recovered Rs. 11.73 crore 

of this escalation payment, the Co mmittee strongly recommend that NHAI 
may make all possible efforts to reco ver the balance amount of Rs. 65.98 
crore.  It may also ensure standa rdization and uniformity in contract 
provisions so as to prevent recurrence of such lapses in the future.  

Recommendation No. 10 
Toll Collection  
 Toll revenue is a fee levied and collected from mechanical vehicles 
for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of a section of a 
National Highway, bridge or tunnel.  The National Highways Act, 1976 
authorizes the Government to levy such fee. 
 The Committee note that according to the Audit observation, there 
was a loss of toll revenue of Rs. 42.23 crore due to various reasons such as 
delay in issue of Gazette Notificat ions; late handing over of site, non-
finalization of site for the toll plaz a and law and order problems etc.  
Further, NHAI did not take timely action in foreclosure of contract with a 
toll-collecting agency that defaulted in its payments as per the terms of 
agreement resulting in non-recovery of Rs. 31.26 crore. 
 The NHAI while admitting that there were some procedural delays in 
the issuance of Gazette Notifications has sought to justify the above audit 
observations on the grounds that tolling is an entirely new concept in India.  
As such, it initially needed some ti me to operationalise and streamline the 
same.  However, the system has sin ce been streamlined and now it is 
ensured that required Notifications fo r levy of toll are published well in 
advance and fee collection is started as per the schedule without any loss 
of revenue.  For this purpose, a noda l officer of the rank of General 
Manager has also been appointed in NHAI for following up the toll 
Notifications with the Department of  Road Transport and Highways and 
also the Ministry of Law.  Further, the locations of toll plazas and tollable 
lengths have also been finalized for th e Golden Quadrilateral and those for 
North-South & East-West corridors are under finalization. 
 As regards the delayed decision to terminate the contract with a toll 
collecting agency resulting in non- recovery of Rs. 31.26 crore, the 
Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that this 
issue pertains to Kotputli – Alwar Sect ion of NH-8 in the State of Rajasthan 

where the contract for toll collection was awarded to M/s Ganapati Tolls on 
the basis of competitive bidding.  The period of contract was from 
30.03.1998 to 14.03.2000.  The said contractor started defaulting in making 
the contractual payments and also st arted overcharging from the users.  
On the matter being pursued by NHAI, the contractor resorted to several 
litigations to delay the punitive action agai nst him.  As per the latest status 
furnished by the Ministry, the matter of  toll recovery from the toll agent is 
presently under arbitration.   
 The Committee are of the view that huge investments are involved 
for construction and development of the National Highways.  Hence, proper 
collection of toll revenue is of unassumed significance.  The Committee 
has been further informed that the actual user fee collection for the 
financial year 2005-06 is to the tune  of Rs. 798.34 crore.  With the 
completion of the subsequent phases of NHDP, the toll revenue is likely to 
attain gigantic amounts.  In view of this, the Committee feel that proper 
planning, timely action for issuance of toll Notifications, putting up of toll 
plazas and engagement of agencies for toll collections are of paramount 
importance.  However, the Committee fe el that by all accounts there have 
been prevalent irregularities in pr actice causing avoidable leakages.  
Keeping in view the fact that the sy stem of toll collection is prone to 
leakages, there is a dire need for NHAI to improve its system of monitoring 
of tolling agencies so as to pre-empt  any attempt at leakage/non-remission 
of the toll collections as had happened in the above mentioned case.  The 
Committee trust that various measures taken by the NHAI to prevent toll 
leakages such as conducting frequent surprise checks; engagement of 
round the clock supervisors; 72 hours pl us spot study of  fee collection; 
study of discreet observations; computerization of toll plaz as etc. would be 
strictly adhered to.  The Committee recommend that such measures be 
reviewed periodically for removal of any shortcomings and a fool proof and 
legally sound system needs to be evol ved and put into use so as to avoid 
ugly situations where the NHAI becomes totally helpless either to foreclose 

a contract or to take any punitive acti on against the contractor in case of 
his defaulting the terms of agreemen t. The Committee wonder whether the 
credibility of the contractor so appoint ed by NHAI in the extant case was at 
all ascertained by the NHAI before awarding the contract.  The present case 
definitely points towards shortcomi ngs on this account.  The Committee 
also direct that all efforts must be  made by the NHAI to recover its 
legitimate due by presenting its case professionally during the arbitration 
proceedings.  In this regard, the Committee desire that the proposal of the 
Ministry for creation of a Legal and Arbitration Ce ll in NHAI headed by a 
Chief General Manager with experien ce in Concessions and Contract Law 
be implemented without any delay for the purpose of handling competently 
the issues related to monitoring of di spute resolution process and all legal 
and arbitration cases. 
 Coming to the question of the pr oposed implementation of a Modern 
Toll Collection System as a future so lution, the Committee note from the 
information furnished by NHAI that the said system comprising of many 
advance sub-systems would have some distinct advantages in terms of 
preventing leakages besides being user convenient by allowing the toll 
collecting agency to improve customer  service and satisfaction.  In this 
direction, the Committee recommend th at with the fast development of 
NHDP, all efforts must be made by the Government as well as NHAI to put 
into place the Modern Toll Collection System at the maximum number of 
toll plazas in a time bound manner so as to cover the entire NHDP.  For this 
purpose, target dates for various to ll sections must be fixed and their 
implementation must be ensured.  
Lastly, the Committee recommend that as an exercise of foresight, 
the NHAI must prepare a list of all the present and future tollable stretches 
indicating the details of expected reve nue, cost of collection, arrangement 
for collection etc. besides bringing out clearly the variations, if any, from 
the Government approved toll norms and the reasons for the same etc.

Recommendation No. 11 
Restructuring of National Highways Authority of India 
 
 The Committee note that in 1995 when the NHAI was set up, its 
mandate was limited to implementati on of a few Asian Development Bank 
assisted works and subsequently, a few more projects were entrusted to it 
by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways.  It was only after the 
sanctioning of the NHDP in 1998 th at its mandate was enlarged 
exponentially.  To cope with the in creased mandate, the Committee feel 
that institutional strengthening of NHAI is very crucial.  In this direction, the 
Committee note that the Committee on Infrastructure under the 
Chairmanship of Prime Minister considered this issue and decided that it is 
necessary to build NHAI’s instituti onal capacity by making it a multi-
disciplinary body having high quality expe rtise in financial and contract 
management.  Accordingly, an Inte r-Ministerial Committee constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Road Transport and Highways has 
inter-alia recommended that the tenure of the NHAI Chairman be fixed for at 
least 3 years extendable to 5 years; increase in number of part-time 
members in NHAI Board from the pre sent 4 to 6; 6 full time members 
against 5 at present; to empower the Authority to create posts in NHAI upto 
the level of Chief General Manager and creation of additional posts of 
CGMs, etc.  This Committee has al so recommended establishing expert 
cells in NHAI in the fields of Pr oject Appraisal, Planning, Quality 
Assurance, Standardization and R& D, Contract Management, Legal 
Arbitration and Safety.  The Commi ttee note that the above-mentioned 
report is presently under the approval of the Cabinet.  In view of this, the 
Committee while appreciating the effo rts made by the Government for 
restructuring of NHAI feel at the same time that this should have been done 
much earlier.  There has been a de finite laxity on the part of the 
Government for not initiating these me asures during the initial stages of 
NHDP.  The Committee, therefore, r ecommend that, as promised by the 

Ministry during their deposition before  the Committee, all requisite efforts 
must be made to complete the wh ole exercise of rest ructuring of NHAI 
including some amendments required in  the NHAI Act, 1988 for creation of 
certain additional posts, by the e nd of the year 2006.  The Committee 
further recommend that the exercise of framing the Recruitment Rules, if 
any, required to be framed in pursuance of the amendments in the NHAI 
Act should also be started simultaneous ly so that requisite posts in NHAI 
could be filled up in time. 
 

Recommendation No. 12 
Implementation of Subsequent Phases of NHDP  
 The Committee note that Phase-I of the NHDP suffered many 
shortcomings during its implementation resulting in time and cost overrun.  
These shortcomings occurred primarily on account of inadequate planning 
and non-synchronization of pre-construction activities, lack of coordination 
with governmental agencies, deficient Detailed Project Reports, inadequate 
contract management and non-standard ization of contract provisions.  
Further, lack of effective deterrent provisions regarding performance of 
DPR consultants, Project Supervision Consultants and Contractors etc. led 
to making of overpayments and sub- standard quality of works besides 
resulting in delayed completion of project. 
 The Committee are, however, inclin ed to give lenient view to NHAI 
with regard to the above-mentioned deficiencies keeping in view the fact 
that the Authority was performing such a mammoth task for the first time.  
The lack of experience by NHAI in handling projects and programmes of 
this magnitude is the main reason for the deficiencies observed in planning 
and contract management during implementation of Phase-I of the NHDP.   
 In the above backdrop, the Committee observe that the subsequent 
phases i.e. Phase-II and Phase-III of th e NHDP Project are already under 
implementation by the NHAI and the approval for other phases like Phase-
IV to Phase-VI has already been given by the Government.  The Committee 
feel that NHAI should learn a lesson fr om its past experiences and ensure 
that the lapses which occurred during the implementation of Phase-I do not 
recur in the subsequent phases of NHDP.  The Committee recommend that 
the NHAI must evolve a system fo r continuously storing and using 
experiences gained over the passage of ti me in various fields such as bid 
process, contract management, time and cost overrun, quality of work, 
performance of Contractors, Design Consultants and Supervisory 
Consultants etc. and this must be put into use in the subsequent phases in 

the best possible manner.  The Co mmittee further recommend that the 
recommendation of the Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) constituted by the 
Ministry regarding establishment of Ex pert Cells in the field of Project 
Appraisal, Planning, Quality Assuran ce, Standardization and Research & 
Development, Contract Management , Arbitration and Safety be 
implemented without any further loss of time so as to establish in-house 
specialist expertise in these fields. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND PAL  
6th December, 2006                CHAIRMAN  
15 Agrahayana, 1928 (S)      CO MMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 
 
Sl. No. Items of work Description 
(1) (2) (3) 
1.  
 
Alignment  The vertical and horizontal location of a road.  
2.  
 
Bitumen  A viscous liquid or solid material black or dark brown in 
colour, having adhesive properties, consisting 
essentially of hydrocarbons, derived from petroleum 
occurring in natural asphal t and soluble in carbon 
disulphide. Normal grades used - 50 pen (hard) to 100 
pen (soft).  
3.  
 
Bituminous  Containing Bitumen  
4.  
 
Bituminous 
Concrete (BC)  
Laying and compacting for us e in wearing or PCC in 
the thickness of 25 mm to  100 mm, using prescribed 
aggregate and premixed with bitumen on a bituminous 
bound surface.  
5.  
 
Borrow 
Excavation  
When NHAI specifies a new roadway to be 
constructed; the roadway embankment is usually 
constructed from earth available on the right-of-way, 
however, if there is insufficient earth the contractor is 
required to obtain the needed additional material from 
off the right-of-way (land). This material is called 
borrow excavation  
6.  
 
Borrow Pit  The source of approved material required for the 
construction of embankments,  or other portions of 
earthwork requirements.  
7.  
 
Cement Treated 
Upper Sub-base  
The portion of sub base treated with cement so as to 
provide improved strength.  
8.  
 
Contract 
Specifications  
The requirements, which are to be followed in the 
construction of highways.  
9.  
 
Culvert  Any structure, not cl assified as a bridge, which 
provides an opening under the roadway.  
10.  
 
Day Work  An item in BOQ for which rates for the supply of labour, 
material and plant & mach inery are quoted by the 
bidder. If PSC considers necessary the varied work is 
executed on Day Work basis.  
11.  
 
Dense 
Bituminous 
Macadam (DBM)  
A dense bitumen macadam r oad base or base course 
manufactured with bitumen.  

12.  
 
Design Life  Initially figured to be a 20-year period for pavement.  
13.  
 
Earth Excavation  On a construction project that requires new or 
relocated roadway, the earth, which must be moved 
from one place to another, is called earth excavation. 
 
 
14.  
 
Earthen 
Embankment  
Earthen embankment including Sub grade, earthen 
shoulders and miscellaneous backfill with approved 
material obtained from roadw ay excavation, borrow pit 
or other sources.  
15.  
 
Environmental 
Impact  
The effects a project will have upon the environment, 
especially the human environment.  
16.  
 
Excavation  The act of taking out materials, the materials taken out, 
or the cavity remaining a fter materials have been 
removed. NHAI has an agreement with the  
17.  
 
Expressway  A divided arterial hi ghway for through traffic with full or 
partial control of acce ss and generally with grade 
separations at major intersections.  
18.  
 
Fly Ash  The finely divided residue that results from the 
combustion of ground or pow dered coal, transported 
from the firebox through the boiler by flue gases.  
19.  
 
Geo-textile 
Material  
Woven cloth made from nylon type of material that is 
not bio-degradable  
20.  
 
Granular Sub-
base  
A continuously graded granul ar material to MOST 
Specification for Highway Works. Used in the sub-base 
layer of road construction, which consists of crushed 
rock, slag or concrete is the superior material and is the 
only one permitted for major trunk roads and 
motorways.  
21.  
 
Mobilization 
Advance  
The employer typically reim burses the contractor when 
completed portions of work are performed. Contractors 
therefore must find financin g to help start a new 
project. The pay item mobiliza tion is provided to help 
the contractor with these early start-up costs.  
22.  
 
Professional 
Liability 
Insurance  
Professional Liability Insu rance is an insurance to 
cover a loss resulting from ma lpractice or other liability 
of a professional person to a third party. The insured’s 
benefits under the policy be gin when the insured’s 
liability to a third party has been asserted.  
23. Pavement  The part of a roadway  having a constructed surface for 
the facilitation of vehicular movement.  

24.  
 
Permanent 
Work  
The items of work in the BOQ to be executed in 
accordance with the contract.  
25.  
 
Profile 
Correction 
Course  
A bituminous or non bituminous course provided to 
rectify the undulations and ca mber correction of road 
surface  
26  
 
Rigid pavement  Road pavement / surface constructed with cement 
concrete  
27.  
 River Shingles  Small size stones available in riverbed.  
28.  
 
Specification  The standard s pecifications, supplemental 
specifications, special provisions, and all written or 
printed agreements and instru ctions pertaining to the 
method and manner of performing the work or to the 
quantities and qualities of the materials to be furnished 
under the contract.  
29.  
 
SPV  A special company established by a company to meet 
a specific financial objective.  
30.  
 
Terrain  The physical features of a tract of land.  
31.  
 
Variation item  This include in crease or decrease in quantity, 
additional or omitted item , change in character or 
quality, levels, lines, positions and specified sequence  
32.  
 
Wearing course  The top surface of a road, which is made of asphalt 
and laid over the base course. It is made using high 
quality stone to improve wear and skid resistance.  
33.  
 
Weep Holes  Small openings whose purpose is to permit drainage of 
water that accumulates inside a building component (e.g., a 
wall etc.)  
34.  
 
Wet Mix 
Macadam (WMM)  
Laying and compacting coarse and fine crushed rock or slag 
blended to meet the grading requirement. Clean crushed 
graded aggregate and granular material premixed with water 
to a dense mass on a prepared sub base  
35.  
 
Voids  Space occupied by air particles during compaction of any 
pit.  
 
 

ANNEXURE - I 
HIGHLIGHTS  
•  Overall performance of NHAI  in terms of output in National Highway Development Project 
Phase-I was 29 per cent. NHAI completed only 1,846 km in terms of completed stretches 
out of the target of 6,359 km of National Highways by the scheduled date of June 2004. 
There was no corporate plan to implement su ch a large project. Deficient planning and 
inefficient contract management by the de sign and project consultants contributed to 
underperformance in achievement of the tar get. The underperformance was 59 per cent 
if partially completed stretches were also reckoned.  
(Paras 2.1 and 4)  
•  Phase-I of the project consisted of the Na tional Highways connecting the four metros, 
forming the Golden Quadrilateral consisting of 5,014 km; port connectivity of 674 km and 
North-South-East-West corridors of 671 km. NHAI missed the completion goals of all 
three by 73, 67 and 58 per cent respectively. NHDP Phase-I had been re-scheduled for 
completion by December 2005, overshooting the original schedule by 18 months.  
 
(Paras 1.3 and 2.1)  
•  The adverse impact of the significant under performance resulted in unrealised expected 
benefit of free flow of traffic on these routes. Additionally, NHAI also lost an opportunity to 
generate toll revenue of at least Rs.560 crore due to the delay in completion of the 
highways. Besides, the road users also lost potential economy in vehicle operating cost 
of about Rs.4,300 crore over the period of delay.  
 
(Paras 2.1 and 2.2)  
•  While the overall status of the output is stated in this repor t with reference to the entire 
NHDP Phase-I consisting of 175 stretches, the detailed finding and conclusions are with 
reference to scrutiny of a sample of 32 stre tches, which were selected on the basis of 50 
per cent or more progress. The audit tests on th e sample disclosed that the completed 
works had suffered delays of upto 28 months  from their scheduled dates, with cost 
overrun of over Rs.690 crore including additi onal items of work in these stretches alone. 
In the background of the delay in completion in  other stretches, the cost overrun on the 
entire project is likely to be substantially more, which may compromise the economy of 
the entire project.  
(Para 2.1)  
•  Imprecise terms of contract with the design consultants, who were responsible for 
preparation of detailed project reports (D PRs) and project supervision consultants 
(PSCs), who were responsible for supervision of the works and their underperformance 
constituted the foremost risk to the project. NHAI did not address the risk associated with 
the terms of contracts and performance of the two  
• categories of consultants with adequate att ention, which ultimately became the prime 
reason for time and cost overrun. NHAI failed to determine comprehensively the terms of 
reference for preparation of the DPRs by the design consultants and of project 
supervision by PSCs. The quality of DPRs and the project supervision were left to the 
discretion of the consultants rather than binding them to comprehensive terms of 
reference, which severely compromised the value for money spent on hiring them and on 

the project. The terms of both the consultant s did not provide for performance warranty 
and penalty for underperformance.  
 
(Paras 3.1 and 3.2)  
•  DPRs were found deficient in terms of pr ecise determination of quantities and nature of 
the items of works, land to be acquired, su b-soil investigation, bridge design, correct 
technical specifications, numb er of trees to be felled, services/utilities required to be 
shifted, and designs of various key items of  work. The inaccuracy in the quantities of 
works upset the competitive ra tes of the bidders, which formed the basis of award of 
contracts in one case.  
 
(Para 3.2)  
•  NHAI did not ensure compliance to the qualit y assurance procedures by the PSCs. They 
failed to obtain quality assurance plans from the contractors in some cases. Besides, 
PSCs did not carry out the quality control ch ecks comprehensively to ensure that the 
quality of the roads was consistent with the specifications. The documentation on quality 
assurance and quality control by PSCs was incomplete. Independent quality check in 
seven stretches carried out by the Central Ro ad Research Institute, engaged by Audit, 
disclosed works which did not uniformly confor m to the specifications. It also indicated 
inefficient contract management by PSCs.  
 
(Paras 2.5 and 7.2.4)  
•  The performance of PSCs was found wantin g in overall supervision of the project, 
verification of works and bills, variations in the works, determination of rates of payment 
for varied quantities, approval of the sub-c ontractors, recommendations on extension of 
time and compliance to the terms of contract by the civil contract ors. Underperformance 
by PSCs entailed a high risk of overpayments and quality compromise.  
 
(Paras 7.2 and 8)  
•  NHAI delayed the award of contracts after receipt of bids by upto 17 months beyond the 
bid validity period entailing extra expenditure due to price escalation. It did not follow 
comprehensive and uniform criteria / standard for evaluation of bids.  
 
(Para 4.1)  
•  NHAI did not prepare the contract doc uments with due care, which resulted in 
inconsistent and faulty contract  clauses. Defective contract clauses with regard to price 
escalation, re-fixation of rates for variations, recovery of advances etc.  
 
 
• provided extra financial assistance to t he contractors affecting the economy of the 
project. This entailed a risk of financial loss and contractual/legal complications.  
 
(Paras 3.1, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3)  

• NHAI foreclosed the opportunity to comp are the estimates, quoted rates and actual 
expenditure per unit length by not standardising the highway stretches or putting in place 
any more robust and effective cost control mechanism as an alternative, which deprived it 
of a framework for evaluation of the rates an d cost. The cost per km in the contracts 
varied from Rs.1.86 crore to Rs.4.20 crore in contiguous stretches awarded during the 
same time.  
 
(Para 4.2)  
•  Similarly NHAI did not standardise or insta ll any alternative cost control mechanism and 
determine the bills of quantities (BOQ) of various items used in the road construction. 
The extra cost worked out to Rs.260.98 crore with reference to the lowest quantities of 
bituminous work in the 23 stretches, for which analysis was made. The quantities of 
bituminous work per unit length shown as having been used varied upto 12.80 times.  
 
(Para 5.4)  
•  Deficient internal control and accountability system within NHAI was responsible for loss 
of Rs.24.44 crore in the sample stretches  only on account of non-recovery of amounts 
from the contractors. NHAI failed to veri fy the authenticity and validity of the bank 
guarantees provided by the contractors.  
 
(Para 7.1.1)  
•  Validity of cash forecast by NHAI had also been rendered questionable. The projected 
cash surplus of Rs.13,239 crore in Phase-I by the end of 2011-12 is not likely to be 
achieved and there is a probability of NHAI su ffering cash deficit at the end of 2011-12. 
On the other hand, due to slow progress of the works, NHAI was left with surplus funds 
mobilised through bonds and consequential avoi dable charge of Rs.77.25 crore towards 
interest during 2000-01 and 2001-02.  
 
(Paras 2.3 and 9.2)  
•  NHAI was slow to introduce tolling on the completed portions of the road and lost about 
Rs.42 crore due to delayed decisions/notifications.  
 
(Para 2.4)  
•  Accounting practices adopted by NHAI were not in consonance with the Generally 
Accepted Accounting Practices. NHAI ex hibited 39 completed stretches valuing 
Rs.3,079.65 crore as Capital-Work-in-Pr ogress (CWIP). Assets created out of 
Government Grants and Loans were also exhibited as CWIP against NHAI’s own 
accounting policy. The ownership of the assets obtained during the course of execution 
of works has not been decided. Interest  earned on unutilised funds amounting to 
Rs.1,715.43 crore was also credited to the capital.  
 
(Para 11) 

ANNEXURE - II 
 
LIST OF NON-PERFORMING CONTRACTORS 
 
Sl.No. Foreign Firms Sl. 
No. Indian Firms 
1. 
 
Bhumihighway 
Venture Berhad (400463-M) No. 35 
Jalan SG 3/1 
TMN SERI Gombak  
68100 Batu Caves 
Selangor-Darul Ehsan 
Malaysia 
Ph 6(03) 61842824 
1. Ashwani Contruction Company 
B-3/58, 3rd Floor, Safdarjung Enclave  
New Delhi 
2. Centrodostroy, Russia 
19, Kuznetsky Most 
Moscow-107031 (Russai) 
2 Afecons Infrastructure Ltd. 
Veera Desai Road  
P.B.No. 11979, Andheri (W) 
Mumbai-400053 
 
3. China Coal Construction Group Corpn. 
21, Hepingli North Street 
Dongcheng Distt. 
Beijing, China 
3 A.L.Sudershan Cons.Co.Ltd. 
6-3-249/3/2/1,1st Floor, Naveen Nagar 
Colony, Road No. 1, Banjara Hills,  
Hyderabad-500034 
Fax No. 23302493 
4 Dolomite Industries Co. Sdb.Bhd 
113/4 Mile, Sg. Serai, 43100 Ulu Langat,  
P.O.Box 6, 43207 Batu 9 Cheras 
Selangor Darul Ehsanm, Malaysia 
Fax No. 00603-90212610 
4 APIL (Subsidiary of Afcons Infrastructure Ltd.) 
AFCONS-APIL (JV) 
Veera Desai Road 
P.B.NO. 11979, Andheri(W) 
Mumbai-400053 
5 PATI-SDN-BHD 
3rd Floor, No. 38 Jalan Dang Wangi, 
5100 Kuala Lumpur 
Malaysia 
5 Bhageeratha engineering Ltd. 
B-3/58, 3rd Floor, Safdarjung enclave  
New Delhi-110029 
6 Sticco 
P.O. Box – 10484 
Riyadh-11433 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
 
6 DD Buildiers Ltd. 
9, Satyanagar 
Bhubaneshwar (Orissa) 
7 UEM Builders (6551-K) 
17th Floor, Menara 2, Faber Towers 
Jalan Desa Bahagia, Taman Desa 
Off Jalan Klang Lama 58100 Kuala-
Lumpur, Malaysia
 
7 M/s Essar Group 
Essar House, Mahalaxmi 
Mumbai-34 
Fax.No. 022-24954924 
 
8 You-one Engineering Construction Co. 
Ltd. 
75-95 Sposomun-Dong 
Chung-gu 
Seoul (Korea)-100110 
8 Lanco Construction 
C-10, Ashoka Tower, Community Centre, 
Janakpuri, New Delhi-58 
 
  9 Rani Construction  
C-10, Ashoka Tower, Community Centre  
Janakpuri, New Delhi-58. 

 
ANNEXURE–III 
 
 
Sub-standard work or work not conforming to the specifications 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
the Stretch  
Description 
of sub-
standard 
work  
Qty  
Executed 
Value  
(Rs. in 
crore)  
Audit observations 
Reply of 
Ministry/NHAI  
Remarks of Audit 
(1)  (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
1.  Gorhar–
Barwa 
Adda  
Inferior Geo-
textile used / 
no Geo-
textile used  
11,91,65
6 
sqm 
5.79 The Geo-textile 
material used 
between Sub grade 
and Granular Sub-
base in this project 
was not an 
approved material.  
The work was 
to be approved 
after testing/ 
certification by 
IIT Delhi. IIT 
Delhi did not 
have the facility 
to do all testing. 
It was then left 
to the Engineer 
to decide.  
Due to non-
availability of 
testing facilities, 
NHAI failed to 
ascertain the 
suitability of the 
material used.  
2. Gurgaon-
Kotputli  
Additional 
layer of 
Distressed 
Bituminous 
Pavement  
2.11 CRRI observed 
premature distress 
like deformation 
and cracking due to 
unstable mix, less 
voids in the mix 
and loose material 
in the sub-base. On 
being pointed out 
the same was 
rectified within the 
defect liability 
period at a cost of 
Rs.2.11 crore 
without any 
recovery from the 
contractor.  
NHAI has 
disagreed with 
this payment 
and accordingly 
matter has 
since been 
referred to 
arbitrator. The 
award of the 
arbitrator was 
awaited
.  
Final recovery of 
the overpayment 
would be 
watched in audit.  
3.  Hosur-
Krishnagiri  
Granular 
Sub Base 
with 
unconfirmed 
compressive 
strength  
1,07,754 
sqm 
8.40 The cement treated 
sub-base should 
have compressive 
strength of 9 
MPA/6MPA at 98 
per cent maximum 
dry density as per 
technical 
specifications. But 
the PSC changed 
the specification to 
lower strength 
resulting in the 
work becoming 
sub-standard.  
There was 
something 
inherently 
wrong with the 
specification 
provided in the 
contract. The 
strength 
specified was 
not achievable. 
The reply that the 
applicable 
specifications are 
wrong is not 
acceptable. 
MOST 
specifications are 
based on 
empirical testing 
and the required 
strength was 
achievable. NHAI 
did not fix 
responsibility for 
the execution of 
this sub-standard 
work.  

 
4.  Surat 
Manor-
Pkg-1  
Dense 
Bituminous 
Macadam 
(DBM)  
89024 
cum  
19.03 According to 
MOST 
specifications, 
DBM should be 
provided with 
wearing course. 
But even after 
execution, the 
wearing course 
was not 
provided 
resulting in sub-
standard 
execution of 
work.  
The 
specifications 
are only 
suggestive. 
The contractor 
/ Engineer are 
responsible for 
quality of work 
done.  
The specifications 
form a part of the 
agreement and no 
deviation is 
permissible. 
Clause 507.5 
requires wearing 
course as early as 
possible even if 
road has been 
opened to traffic. 
The liability of 
PSC/ Contractor to 
rectify did not 
permit relaxation of 
specifications. 
Further, the defect 
may not manifest 
during the Defect 
Liability Period, but 
the life of the road 
would be reduced.  
5.  Surat-
ManorPkg-
III  
Pavement 
Quality 
Concrete 
on Toll 
Plaza  
2.72 Agreement was 
to provide PQC 
with sensor 
paver. But the 
contractor did 
not use sensor 
paver.  
  
6.  Surat-
ManorPkg-
1  
Well 
having 
shifts and 
tilts  
1.95 The well should 
be constructed 
with a tolerable 
shift/tilt ranging 
from 50 to 300 
mm only as 
against the 
executed shift/tilt 
ranging from 
441 to 535 mm 
in three wells 
resulting in poor 
quality of work.  
  
  Total 40.00    
 
 

ANNEXURE - IV 
 
AMENDMENTS SUGGESTED BY NHAI 
Amendment required for Institutional strengthening   
 Keeping in view the enhanced mandate and change in focus from the EPC contracts to PPP 
projects, NHAI is in the process of strengthening th e institution. A proposal of restructuring of 
NHAI has been prepared by Inter-Ministeri al Committee, which has subsequently been 
discussed in the meeting of Committee of Secret aries. Some of the recommendations in the 
report would require amendment in the NHAI Act, 1988 (68 of 1988) and amendment to the 
NHAI (the Term of Office and Other Conditions of Service of Member) Rules, 2003.   
 
2 The following amendment is required to be made in order to strengthen the NHAI:  
(i) section 3 of Section 3 of the NHAI Ac t, 1988 (68 of 1988) for increase in the number 
of full-time Members from five to six and increase in number of part-time Members from four 
to six.  
 
(ii) Amendment to the Section 6 of the NHAI (the Term of Office and Other Conditions of 
Service of Member) Rules, 2003 for increase in the part time Members from four to six. The 
two Members to be included in the Authority will be from the non-Government Sector, one 
from IITs/ IIMs and other from financial institutions. This is mainly to widen the perspective for 
private sector point of view.  
 
(iii) to be made in the NHAI (the Term of Office and Other Conditions of Service of 
Member) Rules, 2003 for inducting Member (PPP) whose qualifications and experience have 
been laid down in the report of restructuring of NHAI. The Member (PPP) would be 
responsible for formulating the policy for PPP projects, financial modelling and appraisal and 
should have adequate experience in the field of planning, structuring and management of 
PPP projects of infrastructure sector, preferably in the highways.
  
 
(iv) to be made in the NHAI (Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) Regulation, 1996 for 
relaxation in the age of consultant to be appointed on contract basis specifically for the posts 
of Contract Management Specialist, Transport Economist, Transport Planner and Financial 
Analyst.  
 
 
 
 

Amendment required for Land Acquisition:  
Amendment in the NH Act, 1956 would also be requi red to facilitate the acquisition of land 
expeditiously for the NHAI projects. The followi ng needs to be added under Sub-section 7 of 
Section 3-G NH Act, 1956:  
 
(1) In addition to the market-value of the land, the Competent Authority or the Arbitrator shall 
in every case award a sum of 30 per centum on such market value, in consideration of the 
compulsory nature of the acquisition. 
 
(2) The 1956 Act does not specifically provide fo r a time limit for initiating the arbitration 
proceeding challenging the compensation determined by the Competent Authority. There have 
been instances where interested persons have challenged the awards determined by the 
competent authority after two years which not on ly delays the completion of the LA process but 
also creates administrative problems.  It may be better to prescribe a time limit for the interested 
persons for challenging the compensation award before the Arbitrator. Following need to be 
added in the NH Act 
 
“Provided that every such application shall be made - 
 
within six months from the date of the Competent Authority’s determination.” 
 
(3) to include acquisition through mutual consent  to a limited extent only in the following 
cases: 
(a) Missing plots, which are left out from the bulk acquisition. 
(b) Additional land required due to alteration of alignment at implementation stage. 
 
To adopt this process, adequate protective mechanism would be put in place for ensuring 
transparency in the rates and for establishing rightful ownership. 
 
(4)  Explore the possibility of invoking urgency clause, as in case of LA Act, for faster LA 
process in some special cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Amendment required for Environment Clearance: 
All widening projects where diversion of land of the reserved forest / national park/ sanctuary land 
is not involved should be exempted from the purview of the Environment clearance. This would 
require amendment in the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) notification.  
 
Grant of Tax Exemption Status to NHAI u/s. 10 of Income Tax Act.  
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) was constituted by an Act of Parliament namely 
National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988), as an autonomous body of the 
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways.  
The objectives and functions of the Authorit y has been specified in section 16 of the 
National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988. As per the enactment the Authority has 
executive responsibility for development, maintenance and operation of the National 
Highways and associated facilities as entrusted to the Author ity by the Ministry of Shipping, 
Road Transport and Highways. The functions of the Authority as per sections 16 of the NHAI 
Act are as under: - 
(a) survey, develop, maintain and manage highways vested in or entrusted 
to it; 
(b) construct offices or workshops and establish and maintain hotels, motels, 
restaurants and rest-rooms at or n ear the highways vested in or 
entrusted to it; 
(c) construct residential buildings and township for its employees; 
(d) regulate and control the plying of v ehicles on the highways vested in, or 
entrusted to it, for the proper management thereof; 
(e) develop and provide consultancy and construction services in India and 
abroad and carry on research activities in relation to the development, 
maintenance and management of  highways or any facilities there at; 
(f) provide such facilities and amenities for the users of the highways vested 
in, or entrusted to it as are, in the opinion of the Authority, necessary for 
the smooth flow of traffic on such highways; 
(g) form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1956 to further 
the efficient discharge of the functions imposed on it by this Act; 
(h) engage, or entrust any of its f unctions to, any corporation or body 
corporate owned or controlled by the Government; 
(i) advice the Central Government on matters relating to highways; 

(j) assist, on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, 
any State Government in the formulation and implementation of schemes 
for highway development; 
(k) collect fees on behalf of the Central Government for services or benefits 
rendered under section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956, as 
amended from time to time and such other fees  on behalf of the State 
Governments on such terms and conditions as may be specified by such 
State Governments; and  
(l) take all such steps as may be necessary or convenient for, or may be 
incidental to, the exercise of any po wer or the discharge of any function 
conferred or imposed on it by this Act.  
 
As per section 3 of Chapter-2 of NHAI Act, 1988  
 
2 The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to  the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said 
name sue and be sued. 
 
3 The Authority shall consist of:-  
(i) a Chairman 
(ii) not more than five full-time members; and  
(iii) not more than four part-time members 
 
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 
 
Projects taken up by the Authority are as under:- 
 
(i) Govt. approved the programmes of NHDP Phase-I (mainly Golden 
Quadrilateral) in April 2000 at an estimated cost of Rs.30300 crores.  
(ii) Govt. approved NHDP Phase-II (mainl y North-South and East-West     
Corridor) in December 2003 at an estimated cost of Rs.31831crores.  
(iii) Govt. approved NHDP Phas e-III-A and III-B (connectivity to State   Capitals, 
places of tourist and economic importance) in March 2005. 
 
In addition, following are the future programmes of NHAI:- 
(i) NHDP Phase IV : 2 laning of 20,000 km   of National Highways on BOT/Annuity 
at an estimated cost of Rs.27800 crore. 

(ii) Accelerated Road Development in North East-603 km. at an estimated cost of 
Rs.12, 123 crore. 
(iii) NHDP Phase V: 6 laning of select ed stretches (6500 km.) on BOT/Toll at an 
estimated cost of Rs.41, 210 crore. 
(iv) NHDP Phase VI: Development of 1, 000 km Expressways on BOT/Toll at an 
estimated cost of Rs.16, 680 crore. 
(v) NHDP Phase VII: Ring R oads, Bypasses, Grade S eparators, Service Roads 
etc. on BOT/Annuity at an estimated cost of Rs.16, 680 crore. 
 
The projects taken up by the Authority have been considered to be priority projects of 
the Govt. of India and following benefits will be available to the economy and the broad 
section of the society.  
 
(i) Vehicle operating cost saving. 
(ii) Travel time saving, fuel saving & saving in foreign exchange. 
(iii) Benefits to the trade. 
(iv) Saving in maintenance cost of vehicles. 
(v) Reduced accidents. 
(vi) Area development. 
(vii) Increased employment potential 
(viii) Contributing to GDP etc. 
 
For financing the projects, various sources of financing has been identified as 
detailed below: 
 
(i) A dedicated non-lapsable ‘Central Road Fund’ has been created for pulling the 
resources generated from the cess on petrol and diesel. 
(ii) Loan/grant from, various multilateral funding agencies e.g. World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank, Japan Bank for International Cooperation. 
(iii) NHAI has been authorized to raise fund through bond issue and NHAI bond has 
been made eligible for capital gains tax exemption. 
(iv) Direct funding from the budgetary resources of Government of India. 
(v) Private Sector participation for funding of BOT and Annuity Projects of NHAI. 
(vi) Subsidiaries of NHAI have been approved for taking up projects such as Port 
connectivity and Bypass etc. 
The Authority is working under the Administ rative control of Ministry of Shipping, 
Road Transport and Highways. Projects are approved by the Govt. of India and funded 

mainly through Central Road Fund, financing from multilateral funding agencies and 
borrowings. The objective of th e Authority purely related to adv ancement of public utility in 
public interest.  
 
In view of above, it is submitted that Au thority and its subsidiaries (as provided in 
NHAI Act 1988) may be granted exemption under section 10 of Income Tax Act on the similar 
lines as has already been granted to the following: - 
(i) Coffee Board, Rubber Board, Tea Board constituted under respective Act.  
(ii) Marine Products Export Developmen t Authority, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority constituted under respective Act 
************ 
 

ANNEXURE –V 
 
RESTRUCTURING OF NHAI AS SUGGESTED BY MINISTRY 
 
1. The vision statement of NHAI to be:  
“To meet the nation’s need for the provision and maintenance of National Highways 
network to global standards and to meet user’s expectations in the most time bound and 
cost effective manner, within the strategic policy framework set by the Government of 
India and thus promote economic well being and quality of life of the people.” 
2. NHAI’s Business model of outsourcing major activities to be essentially retained. NHAI 
Board to evolve an appropriate procedure/system of  sample test checks by Project Directors for 
ensuring the veracity of the bills prepared by the Supervision Consultant for payments to the 
contractor and appropriateness of the authorisat ion given by the Superv ision Consultant for 
variations. 
3. Selection of the Chairman by a Search Committee headed by  the Cabinet Secretary and 
comprising Secretary, DORT&H, Secretary, Planni ng commission,  a CMD or MD of a financial 
institution and one of the directors of IIMs to be nominated by the Cabinet Secretary.  
4. The tenure of the Chairman to be fixed for at least three years which can be extended 
upto five years.   
5. Age in case of the Chairman to be relaxed upto 62 years if required for three-year tenure.   
6. Increase in the number of part time Members by two (from 4 to 6), who would be from the 
non-Government sector, one from IITs/IIMs and the other from financial institutions.  
7. NHAI to have six full time members (against five at present) – one each for finance, 
administration, public private partnership (PPP), two Members (Project) and one Member 
(Technical).   
8. Member (Finance) to have adequate experience in finance and financial management, 
preferably knowledge of financial market and funding of infrastructure projects. 
9. Member (PPP) to be responsible for formulating policy for PPP projects, financial 
modelling and appraisal of PPP projects and to have adequate experience in the field of planning, 
structuring and management of PPP projects of infrastructure sector, preferably in the highways.  
10. Member (Technical) to act as the repository of technical knowledge to be responsible for 
R&D, technical manuals, standards, and specifications that guide design and safety. The Member 
(Technical) and the proposed standardization and R&D Cell would supervise the technical 
sanctions and standards for all the stages of th e preparation of DPRs and administration of 
contracts. 
11. Creation of a Project Appraisal Cell to undertake comprehensive project appraisal and 
critically examine realistic capacity planning, optimal specification, estimates of toll revenue, cash 
flows, funding tie-up, and financial viability within the maximum grant permissible. The cell to be 

headed by financial analyst (rank of CGM) and to comprise experts in the areas of finance, 
transport economics, transport planning, and legal aspects. 
12. Creation of a Planning Cell with key respon sibilities of planning for new projects and 
supporting the strategic functions of top management. The Cell to be headed by a GM level 
officer reporting to CGM (PQ).  The CGM (PQ) will report directly to the Chairman.  
13. Creation of a Quality Assurance Cell with key responsibilities for promotion of quality 
assurance initiatives, quality checks through inspection of the ongoing works including quality 
audit through external professional agencies. The Cell would be headed by a GM level officer and 
report to CGM (PQ). 
14. Creation of a Standardization and R&D Cell fo r tracking new technical developments and 
international best practices in road and bridge construction, formulating standards and manuals, 
and for undertaking R&D activities. The cell to be headed by a CGM level officer, to report to 
Member (Technical). 
15. Creation of a Contract Management Cell for advising on all key contract agreement 
issues. In addition, the unit will advise NHAI in ca se any amendments to the contracts are to be 
made during the implementation of the projec ts. The cell will be headed by a contract 
management specialist (rank of CGM) reporting to one of the Members (Project). 
16. Creation of a Legal and Arbitration Cell headed by a Chief General Manager with 
experience in Concessions and Contract Law. Apart from building sufficient in-house capabilities, 
the cell should be enabled to retain specialist l egal counsel. The specific responsibilities should 
include legal vetting of the terms of reference of consultants, bid documents etc., legal advice on 
contract management and other issues, monitori ng of dispute resolution process and outcomes 
and all legal and arbitration cases. The cell would be located under Member (Administration).  
17. Creation of a Road Safety Cell to appraise safety, set operational policy and safety 
standards and monitor asset performance to be located under Member (Technical).  
18. A Committee under CGM to examine and accept the Detailed Project Report. A monthly 
report on the acceptance of various DPRs would be placed before the NHAI Board. 
19. NHAI to prepare manuals and guidelines for various processes and proper administration 
of contracts. 
20. To empower the Authority to create posts in NHAI upto the level of Chief General 
Manager. 
21.  Creation of posts of CGM (Finance) (2 posts), CGM (PQ), CGM (SR&D), CGM 
(Administration and HR), CGM (IT), CGM (LA), CGM (Legal), CGM (Safety), Financial Analyst 
(CGM level), Contract Management Specialist (CGM level). CGMs for project implementation and 
corridor management as per the norms fixed by the NHAI Board. 

22. To consider State level institutions in cluding some State Governments as “partner 
institutions” at the regional level for implem enting some of the mandated works under NHAI’s 
umbrella.  
23. To identify and retain key persons and also recruit some personnel directly to build, over 
time, a core of permanent employees of NHAI. 
24. To revisit the comprehensive training plan prepared by NHAI for its employees in the light 
of shift of focus from EPC to PPP and also to expand the plan to include consultants and 
contractors.  
25. To empower the Authority to engage, where required, outside experts (with relaxation of 
age if needed) specifically the posts of for financial analyst, transport economist, contract 
management specialist and legal expert; on compensation to be determined by the Authority in 
line with the experience and availability of the appropriate personnel. 
26. To revamp and strengthen organizations li ke the National Institute for Training of 
Highways Engineers (NITHE), Central Roads Re search Institute (CRRI), Indian Roads Congress 
(IRC) to enhance overall capacity and capability in the highways sector. 
27. To set-up a Knowledge Management System fo r capturing and using experiences in bid 
process; contract management; time, cost and quality performance of contractor; and 
performance of design consultants in terms of abnormal variations. 

ANNEXURE -VI 
MINUTES OF THE 2nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 25 JULY 2006 
 
The Committee sat from 1630 hours to 1730 hours.  
 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Shri Rupchand Pal 
MEMBERS       
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Dr. M. Jagannath 
5. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Shri Kashiram Rana 
8. Shri Mohan Rawale 
9. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
MEMBERS       
RAJYA SABHA  
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri. N.C. Gupt a  Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar  Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya   Deputy Comptroller & Auditor General cum 
Chairman, Audit Board. 
2. Shri Sunil Chander  Prin cipal Director (Commercial). 
3. Shri A.K. Singh Principal Director of Commercial Audit & Ex-Officio, 
Member Audit Board-I  

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the C&AG.  Thereafter, the Committee were briefed by the 
Officials of Comptroller & Auditor General of India on various aspects related to 
National Highways Development  Project of National Highways Authority of India 
as contained in the C&AG’s Repor t No. 7 of 2005 (Commercial).  The 
clarifications sought by the Members were also resolved by the Officials of 
C&AG. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE  3rd  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  22  August,  2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1645 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
5. Shri Kashiram Rana 
6. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Shri Rishang Keishing 
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
9. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
2. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
3. Shri Sunil Chander  Princi pal Director  (Commercial) 
4. Ms. Meena Swaroop Principa l Director  (Commercial) 
 

 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayana Dash   Chairman 
2. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi   Member (Administration) 
3. Shri Nirmal Jit Singh   Member (Technical) 
4. Shri Indu Prakash    Member (Technical) 
5. Shri G. Sharan    Member (Technical) 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of National 
Highways Authority of Indi a (NHAI) in connection with  examination of C&AG’s 
Report No. 7 (Commercial) of 2005 on National Highways Development Project 
(NHDP) Phase-I which has been selected as a subject for examination during 
2006-2007.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of NHAI and 
also drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating 
to evidence before the Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives 
of NHAI made an audio-visual presentation on the National Highways 
Development Project being implemented  by the NHAI.  After audio-visual 
presentation, Members ra ised queries on various aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the 
representatives of NHAI.  Information on  some of the points raised by the 
Committee was not readily available with the representatives of NHAI.  It was, 
however, promised by them that the sa me would be furnished to the Committee 
Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the represent atives of NHAI for providing all 
the material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE  5th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  7th SEPTEMBER, 2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1030 hrs to 1145 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
3. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA  
8. Shri Ajay Maroo 
9. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a,  Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar,  Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
5. Shri U. Bhattacharya Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
6. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
7. Shri Sunil Chander  Prin cipal Director (Commercial) 
8. Shri J. Wilson  Principa l Director (Commercial)  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS 
1. Shri Vijay Singh  Secretary (RT&H) 
2. Shri C. Balakrishnan, Additio nal Secretary & Financial Advisor 
3. Shri A.P. Bahadur  Chief Engineer (PIC) 

 
 
4. Dr. Satyanarayana Dash, Chairman, NHAI 
5. Shri Nirmal Jit Singh, Member (Technical), NHAI 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of  the representatives of Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways in connection with examination of 
C&AG’s Report No. 7 (Commercial) of 20 05 on National Highways Development 
Project (NHDP) Phase-I of National Hig hways Authority of India which has been 
selected as a subject for examination during 2006-2007.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
and also drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker 
relating to evidence before the Parliam entary Committee.  Thereafter, Members 
raised queries on various aspects pe rtaining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the representatives of the 
Ministry.  Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was not 
readily available with the r epresentatives of the Mini stry.  It was, however, 
promised by them that the same would be furnished to the Committee Secretariat 
in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the repr esentatives of the Ministry for 
providing all the material/information on the subject matter as desired by the 
Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 

MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 6th December 2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1630 hrs to 1715 hrs. 
CHAIRMAN 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
2 Dr. M. Jagannath 
3 Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5 Smt. Praneet Kaur 
6 Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7 Shri Kashiram Rana 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA  
8 Shri Rishang Keishing 
9 Shri. K. Chandran Pillai 
10 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
11 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. G upta Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
2. Shri J.Wilson,   Principal Director of Commercial Audit  
  
2. The Committee considered the two Draft Reports on the following subjects 
and adopted the same with some modifications: -  
(i) National Highways Authority of India – National Highways 
Development Project, Phase-I; and  
 
(ii) XXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXX.  
 

3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation.   
 
4. XXXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXX  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 