 
C.P.U. No. 924  
 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED – UNPRODUCTIVE 
PAYMENT OF INCENTIVE 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16-12-2008 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16-12-2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2008 / Agrahayana 1930 (S) 
 
 
 
31  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
PART  A  
REPORT  
A. Overview  1 
B. Incentive Schemes in HPCL 3 
C.  Rationale for introduction of PRI Scheme 5 
D. Retrospective Implementation of Incentive Scheme  7 
E. Delay in introduction of PRI and evolving 
parameters of the scheme 
 
10 
PART  B 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 12 
Annexure-I – Para 14.4.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 11 of 
2008 (Commercial). 
 
16 
Annexure-II – Minutes of Sittings of Committee 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
C O M P O S I T I O N  O F 
 
T H E  C O M M I T T E E  O N  P U B L I C  U N D E R T A K I N G S  
(2008-2009) 
 
 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal         -       Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5. Shri Francis K. George 
6. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
7. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale 
10. Shri K.C. “Baba” Singh 
11. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
12. Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
13. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
14. Shri Rajesh Verma 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Rahul Bajaj 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
20 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
21 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
22 *Shri Amar Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Executive Officer 
            
 
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent on his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
 
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION  
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their beh alf, present this Thirty First 
Report on “Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited – Unproductive payment of 
incentive” – unproductive payment of Rs. 76.26 crore. 
 
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2008-2009).  The Committee’s examinat ion of the subject was based 
on Paragraph 14.4.1 of the Report on Union Governme nt (Commercial) of the 
C&AG of India No. 11 CA of 2008. 
 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of representati ves of the HPCL on 2 
nd  
June, 2008.  Thereafter, the Committee obtained the  replies of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to a list of questions.  
 
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2008-09) c onsidered and adopted 
the Report at their sitting held on 2 
nd  December, 2008.  The Committee feel obliged 
to the Members of the Committee on Public Undertaki ngs (2008-09).  They would 
also like to place on record their deep sense of ap preciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by officials of Lok Sab ha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Lim ited for placing before them 
the material and information they wanted in connect ion with examination of the 
subject.  They also wish to thank in particular the  representatives of the Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited who gave evidence and  placed their considered 
views before the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                          RUPCHAND PAL  
2 December, 2008                                CHA IRMAN 
11 Agrahayana, 1930 (S)               COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
 
 
(v) 

 -  
 
1  
 
PART A  
 
A. Overview  
 
1. Para No. 14.4.1 of Comptroller & Auditor General ’s Report (Commercial) No. 
CA 11 of 2008 contained an observation highlighting  payment of unproductive 
incentives to employees of Hindustan Petroleum Corp oration Limited. As per the 
audit observation, inapt implementation of a new in centive scheme on the basis of 
performance already attained by employees and paid for under an existing incentive 
scheme led to avoidable payment of unproductive incentive of Rs. 76.26 Crore.  
 
2. The main contentions made in the audit observati on are: - 
 
(i) Productive Incentive (PI) Scheme for payment of  incentive on 
attainment of specific milestones as per applicable  parameters was 
introduced in 1983, subject to ceilings for two cat egories of employees 
of HPCL viz., (a) employees eligible for profit sha ring bonus and (b) 
employees not eligible for such bonus. 
 
(ii) Performance Linked Incentive (PLI), another in centive scheme was 
introduced again in 1991 for employees not eligible  for profit sharing 
bonus. 
 
(iii) The company introduced a third incentive sche me, namely, 
Performance Related Incentive (PRI) scheme in April  2006 
retrospectively from the financial year 2004-05. Th is scheme was 
justified on the basis of DEP guideline increasing the limit for payment 
of performance linked incentives to 50% of basic pa y and five percent 
of distributable profit of a PSE, effective from 1 January 1997, and the 
fact that payments made under the two existing sche mes are well 
below such limit. 
 
(iv) The Parameters for the PRI scheme were perform ance of Strategic 
Business Units (SBUs) at the first level and team p erformance for all 
employees at the second level.  But the payment of incentive for the 
year 2004-2005 and 2005-06 under the scheme were ma de by the 
Company, adopting parameters for the PI scheme.  Fu rther, on finding 
that the limit of 50% had not been reached in the y ears 2002-2003 
and 2003-04 also, the Company in October, 2006 deci ded to further 
extend the retrospective implementation to cover th ose two years as 
well as.  As  a consequence, incentive payments of Rs. 19.55 crore, 
Rs.23.91 crore, Rs. 16.30 crore and Rs. 16.50 crore  for the years 
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively  were made 
under the new PRI scheme, amounting to a total payo ut of Rs. 76.26 
crore. 
 
(v) Audit had in March 2007 observed that payment o f incentive under 
PRI scheme, having a distinct set of parameters, by  adopting 

 -  
 
2  
 
parameters applicable to the existing PI scheme was  irregular, 
amounting to releasing of double payment for the sa me performance 
by the employees and exceeding the ceiling prescrib ed under the PI 
scheme. 
 
(vi) Further, retrospective implementation of incen tive scheme cannot be 
expected to motivate the employees for better perfo rmance than what 
had already been achieved and rewarded, thus resulting in payment of 
unproductive incentive. 
 
(vii) The Management of the company in their reply stated the introduction 
of the PRI scheme had its genesis in the Justice Mo han Committee 
Report and that while the distribution of PRI effec tive from the year 
2006-07 among various SBUs would be carried out in line with their 
respective performance against targets, for the per iod prior to April 
2006, it could only be linked with parameters set i n the then existing 
scheme, i.e., Productive Incentive. It further stat ed that the Board 
approved (October 2006) implementation of PRI for 2 002-03 and 
2003-04, as PI was restricted to 15 percent as per DPE guidelines. 
 
(viii) The Ministry endorsed the reply of the Manag ement (August 2007), 
justifying the payment of new incentive with retrospective effect stating 
that the petroleum sector was liberalized effective  from 2002-03 and 
oil PSUs have to aggressively compete in the market  to retain their 
market share and to sustain growth. 
 
(ix) Audit found the reply untenable. Justice Mohan  Committee stressed 
the necessity to ensure that incentives be related more to 
performance and profits of the companies than it wa s at present, 
further observing that performance related payments  in PSUs existed 
only in form and not in substance. By rewarding the  employees under 
PRI for parameters achieved and already awarded und er PI amounts 
to rewarding in form and not in substance. Further,  retrospective 
extension of the scheme from 2002-03 on the ground of liberalization 
and competition for market share was not justified as there was 
virtually no competition in the retail and LPG segm ents that 
constituted 70% of the company’s total turnover and  in view of the 
existence of subsidy scheme. 
 
(x) According to the Audit, the manner in which PRI  scheme had been 
implemented was not in the best financial and profe ssional interest of 
the company and appeared to be aimed at exhausting the 
distributable amount of profits made available by t he new DPE 
guideline, resulting in unproductive payment of Rs. 76.26 crore. 
 
 

 -  
 
3  
 
B. Incentive Schemes in HPCL 
 
3. The Committee asked to furnish the salient featu res of the three incentives 
Schemes in vogue in the company, HPCL in their reply wrote:  
 
“Currently, there are following three schemes in vo gue in HPCL, out of which 
Productivity Incentive & Performance Linked Incenti ve schemes are based 
on the guidelines given by the Ministry and was int roduced way back since 
1982-83.  Performance Related Incentive has been in troduced effective 
2004-05 and was made applicable for the previous tw o years i.e. 2002-03 
and 2003-04. 
 
 a) Productivity Incentive Scheme 
 
 
  This scheme was introduced in the year 1983.  Thi s scheme is 
based on the guidelines given by the Ministry of En ergy, Department 
of Petroleum, Government of India. Productivity is determined based 
on the various components of Marketing and Refinery  activities and 
marks are being allotted for each component to arri ve at the total 
score for the respective activity.  Considering the  total marks, the 
incentive percentage is fixed for the respective financial year. 
                                               
 b) Performance Linked Incentive 
 
 
  This payment is in lieu of bonus.   The salary is  calculated @ 
Rs.2500/- per month.  The total amount payable unde r the scheme is 
calculated at a max. of 20% and the maximum payable  is Rs.6000/- 
per year , which is same for all employees .The var ious parameters 
are fixed for achieving rating for performance of t he Corporation.  The 
rating for the purpose of calculation of PLI is bei ng determined by the 
MOU score arrived at by adding the weighted criteri on value 
representing performance achieved in a financial ye ar compared to 
objectives in respect of each value allotted ingredient.   
 
 c) Performance Related Incentive 
 
 
  In addition to the Productivity Incentive and Per formance 
Linked Incentive that have been in vogue for quite some time in the oil 
industry and in line with action taken by other ind ustry members, the 
Board of HPCL has also approved Performance Related  Incentive 
(PRI) scheme related to distributable profit as rec ommended by 
Justice Mohan Committee initially effective from th e financial year 
2004-05, which was subsequently extended for the years 2002-03 and 
2003-04.  There have been repeated demands from the  Officers’ 
Associations in the industry for development of Inc entive Schemes, 
which will ensure profit sharing as envisaged in th e Justice Mohan 
Committee Report.  Officers’ Associations have been  demanding for 
profit sharing effective 1.1.1997 based on Justice Mohan Committee 

 -  
 
4  
 
recommendations.  As a result of this, an industry consensus was 
arrived at with consultation with the Ministry of P etroleum & Natural 
Gas for development of suitable incentive schemes i n the concerned 
oil companies which was made effective from 2004-05.   
       
As per the scheme effective 2006-07 performances of  the 
major SBUs in the Corporation is judged against tar gets set at the 
beginning of the year.  In line with such parameter s/measured 
performance, PRI is paid to all employees based upo n individual 
salary grades. “  
 
4. During evidence, representatives of HPCL further  elaborated on the 
distinguishing features of the three incentive schemes as reproduced below. 
 
“Sir, there are three types of incentives currently  in vogue.  One is 
productivity incentive.  The scheme has been in vog ue since 1983.  it was 
introduced by the Government.  There are specific p arameters for marketing 
and refineries.  The maximum productivity incentive  payable is 15 per cent of 
the salary.  The second incentive scheme, which is in vogue, is called 
performance linked incentive.  It was also introduc ed by the Government.  It 
is in lieu of bonus.  The actual amount payable com es to Rs. 6,000 only for 
every employee. The other incentive that was introd uced is the performance 
related incentive. It is borne out of the Justice M ohan Committee Report at 
the time of the last pay revision in 1997.  
 
Based upon it, the DPE issued a circular in 1999.  There was a 
clarification in 2000.  it talks about two things.  First of all, it says that the total 
perquisites, which include the incentives, should n ot exceed 50 per cent of 
the basic.  If it exceeds, the same has to be withi n five per cent of 
distributable profit.  The performance related ince ntive was introduced, and 
the scheme envisages fixing of the targets at the b eginning of the year for 
each team, that is, each strategic business unit, a nd then looking at the end 
of the year the performance related to targets and based upon that, the 
schemes have been introduced.   
 
First of all I want to say that we have been follow ing this particular 
thing, namely, targets vis-à-vis performance, since  2006-07.  This was also 
introduced for the year 2005-06 and for the previou s years, 2002-03, 2003-
04 and 2004-05.  This incentive was paid.  In the a bsence of the targets 
specifically fixed, which we could do from 2006-07, the criteria for productivity 
incentive, which is a Government approved criteria,  has been taken for the 
purpose of payment of the performance related incen tive for the years 2002-
03 to 2005-06.  That is how it was done.” 
 
 
 

 -  
 
5  
 
C.  Rationale for introduction of PRI Scheme 
 
5. Explaining the need behind the introduction of t he PRI scheme, the company 
in their post-evidence reply stated; 
 
“With regard to need for introduction of PRI scheme , since the salary and 
benefits in private sector are high compared to the ir counterparts in public 
sector oil companies, there were more resignations from officers from 2005 
onwards. Under these circumstances, a need was felt  to introduce a new 
rewarding scheme to motivate employees and retain t hem in the 
organization. APM was removed in the year 2002. The  Oil Sector Officers 
Association (OSOA) was demanding for an incentive s cheme to reward the 
officers in a changed scenario to motivate them and  retain them. 
Accordingly, downstream oil companies have introduc ed incentive scheme 
for employees for their excellent performance in line with DPE guidelines.” 
 
6. The Committee desired to know whether the scheme  was made available to 
all employees and whether the principle of equity a nd social justice had been 
adhered to in distributing the payout. The company in their post evidence reply 
stated as follows; 
 
“As per Justice Mohan Committee recommendations, PR I should be paid 
only to the management employees. However, in order  to recognize the 
contribution made by non-management employees and a lso for a peaceful 
industry climate in the organization, it was decide d to share the PRI with 
non-management employees, even though there were ce rtain objections 
from the officers’ association. Accordingly, discus sions were held with 
Unions for quantum of payment of PRI to them. The c omparable level 
between the highest non-management and the entry-le vel officer trainees 
(Management Cadre), the difference is not much. As done in the case of 
management employees, the non-management employees were also paid 
PRI based on the salary grades and unions are gener ally happy about the 
payment of PRI made to non-management employees. Th e salaries and 
benefits paid for non-management employees in HPCL and other oil sector 
companies are comparatively better and higher than the counterparts in 
private sector whereas the salaries and benefits fo r officers in HPCL and 
other oil sector companies are far lesser than thei r counterparts in private 
sector.” 
 
7. Explaining the rationale for the introduction of  the PRI scheme during 
evidence, the CMD of HPCL stated; 
 
“The first problem that we are facing is very well- known. This is the problem 
which is caused by the under recoveries in the sell ing of petroleum products 
– four major projects, petrol, diesel, kerosene and  LPG – on which we are 
losing something like Rs. 115 crore per day approxi mately….The second 
problem that we are currently facing for the last t hree to four years has been 
the large-scale resignations of our experienced people in the Company.  This 

 -  
 
6  
 
is also, to some extent, related.  During the curre nt year, at least, it is related 
to the profitability of the Company as well.  Durin g the exit interview, we have 
been talking to them as to why they have been resig ning.  One of the major 
reasons of the people resigning from the company is  actually because of the 
comparatively lower salary vis-à-vis the other oppo rtunities, which they get in 
the Middle-East countries and also in other parts….  Sir, this was the main 
issue.  The problem of exodus from the company is b ecause of the higher 
salary elsewhere.  During the exit interview we had  asked them:  “Is there 
any other issue, which is affecting?  Why are they leaving?”  They said: “No.  
Just because they are being offered high remunerati on, they are leaving.”  
They actually thanked us for the kind of training t hat is given by the company 
and things like that. We have been representing this matter to our Ministry for 
a very long time.  This matter gets discussed in th e Board of the company as 
well as, as to how we can stop this exodus.  So, we  were always looking at 
the opportunities of pay, any kind of remuneration or incentives to our 
experienced colleagues.  This is where the whole issue starts.” 
  
 
8. On the ministry’s endorsement of HPCL’s reply to  the C&AG that introduction 
of the new incentive scheme was necessitated by the  need to combat aggressive 
competition posed by the new entrants in the busine ss in the post APM regime, the 
Committee desired to know how the ministry justifie d the scheme given the fact that 
HPCL is mainly in marketing business where no priva te player entered in a big way. 
The ministry in their reply stated; 
 
“The incentive given was based not only on performa nce of Marketing 
segment but the performance of other SBUs including  Refineries.  Further, 
since the salary and benefits in Private Sector are  high compared to their 
counterparts in Public Sector Oil Companies and as there were more 
resignations from officers, a need was felt to intr oduce a new rewarding 
scheme to motivate employees and retain them in the  organization.  
Accordingly, down stream oil companies introduced i ncentive scheme for 
employees for their excellent performance in line with DPE guidelines.” 
 
9. The Committee also desired to know the attrition  figures in HPCL since the 
introduction of the new incentive scheme. In their post-evidence reply, the stated; 
 
“….470 officers have resigned in last four years i.e., 2004-05, 2005-06, 2006-
07 and 2007-08.” 
 
10. On whether the ministry has any mechanism to mo nitor the various incentive 
schemes framed and implemented by the oil PSUs, the ministry replied; 
 
“Board of concerned oil companies is the final auth ority for approving such 
schemes within the framework of DPE guidelines.  Al l these schemes are 
more or less similar in all Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies.” 
 
 

 -  
 
7  
 
D. Retrospective Implementation of Incentive Scheme  
 
11. To a question as to how management can justify retrospective payment of 
incentive, that too, over and above an existing inc entive scheme for rewarding 
performance which had already been achieved and rew arded, the company replied 
stating; 
 
“As per DPE guidelines, the Productivity Incentive is restricted up to a 
maximum of 15% of a salary.  Based on continuous re presentation of Oil 
Sector Officers Association members to industry to share the profits, the oil 
industry members including HPCL obtained Board approval for extension of 
the PRI Scheme for the years 2002-03, & 2003-04 as an additional 
incentive for achieving the new targets emerging out of the new challenges. 
It may be mentioned that due to employment opportun ities available in 
India and abroad, many officers were resigning and leaving oil sector 
industry and there was no other way to motivate off icers and retain them in 
the organization and also due to wide disparity in the wages between PSU 
offices and corresponding private sector, it was fe lt by industry members 
that there should be a scheme to motivate officers to perform better and 
retain them in the organization.  As per DPE guidel ine OM No.2 (49)/98-
DPE (WC) dated 25.6.1999, clause no 12 states that payment of perquisite 
and allowances may be made up to a maximum of 50% o f the basic pay 
and payments over and over the ceiling of 50% shoul d be entirely in the 
nature of performance related payments which should  not exceed 5% of 
the distributable profits in an enterprise. As stat ed in reply to our question 
no. 1, PRI includes the criteria of performance lev el, which has been 
adopted from the year 2006-07.  As regards 2002-03 to 2005-06 the 
parameters adopted for PI has been taken as a trans itory measure and 
distribution of PRI for this period has been based upon the parameters 
applicable for PI since we cannot lay parameters for the past period.” 
 
12. Explaining the extension of the scheme for the previous years during 
evidence before the Committee, a representative of the company stated; 
 
“Basically, the reason for extension of this scheme  for the previous years 
has been that it was felt that the productivity inc entive and performance 
linked incentive that were paid is not motivation enough for the officers” 
 
13. On whether basing the retrospective payment of PRI scheme based on 
parameters of PI scheme, payments under which have already been made would 
not amount to double payment, the company replied thus; 
 
“The scheme of PRI was born out of profit sharing c oncept introduced by 
Industry Members and adopted by DPE which is entire ly different in nature 
from the PI/PLI schemes.  With the business expansion and globalization in 
the recent years, the new parameters /targets focus ing on customer 
satisfaction have been emerged and a need has arise n to introduce new 

 -  
 
8  
 
incentives to employees for better individual/ SBU wise performance to 
compete with the new entrants in the business. 
 
In order to motivate the employees for focused perf ormance towards 
growth and profitability of the Corporation, it was  essential to introduce the 
concept of profit sharing Thus the new scheme does not tantamount to 
releasing the double payment of same performance bu t should be treated 
as an additional incentive for the employees performance.” 
 
14. On whether there is a requirement for governmen tal approval of such 
incentive schemes, and if so, give details and whet her the PLI and PRI schemes 
were approved by the Government, the company stated in their reply; 
 
“The PI/PLI schemes were introduced based on Minist ry of Petroleum & 
Chemicals, Dept. of Petroleum & Natural Gas guideli nes received in 1991. 
The PRI payments are based on the guidelines specif ied under Para 12 of 
DPE OM NO.2 (49)/98DPE(WC) dated 25th June 1999 and  the same has 
been approved by the Board.” 
 
15. On why the new PRI scheme was implemented retro spectively in the 
absence of any specific parameters for adjudging th e employees’ additional 
contribution towards productivity under the new sch eme and on the basis of the 
already achieved parameters of an existing scheme, the management replied; 
 
“With the decontrol of retail trade which forms the  major portion of 
petroleum market, effective 2002-03, the entire pet roleum marketing was 
liberalized and it paved the way for entry of priva te players in a big way. 
PSU oil companies have to aggressively compete in t he market effective 
2002-03 to retain their market share, develop the r etail outlets and sustain 
growth.  This involved considerable efforts by the employees since 2002-03 
as compared to previous years of APM regime and emp loyees’ efforts put 
in during this period needed to be recognized by a suitable additional 
incentive.  The current incentive schemes (PI / PLI ) which were based on 
the Ministry guidelines, were not enough to reward employees for their 
excellent performance / achievements in the various  activities with regard 
to expansion of Corporation’s business.  Management  therefore took a 
conscious decision to give an incentive in apprecia tion of the high 
performance achieved considering that the challengi ng targets fixed for 
these years was very high and the incentive paid was very low compared to 
the achievements made against the targets.  In orde r to boost the 
employees’ enthusiasm for future achievements, an i ndustry consensus 
was arrived in consultation with MOP&NG for develop ment of suitable 
incentive schemes with effect from the year 2006-07  and the same to be 
made applicable to the previous years i.e. 2002-03 to 2005-06.” 
 
16. The Committee addressed the above query to the ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas as well. The ministry in its reply stated; 
 

 -  
 
9  
 
“In April 2006, Board of Hindustan Petroleum Corpor ation Limited (HPCL) 
had approved a new incentive scheme titled Performa nce Related Incentive 
(PRI) Scheme for all employees.  In addition to the  existing schemes of 
Performance Incentive (PI) and Performance Linked I ncentive (PLI), effective 
from the year 2004-05. 
 
2. With the dismantling of Administered Pricing Mec hanism (APM) 
effective from 1.4.2002, the marker of petroleum pr oducts was opened for 
private companies also.  This opening up also broug ht severe competition.  
PSU oil companies had to aggressively compete to re tain their market share, 
and develop their retail outlets for sustainable gr owth.  This involved 
considerable efforts by the employees since 2002-03  as compared to 
previous years of APM regime and employee’s efforts  put in during this 
period needed to be recognized by a suitable additional incentive. 
 
3. The present reward was, therefore, given to empl oyees for their 
continuing excellent performance/achievements in re gard to expansion of 
Corporation’s business.  The Board, therefore, took  a conscious decision to 
give an incentive in appreciation of the high performance achieved. 
 
4. In order to boost the employees enthusiasm for f uture achievements, 
an industry consensus was arrived at for developmen t of suitable incentive 
schemes.  In a meeting of downstream oil companies,  it was decided to 
introduce a scheme in addition to the existing bene fits available to 
employees under the then existing PI/PLI. 
 
5. Keeping in view the above facts, the introductio n of Performance 
Related Incentive Scheme retrospectively was consid ered appropriate, since 
the achievements were excellent against the high ta rgets fixed for these 
years.” 
 
17. On how the management would justify rewarding p ast performance, which 
stood achieved and already rewarded, to be in the i nterest of the Company, the 
reply of the company stated; 
 
“As already stated supra there is a wide disparity among the salary and 
benefits paid to PSU oil sector  officers and their counterparts in private 
sectors, which led to attrition of considerable num ber of employees of the 
organization.   There is no other way they could be compensated, si nce the 
wage revision period would expire only in December 2006. As there was 
consistent  representation from the officers association for in troduction of 
new incentive scheme which will motivate employees to improve their 
performance, leading to profitability of the Corpor ation, a new PRI Scheme 
had to be introduced with different parameters from  PI /PLI. Basis above in 
line with the industry members Board has approved PRI scheme which was 
implemented effective 2004-05 and the new parameter s were implemented 
effective 2006-07.” 
 

 -  
 
10  
 
 
18. Asked as to why the ministry did not intervene against the retrospective 
implementation of the PRI scheme based on parameter s of an existing scheme 
against which the performance of the employees had already been measured and 
rewarded, the ministry in their written reply stated; 
 
“Since 2006-07, the PRI scheme is being implemented  amongst various 
Strategic Business Units (SBUs) according to their respective performances 
against set targets.  Regarding the period prior to  April 2006 viz. the years 
2004-05 and 2005-06, the PRI scheme could only be l inked with the 
parameters set against the then existing scheme viz . Productivity Incentive 
Payments were made to concerned employees after tak ing Board approval.  
Post APM, new challenges faced by oil sector organi sations were extremely 
compex and tough.  In order to motivate employees a nd retain the talent, the 
Incentive Scheme was extended to earlier years by t he Board of HPCL, 
which is the final approving authority in this regard.” 
 
E.  Delay in introduction of PRI and evolving param eters of the scheme 
 
19. In view of the fact that DPE guidelines issued in 1999 have provided for 
evolving a new incentive scheme with revised limits of 50% of basic and up to 5% of 
distributable profit towards payment of incentives to employees, the Committee 
desired to know why the management delayed introduc ing the PRI scheme till April 
2006. In reply, the representative of the company d uring evidence before the 
Committee stated; 
 
“Sir, the Justice Mohan Committee report’s period w as effective from 
1.1.1997 onwards. But, actually, by the time the re port was in and it was sent 
to us as an oil company, it was past 1999 almost an d it was in the year 2000. 
From 2000 onwards we started looking at various pos sibilities for developing 
a different set of parameters for doing this. These  parameters are normally 
done in discussion; we have a management associatio n as well plus we 
discuss with the other oil companies as well, so th at whatever we do in the 
industry, there is some kind of parity—though not e xactly the same. So, by 
the time we actually came to do something, two year s had gone by because 
there was no proper agreement on this. But then the re was tremendous 
demand for payment of this as well. So, we decided that since there is a 
Government formula available by which we are alread y giving one set of 
incentive, we said to start with, we would do that.  On the basis of that we 
started doing that based on the PI which is already  there, the productivity 
incentive which is already there.  So, we started out the first year like that. 
 
Next year, we started modifying it based on our exp erience and every 
year it has been changed.  In fact, for the year 20 06-2007 it came into a 
three-stage formula by which the profit of the comp any, of course the five per 
cent distributable profit is taken into account, th e profit of the SBU, strategic 
business unit, also started taking into account.  F or the year 2007-2008, the 
Board desired to add another parameter which is the  individual performance 

 -  
 
11  
 
rating also.  So, we were evolving over a period of  time.  But, I do agree, 
when we started the first time, it was based on the  parameters, which were 
originally given by the Government.  Because that w as a Government-given 
parameter, we thought it was the safest thing to st art with and it is 
continuously evolving.” 
 
20. On the issue of delay in evolving parameters fo r PRI scheme and the 
consequent resort the company took to utilizing par ameters of the PI scheme, the 
company in their post-evidence reply submitted thus; 
 
“With regard to the parameters of Performance Relat ed Incentive Scheme, 
due to the reasons stated above, the Board approval  was sought by 
Management for introduction of Performance Related Incentive in March 
2006.  Therefore Productivity Incentive parameters were taken as base for 
Performance Related Incentive up to 2005-06.  Howev er, effective 2006-07, 
specific parameters are fixed for making PRI paymen t.  At the beginning of 
the year the target has been fixed strategic busine ss unit wise and the 
payments are made based on the target received at t he end of the year.  
Similarly, for the year 2007-08, the targets are fixed SBU wise.” 
 
21. While replying to the Committee’s query regardi ng measures taken to avoid 
retrospective payment of incentives in future, the company merely stated that all 
future incentive schemes would be introduced after approval by the board and they 
have not given any commitment that incentive scheme s would be implemented 
prospectively on the basis of pre-evolved and pre-d eclared parameters. Asked what 
corrective steps the ministry would contemplate to avoid unproductive payments of 
incentives retrospectively, the ministry in their reply stated; 
 
“As per the minutes of the Board Meeting for introd uction of subject incentive 
scheme, it is clearly stated that in future such pa yments will be made based 
on the actual performance against the targets set a t the beginning of the 
financial year for each SBUs in the subject years.  Accordingly, effective 
2006-07, PRI payment is made based on the actual pe rformance achieved 
against the target set at the beginning of the year by the various SBUs. 
 
2. Downstream Oil Sector Companies have introduced/ modified the 
existing scheme and paid more or less similar amoun ts to their employees 
based on the PI parameters for the past periods.  T herefore, it was the 
decision of the HPCL Board to reward the employees with suitable incentives 
for their efforts during post APM period and in order to retain the talent.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 -  
 
12  
 
PART B 
 
 
Observations and Recommendations 
 
Recommendation 
 
Delay in formulation and implementation of PRI scheme 
 
 
The Committee note that HPCL in 2006 introduced an incentive scheme, 
namely, the Performance Related Incentive (PRI) sch eme.  This new scheme 
was in addition to the two already existing schemes  viz., the Productivity 
Incentive (PI) scheme and the Performance Linked In centive (PLI) scheme. 
This scheme in question was justified on the basis of DPE guideline 
increasing the limit for payment of performance lin ked incentives to 50% of 
basic pay and five percent of distributable profit and subject to the condition 
that payments made under the two existing schemes a re well below such 
limit.  The Committee further note that the PRI was  made effective 
retrospectively from the year 2004-05 and later ext ended to include the years 
2002-03 and 2003-04.  As a consequence, incentive p ayments of Rs. 19.55 
crore, Rs. 23.91 crore, Rs. 16.30 crore and Rs. 16. 50 crore for the years 2002-
03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively were made under the new PRI 
scheme, amounting to a total payout of Rs. 76.26 cr ore.  In this regard, the 
Committee note that since the parameters for determ ining the payment under 
PRI scheme would have been evolved only after the s cheme was introduced 
in 2006, the Board of HPCL decided to use the param eters of the PI scheme 
for payment of incentives under PRI for the years 2002-03 to 2005-06.   

 -  
 
13  
 
As per the Audit objection, the payment of incentiv es retrospectively 
for the years 2002-03 to 2005-06 using the performa nce parameters of PI 
scheme, instead of PRI Scheme was irregular since t he objectives of the two 
schemes were entirely different and tantamounts to releasing of double 
payment for the same performance thereby resulting in unproductive 
payment of incentive.  Further, implementation of s cheme retrospectively 
cannot be expected to motivate employees for the pe rformance already 
achieved and rewarded.  
The Company, however, has tried to justify their ac t by stating that the 
PRI scheme was introduced primarily to utilize the provisions of the revised 
guidelines to address the inadequacy of the two exi sting schemes to fairly 
reward the performance of employees in meeting the stiff targets set for them 
especially since 2002-03 in view of the dismantling  of the Administered Price 
Mechanism (APM) in Oil sector and the emerging comp etition from the private 
players. Besides, the scheme was also aimed at cont aining the high attrition 
rate evident since 2005 due to a wide disparity amo ng the salary and benefits 
paid to employees of public sector oil companies an d their counterparts in 
private sector.   
 
The Committee are not convinced with the justificat ion furnished by the 
Company on the Audit objections in respect of the P RI Scheme.  The 
Committee feel that the PRI Scheme should have been  operationalised soon 
after the revised guidelines for the payment of per quisites and allowances 
were issued by DPE in 1999.  In the opinion of the Committee, the 
management, despite having the necessary autonomy t o pre-empt the 

 -  
 
14  
 
undesirable occurrence of high attrition among its experienced employees, 
had failed to initiate timely action to compensate them at comparable levels 
through a proactive introduction of permissible inc entives. The Committee 
recommend that the company should in future take pr oactive steps to 
motivate and retain its workforce rather than engage itself in repair work often 
involving questionable methods such as the utilizat ion of performance 
parameters of one scheme to pay incentives under another scheme.  
  
 As regards giving of retrospective effect to the im plementation of the 
PRI scheme, the Committee note that both HPCL manag ement and the 
Ministry concurred in justifying the decision based  on the need to reward the 
appreciable performance rendered by the employees s ince the end of the 
APM regime in 2002-03 and the inadequacy of the exi sting limits of incentives 
to adequately reward such performance. While apprec iating the argument, the 
Committee reiterate that in view of the fact that D PE guidelines have provided 
for the implementation of such a scheme as early as 1999, the justification put 
forth by the management and the ministry are at bes t an attempt to cover up 
inefficiency in timely introduction of the scheme. Further, the Committee are 
in concurrence with audit’s observation that paymen t of incentives under PRI 
scheme based on performance parameters of the PI sc heme, which stood 
attained and rewarded technically amounts to unprod uctive payment, for 
incentive schemes are by nature meant to motivate f uture performance based 
on defined parameters and should not be utilized to  exhaust unutilized funds 
in gestures of retrospective benevolence. The Commi ttee therefore 
recommend that the company must take timely action to effect such schemes 

 -  
 
15  
 
as per guidelines issued from time to time so as to  ensure that recurrence of 
such kind of anomaly and undesirable situations do not arise.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                          RUPCHAND PAL  
 2 December, 2008                                  CHAIRMAN 
11 Agrahayana 1930                COMMITTEE ON PUBL IC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 -  
 
16  
 
ANNEXURE -I 
 14.4.1  - UNPRODUCTIVE PAYMENT OF INCENTIVE 
 
Inapt implementation of a new incentive scheme on t he basis of performance 
already attained by the employees and paid for unde r an existing incentive 
scheme led to avoidable payment of unproductive incentive of Rs.76.26 crore.  
 
The Government of India introduced productive incen tive (PI) scheme for payment 
of incentive to the employees of Hindustan Petroleu m Corporation Limited 
(Company) in 1983. The amount of incentive payable on attainment of specific 
milestones as per applicable parameters of the sche me was subject to ceilings for 
two categories of the employees viz. , (i) employees eligible for profit sharing bonus 
and (ii) employees not eligible for such bonus. The  Company introduced another 
incentive scheme viz. , Performance Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme in Janu ary 1991 
for the employees who were not eligible for profit sharing bonus. With effect from 1 
January 1997, the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) increased the limit for 
payment of performance linked incentives to 50 per cent of the basic pay and five 
per cent of the distributable profit of the PSE.  
 
In April 2006, the Company decided to introduce a t hird incentive scheme viz. , 
Performance Related Incentive (PRI) scheme from the  financial year 2004-05, 
retrospectively. The PRI scheme was justified on th e grounds that the amount of 
incentive payable to the employees under the existi ng two incentive schemes was 
well within the ceilings prescribed by the DPE and a new and third (PRI) scheme 
could be introduced within the existing ceilings.   
 
The new scheme envisaged distribution of PRI on the  basis of performance of 
Strategic Business Unit (SBU) at first level. Incen tives for team performance for all 
the employees was envisaged at second level. For pa yment of incentive for the 
years 2004-05 and 2005- 06 under the PRI scheme, th e Company adopted the 
parameters that were applicable for the PI scheme a nd disbursed Rs.16.30 crore 
and Rs.16.50 crore for 2004-05 and 2005-06, respect ively to the employees. On 
finding that the said limit of 50 per cent had not been exceeded in the year 2002-03 
and 2003-04 also, the Company decided in October 20 06 to implement the PRI 
scheme further back in time from 2002-03 onwards. A gain, the parameters 
applicable to the PI scheme for those years were ap plied and incentive of Rs.19.55 
crore and Rs.23.91 crore for the year 2002-03 and 2 003-04 respectively was paid 
under the new PRI scheme. Thus, an aggregate amount of Rs.76.26 crore was paid 
as incentive under the newly implemented PRI scheme. Incentive for the year 2006-
07 was yet (July 2007) to be paid.   
 
Audit observed (March 2007) that:  
 
(i) Payment of incentive under PRI scheme by adopti ng the parameters 
applicable to the existing PI scheme was irregular since the objectives of 
introducing the PI and PRI schemes were different. Whereas the PI 
scheme was based on achievement of productivity by the employees 

 -  
 
17  
 
individually, the PRI scheme envisaged payment of i ncentive on the basis 
of performance achieved by various SBUs against five clearly measurable 
criteria, to be approved  by a Committee of Functio nal Directors (CFD) as 
a part of the first level performance. The second l evel performance 
applicable to all the employees envisaged adjudging  performance of 
“intact teams” under major SBUs. Criteria specific to the objective of PRI 
scheme were not fixed by the CFD at any stage and, therefore, adoption 
of parameters and milestones of an existing incenti ve scheme for 
payment of incentive under the new scheme tantamoun t to releasing of 
double payment for the same performance by the empl oyees and 
exceeding the ceiling prescribed under the PI scheme.  
 
(ii) Implementation of the scheme retrospectively c annot be expected to 
motivate the employees for better performance than what had already 
been achieved and rewarded. Thus, implementation of  the scheme 
retrospectively resulted in payment of unproductive incentive.  
 
The Management stated (March 2007) that the introdu ction of the PRI scheme had 
its genesis in the Justice Mohan Committee Report. While distribution of PRI 
effective from the year 2006-07 among various SBUs would be carried out in line 
with their respective performance against targets, for the period prior to April 2006 
viz. , 2004-05 and 2005-06, it could only be linked with  parameters set against the 
then existing scheme i.e., Productive Incentive. The new incentive scheme 
envisaged judging the performance of all major SBUs  against targets set and the 
quantum of PRI was in line with DPE guidelines. It further stated that the Board 
approved (October 2006) implementation of PRI for 2002-03 and 2003-04 as PI was 
restricted to 15 per cent as per DPE guidelines. The Ministry while endorsing  
(August 2007) the reply of the Management justified  payment of new incentive with 
retrospective effect stating that the Petroleum Sec tor was liberalised effective 2002-
03 and oil PSUs have to aggressively compete in the  market to retain their market 
share and to sustain growth.  
 
The reply was not tenable. Justice Mohan Committee stressed on the necessity to 
ensure that the total package was related more to p erformance and profits of the 
companies than it was at present. Further, the Comm ittee observed that 
performance related payments in public sector under takings existed only in form 
and not in substance. By rewarding the employees by  payment of PRI which 
already stood rewarded by way of PI, the Company re warded productivity linked 
performance in form and not in substance. Thus, pay ment of PRI on the same 
parameters of PI without achieving any additional b enefits, that too retrospectively, 
was not justified. Extension of PRI scheme for 2002 -03 and 2003-04 on the ground 
that PI was restricted to 15 per cent as per DPE guidelines only proved that the 
Company circumvented the guidelines and also Justic e Mohan Committee’s 
recommendations. Retrospective extension of the sch eme from 2002-03 on the 
ground of liberalisation and increase in market sha re was not justified as there was 
virtually no competition in the retail and LPG segm ents that constituted 70 per cent 
of the Company’s total turnover and in view of existence of subsidy scheme.  
 

 -  
 
18  
 
Thus, the manner of implementation of the PRI scheme was not in the best financial 
and professional interest of the Company and appear ed to be aimed at distributing 
the amount of profits available within the overall ceiling prescribed by the DPE. The 
decision of Management resulted in excess payment of Rs.76.26 crore. 
 
 

 -  
 
19  
 
ANNEXURE-II  
MINUTES OF THE 2 nd  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 2 nd JUNE, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1300 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo  
5 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6 Shri Harikewal Prasad 
7 Shri Kashiram Rana 
8 Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
9 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
10 Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
11 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
12 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
13 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
4 Shri N.S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
 
1. Shri E.R. Solomon  Director General (Commercial)  
2. Shri K.P. Sasidhar  Principal Director (Commerci al) 
 
Representatives of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited  
 
1. Shri Arun Balakrishnan Chairman & Managing Direc tor 
2. Shri S. Roy Choudhary Director (Marketing) 
3. Shri M.A. Tankiwala Director (Refineries) 

 -  
 
20  
 
4. Shri V. Vizia Saradhi Director (Human Resources)  
5. Shri B. Mukherjee Director (Finance) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Comptroller & Auditor Ge neral of India.  Thereafter, the 
Committee were briefed by the Officials of C&AG of India on two Audit Paras on 
which the Committee were to take oral evidence.  Fi rst audit para no. 14.4.1 of 
C&AG Report No. CA 11 of 2008 (Commercial) related to unproductive payment of 
incentive in HPCL and second audit para no. 14.7.1 of the same audit report related 
to loss occurring to ONGC due to sale of crude oil containing Basic Sediments & 
Water (BSW) content above the contracted norm to IO CL.  The clarifications sought 
by the Members were also resolved by the Officials of C&AG. 
 
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the rep resentatives of Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) in connection with examination of Para 
14.4.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 11 of 2008 (Commercial ) relating to ‘unproductive 
payment of incentive’ in HPCL. 
 
4. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of HPCL and drew 
their attention to direction 58 of the Directions b y the Speaker relating to evidence 
before the Parliamentary Committee.  Then, the repr esentatives of HPCL made a 
brief presentation on the subject before the Commit tee. Thereafter, Members raised 
queries on various issues pertaining to the subject . Clarifications on some of those 
issues were made by the representatives of HPCL.  I nformation on some of the 
points raised by the Committee not readily availabl e was, however, promised by 
them that the same would be furnished to the Committee Secretariat in due course.   
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  HPCL for providing 
information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
 
 
 
 

 -  
 
21  
 
MINUTES OF THE 12 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 2 nd  DECEMBER, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hours to 1500 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3 Shri N. S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
4 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
 
   Shri P.K. Mishra   Principal Director (Commercia l) 
 
2. The Committee considered two draft reports on th e following subjects and 
adopted both without any modification: 
 
(i) Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited – Unpro ductive payment of 
incentive” – unproductive payment of Rs. 76.26 crore.   
 
(ii) Xxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxx xx 
 
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxxxxxx 
 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
3 Shri Francis K. George 
4 Shri Harikewal Prasad 
5 Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Shri Mohan Rawale 
7 Smt. Pratibha Singh 
8 Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
9 Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
10 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
11 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
12 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 

 -  
 
22  
 
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finali ze the Report for 
presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
********** 
 