 
C.P.U. NO. 916 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2007  - 2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
PERFORMANCE OF ENGINE DIVISION OF BHARAT EARTH MOVERS 
LIMITED 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION 
 
 
[Based on C&AG Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2007] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.03.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5.03.2008 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
Composition of the Committee (2007-08)   (iii) 
Introduction (v) 
 REPORT 
 
 
Chapter-I Introductory 1 
Chapter-II Achievement of objectives 
I. Objectives sought to be achieved 
 
4 
5 
Chapter-III Production performance including under-utilization of 
installed capacity 
 
I. Production capacity 
II. Under utilisation of the installed capacity  
III. Non-fitment of own engines in BEML equipment  
IV. Marketing strategies and performance of BEML 
Engines  
V. Manpower utilisation  
 
10 
 
 
10 
12 
15 
25 
27 
Chapter-IV Cost of Production and Financial Performance 
I. High Production Cost 
II. Indigenisation  
III. Cost reduction measures  
IV. Dependence on single supplier  
V. Sales of spares and after sales service  
VI. Turn around plans  
 
28 
28 
28 
30 
31 
34 
34 
 
Chapter-V Diversification Activities 
I. Manufacture of diesel engines for diesel generator 
sets. 
II. Manufacture of K-300 engines for use in compressors   
 
36 
36 
37 
Chapter-VI Monitoring role of the Ministry  
 
I. Government of India approval. 
II. Monitoring by Government 
III. Role of Government Directors. 
 
41 
 
41 
42 
43 
 PART B 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
46-58 
 
ANNEXURES 
I Highlights of the Audit Report  59
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 62
  
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma                                      Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma                         Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain                         Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar                         Deputy Secretary-II  
5. Smt. K. Rangamani Narasimhan   Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 (iii) – 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Fifth Report on Bharat Earth Movers Limited. 
 
2. The Committee on Public Undertaki ngs (2007-08) took evidence of the 
representatives of BEML on 11.10.2007. The Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2007-08) took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence on 26.11.2007.   
 
3. The Committee on Public Under takings (2007-08) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27th February, 2008. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express thei r thanks to the Mini stry of Defence 
and Bharat Earth Movers Limited for pl acing before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection with examination of  the subject.  
They also wish to thank in particular t he representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence and Bharat Earth Movers Li mited who gave evidence and placed 
their considered views before the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered by the officials of Comptrolle r & Auditor General of India. They 
would also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance render ed to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            RUPCHAND PAL  
27th February, 2008      Chairman  
8th Phalguna, 1929 (S)                             Committee On Public Undertakings 
- (v)-  
 

CHAPTER- I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 BEML, established in 1964, is a multi-technology  Company offering high-
quality products for diverse sectors of economy such as coal, mining, steel, 
cement, power, irrigation, construction,  road building, defence and railways.  In 
last four decades, it has come to the forefront of heavy engineering industry and 
established an undisputed leadership in earthmoving industry.  The Company’s 
manufacturing facilities are certified by ISO 9000 recognition. BEML’s nationwide 
network of Marketing offices enables buyers with ready access to the wide range 
of products and services.  Service centers and parts depots provide total 
equipment care and rehabilitatio n services.  Over 38 countries, across the globe 
in Asia, Africa, Europe, Latin America and the Middle East use BEML machines 
successfully. Product range of BEML is divided into four main heads.  They are: 
a) Mining & Construction 
For deployment in surface mining pr ojects and construction projects, 
BEML produces machines such as Electric Shovels, Hydraulic 
Excavators, Bulldozers, Wheel Loader s, Wheel Dozers, Dump Trucks, 
Motor Graders, Pipe Layers and Tyre  Handlers.  Besides, Giant Walking 
Draglines for cost-effective operat ions in the open cast mines are 
manufactured.  BEML also divers ified into undergr ound mining with 
products such as Side Discharge Loader, Load Haul Dumper etc. 
b) Defence Equipments 
BEML’s multi-role vehicles and tr ansportation trailers have found total 
acceptance with Defence Services.  The Company is manufacturing entire 
range of value-added Tatra vehicles  which are robust and suitable for 
operations in all terrain.  These incl ude Crash Fire Tender, Bridge Layer, 
Field Artillery Tractor, Medium / H eavy Recovery Vehicles and Pontoon 
Mainstream Bridge System.  BEML also supplies Aircraft Towing Tractors, 
Engineering Mine Ploughs, Armoured Re covery Vehicles and Weapon 
Loading Equipment. 

 2
 
c)   Railway Products  
One of the recent innova tions in the rail sector  has been the manufacture 
and supply of hi-tech stainless steel metro coaches to DMRC. Other 
products include Integral Rail Coaches, Over head inspection Cars, Track 
Laying Equipment, Broad gauge Rail Bus, Treasury Vans and Spoil 
Disposal units. It also offers Electrical Multiple Units [EMU] for deployment 
in suburban railway services. Plans are afoot to manufacture innovative 
Sky-bus.  
c) Other Products  
The Company manufactures heavy-duty diesel engines, Diesel Generator 
Sets and Hydraulic aggregates. BEML has  entered into strategic alliances 
with International partners for severa l new products which include Multi-
Utility Armoured Vehicles, Mine Laying Vehicle, Longwall Mining System, 
tunneling equipment, Mine Protected Vehicle, Surface Miner etc. 
 
1.2 In order to meet the requirement of engines for the production of Earth 
Moving (EM) equipment, the Government accorded approval in 1988 for the 
establishment of facilities for the manufacture of engin es at the Mysore Complex 
of Bharat Earth Movers Limited (Com pany). The project was conceived with 
technical collaboration of Komatsu Limit ed, Japan. The first phase of the project 
was commissioned in April 1991 and second phase (with establishment of 
Flexible Manufacture System) in March 19 98. The gross block (Fixed Assets) of 
the project as on 31 March 2006 stood at Rs.72.44 crore and the net block at 
Rs.16.81 crore. The project envisaged manu facture of 2400 engi nes in the sixth 
year of commencement of production. 
 
1.3 When asked about the  salient feat ures of the agree ment with Komatsu 
Limited including making of investments and sharing of revenue and the  role 
played by the Japanese Company toward s technical performance of the Engine 
Division, the Committee were informed th at Technical Collaboration agreement 

 3
calls for transfer of technology at a cost in terms of technical know how fees and 
royalty and does not involve in any a rrangements for investment and sharing of 
revenue.  During the peri od of agreement, they have helped Engine Division in 
absorbing the technology.  Collaboration agreement ended in 1998. 
 

 4
CHAPTER-II 
 
ACHIEVEMENT OF OBJECTIVES 
 
2.1 As per para 3.3 of the Audit Report, the Project Report  of 1983 envisaged 
the setting up of  the Engine Divisi on to satisfy the demand for captive 
consumption and to overcome customer s’ dissatisfaction with engines being 
used in the Company’s equipment due to: 
(i) Poor engine quality resulting in high down time of the Company’s 
equipment; 
(ii) Poor performance, reliability and life of engines; 
(iii) Non-availability of engine spare parts in time; 
(iv) Poor after sales service of engines; 
(v) Diversity in product line, such as diesel engine sets, compressors etc. 
Main reasons 
According to the Company the main  reasons which compelled it to 
establish its own Engine Division  were :- 
• Backward integration 
• Value addition 
• Improving Equipment performance and Value to Customer. 
• Reducing dependence on external source s including collaborators for 
critical component of the equipments of BEML like engine. 
• Saving Foreign Exchange. 
• Redeployment of trained and surplus manpower from other divisions. 
• Improving bottom-line for the Company as a whole. 
• Emerge as a key player in Engines so as to hold their prices which 
otherwise was being dictated by a few suppliers. 
• Helps BEML to diversify in product oriented line; 
• Assured market by way of captive utility; 
• Full Control over spares and after sales service; 
• Increased profit margin in spares market; 

 5
 
I. Objectives sought to be achieved 
 2.2 When asked about the objectives sought  to be achieved by setting up of 
the separate Engine Division and what has been the extent of achievement of the 
envisaged objectives, the BEML in their written reply submitted :-   
“For the manufacture of Diesel Engines following objectives were 
envisaged: 
1. Fit engine suitable for mining & construction equipments; 
2.Provide the Company with higher technological base;  
3. Sell engines for other applications like Diesel Generator sets. 
Above objectives as envisaged have been finally achieved. The Company 
has successfully fitted the engines not  only on construction equipment but 
also based on the technology made available under the Collaboration 
equipment diversified into Mining equipments for open-cast mining. The 
Company has also endeavoured to develop and sell engines for other 
applications like Diesel Generator sets. Engine Division satisfies the 
demand for captive consumption of engines of 100 HP to 550 HP for earth 
moving equipment which were ear lier sourced from other engine 
manufacturers.” 
 
2.3 On being asked about the type of  engines being used by the BEML for 
their earth moving equipment prior to es tablishment of Engine Division and  the 
shortcomings/deficiencies which were observed in the engines procured by the 
Company from other sources for its earth moving equipments, the Company 
replied as under:- 
“Before establishment of Engine Division, BEML were using Engines 
procuring mainly from Cummins, Komatsu and Ashok Leyland. 
Shortcomings/deficiencies observed in the engines procured by the 
Company from other sources fo r its earth-moving equipments (that were 
encountered by the customers) were : 
• Poor Engine quality resulting in high down time of BEML equipments; 
• Poor performance, reliability and life of engines; 
• Non-availability of engine spare parts in time; 
• Poor after sales service of engines. 

 6
• Exploitation of price by local engine manufacturers making BEML products 
non-competitive 
• Performance of some of the BEML pr oducts like Dozers were of high 
standards only with these Komatsu engi nes. To keep up performance of 
products importation was only route with high input cost. 
With the use of in-house produc ed engines, as reported by Audit, 
expenditure on warranty showed a decreasing trend even though the 
number of engines sold increased in dicating better performance of BEML 
Engines. Further, the engine perfo rmance analysis assessed through 
customer satisfaction survey by getti ng feedback from customers relating 
to commissioning, maintenance, fuel and other systems, cooling systems, 
oil/fuel consumption etc., revealed sa tisfactory results. The trend analysis 
obtained for the years 2003-04 to 2004- 05 showed the performance rating 
in respect of BEML Engines on 1 to 10 scale ranged between 7 to 9. 
Though the sale of engines increased by 300% the major complaints 
reduced by 30% over the period 2002-03 to 2005-06. Thus, the 
performance of BEML Engines improved significantly not only over the 
engines procured by the Company from other sources but also over the 
engines of BEML over a period covered in audit.” 
 
 
2.4 Regarding  commencement  of production, the Company informed that the 
Engine Division started manufacturing eng ines from 1991 out of SKD received 
from M/s.Komatsu, Japan.  With phas ed indigenization program, as on 31 st 
March 2006, Engine Division has achieved over 90% indigenisation. 
 
2.5 While observing that the objective of  establishing the Engine Division such 
as avoiding competitor’s engines in BEML equipments since the competitors 
engines were having problems like poor quality, poor performance, non-reliability, 
high down time, non-availability of spares and poor after sales services etc. was 
not fully achieved since the Company is  using / offering Cummins Engines even 
where the Company has its own capabilities, the Com pany was asked to state 
the reasons for still encouraging competitor engines. In reply, the Company inter-
alia stated:- 
 
“BEML acquired technology from M/s Komatsu for four series engines. 
However, the world over the earth  moving equipment manufacturers are 

 7
not producing the entire range of engines used by them for their OEM 
equipment.  However, they either produce certain range of equipments 
having the volume or tie-up with t hose manufacturing engines for long 
term supplies.  Further, they procur e the remaining range of Engines from 
various customers, many a times mo re than one manufacturer to ensure 
continuity in supply and not so lely dependant on a given brand of 
manufacturers.  As regards Spares for engine, there are different types of 
practices whereby either the OEM M anufacturers buy the spares and sell 
to customers or the E ngine Manufacturers themselves  market and sell 
entire engine to their custom ers, seizing the entire pr ofit for themselves.  
However, there are companies like Cummins, USA and MTU who are 
completely in the business of engi ne alone perhaps and manufacture and 
almost the entire engines applic able to Earth Moving and other 
applications including Defence.  
 
Following the above said models, BEML also entered into manufacture of 
engines to exclusively use their captive consumption with four series 
engines obtained from M/s. Komatsu, Japan  and the remaining Engines 
have been in the past pr ocured from other supplie rs including Cummins, 
Ashok Leyland, Kirloskar & MTU.  However, BEML has been making 
efforts through their in-house R&D to upgr ade their engines or to bring in 
certain modifications and technology  updation to in crease the engine 
application to various other products being diversified by BEML to the 
extent possible, which has, of cour se,  helped BEML to increase its 
volume of Engine production along with spares and to  achieve breakeven 
and profit of Engine Division. 
 
In fact, BEML has developed Four-C ylinder Engines fr om Six Cylinder 
Engines using the technology of Koma tsu and trying to apply the Engine 
for lower-end equipments such as BE-71, BL-9H and the volume is 
expected to be around 1000  numbers in another 2/3 years.   
 
In a nut-shell, in line with the global practices adopted not only by EM 
Equipment manufacturers, but also by other businesses as well, it is 
deemed fit that, it is not prudent  and not business- wise viable to 
manufacture the entire range of engines by investing in Technology fee & 
Royalty and therefore it is advisable to  restrict to certain range of engines 
where volume is continuously obta ined for the Engines and develop the 
spares and services to sustain the market and business on a long term 
basis. It is thus technologically and oper ationally not advisable to diversify 
into entire range of Engines by incurri ng not only in technology but also in 
infrastructure substantially, as our main business is not manufacture & 
market the engine as core business.” 
 
2.6 Giving their response regarding overco ming dissatisfaction of customers’ 
on account of poor performance, non-availability of spare parts, reliability of life of 

 8
engines etc., in respect of other make engines used in the equipments 
manufactured by BEML,is ensured, the Company submitted:- 
 
“This was the case 15 years back when  the division was started.  The 
setting up of BEML Engine  Division triggered improvement in the engines 
of other manufacturer. In fact thei r performance has improved steadily 
over the years. Also, some of t he other engine suppliers like Cummins 
have improved their service net wor ks and other related systems to over 
come the issues relating to poor performance, non-availability of spares 
and reliability of life of engi nes.  The customers like Coal India Ltd. prefer 
these engines over BEML engines. However, customers are being 
persuaded to accept BEML engines in  case of BH 35-2 and BH 50M 
dumpers to obtain full satisfaction of the customers. 
 
The technology of BEML Engines as  compared to the Global competitors 
including Cummins & MTU is  definit ely not advanced as BEML still has to 
catch up with the advanced technologies including the Electronic Fuel 
Pump (FIP), Engine Monitoring  system and other advancement for 
improving efficiency of the Engine as well as fuel consumption and also 
meet the Bharat-II and Euro-II standar ds. The customers including Coal 
India Ltd. and the small co ntractors in the contract  segment prefer to go 
for equipments with fuel efficient engi ne including Electroni c applications 
and therefore even if BEML offers it s engine, certain customers do not 
approve of and prefer  su ch engines and would li ke BEML to go in for 
supply of the equipment with competitors engine.  Ho wever, BEML is able 
to manage to maintain about 70-80 percent of Four-series Engines 
applicable to their OEM and sustain  market share and service and part 
support. BEML is also now working wi th global suppliers for increasing 
fuel efficiency  through FIP application, etc., and to  achieve fuel efficiency 
and hope to increase volume of engine s and market share of equipments 
having application of the Four-series engines manufactured by BEML.”  
 
2.7 When asked about  the percentage ut ilization of Company’s own engines 
vis-à-vis the engines of other makes in overall equipment manufactured by BEML 
and   why this percentage utilization cannot be achieved as 100% so as to make 
the Company totally self reliant in respect of engines and giving a boost to 
Engine Division in meeting its objectives, the Company stated:  
 
 “ The equipment manufactured by BEML fall in following categories: 
 

 9
a. Equipment originally with Komatsu engine -  These are 
manufactured 100% with BEML engine only; 
 
b. Equipment originally with Cu mmins Engine falling within the 
range of Engine Division technology :  BEML engines are 
engineered on these equipment and a fter field trials, percentage of 
BEML engines used on these equipment is increased gradually.  Some 
equipments like BD 50, BD 80, BG  605 are being fitted with BEML 
engine only.  Equipment like BH 35-2 and BH 50M are undergoing field 
trials with BEML engines; 
 
Equipment originally with other make of engines beyond range of 
Engine Division technology:   BEML engines cannot be engineered 
on these equipment as such BEML has to produce these equipment 
with engines other than BEML.  Furt her, the very objective of 
establishment of Engine Division is to maximize application of BEML 
engine and make it viable operationally justifying the investment.  Now 
from 2006-07 onwards, Engine Divis ion has made profits and will 
continue to make profits with add itional profits from Spares and 
remanufacturing of engines.  Hence, the objective is achieved and 
BEML will continue increasing the volumes. “  

 10
CHAPTER-III 
 
PRODUCTION PERFORMANCE INCLUDING UNDER-UTILISATION OF 
INSTALLED CAPACITY 
 
3.1 According to para 3.7 of the Audit Report, the or iginal project report had 
prescribed the production capac ity of the plant as 240 0 engines (4 bore sizes) 
per year with man power of  1500 and with the plant work ing in three shifts. The 
manpower strength of the Division as  on 31 March 2006 stood at 263 (101 
officers, 88 direct employees and 74 indi rect employees). The Division could not 
achieve the envisaged capacity. The av erage engine production per year during 
the period 2000-01 to 2005-06 stood at only 356 engines.  
I. Production  capacity 
3.2 Audit in para 3.7.1.1 has observed that accordi ng to the Project Report, 
the Engine Division was expected to m anufacture 2400 engines of varying bore 
size category per year.  However, since the machining facility for Cylinder Blocks 
was not enhanced beyond 1500, the inst alled capacity has been adopted as 
1500 engines per year.  In terms of insta lled capacity of the Engine division, the 
utilization ranged from 14 percent in 2000-01 to 42 percent in 2005-06. In this 
regard, giving a brief history, the BEML in their wri tten reply dated 22nd October, 
2007, submitted:- 
(1) The project envisaged manufacture of  2400 Engines (of four bore sizes) in 
the sixth year of commencement of  production with manpower of 1500 
employees and the plant working in three shifts 
 
(2) The phase-I of the project was commissioned in the year 1991 with 
importation of Camshaft and Castings and Forgings from collaborators.  
 
(3) Due to severe foreign exchange constraints faced subsequently to the 
sanction of the project, the procurement  of flexible machining system was 
restricted to a capacity of 1500 Engines, only with manpower of 263 
people, as against the projected requi rement of 1500 employees in the 
project report under Phase-II. 
 
(4) Since the machining facility for cylinder blocks was not enhanced beyond 
1500 Nos. the installed capacity was pegged below 1500 Engines per 
annum. Under Phase-III, the capacity of the Division was re-assessed as 

 11
at 1100 Nos. 140 Bore equivalent E ngines, but adequate Manpower and 
corresponding outsourcing was done. 
 
3.3 On the observations of the Audit t hat the projections made in the project 
report were shown on the higher side vis-à-vis the ac tual demand, the Company 
replied as under:- 
“Projection of demand for engines  in DPR was based on the 
anticipated growth in the producti on of Coal, Hydro Electric power, 
irrigation projects etc., which on a conservative basis taken at 12% 
P.A. Accordingly an d based on the 2690 eq uipments to be 
manufactured by 1991-92 from 970 produced in the base year of 1981-
82 as well as the possibi lity of direct sale in the market the production 
of BEML engines was pr ojected at 2400 engines. This requirement of 
production capacity from BEML coupled with the production capacity of 
Hindustan Motors was expected to f ill the shortfall in the anticipated 
demand of 13,000 P.A. by 1984-85 as indicated by the working group 
on the machine building industry. Further, the only manufacturer of 
engines used in construction  equipment  at that point of time was 
Kirloskar Cummins and it was anticipat ed that the requirement justified 
establishment of manufacturing fa cilities at BEML. It may not be 
correct for audit to state that t he demand was projec ted on the higher 
side in the DPR considering the above as well as the slump in the 
economy caused by general recession an d tight financial conditions 
which could not be anticipated at the time of DPR.” 
 
3.4 Regarding the actual m anufacturing capacity of the engine division of the 
Company and whether this capacity wa s fully utilized, the Committee were 
informed as under:- 
“The capacity of the plant has since been reassessed and the same 
has been arrived at 1100 equival ent engines. However, since, 
demand/market share of BEML for EM equipment where BEML 
engines are applicable has not gone up to 1100 nos, on account of 
various reasons including but not lim ited to opening up of Indian 
economy whereby number of market players increased the level of 
production of engines has been rest ricted to the requirement for 
captive consumption onl y [708 in 2006-07]. It is anticipated that the 
demand for BEML Engines which have been established as to 
performance in the market will go up significantly considering the 
strategies of the company to addr ess the changes in the market for 
earth moving equipment especially in the areas of Contract mining.” 
 
 

 12
3.5 About the installed capacity of t he Plant and rated / estimated capacity 
and its utilization, the Committee were informed as under:-  
 
“The objective of Engine Division was to manufacture 2400 Engines with a 
Manpower strength of 1500 at phase-V level. As per performance levels of 
2006-07   Division has achieved Phase- II level with production of 708 
Engines with Manpower str ength of 286.  Currently, the capacity of the 
Division is limited by  the  capacity  of   FMS used for Cyl. Block machining .  
The Capacity of FMS is  limited to around 700 Engines on  2 shift  basis and 
1100 Engines   (equivalent  of 140 series  engines) on  3 shift basis at  90%  
efficiency.  The division has set a target to achieve about 1000 Engines 
during 2007-2008 with increased outsourcing. If BEML has to produce 2400 
Nos. of Engine per year, we need to have the following additional facilities : 
 
(1)  FMS Units - 2 nos.            :   Rs. 45 crores 
(2)  General purpose and CNC mach ines  :   Rs. 15 crores 
 
The above facilities will incur a capital expenditure of  Rs. 60 crores.     
Besides the above, additional man power of 1200 is required to reach the 
annual production level of  2400 engines with the abo ve capacity addition, 
the rated and estimated capacity ma y be achieved provided there is 
consistent demand for 2400 engines per Annum.” 
 
3.6 On being asked as to how the Co mpany would justify the installed 
capacity of only 1500 engines and subsequent ly estimated to 1100 engines 
whereas the facility was initially cr eated to accommodate production of 2400 
Engines and how the additional Land and Buildings were being utilized, the 
Committee were informed as under:-. 
“Initially Land and building ha s been created for 2400 engines. 
Machineries has been restricted to  1500 engines wh ich has now been 
reassessed to 1100. Addi tional land and building available at Engine 
Division is being utilized for manufac ture of Tatra equipment to the 
tune of 300 trucks with VoP of around Rs.150 crore. “ 
 
II. Under-utilization of the installed capacity 
 
3.7 The audit has pointed out that the company did not utilize its engines in all 
its equipment manufactured resulting in under utilizati on of the manufacturing 
capacity of engines.  The Company had been purchasing Cummins engines and 
utilizing the same for manufacture of equi pment.  Except in 2004-05, the number 
of equipment fitted with the company’s engine was less than 50% of the total 

 13
number of equipment manuf actured.  In spite of the av ailability of capacity in the 
Engine Division, the Company did not use its engines in all its equipment 
manufactured.  An audit analysis in th is regard revealed that fitting of the 
Company’s engines in the equ ipment supplied to the ma jor customers viz., Coal 
India Limited and its subsidiaries ranged between 15 and 45 percent only.  In this 
regard the comments of the Company were as under:- 
“The Company is not in agreement  with the observations of audit 
which are not tenable consideri ng the number of equipments not 
falling under the range of engines manufactured by Engine division. 
Considering the equipments falling under the range of BEML engines 
the percentage of BEML engines fitted on the equipment is as under 
(Annexure-B) which are in the range of 68 to 100% in case of Mysore 
Complex and 88 to  100% in case of KGF Complex which are much 
higher than the 50% reported in audit.:- 
 
    ANNEXURE-B 
NUMBER OF ENGINES PRODUCED AND UTILIZED 
SL NO YEAR NO.OF ENGINES 
PRODUCED  
NO.OF ENGINES 
UTILIZED 
DG ENGINES 
1 2005-06 625 623 2 
2 2004-05 480 479 1 
3 2003-04 331 272 59 
4 2002-03 217 216 1 
5 2002-03 215 215 0 
          
 
The company had implemented the decision to use only BEML 
Engines wherever techni cally feasible and commercially viable even 
during the period covered in  audit as evidenced by 100% in four out of 
six years in case of Mysore Complex and two out of si x years in case 
of KGF Complex. 
 
The original project w hen sanctioned in 1988, the capacity of the plant 
was estimated at 2400 Engine s based on the demand and supply 
figures which were available from  the working group on consumer 
goods and light engineering i ndustries set up for the 7 th year plan of 

 14
1985-1990.  However, due to severe foreign exchange constraints 
faced subsequently to the sanction of  the project, the procurement of 
FMS was restricted to a capacity of 1500 engines only. Even though 
the building and other infrastructure facilities are available for 1500 
engines, employment of manpower was restricted based on the 
production envisaged.  Accordingly,  only 263 people were engaged as 
against 1500 (subsequently revised to 1050) for the current level of 
production. The Engines manufactur ed are presently only for captive 
consumption in earth moving equipment wherever direct application of 
these engines are possible.  Henc e, depending upon t he requirement 
of EM equipment, the production wa s planned and achieved.  Hence, 
full production level of 1500  was not planned till date.  The capacity of 
the plant has since been reassessed and the same has been arrived at 
1100 equivalent engines. 
 
However, since, demand/market s hare of BEML for EM equipment 
where beml engines are applicable has not gone up to 1100 Nos, the 
level of production of engines has been restricted to the requirement 
for captive consumption only. In case of EM equipment also, since, 
some of the equipment like Dumper s were originally engineered with 
Cummins Engines, the re-engineering of the same with BEML Engine 
took some time and hence the production of engines was not achieved 
to the level of available capacity.  However, it may be seen that over a 
period of time the pro duction of engine is show ing an increasing trend 
and has gone up from 215 during 2000-01 to 708 during 2006-07." 
 
3.8 Regarding expansion plans for incr easing the production of Engines, the 
CMD of the Company during evidence before the Committee on 11 October, 
2007, submitted:- 
 
“I would like to submit that as far as we are concerned, we have gone 
in for diversification of engines, in addition to ARI, in defence 
application. We are supplying almost closer to about 500 to 600 heavy 
trucks in collaboration wit h M/s Tetra, Slovakia.  They are willing to 
give technology transfer which we will take and produce for Euro 
Engines. We would be producing ab out 400 to 500 engines and the 
remaining one-third space we are going to increase the capacity and 
build that engine. Those engines will be exported in addition to fulfilling 
the Indian needs. Recently, we are working with another company for 
defence application. T here are about 2600 machines working in the 
country in the T-72 tanks. The Army now wants to upgrade those 
engines from 678 HP to 1000 HP so that it can go faster. We have 
configured those engines in the T-72 engines. We have offered them 
on trial to the Army and if these are accepted, then we would be 
producing 2600 engines in another five years. We are going to produce 

 15
the assembled engines in the Myso re complex so that our entire 
capacity is going to increase and our turn over also will go up further.” 
 
III. Non-fitment of own  Engines in BEML equipment 
3.9 On the observation of the Audit that in some of the earth moving 
equipment, the Company itself was fitting Cummins engines instead of their own 
engine, the Company was asked to justify this in the light of having its own 
engine division. The reply of the Company was as under :- 
 
“As earlier stated, Engine division was established to manufacture 
engines coming in the range of 100 HP  to 550 HP which are suitable 
for use on equipment manufactured with Komatsu Collaboration like 
Dozers, Excavators, Loaders, Motor Graders etc   Equipment for which 
engines of higher / lower HP required is being outsourced from 
Cummins and other engine manufacturers (Eg. BH-85, BH 100 etc) 
Dumpers were manufactured wit h American Collaboration and 
Cummins engines.  Efforts have been made to develop engines of 
lower / higher capacity and succeeded in developing such engines.  
Engines so developed are being fitted in the EM equipment.” 
 
3.10 The above comments of the company were countered by the Audit  by 
observing that in respect of BH50M  (210M) the company has fitted one 
equipment with BEML engine in  2001-02 itself whereas the Company supplied 
only 4 equipments each with BEML engine during 2005-06 and 2006-07 
respectively out of total 77 & 90 equi pments supplied durin g those years.  
Similarly, in respect of BH35-2, t he company successfully commissioned 4 
equipments with BEML engines dur ing 2003-04 itself.  Howe ver, it is observed 
that out of 203 and 162 equipments supplied durin g 2005-06 and 2006-07, the 
company fitted only 2 & 16 equipments with BEML engines respectively. The 
Company was asked to offe r their comments on the abov e observation of Audit. 
In their written reply, the Company stated:- 
“the engine introduction involves: 
• Design modification; 
• Proto type development; 
• Field trial; 
• Corrective action; 
• Small batch production; 

 16
• Component / Vendor development; 
• Progressive ramping of and Mass production. 
 
The above activities involve a time  period of two to three years.  
Simultaneously, customer confidence building exercise and winning away 
the customer from user friendliness of competitor  engine, spares bank of 
competitors engine with t he customer is a time consuming process.  
However, BEML is not leaving any  stone unturned towards achieving a 
higher percentage / share of business for BEML engines and all out efforts 
are made since 2003- 04. Although in the past it was not done 
aggressively and whole-heartedly.”  
 
3.11 The Company was asked to explain the rationale behind fitment of 
Cummins engines in the BEML equipme nt and whether any market survey 
conducted prior to procurement  of Engines from M/s. Cummins. In this regard, 
the detailed reply of the Company was as under:-   
“BEML do carryout the market survey on Engine availability as any other 
product but  in an  informal  way.  In India, there are  only  few  higher 
power Off Highway Equipment Engine ma nufacturers  at present . BEML 
being  a member of Indian Diesel Engi ne manufacturer’s association, it 
has  up-to date   informat ion about  the  other  manufacturers. The major  
manufacturers are  Cummins, BEML and Caterpillar. Since, Caterpillar  is 
a  major competitor, question of adopti ng its Engine  does not arise.  Two 
other major manufacture with reasonab le service network are BEML and 
Cummins India Ltd., Engine is an int egral part of an Equipment and it 
requires full integration with the v ehicle. The performance of the 
Equipment is greatly  dependant on the Engine.   Engines having same 
power  and overall specification do  hav e  different confi guration,  size,  
shape, weight,  accessories like  Radiat ors , coolers etc.,  and  call for  
different  pipes, mountings, coolers,  and frame structures etc., Engines 
need to be coupled, aligned and synchr onized with Transmissions for the 
equipment. Every Equipment with engi ne, transmission, coolers, pipes, 
electrical harness and engine management  system is tested to prove its 
suitability, performance and durability. New Engine selection involves an 
elaborate procedure and necessitates  design modifications  in many 
components  and  assembly layouts.  After assembly, the equipment is 
tested under  simulated  conditions and fi eld trials, so as to confirm the 
suitability of the Engine and various  performance parameters. Normally, 
these trials are carried out as a practice jointly by the  
Original Equipment Manufacturers, Engine Manufacturers and the 
Customer to validate the use of par ticular new  engine. The selection 
processes and validation process can extend somewhere between six 
months to one year. This in turn involves a lot of efforts and huge cost .  
So, until and  unless  there  is  a major  up-gradation  and  benefits  in 

 17
terms  of  fuel efficiency  or  major advantage, the Original Equipment 
Manufacturer does not change the Engine make / source. This is the 
governing principle applicable from Aircra ft to Automobiles.  In addition to 
this, since Engine is the prime mover,  it requires Service support from the 
Engine manufacturers at site for proper maintenance and systems. This 
carries weight during the selection pr ocess of Equipment.   Cummins  has 
been  the  original  Engine supplier  to almost all equipments  of BEML, 
prior to  start of Engine Division. 
 
Normally, as per the Tendering System followed by Coal India Limited the 
time given for delivery of equipment is one month.  Within this short 
period, it is not possible to tender out for a new Engine, validate and adopt 
for Equipment.  Hence, only proven En gines are offered to the Customer. 
The following choice has been limited to Cummins / BEML engines : 
 
Public Sector Undertak ing including BEML follows similar purchase  
procedure viz.,  
 
(a) Public tender for new product. 
 
(b)  Limited Tender among those already  short listed for the given product 
or short-listed by low evaluation of capacity to s upply the specific products 
or aggregates and   
 
(c) Proprietary purchase from vendor identified, based on indepth analysis 
of product capability and after-sales-service. 
 
We have followed the third method for the purpose of zeroing Cummins 
Engine, as such, specifications sought for by one of the Coal India 
Subsidiaries, aptly meets the specs of Cummins. 
 
There have been instances where BEML ha s offered  BEML  Engines  at 
lower cost  than   Cummins  Engines,  but  Customer  has  preferred  
Cummins Engine. Reasons are such as  (a) Commonality of Engine make 
with their existing fleet of Equipm ent (b) Cummins having long term 
arrangement with many customers for service and parts support, (c) 
stocking of spares at customer location and (d) familiarity of  Engine  
operation & maintenance etc., and (e) any other reasons best known to 
the Customer. 
 
Recently, M/s.NCL wanted to adopt MT U (Imported) Engines into 85 Ton 
Dumpers for  better performance.  BEML has integrated MTU Engines and 
joint validation process is going on at NCL. This has taken almost 10 
months involving design, modifications , import, and procurement, of more 
than 150 items.  Hence, it is customer who is the King deciding the Engine 
make for his equipment and not BEML. 
 

 18
In order to increase the share of  BEML Engine on our products, the 
Company has successfully engineered BEML engine on products such as 
BH40, BH60, BH35-2, BH50M, BE 220, BE200, BE70 & BL9H. In addition 
to the above, the Engine Division has developed Di esel Generating Sets 
using BEML engine.” 
 
3.12 On being specifically asked whether Coal India Limited is specifying any 
specific brand of Engine or only Engine specification in the Notice Inviting Tender  
and  if not, why BEML is quoting Cummins India Limited Engines in the Tender, 
the BEML replied as under:- 
“Coal India Ltd. is not specifying any specific brand of Engine and is 
specifying the engine technical r equirements in the equipment NIT, 
except in one case, where one of t he Coal subsidiaries which tendered-
out purchase of Dozers, specific ally mentioning Cummins Engine. 
However, in the eligibility criteria, proven models only need to be offered 
and any change in the scope, Coal India Ltd., needs trials and 
performance evaluation and BEML Machine will be liable for rejections. 
 
35 Ton and 50 Ton classes of Dumpers are manufactured by BEML from 
1970s, which are originally designed by our collaborators with Cummins 
engine (initially LW taken over by Dressers and then by Komatsu).  
These Engines are having eligibility in Coal India tenders because of first 
introduction.  We have engineered BEML engines on these equipment in 
the year 2002-04 and subsequently we have been offering BEML as well 
as Cummins engines.  Now equipment  with our engine are also eligible 
technically in Coal India tenders.  Accordingly, Coal India has been 
considering both the engine options  for purchase of equipment 
depending on commercial terms offered by BEML. 
 
As explained above, even though the Customer is not specifying make 
of Engine (except in one case as above), Cummins is a world leader in 
Engines and is a Long Term performing supplier for suiting CIL 
specifications.” 
 
3.13 As per the audit, it ha s been stated by the Managemen t that it took some 
time to re-engineer the earth moving equipment which were originally engineered 
with Cummins engines with the Company’ s own engines.  Since the engine 
division of the Company was freshly es tablished the Company was asked to  
justify the non-compatibilit y of engines manufactured by  it with its own earth 
moving equipment and   what advance pl anning was done in this regard while 

 19
switching over from Cummins engines to their own engines. The Company in 
their written reply stated as under :- 
.. 
“Originally, BEML had collaboration agreement with M/s.Komatsu to 
manufacture engines suitable for 7 applications [equipment] viz., BD 
65, BE 300, BG 825, BE 650, BD  155, BD 355 and BE 1000.  Later, 
five more applications viz, BL 200, BE 220, BG 605, BH 40 and BH70 
were added to the agreement.  Subs equently, application engineering 
was done by Engine division for other  equipment like BH 35-2, BH 
50M, BH 60 etc. and as at present, engine division is catering to the 
engine requirement of 30 equipment s manufactured at both Mysore 
and KGF which were originally engineered with engines from 
Cummins. 
 
The company had to reengineer the equipments for BEML engines 
since the equipments were fitted with engines of other makes including 
Cummins engines. The switch-over from Cummins to BEML engines is 
a design and development process t hat is continuous and as such 
cannot be envisaged before implementation of t he project or without 
being based on firm market requirements.” 
 
3.14 In the above context, the Company were asked to state about the steps 
which were taken by it during the last  few years to modify/upgrade upon their 
engines to suit the equipment being manufactured and for avoiding under 
utilization of available capac ity and the initiative taken towards the research and 
Development activities and the invest ments made thereupon. The reply of the 
Company was as under :- 
 
“As stated earlier, collaboration ag reement with M/s.Komatsu was to 
manufacture engines for 12 appl ications. These engines were 
modified suitably by R&D of Engi ne division to match the other 
applications.  With this, Engine divi sion is able to cater to the engine 
requirement for 30 models of equipment manufactured by BEML.  No 
further investment has been made for above application engineering 
made by R&D of Engine division.” 
 
3.15 The Company was asked to state about  its  major customers to whom the 
earth moving equipment is supplied and  how many equipments so supplied 
were fitted with Company’s own engines and ho w many with the others during  

 20
the last 5 years. The Company  while stating that Coal India Limited is the major 
customer for BEML Earth Moving Eq uipment, furnished the information 
(Annexure –D) as under:- 
 
     ANNEXURE-D  
MAJOR CUSTOMERS (SALES OF EQPT MADE DURING LAST 5 YEARS WITH BEML/OTHER 
ENGINE) 
2002-2003 
TOTAL 
SLNO CUSTOMER EQPT 
EQPT SOLD  
WITHIN PRODN 
RANGE OF 
ENGINE DIVN. 
EQPT SOLD  
WITH BEML 
ENGINE 
EQPT SOLD  
WITH OTHER 
ENGINE % 
1 
COAL 
SECTOR 231 171 94 77 55% 
2 DEFENCE 106 106 1 105 1% 
3 STEEL CO, 27 27 10 17 37% 
4 CEMENT CO. 6 5 4 1 80% 
5 POWER 13 13 5 8 38% 
6 OTHERS 155 141 115 26 82% 
    538 463 229 234   
2003-2004 
1 
COAL 
SECTOR 
182 144 61 83 42% 
2 DEFENCE 122 122 41 81 34% 
3 STEEL CO, 67 67 17 50 25% 
4 CEMENT CO. 10 9 7 2 78% 
5 POWER 19 19 19 0 100% 
6 OTHERS 159 142 128 14 90% 
    559 503 273 230   
       
2004-2005 
1 
COAL 
SECTOR 299 280 126 154 45% 
2 DEFENCE 55 55 55 0 100% 
3 STEEL CO, 25 25 7 18 28% 
4 CEMENT CO. 24 23 9 14 39% 
5 POWER 23 23 21 2 91% 
6 OTHERS 324 297 258 39 87% 
    750 703 476 227   
 
2005-06 
1 
COAL 
SECTOR 
471 426 144 282 34% 

 21
2 DEFENCE 36 36 35 1 97% 
3 STEEL CO, 22 22 18 4 82% 
4 CEMENT CO. 13 13 9 4 69% 
5 POWER 21 20 18 2 90% 
6 OTHERS 258 222 197 25 89% 
    821 739 421 318   
       
2006-2007 
1 
COAL 
SECTOR 329 271 119 152 44% 
2 DEFENCE 136 136 136 0 100% 
3 STEEL CO, 51 51 27 24 53% 
4 CEMENT CO. 69 68 22 46 32% 
5 POWER 40 39 39 0 100% 
5 OTHERS 441 331 258 73 78% 
    1066 896 601 295   
 
 
3.16 The Committee desired to know the ju stification of the Company to the 
observation of the audit that the Company  itself was offering a competitor brand 
viz.  Cummins engines as an alternativ e in preference to their own product 
thereby defeating the aim of establishment of Engine Division. In this regard, the 
response of the Company was as under:- 
 
“The company is not in agreement wit h the observations of audit to the 
extent that the offers of Cummins  engines or BEML engines were 
made as per NIT Specif ications with a view to get the order for 
equipments either with or without  BEML Engines. This way, the 
company has increased the order booking for equipments rather than 
losing the order based on NIT Specific ations or Customer preference 
for Cummins engines.” 
 
3.17 On being further probed by the Commi ttee about the initiatives taken by 
the Company to remove the misconception in  the minds of clients such as Coal 
India Limited and other mining customer s that BEML engines are inferior to 
Cummins engines, since BEML itself was offering Cummins engines, the 
Company stated :- 
 

 22
“As clarified hereinabove, BEML  equipments were powered with 
engines of other makes before establ ishment of engine division of 
BEML. The Customer requirement fo r Cummins engines is on account 
of various reasons in cluding standardization, operation, maintenance 
and replacement of equipm ents. This preference cannot be attributed 
to the inferior quality of BEML engines. As a matter of fact, the 
penetration of BEML engines in to the market share of Cummins is in 
evidence of the quality and performance of BEML engines.” 
 
3.18 To a pointed query whether the intervention of the Ministry of Defence was 
ever sought to take up this issue with the Ministry of Coal so as to impress upon 
the Coal Companies for fitment of BEML Engines in the equip ment supplied to 
them , the Company stated: 
 
“CIL has preference for Cummins and re luctance for BEML Engines.  On 
day-to-day basis, business issues bet ween Coal companies and BEML 
are handled at BEML level only. BEML Management has taken up with the 
Chairman of Coal India and its subs idiaries regarding acceptance of 
Equipment with BEML Engines.   Mi nisterial intervention has not been 
sought in these specific cases as it relates to marketing and competing for 
tender / orders which are routine.” 
 
3.19 To a pointed question as to whether any programmes have been 
proposed by the Company to replace Cummins engines wit h BEML whenever 
the EM equipments come for re-fitment, the Company submitted :- 
 
“Wherever possible, we are persuadi ng customers for refitment with 
BEML engines for the equipment supplied earlier with Cummins 
engines. We have taken up fitment of BEML engines for BD50 and 
BD80 Dozers in respect of DGBR Orders”. 
 
3.20 According to Audit, with regard to Company’s reply that the production and  
utilization of its engines wa s with reference to number of equipments falling 
under production range, the Chai rman BEML had stated in the 238 th Board 
meeting held on 22nd January 2003, that a policy decision had been taken to offer 
all the equipments with BEML engines effective from 1 st April 2003 wherever 
engines manufactured were within the ra nge of the equipment  manufactured by 
the Company.  In this connection audit observed that the company did not fit 

 23
BEML engines on equipment s manufactured by them even though they were in 
their range of production but fitted engine s of other makes.  On being asked 
whether the Ministry are aware of the above decision of the Board taken on 22 nd 
January 2003 and If so, whether any interventions has been made by the 
Ministry for ensuring implementation of t he decision., the Ministry submitted that 
BEML has taken steps to implement the de cision taken in the Board, however, 
certain deviations as repor ted in the Audit Report we re made due to specific 
requirement of the users/customers. On  the same issue, the reply of the 
Company was as under:- 
 
“From 2003-04 onwards, Management ha s, as a policy, decided to 
introduce BEML engines on all equipment falling within the range of 
engines manufactured by BEML.  T he said decision was implemented 
100% wherever the engines manufactur ed by BEML matched the original 
engine exactly.  In respect of equipments designed with Cummins engine 
by the collaborator of the equipment, the Cummins engines [BH 35-2 and 
210M] were being used, as indicated in para 1(i), the development 
process is time consuming and in right earnest, the induction process is 
done progressively.  In this area also, BEML R&D has engineered some of 
the engines wherever possible.  For eg., BD 50,BD 80 and BG 605 
equipments  were fitted with Cummins engines and these were being 
supplied to Director General Border Roads (DGBR). 
 
Subsequently, BEML engines were engi neered on these equipments and 
trials successfully completed at DGBR  at various locations ranging from 
Himalaya to Rajasthan desert as per t heir procedure.  After this, these 
equipments are being fitted with BEML engines only. 
 
Similarly, the field trials with Coal  India Limited are under progress for 
BEML engines engineered on BH 35-2 and BH 50M dumpers where the 
equipment designer had des igned the equipments with Cummins engine.    
After successful field trials, gradually,  
 
maximum number these equipments will also be manufactured with BEML 
engines only unless the customer in cluding CIL is convinced of engine 
performance with fuel efficiency, they may not agree to switch totally to 
BEML engine.  Part is now being supplied and will improve further in time.” 
 
 

 24
3.21 In the above context , it was brought to the notice of the Committee by the 
audit  that BEML submitted in June 2006 two separate response to one and the 
same tender No. 17 dt. 19-04-2006 of South Eastern Coal Fields, Bilaspur, for 
supply of ten 35-T dumper s. Strangely, though both letters bear the same 
number and date, one offer was to fit Cu mmins engines and the other offer to fit 
BEML engines. This provided evidence t hat the Chairman’s assurance to the 
Board (January 2003) is being circumvent ed and the company still offers to fit 
Cummins engines in BEML equipment. This  also confirms that the Company has 
not followed the statement made to its Board in January 2003 as narrated above.  
In this regard, the company responded:- 
 
“BH 35-2 (35-T) dumper wa s designed originally with Cummins engine by 
the designer.  Subsequently, BEML has engineered the said equipment 
with BEML engine.  As this is a new combination, as per Coal India norms, 
field trials are to be completed before bulk supplies.  In view of this, had 
BEML offered to SECL equ ipment with BEML engine  only, it would have 
got a trial order for few number s only and there would have been a 
business loss even though proven model with Cummins engine was 
available to meet the tender requirement.  As such BEML had to offer both 
the options. 
 
To meet competitor pr ice range, a new value eng ineered version of BH 
35-2 involving major structural changes  of the equipment was introduced 
in 2006-07 which also extended the introduction of BEML engine mass 
production and stabilization period.   Company has sincerely adhered to 
the commitment made by the Chairman to the Board of Directors.” 
 
3.22 Regarding strategies  and programmes formulated by the Company to 
increase the production of viable model s of engines instead of production and 
stacking engines of unviable model the Committee were informed that :- 
 
“Engines for all the equipments which are coming under the production 
range of Engine division has been re-engineered with BEML engine.  
This is evidenced by the increase in production quantity from 215 
during 2000-01 to 708 during 2006- 07.  Division has stopped 
manufacturing unviable m odel of engines and t he stock available at 
engine division relating to unviable models have been converted to 
viable model during 2006-07”. 
 

 25
3.23 Regarding the steps taken and time frame fixed by the Company to re-
engineer dumpers with BEML’s engine, the Committee were  informed that while 
the company has started supplying BH 35-2 Dumpers and BH 50M Dumpers with 
BEML engines during 2006-07 after succe ssful field trial earlier, 85 Ton and 
above dumpers need engines which are beyond the range of technology 
available with Engine division. 
 
IV. Marketing strategies and performance of BEML Engines 
3.24 When asked whether any ev aluation had been done regarding 
performance of BEML Engines and the f eed backs received from the users of 
BEML Engines, and the remedial steps, if any, taken on the basis of feedback so 
received , the Company inter-alia stated as under:-  
“As reported in Audit, expenditur e on warranty showed a decreasing 
trend even though the number  of engines sold increased indicating 
better performance of BEML Engines. Further, the engine performance 
analysis assessed through customer satisfaction survey by getting 
feedback from customers relating to commissioning, maintenance, fuel 
and other systems, cooling systems,  oil/fuel consumption etc., 
revealed satisfactory results. The trend analysis obtained for the years 
2003-04 to 2004-05 showed the performan ce rating in respect of 
BEML Engines on 1 to 10 scale ranged between 7 and 9.” 
 
3.25 The Committee were also informed that performance ra ting is based on 
various parameters like delivery, init ial commissioning, performance of engines 
during initial period, perfo rmance during entire warrant y period, promptness in 
offering after sales service support, supply of  spares etc.  The rating is given by 
BEML team. 
 
3.26 In view of the above reply, the Co mpany was asked about the  mechanism 
available with them to ascertain the customer’s satisfac tion and obtaining feed 
backs from the users. The Company stated as under : 
“Company has got regional and distri ct offices at the door steps of 
customers providing after sales serv ice in time.  Local BEML marketing 
personnel interact on day-to-day basis and give feed back to head quarter 
regarding customers’ satisfaction.   The service reports regarding 
performance of equipment also ca rry customers’ endorsements about 

 26
their feelings.  Customers also write directly to Regional Manager / Head 
quarter regarding their needs/feelings.  Peri odical visits by senior official 
from head quarters to customer sites also generate feedback on customer 
feelings.” 
 
3.27 Regarding the efforts initiated by the company to impress upon the 
customers to accept BEML engines instead of Cummi ns engine, the Committee 
were informed that :- 
“Special efforts are being put thr ough various forums and levels for 
adoption of BEML engines into cust omers fleet being pursued on 
continuous basis.  
 
Special drive is being made through re-inforcement service net work, 
Warranty spares supplies, storing of adequate spar es close to customers 
are few actions already taken and continuous improvement is being 
pursued.” 
 
3.28 On being asked whether  the feed-back so obtained has ever been utilized 
to further improve the performance of BEML engines, the Committee were 
informed that feedbacks obtained as above are examined periodically by cross-
functional teams consisting of  representatives from Desi gn, Quality, Service and 
Production.  Corrective action for improv ement of performance of BEML engines 
is taken based on above interaction.  
 
3.29 To a specific query about the  effort s being made by the Engine division to 
increase the compatibility of BEML engines to suit present generation of earth 
moving equipment, the company in their written reply stated:-  
“All out efforts are being made by en gine division R&D to maintain the 
competitive edge of BEML engines by adopting to the contemporary 
requirement through: 
 
• Development of High power density engine; 
• Up gradation of ARAI, Pune to  meet environmental norms 
requirement; 
• Development of CRDI system for one range of engines. 
• Develop electronic system to make electronic engines.” 
 
3.30 On the issue of marketing strategi es being adopted to increase the market 
for BEML engines, it was stated that:- 

 27
 
“Company is contemplating to 
 
• increase in supply of equipment with BEML engines; 
• meet increase demand of  float / recon engines; 
• Spare engines for repowering the customer fleet; 
• Diversify into Defence Engines, Gensets, Gas Engines and Spares. 
 
These will create a dem and for doubling the engine production to more 
than 2000 engines per annum by the year 2010 with additional capital 
expenditure.”   
 
V. Manpower Utilization 
3.31 The committee desire to know about the manpower deployed during the 
last 5 years in the Engine division and the criteria followed in determining the 
same.  The company in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“The total man power for the last 5 years has been 283, 286, 279,270 & 
272. As per project report, manpower required for manufacture of engines 
is 1500 employees.  During the last five  years, the actual production of 
engines ranges from 215 to 708 nos. with the manpower ranging from 270 
to 286 which is well within the manpower envisaged in  the project report.  
No fresh employment was made for engine division up to the year 2005-
06 and was managed with the existing manpower strength there by 
increasing the manpower utilization.” 
 
3.32 On being asked as to whether the manpower so deployed is sufficient to 
carry out the work load or is there any  under / over utilisat ion of the manpower, 
the Committee were informed as under:-. 
 
“The man power deployed is sufficient to manufacture engines up to 700 
nos. at increased level of off-loading and will be increased based on the 
increase in production plan.  As at present, man power is being utilized to 
optimum level.” 
 

 28
CHAPTER IV 
 
Cost of Production and Financial Performance 
I. High production cost 
4.1 The audit in para 3.7.2  has observ ed that the Engine Division  incurred 
loss every year.  The loss of the Divisio n during the year 2002-03 was Rs. 15.97 
crore but came down to Rs. 4.40 crore in the year 2005-06.  The progressive 
improvement in the financial results could be attributed to incr ease in the Volume 
of production (217 nos. in  2002-03 to 625 nos. in 200 5-06).  The manufacturing 
cost was higher mainly due to high cost of raw materials and components, under 
utilization of installed capacity and low volume of production for captive 
consumption.  The Company was asked to give justification on the above – 
mentioned observation of the audit.   Furt her keeping in view the Production cost 
of engine which is considerab ly high due to high cost of  raw materials, it was 
asked to state the action taken by the Company to bring down the cost of 
procurement which will resu lt in bringing down the cost of production. The 
Company in their written reply submitted :- 
 
“As stated in query, the loss at E ngine Division has come down from 
Rs.15.97 crores during 2002-03 to Rs.4.40 crores during the year 
2005-06. The profitability indicated is based on the Transfer price 
adopted by the Company.  In this c onnection, it may please be noted 
that the transfer price for the engines produced by the Division was 
fixed based on prices of comparable models of engine available in the 
market at that time.  W herever prices were not available, prices were 
fixed considering Horse Power on pro ra ta basis.  Prices so fixed are 
retained since 2000-2001. This was ado pted as a strategy to impress 
upon the Division to reduce the Cost  of production on a continuous 
basis.” 
 
II. Indigenisation 
4.2 Further, the audit in para 3.7.2.3 has observed that even though the 
Engine Division achieved import substitution by indigenising certain portion of 
material and components, the material  cost could not be brought down 
significantly as the division was unabl e to achieve economies comparable to 

 29
those of the multinational companies. The Company was not in a position to 
secure the most economic prices since the quantity of raw material procured was 
low and production was not commensurate with installed capacity. There was 
competitive Research and Development (R&D) in EM e quipment and the related 
business being complex needed heavy investments. The Company was 
therefore asked to state about the constraints being faced  in indigenisation of 
EM equipments and action taken by the Co mpany to overcome them besides 
taking up the matter with the Board of Direc tors and the Administrative Ministry. 
In reply, the Company stated as under:- 
 
“In spite of general inflation and other adverse market condition, the 
material cost has actually come down which is on account of the 
continuous indigenization and finding alternate sources: 
                                                        Material Cost  ( Rs. Lacs ) 
Engine          2001-02         2005-06       Reduction    % Reduction 
 
ATT                     4.01                   2.43             1.58           39.40 % 
BE 220                 3.41                   2.37             1.04           30.49 %  
BD 65                  6.49                   5.47             1.02           15.71 % 
BD 80                  7.26                   6.31             0.95           13.08 % 
BG 605                6.40                   5.80             0.60             9.37 % 
BG 825                8.33                   6.54             1.79           21.48 % 
BD 155              10.26                   8.98             1.28           12.47 % 
BD 355              11.61                   8.88             2.73           23.51 % 
 
It may be seen from the above that t he reduction of material cost has 
been made in the range of 10% to 40% during the period from 2001 to 
2006. 
 
Further indigenization and development of alternate sources will bring 
down the material cost. With increase in the volume of engines 
produced, the overhead element in t he cost of engines will come down 
there by resulting in the reduction of engine cost . Matter for additional 
capital expenditure towards additional  machinery / overhead to improve 
productivity has been under favourabl e consideration of Board of 
Directors during 2007-08.” 
 

 30
III. Cost reduction measures  
4.3 Regarding reducing the cost of production, the au dit in para 3.7.3.1 has 
observed that the Company made efforts to offload conventional process for cost 
saving activities related to turning, milli ng, drilling, boring, t apping, grinding and 
keyway slotting, etc.  Ho wever, it was seen that offloading was less than 10 
percent of the total purchases made during the last six years and such 
outsourcing had also resulted in non-utilisat ion of available capacity.  In this 
context, the Company was asked about the steps  taken to offload routine jobs 
and develop alternate sources and get the job done on economic rates. The reply 
of the Company was as under:- 
“As per the original project repor t the plant is established to 
manufacture only 7 critical components in-house and remaining 
components were to be bought out or  obtained through off-loading. 
Accordingly, the off-loading activities are resorted to based on the 
production requirement for the co mponent which cannot be machined 
in house. It is reiterated that the machines installed at Engine Division 
are dedicated to only seven critical components. If all the components, 
which are required to be off-loaded,  are to be machined in-house, it 
would require huge capi tal investment and m anpower.  The present 
manufacturing trend is mainly an a ssembly plant and outsource as 
much as components, as possible, in  view of the up gradation in the 
manufacturing technology of SSI and m edium scale industries. It is 
further stated that va lue of off-loading purchase orders does not 
include material cost.  Hence, com parison of the valu e of off-loading 
purchase orders with the total value of purchases is not on like to like 
basis.” 
 
4.4 On being asked as to why the Com pany is restricting its manufacturing 
capacity to captive cons umption only and not prom oting engine sale as a 
separate aggregate to increas e the volume of production to achieve benefits of 
economies of sale,  the Company submitted as under :- 
“In addition to satisfying captive demand, Company had made efforts to 
produce engines for other applications viz.,  
• Repowering of Euclid dumpers with BEML engines at Syria; 
• Repowering PES 100 gensets with Indian Army with BEML 
engines; 
• Repowering of MTU boat for defence with BEML engines. 
 

 31
However with present spurt in demand for BEML equipment with BEML 
Engines will consume entire capacit y of Engine Division for captive 
consumption during 2008-09. This will also achieve benefits of economies 
of scale.  Further, it need to be menti oned that part of the Engine Division 
hangers are utilized for Tatra range of  equipment and other defence 
equipment to optimize the Company’s overall resources, Gas Engines, 
Gensets will be purely outside applications.” 
 
4.5 In view of the observation of Audit that the production costs of engines are 
considerably high mainly due to high cost  of raw materials and low volume of 
production, the Company was asked about t he  action taken by them to increase 
the volume of production to bring down the unit cost of production.  The response 
of the Company was as under :- 
 
“Cost impact due to lower volume demand for off-hi ghway application 
engines will remain a concern.  Howeve r, focusing in contractor segment 
equipments like BL 9H is likely to create larger volume demand on 4D-105 
engine which will support higher volume.  During 2003-04 Company has 
taken a decision to expand appl ication of BEML engines on BEML 
equipment.  This has resulted into in crease in demand, which has been 
met with increased volume of production.  With this, the engine production 
has gone up from 217 in 2002-03 to 708 during 2006-07.  
 
Further, we propose to produce 1,000 No s. BE220 Hydraulic Excavators 
(current level of production 200) and BL9H Backhoe Loaders to 1,000 
Nos. (current level of pr oduction 100) in next 2 to 3 years, which will help 
increasing the engine pr oduction beyond 2,400 Nos. including spares and 
re-manufactured engines, of course wit h application of capital expenditure 
(CAPEX).” 
 
IV Dependence on single supplier 
4.6 The audit in para 3.7.3.3 has fu rther observed that the dependence on 
single source supplies for raw materi als and components by the Division was 
high. Percentage of purchases made on single tender basis ranged between 
30.1 and 59.2 percent. The procurement  of materials and components on single 
tender basis resulted in denial of the benefits of competitive pr icing with resultant 
higher cost. The Company was asked to offer their comments on this observation 
of audit besides stating the steps taken to develop alternative source of supply to 

 32
get a competitive price in procuring raw materials and components. The 
comments of the Company were as under:- 
“If number of items is considered instead of value of purchase order for 
the purpose of arriving at the per centage of purchase order placed on 
single tender, it would work out to 34% during 2005-06. It is may 
please be noted that  
 
• the vendor development of alternate source is inhibited due to low 
volume; 
 
• single tender is limited to the procurement of  
-   Proprietary / performance related items; 
-   Casting / forgings involving high development cost; 
-   Non-project items / consumables 
                  -   Other items like Bi-metal bearings / bushes & critical items 
                       involving fast cycle tests  
 
• Proprietary items are aggregates or critical functional items which have 
got bearing on the performance of t he engines.  It is a universal 
practice to procure these items fr om specialist ma nufacturers who 
retain the know-how. Hence, for t hese items, Engine Division is going 
for single tender; 
 
• Items like castings and forgings s pecially developed for us for which 
we have already incurred the development  expenditure.  In order to go 
for alternate source, division has to spend huge development cost 
again for the same items.  Further, the manufacturers of forgings and 
casting generally call for minimum order quantity, which would cater to 
the whole year requirement  of the division.  In view of the above, 
division resorted to single tender;   
. 
• on-project items like  machinery spares, special cutting tools are being 
procured from OE manufacturers of machines for which division has to 
go for single tender; 
 
• Consumables like Diesel and Lubric ants are being procured from 
Public Sector units viz., IOC; 
 
• Some of the components of engines are critical and tolerance limits 
specified by the collaborator are st ringent.  In those cases, items have 
been developed with lot of involvem ent of our quality and purchase 
department.  In view of this, t hough no development cost has been 
paid, division has gone on single tender  considering the difficulties and 
time involved in developing second source.  However, alternate source 
are being developed in such cases. 

 33
 
Development of alternate source is a continuous process and the 
division is putting all out efforts to  address the monopolistic act of the 
totally dependent single vendors.  In this direction, a vendor 
development cell has also been fo rmed to address the cost, delivery 
schedule and quality, so t hat our engines will be cost competitive, as 
part of vendor modernization (the concept of extended partner).” 
 
4.7 On being asked as to what action has been taken by the Company to 
achieve economies in the purchase of materials, it was submitted:- 
• Change in supply chain strategy; 
• Outsourcing of components for low end engines; 
• Develop Alternate sources; 
• Grouping of component family so as to enhance order value and 
reduction of vendor base consequentially leading to lower 
processing and follow up cost; 
• Standardization; 
• Implementation of ERP to opt imize procurement and balanced 
inventory control; 
• Aggressive indigenization has resulted in bringing down material 
cost. Eg.  
 
 
 
 
• Indigenization and other efforts have resulted following results 
                                                       Rs. In lakhs 
Engine         01-02       06-07        % of Redn. 
ATT               4.01          1.85            53.86 
BE 220          3.41         1.93             43.40 
BD 65           6.49          4.39            32.35 
BD 80           7.26          5.00            31.13 
BG 605         6.40         4.91             23.28 
BG 825         8.33         6.05             27.37 
BD 155       10.26         8.40             18.12 
BD 355       11.61         8.10             30.23 
 
The transfer price to other division  for BEML engine wa s fixed in 2000-01 
based on Cummins price available at th at time.  Since then, it has been 
retained to encourage division in cost reduction.  It will now be re-fixed on 
year-to-year basis.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 34
V. Sales of spares and after sales service 
 
4.8 On the issue of sales of spares and after sales service, the audit in para 
3.7.5 has observed that t he Company had been earning income from sale of 
spares. The loss in manuf acturing engines at higher co st was expected to be 
compensated by marketing of spares. Th e Engine Division continued to incur 
losses in all the years and it could not co ver the losses incurr ed in the sale of 
engines through the margin in the sale of  spares. In this regard, the Company 
was asked to shed lights on aspects such  as - efforts made to bring down the 
cost of manufacture of engines and to incr ease the volume of sale of spares to 
restrict its losses; monitoring after – sale s- service of engines  to bring down the 
time required to repair the engines; and e fforts made to improve sales of spares 
by effective marketing. In their written reply, the Company stated as under:- 
 
“All out efforts are being made to bri ng down the cost of material by 
indigenization, Value E ngineering and finding alte rnate sources.  As 
earlier stated, material cost of engines has progressively been brought 
down over the years.  It may al so be noted that the production of 
engines has increased considerably from 215 nos. during 2000-01 to 
708 nos. during the year 2006-07 without increase in fixed cost.  In 
view of this, overhead distribution per engine has come down 
considerably. Due to increase in sale of equipment with BEML 
engines, sale of engine spares al so has increased considerably.  
Supply of engine spares from Engine Division has been increased from 
Rs.19 crores during the year 2005- 06 to Rs. 41 Crores in 2006-07. 
BEML has got service centers in all the major regions where BEML 
equipments are deployed.  After sa les and service of engines are 
being effectively carried out by the skilled engineers  available in 
Service centers and Regional / District offices who visit the site as and 
when required by the customers. Wi th increased sale of equipments 
with BEML engines and supply of spar es within short duration and 
improved response to after sale service, sale of spares have been 
increased considerably over the years.” 
 
VI Turn around plans 
4.9 When asked about the challenges being faced by the Company in 
implementing certain turn around plans for improving the performance of its 
Engine Division and the steps proposed to be taken to convert such challenges 

 35
into opportunities including the future pl an, if any, the Company submitted as 
under:- 
“Engine Division has achieved br eak-even already based on cost 
reduction initiatives. The Company ex pects to reach higher volume of 
production of engines based on various strategies to achieve 
significant growth in turnover of earth moving equipments as part of 
Corporate Plan to double the tur nover by 2013-14. Various business 
initiatives towards Product and applic ations development is expected 
to significantly improve the operat ing levels whereby the Cost of 
Production will substantially come down. The indigenization and 
alternate source developments will be substantially facilitated based on 
higher volumes of Producti on in the coming years resulting in making 
the Engine Division more profitable in the long run.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 36
CHAPTER V 
 
DIVERSIFICATION ACTIVITIES 
 
5.1 In order to optimise the capacity ut ilisation and also to normalise the cost 
of production the Division in tended to extend the application of the Company’s 
engines to other products and also to sell them independently as separate 
aggregate. Accordingly the Division took up the manufacture of engines for diesel 
generator set applications and K- 300 engines for comp ressor applications to 
private customers.  
I. Manufacture of diesel engines for Diesel Generator Sets 
5.2 Audit in para 3.7.4.1 has  observed that as a part of production programme 
for the year 1998-99, anticipating demand for Gensets, the Company proposed 
to manufacture 24 Diesel Generator (DG)  sets and accordingly procured raw 
materials required for the purpose. Howeve r, the Company could manufacture in 
1999-2000 only two numbers each of 548 KVA and 358 KVA DG sets at a total 
cost of Rs.65.57 lakh and Rs.38.82 lakh re spectively and finally sell in 2000- 04 
three DG sets (two numbers of 548 KVA and one 358 KVA) for a total value of 
Rs.46.29 lakh. On account of the Compan y’s inability to market DG sets, the  
programmed manufacture of 24 DG sets could not be conti nued and the unsold 
DG sets (one number) alongwith the raw materials procured for the purpose had 
to be devalued in 2000-03 based on prevailing market prices resulting in a loss of 
Rs.1.69 crore. Subsequent efforts m ade by the Company through value 
engineering and indigenisation did not yiel d the desired results and thus the 
Company’s plan to enter DG sets mark et could did not materialize. The 
Company’s subsequent effort made in March 2003 to enter  into the marketing of 
DG sets through an agreement with a private firm M/s Jeevan Diesel & 
Electricals Limited, Bangalore (JDEL) wa s also not successful and the Company 
had to incur a loss of Rs.2.49 crore bes ides huge accumulation of unsold stock 
valued at Rs.3.14 crore lying with the Division as on 31 March 2006 (after 
devaluation) on account of non-lifting of diesel engines by JDEL. It was observed 
in Audit that the Company had taken up in 2003- 04 the manufacture of 59 diesel 

 37
engines at a cost of Rs.6.39 crore ev en before the receipt of any order as 
required under the terms of the agreement and financial commitment by the firm. 
Finally, JDEL lifted only three diesel eng ines (value Rs.1.6 crore) and paid only 
20 per cent of the sale value. JDEL insist ed for conversion of the purchased 
engines to different ranges and the balance payment of 80 per cent had not been 
received so far (as on November 2006) pending conversion as required by them. 
The Management stated in November 2006 that with a view to finding out 
suitable distributors who c ould market engines for DG sets an agreement was 
entered into with JDEL, for marketing DG  engines based on indications given by 
them, but the same could not materialise as envisaged and JDEL were reluctant 
to adhere to the agreement. Efforts were being made to persuade JDEL to lift the 
engines. In case of failure by JDEL to lift, it was proposed that the engines would 
be rebuilt for use in other equipment. It wa s claimed that the development of DG 
engines may be viewed as a marketing st rategy and that the expenditure was 
product development (R&D) expenditure in anticipation of sales and not wasteful 
expenditure against the sa le contract dishonoured by the party. Further the 
manufacture of DG engines had been taken up to use the existing capacity and 
to educe the financial loss.  However, the fact remains that the manufacture of 
DG engines on a large sca le without any firm commi tment from JDEL and 
continuance of manufacturing without ens uring the delivery/receipt of DG 
engines by the customer on a regular bas is had resulted in an avoidable loss of 
Rs.2.49 crore besides accumulation of non-moving finished  stock valued at 
Rs.3.14 crore. 
II. Manufacture of K-300 engines for use in compressors 
5.3 Similarly, Audit in para 3.7.4.2 has  observed that the Division took up the 
manufacture of a prototype diesel en gine (K-300) for use in compressor 
applications at a cost of Rs.13.40 la kh. The engine was sent in May 2004 to 
Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune (KPCL) for testing on compressor 
application and the test was successful. In August 2004, the Division took up 
manufacture of 10 engines for marketing at  a cost of Rs.1.1 crore. The Division 
delivered one more engine in September 2004 on request by the customer i.e. 

 38
KPCL without finalizing the commercial terms with the firm. The customer 
intimated in September 2004 the purchase pr ice of Rs.4.75 lakh at which it was 
interested in buying the engines along wi th the terms of delivery as ex-works 
Pune, with 90 days credit and warranty per iod of three years or 6500 hours from 
the date of commissioning. There was no settlement of the commercial terms 
with the customer. The material cost of the Company’s engines itself was 
Rs.7.34 lakh as against the indicative pr ice of Rs.4.75 lakh. In December 2005, 
the matter of price was again discusse d with the customer and the customer 
finally agreed to pay Rs.7.5 lakh as a s pecial proto price for the first proto type 
engine accepted by them. However, the customer subsequently informed that the 
market for K-300 compressor had coll apsed and there was no demand for this 
range of compressors. Thus the diversificat ion effort of the Division in marketing 
engines for compressor application had fa iled. Manufacturing of products without 
determining the commercial terms, proper  market feed back regarding cost of 
production and market price led to failure of diversification efforts and blocking of 
Rs.1.10 crore. The Management  stated in  November 20 06 that while entering 
into a new area it may not be  always possible to follow a strict pricing policy and 
market could be penetrated only by taking certain business risks. However, all 
the K-300 engines had since been conv erted and used in Earth Moving 
equipment. 
5.4 The Company was asked to state the justification on the above-mentioned 
audit observations indicating failures on its part in carrying out properly its 
diversification activities and the effectiv e action taken to diversify and capture 
markets for diesel engine, with the over all objective of improving capacity 
utilisation. In their written reply, Company stated as under:- 
“Considering the huge demand for c aptive power generation through 
lower capacity DG sets, a decision was taken to enter the field of 
manufacturing DG sets.  However, due to a large num ber of players 
both in organized and unorganized sect ors in the market the Company 
could not make much head way in ma rketing the DG sets.  Efforts 
were made to find out suitable distributors who can market the engines 
for DG sets.  The Company, acco rdingly entered into an agreement 
with M/s. Jeevan Diesels for marketing of the engines and based on 
the indications given by them, t he manufacture of DG engines was 

 39
taken up.  However, the same could not materialize as envisaged, M/s. 
Jeevan Diesels were reluctant to adhere to the agreement based on 
changed market requirements.  
 
The development of DG engines has to be viewed as a marketing 
strategy and should not be considered as a regular production venture.  
In our opinion, this has to be treat ed as R&D activity till the said 
engines stabilize in the Market. 
 
It may be noted here that the fourt een DG engines relating to 237 KVA 
have been converted to PES 100 and  supplied to Defence during the 
year 2006-07.  Further, 14 nos. of DG engines relating to 105 series 
have been converted to regular m odel of engines during the year 
2006-07.  DG engines of 360 KVA available in stock as on 31
st March 
2007 would be converted to regular models of engines during the year 
2007-08.” 
 
5.5 On being asked as to  why the Company continued manufacturing DG sets 
for M/s.Jeevan Diesels, in the absence of confirmed commercial terms and why 
was the production not stopped when M/s. J eevan Diesels had not lifted the first 
lot of 10 DG sets, the Committee were informed:- 
“DG set Engines were manufactured as per agreement with M/s.Jeevan 
Diesels after agreement.  As the materi al was already procured to meet 
the requirement of Jeevan Diesel, production continu ed hoping that the 
party will lift these engines within su mmer season to meet increased 
demand for Gensets.” 
 
5.6 When asked why the Company failed to  safeguard its interest so as to 
legally bind the private customer in case of backing out, it was stated :- 
 
“BEML initiated manufacturing action agai nst the customer order initially 
and subsequently supplied these engines to Defence and the rest used on 
our equipment.  Company has now formula ted guidelines for entering into 
agreement with private customers to safe guard Company’s interest.” 
 
5.7 Regarding the steps now  being taken by the Co mpany to diversify and 
capture markets for diesel engines, with  the overall objective of improving 
capacity utilisation, the Committee were informed as under:- 
 

 40
“The market for DG set is dominated by the players wit h cost advantage 
due to economies of scale and calls for large volumes of production.  With 
the spurt in demand of BEML equipm ent with BEML engine, the entire 
capacity of Engine Division will be  effectively utilized for captive 
consumption. 
 
After introduction of any engine al ong with equipment, the combination is 
subject to field trial for a reasonable period of time [around 6000 to 7000 
hours (approximately 2 years time) to  achieve confidence of product 
combination of both structure and t he engine and this is essential part of 
any integration process to collect feed back and carryout necessary 
modification on the product design.  On successful trial, pilot batch 
procurement of five to ten numbers including supplier development 
exercise is carried out {m odification involves more than 100 parts both in 
structure and auxi liary parts, mountings].  After proving out, mass 
production will start and volume will be increased subj ect to satisfaction of 
the customers.  Hence, after introduc tion of BH 35-2 e ngine during 03-04, 
two engines in 05-06 and 16 equipment in 06-07 is not abnormal.   Hence, 
the production process is being ramped up progressively and it need be 
appreciated that product developmen t, vendor development to meet the 
design requirement is time consuming progress because of low volume. 
Similarly for 210 M equipment, proto equipment was manufactured during 
2001-02. “ 

 41
CHAPTER VI_ 
 
MONITORING ROLE OF THE MINISTRY  
 
I. Government of India approval 
  
6.1 BEML set up its Engine Division in 1991 for the manufacture of Diesel 
Engines for fitment in Equi pment manufactured by it.  As per the information 
furnished by the Company, the Government  of India approval was obtained in 
1988 for its establishment.  In this regard,  the Ministry was asked to state the 
salient features of the pr oject report on which the approval was given by the 
Government.  The reply of the Ministry of Defence was as under:- 
 
“ Salient features of the project report were: 
i. Establish engine manufacturing di vision to manufacture engines suitable 
for equipment manufactured by BEML; 
ii. Provide the Company with higher technological base; 
iii.Sell engines for other applications like Diesel Generator sets.” 
 
On being asked about the factors taken into consideration by the 
Government while giving the approval, the Ministry stated : 
 
“The factors considered by the Government for giving approval were: 
 
Poor quality of competitors engine; 
Poor performance, reliability and life of competitors engines 
High downtime of BEML equipments due to poor performance of 
engines; 
Non-availability of engine spares in time; 
Poor after sales service of engines; 
Performance of BEML products like Dozers were of high standard 
only with Komatsu engines; 
Increased value addition to BEML if own engine is used in the 
equipment; 
Saving Foreign Exchange; 
Redeployment of surplus manpower from other divisions; 
Improving bottom line for the Company as a whole; 
Full control over spares and after sales service; 
Increased profit margin in spares market 
 
6.2 On being enquired about the conditions imposed by the Ministry on the 
BEML while giving the approval, it was subm itted by the Ministry that as per the 

 42
MoD letter of July 1988 conveying approval of the project, s pecified that  ‘the 
entire capital cost of Rs. 30.06 Crs (with a foreign e xchange content of Rs.8.75 
crore ) at the Companys own land in M ysore should be met by  BEML out of its 
internal resources and the project should be completed  over a period of  5 years 
from now. 
II. Monitoring by government 
6.3 On being asked about the mechanism available with Ministry to monitor 
the performance of the Engine Division of  BEML or   whether  any guidelines/ 
directions have been issued by the Governm ent to the Company in pursuance of 
such monitoring and whether the Govern ment played any monitoring role in 
subsequent implementation of the project by the Company or whether the 
Government has identified shortcomings  in some areas that could have been 
handled more appropriately, the stereo-type response of the Ministry was that 
BEML is a profit making and Board managed Company and performance of each 
division and projects under the divisi on are reviewed by the Board and  
necessary directions/ contributions are made by the Ministry's representatives on 
the Board  and Ministry was kept informed through monthly reports.  
6.4 To a pointed query as to whether  the approval of Government was 
obtained in re assessing the engine manu facturing capacity from 2400 to 1500 
engines and subsequent to 1100 engines, it was submitted by the Ministry that : 
 
“No approval was obtained.  Howe ver, Company has re-assessed the 
capacity due to following reasons:- 
 
(i) Due to severe foreign exch ange constraint, faced subsequently 
to the sanction of the Project the procurement of Flexible 
Manufacturing System (FMS) was restricted to the planned 
Capacity of 1500 Engines on ly with Manpower of 263 
employees, as against the proj ected varied capacity with 2400 
engines per annum and requirement  of 1500 employees in the 
project report in the Phase-II.    
 
(ii) The machining facility for Cylinder Blocks was not enhanced 
beyond 1500 Nos, the installed capacity was pegged to at 
around 1500 Engines per annum.   During subsequent internal 
reviews and by external agencies such as Indian Institution of 

 43
Production Engineers, the c apacity was pegged at 1100 
engines per annum as constrai ned by machines and other 
installation.   However, the Co mpany is trying to increase its 
outsourcing and to catch capacity with 1500 engines in 2 to 3 
years. “ 
 
6.5 On the observation of the Audit that the Engine Divis ion has not fully 
achieved its objectives and also many s hortcomings such as low utilization of 
installed capacity (14 to 42%), offeri ng equipment fitted with engines of other 
makes in spite of having it s own capability, low % of utilization of BEML Engines 
in its own equipments, high cost of pr oduction, suffering continuous losses, 
failure of diversification efforts etc. observed in the perform ance of the Engine 
Division, the Ministry were asked to state whether they were aware of the 
deficiencies pointed out by the Audit and   if so, the steps taken by the Ministry 
by way of any guidance or instructions to the Undertaking as corrective 
measures. In this regard, the Ministry submitted :- 
 
                  “Yes. The performance of Engine Division was includ ed in the C&AG 
report of 2007.  BEML was asked to  comment on the same and they 
have accepted Audit recommendati ons and have taken steps to 
implement.” 
 
6.6 In response to a specific query of  the Committee as to when did the 
Ministry become aware of this non-performance or non-realization of the 
objective and whether it was prior to the audit report or after the audit report, the 
representative of the Ministry during evidence before the Committee, submitted 
“We have seen the details only after the audit report has been circulated.” 
III. Role of government Directors 
6.7 The Committee desired to know fr om the government representative on 
the Board of Directors of BEML who was also present during evidence before the 
Committee about the reporting mechanism to  the Government and also the role 
of the Government in taking the follow- up action. In this regard, the Committee 
were informed that  “Sir, that when we attend a meeting, after return, we submit a 
report to the Reporting Officer.”  He further submitted that :- 
 

 44
“I would like to submit a few points.  There is a Cost Advisor’s report 
which comes every year in addition to  the C&AG’s Report. the basis of 
that Report, our Advisor (Costs) goes to the factory and suggests ways 
and means to improve things. The Cost Advisor visits different 
Divisions and submits from time to  time reports and suggestions to 
improve the performance of  individual Divisions. In this case also the 
Cost Advisor has visited twice in the last four years, which I am aware 
of. On the basis of the Cost Advisor’s report, cost target groups were 
formed in the Company so that for those components of the Engine 
Division which are creating non-com petitive costs value engineering 
takes place and the cost cutting can be realised. That is why you will 
see that in the last four-five year s this Engine Division has not only 
improved the capacity utilisation but has also turned from a loss-
making Division to a profit-making Division.” 
 
6.8 On being asked whether  the decisions  based on the Cost Advisor’s report  
were taken at the Government level, he submitted :- 
“Cost Advisor is a part of the Mi nistry. He goes from here and then he 
submits his report. On the basis of t hat report the Government Director 
takes up the issue in the Board of Director’s meeting and suggests what 
action management has taken or is likel y to take on the bases of certain 
recommendations.” 
 
6.9 To a pointed question about the role being played by the Government 
representative on the Board of  Directors of BEML, the Ministry submitted that 
necessary advice are being given to the Company in the Board Meetings by 
Government's representatives to improve and that  accordingly the  production of 
engines increased from 215 in 2000-01  to 708 in 2006-07. Hence, the 
consequential  improvement. 
 
6.10 The Committee noted that the perform ance audit of Engine Division of 
BEML covered the period from 2000-01 to  2005-06. which  presented a very 
dismal picture of the overall performance of the Engine Division.  In this regard, it 
could easily be concluded that during the period not covered by the Audit i.e., 
from 1991-1992 to 1999-2000, the performance of the Engine Division could 
have been even more pathetic.  In this cont ext, the Ministry were asked to state 
whether the Ministry were aware of t he performance of E ngine Division during 

 45
the period from 1991-92 to 1999-2000 and If so, the details thereof. The reply of 
the Ministry was as under: 
 
“Yes, through the monthly progress r eport of the Company.  However, a 
comprehensive Audit of the Company  as a whole was conducted by 
C&AG where the perfo rmance of Engine Division covering the period 
1991-1998   was also noted and report submitted to the audit and 
government.” 
 
6.11 To a specific query as to whether any  meetings were held at the level of 
Government for reviewing the performance of the Engine Division of BEML  and   
if so, what has been the effect of such meetings in impr oving the Company’s 
performance, the Ministry submitted :- 
 
“No special review meeting for t he Engine Division has been done, 
however, the same is done through the monthly reports of the 
Company’s performance.  Also in t he Board meetings, the review is 
done through MoD representatives on the Board.  Accordingly, Division 
has taken up the task of resolving the various issues and taken 
corrective action which is indicati ve of the improvement in the 
performance in the last three years.” 
 
6.12 Regarding the monitoring role played by the Corporate office with regard 
to bringing improvements in the functioning  of the Engine Divis ion, the reply of 
the Company was as under:- 
“The Performance of Engine Division is being regularly monitored by 
Corporate Office especially in the areas of Cost reduction, 
Development of alternate sources, Productivity of Direct Labour, 
Machine utilization especially wit h reference to high cost CNC 
Machines etc. Various decisions in cluding implementation of incentive 
scheme are under implementat ion. Consequent to this it is expected 
that not only break-even performance of the division will be maintained 
but also the profitability levels will be improved in the near future.” 
 
 
 

 46
 
PART- B 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Non-achievement of objectives  
(Recommendation No. 1) 
The Committee note that the BEML set up its own Engine 
Division in 1991 in order to meet the requirement of Engines for 
captive consumption for its Eart h moving equipment. The said 
objective included manufact uring of engine suitable for mining and 
construction equipment, achievement of higher technological base 
besides avoiding use of the engin es of the other make which were 
having problems like poor quality, po or performance, non-reliability, 
high-down time, non-availability of spares and poor after sales 
services etc.  The other factor s like vertical integration for 
maintaining the overall quality of the equipment, control from the 
Company side over the supplies of spares/engines and having a 
better after-sales service were also considered by the Company for 
establishment of its own Engine Division.  
 In the above context, the Committee note with concern that 
even after sixteen years of establishm ent of its own Engine Division, 
the Company has failed to fully achieve the objectives mentioned 
above. The Company has continued to offer the equipment 
manufactured by them fitted with  the engines of other make even 
during the period upto 2006-07 as pointed out by the audit in their 

 47
latest findings. The Committ ee are not convinced with the 
justification advanced by the Company that business-wise it was not 
viable to manufacture the entire range of engines and secondly the 
customers of BEML equipment have  preference for the engines of 
other make.   
The Committee find the above stand taken by the Company 
contrary to the basic objectives which inspired it to establish its own 
Engine Division. The Committee fa il to understand that even after 
lapse of 16 years the Company has not been able to produce, if not 
the entire range of engines atleast the major varieties required for its 
own earth moving equipment.  In the opinion of the Committee the 
very purpose for which the Company st arted its own Engine Division 
has been defeated to a great extent.  
After going through the explanation/ arguments given by the 
Company, the Committee find that it  is a glaring exam ple of lack of 
vision, poor planning and imprope r execution of their policy of 
establishment of   its own Engine  Division. While deprecating the 
failure on the part of the Engine Division in meeting its objectives, 
the Committee recommend that the Company  must undertake a 
thorough examination about the lapses in the matter and come out 
with a proper review of the causes of failure to achieve the objectives 
and accordingly take corrective st eps.  The Committee further 
recommend that the persons responsible for such serious lapses be 

 48
identified and accountability be fixed and the action taken thereon 
may be communicated to the Committee. 

 49
Poor production performance and under-utilisation of installed 
capacity 
 
(Recommendation No.2)  
 
The Committee note that accordi ng to the Project Report, the 
Engine Division was expected to  manufacture 2400 engines of 
varying bore size category per year  with manpower of 1500 and with 
the plant working in three shifts. However, since the machining 
facility for cylinder blocks was not enhanced beyond 1500, the 
installed capacity was adopted  as 1500 engines per year and 
subsequently re-assessed at 1100. Ac cording to audit, in terms of 
installed capacity of the Engine Di vision, the utilisation ranged from 
14 per cent  in 2000-01 to 42 per cent  in 2005-06.  Further, the 
Company did not utilise its engines in all its equipment manufacture 
resulting in under utilisation of  the manufacturing capacity of 
engines. The Company had been purchasing Cummins engines and 
utilising the same for fitment in  the equipment manufactured by 
them.  Except in 2004-05 the number of equipment fitted with the 
Company’s engine was less than 50 per cent of the total number of 
equipment manufactured.  In spite of  the availability of capacity in 
the Engine Division, the Company di d not use its engines in all its 
equipment manufactured. An audit analysis in this regard revealed 
that fitting of the Company’s engi nes in the equipment supplied to 
the major customers viz. Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries 
ranged only between 15 and 45 per cent. 

 50
According to the justification furnished by the Company, due 
to severe foreign exchange constraints, the machining facility was 
not enhanced beyond 1500 with ma npower of 263 people as against 
the projected requirement of 1500 employees. Further, since the 
engines manufactured are only for captive consumption in the earth 
moving equipment, the production was planned and achieved in 
accordance with the demand/market  share of BEML which has not 
gone up to 1100. Regarding fitmen t of other make engines, the 
Company has come out with the re ply that the manufacturing range 
of the Engine Division was  in th e range of 100 HP to 550 HP and the 
engines of other ranges were outsourced from Cummins.  
 The Committee are not convinced with the justification 
advanced by the Company towards poor production performance 
and under-utilisation of the insta lled capacity. First of all, the 
Committee find that the projections made in the detailed project 
report for establishment of the Engine Division were projected on the 
higher side vis-à-vis the actual demand. Secondly, the Engine 
Division has failed to utilize even the re-assessed installed capacity 
of 1100 engines. Thirdly, as per the latest information furnished by 
the audit, even after sixteen years of its inception, the Company has 
continued to offer their equipment fitted with the engines of both 
BEML as well as that of other makes  in contravention with the policy 
decision taken by the Board itself on 22 nd  January, 2003 to offer all 

 51
equipment only with BEML engines w.e.f. 1 st April, 2003 wherever 
engines manufactured were within th e range of Engine Division. The 
Committee note from Ministry’s reply that performance rating of 
BEML engines is high and feed-back on customers satisfaction has 
revealed satisfactory re sults. The Committee however note with 
concern that despite this high performance rating, the percentage of 
equipment fitted with BEML engines sold to its major customers has 
actually declined. For Coal sector it has declined from 55% in 2002-
03 to 44% in 2006-07 and for Cement sector from 80% in 2002-03 to 
32% in 2006-07.  
The Committee find the perfo rmance of the Engine Division 
appalling in terms of low productivi ty and under-utilisation. For this 
purpose the Committee recommend that the Company may take all 
necessary steps like adoption of su itable marketing strategies, 
development of appropriate infrast ructure, finding appropriate 
diversification activities for the purpose of extension of the product 
range for various types of applications, continuous work on research 
and development to improve the engines making them at par with 
international standards, and fi nally formulating strategies and 
programmes to increase the production of viable models of engines 
instead of production and stacking engines of unviable models.  

 52
High cost of production and Financial performance  
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
The Committee note that since its inception, the Engine 
Division has incurred losses every year and  its poor financial 
performance can be attributed broa dly to the factors namely , high 
cost of raw materials and component s; under-utilisation of installed 
capacity;  and dependence on single source supplies for raw 
materials and components.  
In the above context, the Committee note that the Company 
had made efforts to introduce certain cost saving measures by 
outsourcing some conventional activ ities like turning, milling, 
drilling, boring, tapping, grindi ng and key-way slothing etc. which 
was 10% of total purchases made during last 6 years in order to get 
the jobs done on economic rates. The Committee also note that the 
Company had made efforts to bri ng down the cost of production by 
earning profits through increased sale of spares and after sale 
service of engines.  As regards dependence on single source 
supplies, the Company has advanced the justification that Engine 
Division is resorting to single tender on certain proprietary items 
which are critical functional items having bearing on the 
performance of the engines a nd also in those cases where the 
suppliers are specialized.  

 53
Having noted the fact that the losses of the Engine Division 
over the years are coming down gradually mainly because of 
increasing production level of engin es, the Committee would like to 
emphasize the need for further speeding up of the production level 
instead of going for purchased engines of other makes. The 
Committee recommend that the various strategies proposed by the 
Company to achieve the targeted double turn over of the earth 
moving equipments by 2013-14 as per their Corporate Plan be put in 
place expeditiously so that the demand for the engines is also 
enhanced accordingly. Further, the manpower utilisation be matched 
with the installed capacity with  a view to achieve optimum 
production. The Committee further recommend that the issues like 
exploring development of alternat ive source of supply to get 
competitive price in procuring raw materials/ components and 
requirement of capital expenditu re towards procuring additional 
machinery and other overheads to improve production level of the 
engines be urgently addressed by the Board.  

 54
Monitoring role of the Ministry 
(Recommendation No.4) 
The Committee note that the Government of India accorded 
approval for establishment of Engine Division in 1988 and thereafter the 
Engine Division was established by BEML in 1991 for manufacture of 
engines for captive consumption.  The main factor which was 
considered by the government in granting such approval to BEML was 
that the engines which were being u sed by the BEML in the equipment 
manufactured by them were sufferi ng from many shortcomings. In 
addition to this, some other factors like increased value addition to 
BEML if own engine is used in th e equipment, saving foreign exchange, 
redeployment of surplus manpower from other divisions, improving 
bottom line for the Company as a whole, full control over spares and 
after sales service, and increased profit  margin in spares market were 
also taken into consideration by the Government.  
 The Committee note that as per the audit findings, the 
Engine Division has not fully achieved  its objectives in rectifying the 
shortcomings faced by it prior to  its establishment. The Committee do 
not subscribe to the view of the Mini stry that BEML is a Board managed 
Company and its performance is r eviewed by the Board periodically. 
The Committee feel that there has been lack of constant monitoring on 
the part of the Board. The Committee are of the view  that the concerned 
Ministry cannot absolve itself of it s responsibility by coming out with 

 55
such an irresponsible reply because the representative of the Ministry 
serves as an important link between the Company and the Government. 
As such, there is a need for st rengthening the monitoring mechanism 
which would definitely improve the performance of the Engine Division.  

 56
Failure in the diversification activities  
(Recommendation No.5) 
The Committee note that in order to optimise the capacity 
utilisation and also to normalise th e cost of production, the Engine 
Division intended to extend the application of the Company’s 
engines to other products and also  to sell them independently as 
separate aggregate. Accordi ngly the Division took up the 
manufacture of engines for diesel generator(DG) set applications and 
K- 300 engines for compressor applicat ions to private customers. As 
per the audit findings, the diversification efforts made to 
manufacture and sell the Company’s engine for use in Diesel 
Generator sets were not successful resulting in loss of  Rs 2.49 
crore. Besides, the Company w as left holding an inventory of 
finished stock of Rs 3.14 crore.   
In this regard, the Committee note that according to the 
Company, considering the huge demand for captive power 
generation through lower capacity DG  sets, a decision was taken to 
enter the field of manufacturing DG sets.  However, due to a large 
number of players both in organized and unorganized sectors in the 
market the Company could not m ake much head way in marketing 
the DG sets.  So the Company made  efforts  to find out suitable 
distributors who can market the e ngines for DG sets.  The Company 
entered into an agreement with a private party, namely M/s. Jeevan 

 57
Diesels for marketing the engines and based on the indications given 
by them, the manufacture of DG engines was taken up.  However, the 
envisaged objective could not materialize as the said party was 
reluctant to adhere to the agreement based on changed market 
requirements.  
The Committee are not convinced with the performance of the 
Engine Division in the course of its diversification activities. The 
committee are constrained to not e that the Company continued 
manufacturing DG sets for same party without any acceptable 
commercial terms and the production continued even though the 
concerned  party had not lifted the first lot of 10 DG sets. The 
Company failed to safeguard its interest by not legally involving for 
the said private customer in case of backing out nor the Company  
formulated any guidelines for entering into marketing agreement with 
private customers to safeguard its interests, particularly when new 
products were being  launched. The Committee therefore strongly 
recommend that effective steps should now be taken by the Company 
to diversify and capture markets for diesel engines, with the overall 
objective of improving capacity utiliz ation of the plant and a better 
market share.  The Committee furt her recommend that the Company 
should carefully draw the terms and conditions of agreements with the 
customers to fully safeguard its ow n interests.  The Committee also 
recommend that responsibility be fixed on the persons concerned for 

 58
drafting inappropriate terms and c onditions in the agreement entered 
into with private party regardi ng marketing of DG sets thereby 
resulting in substantial loss to th e Company and action taken thereon 
may be intimated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            RUPCHAND PAL  
27th February, 2008      Chairman  
8th Phalguna, 1929 (S)                             Committee On Public Undertakings 

 59
Annexure - I 
Report No. 9 of 2007 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
CHAPTER III 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited 
 
Performance of Engine Division 
 
Highlights 
 
Despite availability of in-house capacity, Bharat Ea rth Movers Limited (Company) 
resorted to manufacture of equipment with engines of other make. 
 
(Para 3.7.1.1) 
 
The Engine Division (Division) could utilise only a maximum of 42 per cent of installed 
capacity for captive requirements indicating that there had been an unrealistic forecast of the 
demand for engines at the project. 
 
(Para 3.7.1.1) 
Though the annual production targets ranged between 15 and 57 per cent of the installed 
capacity, the Division could not achieve the target in 2003-04 and 2005-06 when the shortfall 
was 23 and 27 per cent respectively. 
 
(Para 3.7.1.1) 
 
The Company could not recover even the materi al cost in 9 out of 20 models of engines 
produced during 2005-06. The excess cost worked out to Rs.2.09 crore. 
 
(Para 3.7.2.2) 
 
The Division placed purchase orders based on single tender. Such orders accounted for 
between 30 and 59 per cent of the total value of purchase orders placed during the period of 
review. 
 
(Para 3.7.3.3) 
 
Diversification efforts made to manufacture and sell the Company’s engines for use in 
Diesel Generator sets were no t successful resulti ng in loss of Rs.2.49 crore; besides, the 
Company was left holding an inventory of finished stock of Rs.3.14 crore. 
 
(Para 3.7.4.1) 
 
Another diversification effort made to use the Company’s engines in compressor 
application was also not successful. 
 
(Para 3.7.4.2) 

 60
Annexure – II 
 
MINUTES OF THE 10TH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 11th OCTOBER, 2007 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1230 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS, LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri Francis K. George 
4. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Kunwar Jitin Prasada 
 
MEMBERS, RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
9. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
2. Shri N. C. G upta Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Ms. Bharti Prasad Chairperson, Audit Board 
2. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LIMITED 
 
 1. Shri V.R.S. Nataraj an Chairman & Managing Director 
 2. Shri Gautam Sen  Ex ecutive Director (Finance) 
 3. Shri S.K. Das  Executive Director (TD) 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee had a briefing by the officials of the 
C&AG about the audit findings contained in Chapter III of C&AG’s Report 
(Commercial) No. 9 (Per formance Audit) of 2007 regarding review of 
performance of Engine Divis ion of Bharat Earth Move rs Limited which has been 
selected as a subject for examination during the year 2006-2007.  

 61
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up or al evidence of the representatives of 
Bharat Earth Movers Limi ted on the above-mentioned subject.  The Chairman 
welcomed the representatives of BEML and drew their attention to Direction 58 of 
the Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence before Parliamentary 
Committees.  The CMD, BEML made his presentation on the audit findings 
contained in C&AG Report.  Thereafter, Members raised queries on various 
aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/ clarifications on the same 
were made by the representatives of BEML.  On certain points raised by the 
members, the Committee di rected the CMD to furnish a detailed note within a 
fortnight. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of BEML for 
providing the material/information on the subject matter as desired by the 
Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
************* 
 

 62
MINUTES OF THE 11 th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 26th NOVEMBER, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
7 Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8 Shri Kashiram Rana 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Ajay Maroo 
10 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
11 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
Secretariat 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N.C. Gupta Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
2. Shri Naveen Kumar  Prin cipal Director (Commercial) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) 
 
1 Shri P.K. Rastogi Additional Secretary 
2 Shri Satyajeet Ranjan Joint Secretary 
3 Shri Narendra Kumar Director (B&E) 
4 Shri V.R.S. Natrajan CMD (BEML) 

 63
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of  the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence (Department of Def ence Production) in connection with examination of 
C&AG’s Report (Commercial) No. 9 (P erformance Audit) of 2007 regarding 
review of performance of Engine Division of Bharat Earth Movers Limited. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence (Department of Defence Production) and drew their attention to direction 
58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamentary 
Committee.  Then, the Chai rman expressed unhapp iness over non-intimation of 
the leave and the absence of Secretary, Department of Defence Production.  The 
Secretary-in-charge explained th at the Secretary is on leav e and he is acting as 
the Secretary-in-charge.  Thereafter, t he Chairman with the consent of members 
condoned the absence of the Secretary.   
 
4. Then, Members raised queries on va rious aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations / clarificat ions on the same were made by the 
representatives of Ministry.  The Commi ttee raised some questions with specific 
reference to the performance and achiev ement of objective s of the Engine 
Division of BEML which could not be replied by the Minist ry to the satisfaction of 
the Committee.  The Committee directed the Ministry to furnish a comprehensive 
note to the Committee.  
 
5. The Chairman then thank ed the representatives of Ministry of Defence 
(Department of Defence Production) for pr oviding all the material/information on 
the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
 
 
********** 

 64
MINUTES OF THE 16 th SI TTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 27th FEBRUARY, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Shri Francis K. George 
4 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5 Ch. Lal Singh 
6 Shri Kashiram Rana 
  
Members, Rajya Sabha 
7 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
8 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
9 Shri Ajay Maroo 
10 Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
Secretariat 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
  Shri A.K. Awasthi   Director General (Commercial) 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Chapter III of 
C&AG’s Report (Commercial) No. 9 (P erformance Audit) of 2007 regarding 
review of performance of Engine Divis ion of Bharat Earth Movers Limited.  The 
Committee adopted the Report with some modifications.   
 
3.  The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalize the Report for  
presentation. 
 
 