C.P.U. No. 917 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION ON 
“STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED" 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
  
 
 
                
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.04.2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2008 / Vaisakh 1930 (S) 
 
 
 
26  

2 
CONTENTS  
 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)  
INTRODUCTION  
ACRONYMS   
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 
 
 
REPORT 
 
Chapter I 
  
INTRODUCTION  
(i) Historical Background 
(ii) Shareholding Pattern 
(iii) Role/objectives/functions 
(iv) Present activities of SAIL 
(v) Organizational Set-up 
 
1 
 
1 
1 
2 
4 
5 
 
Chapter II PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE 
(i) Capacity Utilization 
(ii) Blast Furnace Productivity 
(iii) Coke rate 
(iv) Project Implementation 
 
6 
 
6 
6 
7 
8 
 
Chapter III FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
 
12 
 
Chapter IV RAW MATERIAL SECURITY 
 
1. Iron Ore 
(i) Captive Iron Mining-Renewal of Mining 
Leases 
(ii) Development of Iron Ore Mines 
(iii) Export of Iron Ore 
(iv) Gainful Utilization of Fine Iron Ore 
 
2. Coking Coal 
(i) Acquisition of Coking Coal Equity Abroad 
(ii) Tapping new resources of coking coal 
within India 
 
3. Thermal Coal 
 
15 
 
15 
 
15 
19 
21 
22 
 
23 
 
23 
26 
 
28 
Chapter V EXPANSION AND MODERNIZATION PROGRAMME 
CORPORATE PLAN - 2010 
 
 
31 
31 
Chapter VI 
 NEW STRATEGIC INITIATIVES 
(i) Merger/Acquisition of Steel PSUs with SAIL 
(ii) Setting up of new steel plants 
37 
37 
38 
Chapter VII MARKETING 41 

3 
 
Chapter VIII RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  44 
Chapter IX EXPORT PERFORMANCE 50 
Chapter X ENERGY CONSERVATION 51 
Chapter XI ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 53 
Chapter XII MANPOWER 58 
Chapter XIII INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 60 
Chapter XIV SAFETY MEASURES 63 
Chapter XV THE ROLE OF MINISTRY-NATIONAL STEEL POLI CY 68 
Chapter XVI INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENT 75 
 
PART B 
 
 
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 77-1 08 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I Minutes of Sittings of Committee 
 
 
II National Steel Policy - 2005 
 
 
 

4 
C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  
T H E  C O M M I T T E E   O N   P U B L I C   U N D E R T A K I N G S  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal         -       Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. *Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. *Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha  
 
16 
 
**Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 **Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 **Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   - Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Shri Bala Guru G.   - Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
*  Elected w.e.f. 17.5.2004 Dr. Rameshwar Oraon and  Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be Members of the 
Committee consequent on their appointment as Minist ers of States w.e.f. 6.04.2008. 
** ceased to be Members of the Committee consequent  on their retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 02.04. 2008 
and 09.04.2008. 
 
(iii) 

5 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings ( 2007-08) having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report o n their behalf, present this 
Twenty Sixth Report on Steel Authority of India Lim ited (SAIL).  This report is based 
on the comprehensive examination of SAIL. 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Steel Authority of 
India Limited on 5 December, 2007 and  of the representatives of the Ministry of Steel 
on 8 February, 2008. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 24 
April, 2008. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e Ministry of Steel and Steel 
Authority of India Limited for placing before them the desired material and information 
required in connection with examination of the subj ect.  The Committee also wish to 
thank in particular the representatives of the Mini stry of Steel and Steel Authority of 
India Limited who gave evidence and placed their co nsidered views before the 
Committee. 
 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record  their sense of deep 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered  to them by the officials of the Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                         RUPCHAND PAL  
24 April, 2008 
                           CHAIRMAN 
04 Vaisakh, 1930(S)            COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  

6 
ACRONYMS  
 
  
SAIL Steel Authority of India Limited 
CIL Coal India Limited 
TISCO Tata Iron and Steel Company 
IISCO Indian Iron and Steel Company 
NSP National Steel Policy 
MEL Maharashtra Electroskelt Limited 
BSP Bhilai Steel Plant 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MMDR Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation ) Act 
MTPA Million tones per annum 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle  
JV Joint Venture 
MT Million Tones  
CAGR Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
GNP Gross National Product 
NINL Nilachal Ispat Nigam Limited 
RINL Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
TMT Thermo Mechanically Treated Bars 
GP/GC Sheets Galvanised Plain/ Galvanised Corrugated Sheets 
 
 

7 
Glossary of Terms 
 
Hot Metal (Liquid 
Iron) 
It is the hot, liquid, metallic iron product obtained upon reduction of iron ore ( normally in Blast Furnace). It 
contains about 93-94% Iron (Fe) and other elements/ impurities like Carbon (4%), Silicon (~1%), 
anganese(+1%) Sulphur, Phosphorus etc. Hot metal is  the primary input for production of steel in the 
Integrated Steel Plants. 
Steel Steel is an iron based alloy containing Carbo n, Silicon, Manganese etc. 
Semis 
 
Intermediate solid steel products obtained by Hot r olling/Forging of ingots (in conventional process) or by 
Continuous casting of liquid steel are known as Sem is. These are called so since they are intended for  
further rolling/forging to produce Finished steel products. 
Crude Steel 
 
The term is internationally used to mean the 1st solid steel product upon 
solidification of liquid steel. In other words, it includes Ingots (in conventional mills) and Semis ( in modern 
mills with continuous casting facility).  
Saleable Steel 
 
 
The term is used to designate various types of soli d steel products, which are sold to outside custome rs 
for further processing or for direct use/consumptio n. Therefore, it includes ingots and/or semis and/o r 
finished steel products. (Liquid steel is normally not traded). 
Stainless Steel  
 
which essentially contains chromium (normally more than 10.5% with/without nickel or other alloying 
elements. As the name implies, stainless Steel resi st staining/corrosion and maintains strength at hig h 
temperatures. 
Iron Ore  
 
A naturally occurring mineral from which iron (Fe) metal is extracted in various forms viz Hot metal/ DRI 
etc. 
Beneficiation of Ore 
 
Very low grade Iron ore cannot be used in metallurg ical plants and needs to be upgraded to increase th e 
iron content and reduce the Gauge content. Processes adopted to upgrade ore is called Beneficiation. 
Sinter 
 
Sinter is a clinker like aggregate which is normall y produced from relatively coarser fine iron ore (normally 
–3mm) mixed with coke breeze (-3mm), limestone dolo mite fines (-3mm) and other metallurgical return 
wastes from the plant. 
Pellet 
 
Pellets are normally produced in the form of Globul es from very fine iron ore (normally –100 mesh) and  
mostly used for production of Sponge Iron in gas ba sed plants, though they are also used in blast 
furnaces in some countries in place of sized iron ore. 
Coking Coal  
 
Coking coals are those varieties of coal which on h eating in the absence of air (process known as 
Carbonisation) undergo transformation into plastic state, swell and then re-solidify to give a Cake. O n 
quenching the cake results in a strong and porous mass called coke. 
Coke 
 
Coke is the residual solid product obtained upon ca rbonisation of coking coal. Depending upon property , 
coke is known as Hard Coke, Soft Coke and Metallurgical Coke.  
BF Productivity  
 
which is measured in terms of tonnes of hot metal p roduced, per cubic meter of blast furnace volume, per 
day (T/cubic met/day). 
Coke Rate  This is measured in Kgs. of BF Coke cons umed per tonne of Hot Metal produced in the Blast 
Furnace(Kg/THM). By convention, this excludes coke (nut/pearl coke) mixed with sinter etc. 
Coal Dust Injection 
(CDI)/ 
Pulverised Coal 
Injection (PCI):  
 
These are technologies wherein pulverised/ granulated/ dust coal is injected into the blast furnace through 
the tuyers along with the Blast to replace part of the coke requirement.. 
Fluxes 
 
Limestone, Dolomite, etc. used in Iron/ Steel makin g which react with the undesirable gangue material/  
impurities and removed ash slag. 
Hot Rolling 
 
Rolling of Steel at above the recrystallisation temperature of steel (normally above 1000 C) to produce Hot 
Rolled Long products/Flat Products from semis. Ingots are also hot rolled to get semis. At times blloms are 
also hot rolled to produce Billets. Rolling Mills used for hot rolling are known as Hot Rolling Mills. 
Cold Rolling  
 
Rolling of steel ( normally flat products) below the recrystallisation temperature of steel (normally at Room 
Temperature) to produce cold rolled sheets /strips /coils. Mills used for the purpose are called Cold Rolling 
Mills. 
Long Products 
 
Finished steel products produced normally by hot rolling/forging of Bloom/billets/pencil ingots into useable 
shape/sizes. These are normally supplied in straigh t length/ cut length except Wire rods which are 
supplied in irregularly wound coils. 
Finished Steel 
. 
Products obtained upon hot rolling/forging of Semi-finished steel (blooms/billets/slabs)  
Alloy Steel 
 
Steel which is produced with intended amount of one or more alloying elements in specified proportions to 
impart specific physical, mechanical, metallurgical and electrical properties. 
 

8 
CHAPTER- I  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(i)   Historical Background 
 
 
Formation of SAIL: 
 
1.1 The Government of India, in December 1972, deci ded to set up a Holding 
Company for steel and associated input industries u nder the name of “Steel Authority 
of India Limited” to be registered in the Union Ter ritory of Delhi.  The Company was 
proposed to be set up inter-alia with the following objectives: 
 
 (i) to plan, promote and organise an integrated an d efficient development of the 
iron and steel and associated input industries such  as iron ore, coking coal, 
manganese, limestone, refractories, etc., in accordance with national economic policy 
and objectives laid down by the Government from time to time. 
 
 (ii) to coordinate the activities of its subsidiar ies to determine their economic and 
financial objectives/targets and to review, control , guide and direct their performance 
with a view to securing optimal utilisation of all resources placed at their disposal. 
 
 (iii) to act as entrepreneur on behalf of the Stat e to identify new areas of economic 
investments and to undertake or help in the undertaking of such investments. 
 
 (iv) to formulate and recommend to the Government a national policy for the 
development of iron and steel and related input ind ustries and to advise it on all 
policy and technical matters. 
 
1.2 In pursuance of the decision of the Government of India, the Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL) was formed on 24th January, 19 73.  The shares held by the 
President of India in the following companies were transferred to SAIL: 
 
• Hindustan Steel Limited (HSL) 
• Bokaro Steel Limited (BSL) 
• Salem Steel Limited (SSL) 
• Hindustan Steel works Construction Limited (HSCL) 
• Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) 
• National Mineral Development Corporation Limited (NMDC) 
 
(ii) Shareholding Pattern 
 
 
 From the time of the SAIL’s formation until 1992, the Government of India 
owned all of SAIL’s equity capital.  The Government  disinvested some part of its 
equity in SAIL in phases during 1992 to 1995.    Th e present paid - up capital of the 
company is Rs. 4130.40 crores.  Out of the above pa id-up capital the President of 
India is holding Rs. 3544.69 crores (85.82%) and th e balance shares are held by the 
financial institutions, mutual funds, Banks, Employ ees, GDR - holders and 
individuals.  The total number of shareholders are 2,03,259 as on 31.5.2007 ). 
 
 
 

9 
(iii) Role /Objectives/Functions   
 
As per the Memorandum of Association of the Company , the main objects of 
the Company are as under:  
 
“1) To carry on in India and elsewhere the trade or  business of 
manufacturing, prospecting, raising, operating, buy ing, selling, importing, 
exporting, purchasing or otherwise dealing: 
 
i) in iron and steel of all qualities, grades, type s and kinds as iron 
mongers, iron masters, steel makers and steel convertors; 
 
ii) in ferro-silicon, ferro-chrome and/or all produ cts made of iron and steel, 
coking coal, manganese, ferro-manganese, limestone,  refractories, iron ore 
and other alloys; 
 
iii) as miners, smelters, iron founders in all resp ective branches; 
 
iv) in stainless steel, silicon steel, special stee l, mild steel and in allied 
products, fire-clay, dolomite, limestone, refractor ies, iron ore, bauxite, cement, 
chemicals, fertilizers, manures, distilleries, dye making and industrial and non-
industrial gas, lime burners, stone quarrying, conc rete manufacturing in all 
respective branches, and other allied input or othe r materials, and for that 
purpose to construct, install, operate, manage and maintain all plants, mines, 
establishments, works etc. 
 
2) To do consultancy services required to design, e stablish, provide, 
maintain and perform engineering and related techni cal and consultancy 
services for the development of ferrous and non-fer rous, metallurgical 
enterprises, chemical and petro-chemical enterprise s, fertilizer plants, cement 
plants, refractory plants, laboratories for control  and/or research purposes, 
water works, gas works, sewage disposal plants, the rmal and hydro-electric 
power stations, electrical generators, transmission  and distribution and all 
other types of industrial projects; and for that pu rpose to prepare and get 
prepared feasibility reports, detailed project repo rts, market studies, techno-
economic investigations, survey of all types, site selection, planning basic and 
process engineering, preparing specifications and d ocuments, tender 
evaluation and purchase assistance, detailed design  and working drawing, 
shop inspection, expediting construction, supervisi on, project management 
commissioning operation and maintenance, training of personnel, pre and post 
operation consultancy and any such other services. 
 
3) To construct, execute, carry out, improve, devel op, manage or control 
iron and steel works and bye-products and ancillary  plants, fertilizer plants, 
coke ovens, foundries, furnaces, brick kilns, refra ctory works, factories, 
railways, tramways, ropeways, runways, roads, aerod romes, docks, harbours, 
piers, wharfs, dams, barrages, weirs, reservoirs, e mbankments, canals, 
irrigation, power houses, transmission lines, recla mation, improvement, 
sewage, drainage, sanitary, water, gas, electric li ght, telephonic and power 
supply works and hotels, houses, markets and buildi ngs, private or public, and 
all other works, conveniences whatsoever, and gener ally to carry on the 
business of builders, contractors, engineers, archi tects, estimators, and 

10  
designers in all their respective branches and to u ndertake works on contract 
basis for civil engineering, mechanical engineering , electrical engineering, 
erection engineering, water supply, etc. and to ten der for such works, and to 
undertake consultancy services in the above fields,  general accounting, 
material management, industrial engineering and oth er management services 
etc. 
 
4) To plan promote, and organize an integrated and efficient development 
of the iron and steel and its associated input indu stries such as iron ore, 
coking coal, manganese, limestone, refractories etc . in accordance with the 
national economic policy and objectives laid down b y the Central Government 
from time to time. 
 
5) To acquire shares, stocks or securities in or of  any company carrying on 
any business which this Company is entitled to carr y on or any other company 
or undertaking the acquisition of which may seem li kely or calculated directly 
or indirectly to promote or advance the interests o f or be advantageous or 
beneficial to the Company and to sell or dispose of  or transfer any such 
shares, stocks or securities. 
 
6) To coordinate the activities of its subsidiaries , to determine their 
economic and financial objectives/targets and to re view, control, guide and 
direct their performance with a view to secure opti mal utilisation of all 
resources placed at their disposal. 
 
7) To act as an agent of Govt./Public Sector financ ial institutions, to 
exercise all the rights and powers exercisable at a ny meeting of any company 
engaged in the iron and steel industry, the coking coal industry or other allied 
industries, in respect of any shares held by the Go vernment, public financial 
institutions, nationalised banks, nationalised insu rance companies with a view 
to secure the most effective utilisation of their f inancial investments and loans 
in such companies and the most efficient developmen t of the concerned 
industries. 
 
8) To carry on the business of trading in and deali ng in any manner 
whatsoever in all commodities, goods and things, ma nufactured, produced or 
dealt with in any manner by any of the subsidiaries of the Company. 
 
9) To act as an entrepreneur on behalf of the Centr al Government, to 
identify new areas of economic investments and to u ndertake or help in the 
undertaking of such investments. 
 
10) To formulate and recommend to the Central Gover nment a national 
policy for the development of iron and steel and re lated input industries and to 
advise them on all policy and technical matters. 
 
11) To act as an instrument of the policy of the Ce ntral Government subject 
to such directives as may be issued by the Presiden t from time to time, with a 
view to exercise control over strategic area of economy.” 
 

11  
When asked to furnish a note on the study, if any, conducted by the 
Administrative Ministry/ SAIL to ascertain the exte nt to which the company has 
achieved its objectives and the reasons for non ach ievement of objectives, SAIL in 
their written reply stated as under: 
“There is no specific study conducted by the Minist ry in this regard. However, 
quarterly review of the performance of SAIL is bein g  done by the Ministry and 
the objectives set for the company under the MOU ar e monitored. The final 
appraisal of the performance is done by Department of Public Enterprises 
which grades SAIL annually.  
 
Company Ratings with regard to MOU targets for the last three years is 
as under: 
 
Year MOU Ratings 
2006-07 Excellent  (Prov.) 
2005-06 Excellent 
2004-05 Excellent 
 
 
(iv) Present activities of SAIL 
 
 
SAIL owns and operates eight manufacturing plants –  five integrated steel 
plants at Bhilai, Durgapur, Rourkela, Bokaro and Bu rnpur producing carbon steels, 
and three plants at Salem, Durgapur and Bhadravati making stainless and alloy 
steels.  The subsidiary at Chandrapur is a bulk producer of ferro-alloys.   
 
   The Company also has the distinction of being In dia’s largest producer of iron 
ore.  In fact, owning India’s second largest mines network provides SAIL a competitive 
edge in terms of captive availability of iron ore, limestone, dolomite, etc. 
 
   Equipped with the latest steel making technologi es, the SAIL Plants produce a 
variety of steel products that meet the exacting re quirements of both domestic as well 
as overseas customers.  With the widest product range among Indian steel producers,  
SAIL offers 50 mild, special and alloy steel produc ts in 1000 qualities and 5000 
dimensions, 
 
   The company’s vast portfolio of long, flat and t ubular products is marketed 
within India by its Central Marketing Organization,  headquartered in Kolkata, through 
a vast network of branch offices and stockyards.  E xports are handled by the 
International Trade Division based in New Delhi.  S AILCON, another unit in New 
Delhi, provides consultancy services in iron & stee l and related areas to clients 
worldwide.  By-products and chemicals are marketed directly by the steel plants. 
 
   SAIL has reoriented its products-mix to keep pac e with market demand.  
Higher production of special grade items like API g rade HR Coils/Plates/Pipes, HR 
Coils for cold reducers etc. have enabled SAIL to m aintain and achieve larger market 
share in value-added segments.  By branding some of  its products, the company has 
also been able to achieve better recognition and value in the market. 
 

12  
   With a strong emphasis on tuning business activi ties for customer satisfaction, 
the company ensures supplies of customized products  with shorter lead-time.  
Through the process of Key Account Management, CMO provides single-window 
services to key customers across the country.  Ther e is increased product focus and 
constant review of distribution channels. 
 
   Though primarily a domestic player, SAIL has est ablished a reputation for itself 
as a consistent and reliable supplier of world-class quality products in the international 
market as well.  SAIL products have been well accep ted in more than 75 countries in 
the World, including China, Japan, US, European countries, South-East Asia etc. 
 
   To improve operating processes, introduce new pr oducts for the steel industry 
and achieve world standards in steel making, SAIL h as a well equipped Research & 
Development Centre for Iron & Steel at Ranchi.  Als o located at Ranchi are SAIL’s 
Centre for Engineering & Technology, Management  Tr aining Institute and SAIL 
Safety Organisation. 
 
   Going beyond steel production, SAIL has formed s everal joint ventures in 
different areas ranging from power plants to e-comm erce.  Two are with NTPC and 
DVC for taking care of the steel plants’s captive p ower requirements, one with USX 
Engineers & Consultants, a subsidiary of US Steel Corporation, for promoting IT in the 
steel sector, and one with BMW for a steel service center at Bokaro.  SAIL and Tata 
Steel have also jointly set up m-junction services Ltd., a company managing e-
commerce activities in steel and related areas.  A Joint Venture company namely 
Bhilai Jaypee Cement Limited has been recently form ed for setting up 2.2 million 
tonne slag based cement plant at Bhilai and Satna.  SAIL has also initiated strategic 
alliances with Kudremukh Iron Ore Co. Ltd., in Indi a and BHP Billiton, the world’s 
largest natural resource company to jointly develop  iron ore mines and secure 
supplies of coking coal.  
 
(v) Organisational set-up 
 
 
From the organizational set-up of SAIL, it is noted that Chairman is the head of 
the Company and below him are four Directors viz. D irector(Personnel), 
Director(Finance), Director(Technical) and Director (Commercial) to oversee the 
activities of various divisions of the Company.  Be sides each of the five integrated 
steel plants are headed by a Managing Director.  
On being asked as to whether the present organizati onal set up is 
adequate/satisfactory, the SAIL in their preliminary written reply stated as under: 
“Based on the organizational requirements, the pres ent organizational set up 
is considered adequate/satisfactory. “ 
  
 
 
 
 

13  
CHAPTER II  
 
PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE 
 
 
(i) Capacity Utilization 
 
As per the information furnished by the Company, th e capacity utilization in 
steel plants of SAIL is as follows: 
 
Plants % Capacity Utilization 
(2006-07) 
Bhilai Steel Plant             (BSP) 134 
Durgapur Steel Plant        (DSP) 107 
Rourkela Steel Plant         (RSP) 116 
Bokaro Steel Plant           (BSL) 102 
IISCO Steel Plant                (ISP) 95 
Alloy Steels Plant            (ASP) 76 
Salem Steel Plant              (SSP) 105 
Visveswaraya Steel Plant (VISL) 133 
 
SAIL in their written reply further stated as under: 
 
“As seen above, all the SAIL plants have surpassed capacity during 2006-07 
except ISP and ASP. Production at ISP was affected mainly due to equipment 
breakdowns in Blooming Mill which is an old mill an d is planned to be phased 
out after modernization/expansion. Production in AS P was below capacity due 
to lower production of stainless steel slabs which is set to increase with the 
commissioning of Argon Oxygen Decarbonisation (AOD) unit during 2007-08.” 
 
(ii) Blast Furnace Productivity 
 
 
The Committee were informed that SAIL has a lower p roductivity of Blast 
furnace, when compared with Rashtriya Ispat Nigam L imited (RINL), Tata Steel 
(TISCO) etc.  When asked to explain the factual pos ition, the Company furnished the 
following information: 
 
“BF productivity mainly depends on the quality of  inputs like Coal and  Iron  
ore etc.  Tata steel and RINL have access to better  quality iron ore , as shown 
below: 
 
 2005-06 
Company/mines Iron Ore Quality 
  Lump Fines 
  % Fe % SiO2 % Al2O3 % Fe % SiO2 % Al2O3 
Tata Steel             
Joda 66.84 1.54 1.33 65.57 1.63 2.13 
Noamundi 67.57 0.77 1.25 66.14 1.05 2.1 
RINL 66 1.66 1.3 64.2 3.61 1.81 
SAIL             
Dalli 65.16 2.83 1.85 63.86 4.42 2.34 
Rajahara 65.28 2.82 1.74 62.88 4.74 2.71 

14  
Kiriburu 63.26 2.8 1.99 62.79 4.00 2.28 
Meghataburu 63.91 2.0 2.2 63.44 2.79 2.47 
Bolani 63.44 1.58 1.83 63.09 1.98 2.19 
Barsua 62.71 1.49 3.39 62.12 2.7 3.51 
Kalta 63.71 1.33 2.68 62.85 2.33 3.1 
 
 It can be seen from the table that quality of iron  ore in SAIL is inferior as 
compared to Tata Steel and RINL in terms of lower F e content and higher 
gangue (Al2O3 & SiO2) 
 
Further at RINL, ash in Coal blend is 11-11.5% as c ompared to 12.5-17 
% in SAIL. For every 1% increase in Coal Ash, BF Pr oductivity decreases by 
about 2.5 %. 
 
RINL has two large blast furnaces of 3200 M3 volume  each as against 
blast furnaces of sizes varying from 500 to 2000 M3 in SAIL.  
 
Therefore, productivity of blast furnaces at Tata S teel &  RINL  is higher 
as compared to SAIL plants it  has been informed by the Company that the 
productivity of blast furnaces at Tata Steel and Ra shtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
(RINL) is higher as compared to SAIL Plants.”   
 
The Committee noted that the quality of iron ore in  SAIL is inferior as 
compared to Tata Steel and RINL in terms of lower i ron ore content and higher 
impurity.  When asked as to what remedial measures are being taken in this regard, 
the reply of the Company was as under: 
“Iron ore mines of SAIL were developed way back in 60s and 70s with the 
technology available at that time. SAIL has decided  to modernize the 
processing/beneficiation plants of operating mines at Kiriburu, Meghahatuburu, 
Bolani, Barsua and GUA. Moreover, new mines and ben eficiation plants to be 
developed at Chiria, Rowghat, Taldih and Thakurani will have state-of-art 
technology to provide higher quality of iron ore. B eyond 2010-11, SAIL steel 
plants will receive better quality of iron ore.” 
 
(iii) Coke Rate 
 
 
Coke rate indicates consumption of coke (in kgs) fo r production of one MT of 
hot metal in blast furnace.  The Committee were inf ormed that the coke rate of SAIL 
is higher than the coke rate of other steel majors such as RINL, TISCO etc.  In this 
regard, when asked as to what steps have been taken  to decrease the coke rate, the 
Company in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“SAIL has taken various steps to reduce coke rate such as: 
 

15  
/head2right Modernisation & technological upgradation of Blast furnaces, whenever 
they are due for capital repairs. Two of the blast furnaces have upgraded 
namely blast furnace No. 4 at RSP & No.7 of BSP.   
/head2right Maximising usage of sinter in burden. 
/head2right SAIL has planned for using alternate fuel to reduce  coke consumption. 
Presently 6 furnaces in SAIL are using pulverized c oal injection This 
facilities is gradually being incorporated in other blast furnaces. 
/head2right SAIL has planned to install bigger volume blast furnace of 4000 m3 each at 
BSP, BSL & ISP under expansion plan, which will pro vide economy of 
scale and bring down coke rate.” 
 
  On being further asked as to what is the percentage  reduction in coke rate of 
the integrated steel plants of SAIL in the last two  years, the Company in their written 
reply stated as under: 
“Coke rate in SAIL plants during last year is follows: 
  
Coke rate Kg/thm 2005-06 2006-07 % reduction in cok e rate over 2005-06 
SAIL 543 541 0.4 
 
 
It may be seen from the above table that the percentage reduction in coke rate 
is presently 0.4% in the integrated steel plants of  SAIL.  When sought to know as to 
what would be percentage reduction in coke rate aft er the implementation of 
Expansion Plan 2010, the management of SAIL in thei r written reply stated as 
follows: 
 “Reduction in coke rate is dependent on several fa ctors like quality of coke, 
iron ore, raw materials, technology, usage of secondary fuels like CDI etc. 
 
  Significant reduction is planned by 2010 after mo dernization and 
upgradation which is expected to be about 15% over present level.  However, 
exact reduction will be known after firming up the expansion plans and inputs.” 
 
 
(iv) Project Implementation 
 
 
As regards the number of projects commissioned duri ng the last five years, 
reasons for time lag/delay in commissioning of proj ects and the major projects 
currently under execution etc. the following inform ation was furnished by the 
Company: 
 
 
 
 

16  
MAJOR PROJECTS COMPLETED DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS 
 
S. No. Name of the Projects Cost 
(Rs. Crore) 
Original 
Schedule 
Actual date of 
Commissioning 
Reasons for delay 
 
1. 
2002-03  
Upgradation of BF-3 at DSP 
 
 
194.00 
 
Oct. 02 
 
Aug. 02 
 
- 
 
2. 
2003-04  
Reheating furnace-2 in hot strip mill at BSL 
 
64.58 
 
Jun. 02 
 
Jun. 03 
 
Delay in equipment supply and handing over of 
site  
3. Replacement of 100 ATA steam pipelines along wit h 
additional header in TPP & CPP at BSL 
43.97 May. 99 Nov. 03 Delay in shutdown due to oper ational 
requirement and abandonment of work by 
BHEL’s sub-contractor 
 
4. 
2004-05  
Long rail facilities with rail welding plant at BSP   
Long Rail Facility 
Rail Welding Plant 
 
320.00 
 
 
 
Aug. 04 
Sep. 04 
 
 
 
Aug. 04 
Mar. 04 
 
Delay in supply of critical imported equipment 
as well as deputation of expert for erection 
supervision & commissioning by Ms. 
Gelserner. 
5. Turbo Alternator in CPP-1 at RSP 32.03 Oct. 04 J an. 05 Delay in design engg. Order placement & 
erection by M/s Alstom and delay in equip 
supply by BHEL 
 
6. 
2005-06  
Capital repair of BF-4 at RSP 
 
118.32 
 
Jul. 05 
 
Sep. 05 
 
Delay in equipment supply by M/s TPE, Russia 
7. Upgradation of ERW Pipe Plant at RSP 108.72 Aug.  05 Oct. 05 Otto India’ contract rescinded due to n on-
performance and subsequent delay in 
amendment of contract with Salzgitter 
International (SI) & further delay in equipment 
supply by SI 
8. Installation of 130T Ladle Furnace at DSP 21.85 Jul.05 Dec.05 Delay in erection work, frequent revi sion of 
drawings & change in design of supporting 
structures of furnace to accommodate for 
restrictions on account of operational site 
 
9. 
2006-07  
Repl. of 15 MW Turbo-Generator in Power Plant-1 at 
BSP 
 
48.10 
 
Feb.06 
 
Sep.06 
Delay in design engg. Equipment supply & 
equipment erection by BHEL and delay in civil 
work by BSBK. 
10. Repl./Revamping of B-Strand of Wrie Rod Mill at  BSP 74.66 May.06 Dec.06 Delay in basic & detailed engg. And supply of 
equipment by BEC & ABB 
11. Technological Upgradation of BF-7 Incl. GCP at BSP 170.41 Jul.06 Feb.07 Delay in design engg, site  work and equipment 
supply by Danieli 
12. Argon Oxygen Decarburisation (AOD) & High 
Powered Electric Arc Furnace at ASP 
54.16 Jun.06 Feb.07 Delay in equipment supply by M/ s. SMS 
Demag 
 

17  
MAJOR PROJECTS UNDER EXECUTION 
 
 
S. No. Scheme Sanctioned 
Cost 
Approved 
Schedule 
Likely   
completion 
Reasons for delay 
 
1 
2 
 
3 
4 
 
5 
6 
 
7 
8 
Bhillai Steel Plant 
 
Rebuilding of coke over battery no. 5 
Installation of HAGC & PVR in plate mill 
 
New Slab Caster, RH degasser and ladle furnace 
Repl. of 4 Nos. medium HP locos by high HP WDS-6 
Locos 
HM Desulphrisation in SMS 
Instln. Of power supply facilities for 2x1250 tpd O
2 
Plant 
Installation of MSDS-V 
Replacement of MG sets of roughing & finishing 
stands of PM drives by digital thyristor convertor 
 
 
219.04 
64.10 
 
520.76 
26.88 
 
86.23 
62.00 
 
143.02 
53.52 
 
Jan. 07 
Jul. 06 
 
Sep. 07 
Mar. 07 
 
Aug. 07 
Sep. 08 
 
Nov. 08 
Feb. 09 
 
Dec. 07 
Oct. 07 
 
Dec. 07 
Nov. 07 
 
Aug. 07 
Sep. 08 
 
Nov. 08 
Feb. 09 
 
Delay in design engg. By CUI 
Delay in liquidation of defects by Danieli 
Automation 
Delay in design engg. By Danieli 
Delay in supply by M/s DLW, Varanasi 
 
-- 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
 
1 
 
2 
3 
Durgapur Steel Plant 
 
Bloom Caster, Reheating Furnace & LF 
 
Coal Dust Injection in Blast Fce-3&4 
Augmentation of power distribution system (Phase-I-)
 
 
 
271.41 
 
74.22 
38.39 
 
May. 06 
 
Aug. 07 
Sep. 07 
 
Jul. 07 
 
Aug. 07 
Sep.07 
 
Hot trials in progress. Caster under 
stabilization 
-- 
-- 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Rourkela Steel Plant 
 
HM Desulphurisation Unit in SMS-II 
Installation of Pipe Coating Plant 
Coal Dust Injection in BF-4 
Rebuilding of COB-4 
Uprating of Turbo-Blower No. 5 
 
 
52.39 
68.27 
70.71 
248.94 
54.05 
 
May. 08 
Aug. 08 
Oct. 08 
Aug. 09 
Jan. 09 
 
May. 08 
Aug. 08 
Oct. 08 
Aug. 08 
Jan. 09 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
1 
 
2 
3 
 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 
 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
Bokaro Steel Plant 
 
Installation of CHSG Plant in BF No. 4 
 
Rebuilding of coke oven battery no. 5 
Revamping of Mae west blocks in HSM 
 
 
Repl. of HCI regeneration plant for pickling line-II of 
CRM 
50 MW power tapping arrangement for 1250 TPD O 
2 
Plant 
Provision of ATC & OTC at oxygen plant 
 
Coal dust injection in BF-2&3 
Computerized process control system in SMS-II 
Coking coal storage facilities in CHP 
EDT machine in RGBS 
2
nd  Ladle furnace in SMS-II 
 
35.95 
 
198.84 
91.86 
 
 
35.92 
 
26.38 
 
81.76 
 
133.92 
30.91 
134.32 
29.24 
96.96 
 
Feb. 06 
 
Jan. 07 
Jun. 07 
 
 
Jun. 07 
 
May. 07 
 
Nov. 07 
 
May. 08 
Feb. 08 
Mar. 08 
Mar. 08 
Feb. 08 
 
Jul. 07 
 
Aug. 07 
May. 08 
 
 
Aug. 07 
 
Dec. 07 
 
Jul. 08 
 
May. 08 
Feb. 08 
Mar. 08 
Mar. 08 
Feb. 08 
 
Delay in supply & erection of equipment by 
M/s BSBK. 
Delay in equipment supply by M/s Beekay 
Delay in availability of Phase-I equipment by 
M/s VAI due to falling of container in high 
seas. 
Delay in supply of imported equipment by 
M/s ISSI, USA 
Order placement withheld to match with the 
commissioning of BOO oxygen plant 
Delay in handling over of site due to 
operational requirement 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
IISCO Steel Plant 
 
Rebuilding of BF No. 2 
Replacement of turbo blower 
Rebuilding of COB-10 
 
 
103.93 
20.58 
416.50 
 
Sep. 07 
Oct. 07 
Sep. 09 
 
Sep. 07 
Oct. 07 
Sep. 09 
 
-- 
-- 
-- 
 
1 
VISL  
Installation of Bloom Caster in SMS  
 
 
87.64 
 
Feb. 09 
 
Feb. 09 
 
-- 
 
 
General 
 
Repl. of 11 nos. medium HP locos by 10 nos. WDS-
6 & 1 no. WDG-3A high HP locos 
 
84.39 
 
Dec. 08 
 
Dec. 08 
 
-- 

18  
From the above table, it is seen that some of the major projects currently under 
execution are unlikely to be commissioned as per sc hedule due to various types of 
delays such as delay in supply & erection of equipm ent, delay in equipment supply 
and delay in handing over of site due to operational requirement etc.,   
 
To a question whether there is any mechanism for sp eedier project 
implementation, the reply of the Company was as under: 
 
“As a step towards expediting completion of project s, SAIL has simplified its 
purchase and contract procedures. The new procedure  aims at meeting the 
expectations of internal and external customers, tr ansparency requirements, 
improving the speed of decision making, instilling confidence amongst the 
decision taking authorities, etc. for timely implementation of ensuing projects.” 
On further being asked as to whether the Board moni tors completion of 
projects on monthly basis, the Company in their written reply stated as under: 
“The status of various projects of SAIL is put up t o SAIL Board through a 
detailed Board Note giving the physical and financi al progress of all projects. 
The Board meetings are held almost every month and performance of projects 
is monitored.” 
 
When sought to know whether review meetings are bei ng taken for each 
project at the level of Director and CMD on fortnightly basis to monitor the progress of 
the Projects and to initiate appropriate remedial a ctions, wherever there are 
slippages, the Company in their reply stated as follows: 
“In order to ensure that the projects are completed  on schedule, the projects 
are monitored on day-to-day basis by the respective  Project Managers of the 
Plants and the Project Heads. The Project In-charge s and various monitoring 
committees, both at plant and corporate level, anal yse the progress of 
respective packages w.r.t. delays and suggest corre ctive actions to be taken 
from time to time. Further, the project is monitore d by the Plant Level Standing 
Committee comprising of Head of Projects, Head of W orks and Head of 
Finance on a monthly basis. This Plant Level Standi ng Committee submits its 
action plan to the Managing Director/ Chief Executi ve of the Plant for remedial 
actions, if any, to be taken to ensure that the pro jects are completed in time. 
Managing Director/ Chief Executive of the Plant rev iews the projects every 
month for timely action to complete the projects on schedule. 
 
A Board Sub-Committee, comprising of two independen t Directors, 
Director (Technical) and Managing Director of the P lant, has been constituted 
to review the major projects (Rs.100 Crore & above)  on a quarterly basis. The 
major projects are further reviewed at the level of  Secretary (Steel), Ministry of 
Steel, on a quarterly basis” 
 
 
 

19  
CHAPTER-III  
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
 
 
 The financial performance of SAIL for the years 20 02-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 
2005-06 and 2006-07 indicating the budgeted and act ual figures in respect of 
turnover, value added, profit/loss dividend paid, etc., is given below.  
 
YEAR 2006-07  @  2005-06   $ 2004-05 2003-04 2002-03 
 MOU Actual  MOU Actual  MOU Actual MOU Actual  MOU Actual  
Turnover / 
Sales 35355 39189 
 30760 30993  22407 31805 19136 24178  18000 19207  
Value 
added* 6166 8467 5267 5466 1866 9091 - 3130 - 511 
Profit/loss 
(PAT) 4306 6202 3418 3850 1502 6817 77 2512 -800 -304 
Dividend 
to Govt. - 1099 - 709 - 1170 - - - - 
Internal- 
Resources 
# 
- 6064 - 4460 - 6581 - 3945 - 1173 
 
From the table, it is seen that there is a wide var iation between the figure of 
estimated profit and actual profit.  When enquired as to what are the reasons for the 
wide variation, SAIL in their written reply have stated as follows: 
“Globally the steel markets are more volatile. The business performance of 
SAIL also reflects the cyclic nature of the steel b usiness. MOUs are signed 
between Ministry of Steel and SAIL to improve the p erformance of the 
Company based on the guidelines and parameters like  production and Net 
Sales Realisation (NSR)etc. issued by the DPE. The process of  fixing target 
for the next financial year  starts in the month of  October of the previous year 
and MOU is finalized by the end of December taking into consideration past 
performance. Being a cyclical industry, actual move ment of price of steel & 
inputs (like imported coking coal, ferro alloys, al uminum, nickel, zinc, 
limestone, dolomite, power, stores & spares, etc.) varies during the year, 
resulting in direct impact on actual profitability, either favourably or adversely. 
 
During 1998-1999 to 2000-03 the economy was sluggis h, there was 
declining trend in the international steel prices, adversely affecting sales 
realization in the domestic market.  MOU targets fo r the year 2003-04 were 
finalized based on the market projections and NSR d uring the year 2002-03. 
However, consistent efforts of SAIL collective coup led with buoyancy in the 
steel market resulted in a strong recovery and SAIL  registered a Profit (after 
tax) of Rs2512 crores. Similar methodology was adop ted for the financial year 
2004-05 and 2005-06.  
 
Considering the extreme volatility in steel prices,  from 06-07 MOU, 
targets are now contingent on variation of Steel prices/NSR.  If the NSR varies 
more than + 5% of the stipulated NSR, suitable changes are made  in  MOU 
parameters.” 

20  
From the above table, it is further seen that SAIL turned out into a profitable 
company only. from 2003-04. When asked as to what a re the reasons for the turn 
around, SAIL in their written reply stated as under: 
“The business performance of SAIL reflects the cycl ic nature of the steel 
business. SAIL suffered losses mainly due to slowdo wn in the economy 
resulting in stagnation in steel consumption, decli ning trend in international 
steel prices adversely affecting net sales realization (NSR) in domestic market. 
However, consistent efforts of SAIL collective coup led with buoyancy in the 
steel market helped SAIL to turnaround in the year 2003-04. The company 
registered all round improvement in its performance . Turnover  reached  to all-
time high of Rs.24178 crs. the highest ever annual net profit (PAT) of Rs.2512 
crs. thus,  registering an improvement of Rs. 2816 crs. over the previous year. 
Internal efforts taken by SAIL to improve the profitability are: 
 
Intensive cost control drive.  
Steps to improve techno-economic parameters such as  coke rate, energy 
consumption etc. 
Rightsizing of manpower& implementing VRS. 
Market oriented product- mix.” 
 
When asked as to whether the increase in profit has  come through market 
forces or through internal efficiency, the CMD of S AIL during the oral evidence stated 
as follows: 
“Of course, the profit is the product of both the m arket prices as well as the 
costs.  Now, I would like to submit that it has bee n a combination of market 
forces where international steel prices as well as the domestic steel prices 
improved from a very low level in 2002-03 to 2006-0 7.  Also, there is a series 
of internal steps, which we took in reducing our co sts.  It can be taken about 
that 55 per cent has come through the internal effi ciency parameters and 
about 40 to 45 per cent has come on account of the market improvement.   
 
I would tell what steps we took to reduce the cost and internal 
efficiency.  Our capacity utilisation went up from 100 per cent to 115 per cent 
from the same equipment.  Higher volume brought about extra profit.  We have 
brought down our energy consumption from 7.75 gega calorie to almost seven.  
It has brought down the cost of energy, which is the major cost in production in 
SAIL.  Our coke rate came down from 570 kg to 540 k g; our blast furnace 
productivity has also increased from 1.4 to more th an 1.5 tonne.  Value added 
products, which gives us higher realisation, has go ne up from 1.5 million 
tonnes to 3 million tonnes.  We have doubled the pr oduction of value added 
products. Our yield has improved. Our losses, which  are on waste and scrap 
category, has come down. The finished products, whi ch can go to the market, 
have gone up.  We have done prudent financial manag ement to reduce our 
interest cost, as I had shown.  Earlier, we were in curring Rs. 1300 crore as 
interest cost, which will come down to less than Rs . 300 crore this year. 
Virtually, we have been reducing about Rs. 500 cror e to Rs. 700 crore in our 
cost every year. Cumulative impact of that is reflected on our profit.  But I have 
no hesitation in conceding that part of improvement  in profit is also due to 
improvement in the market conditions.   

21  
 
Yes, it is also an important factor.  But 55 per ce nt from the internal 
efficiency parameter is a great effort.  As you hav e mentioned in your remark 
that from the lesser number of employees, we are producing more.  In SAIL, at 
one time, in the middle Eighties, we were 2,50,000 employees and at that 
time, we were producing 6 million tonnes, and now w ith 1,30,000 employees, 
we are producing 14 million tonnes. So, our labour productivity has almost 
gone up six times.  It is a tribute to our workforce and our employees.” 
 
 The Committee were informed that in future a situa tion may arise in which 
SAIL would have to buy iron ore at international ma rket prices.  In this regard, when 
asked as to how the ‘market pricing of iron ore reg ime’ impact the financial 
performance of SAIL, the Ministry in their written reply inter alia  stated as follows:  
“ 
If iron ore is not available from captive sources a nd is to be purchased from 
outside, the viability of expansion plans will get affected especially in view of 
the recent price trends of iron ore.  In addition, availability of such huge 
quantity and quality of iron ore from market may be difficult on consistent basis 
supply of which is paramount important for maintain ing the continuous 
production of blast furnaces.  The financial impact  of purchases from market 
would depend upon the level of price prevailing in the market from time to 
time.” 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

22  
CHAPTER-IV  
 
RAW MATERIALS SECURITY 
 
 
  Iron ore, coking coal and thermal coal are the cr itical raw material inputs for 
the steel industry.  The timely and assured availab ility in adequate quantity and 
quality on long term basis is sine qua non  for the rapid and orderly growth of the steel 
industry.   
1. Iron Ore 
 
 
(i) Captive iron ore mining – Grant / Renewal of ca ptive iron ore mining leases 
 
 
Captive iron ore mining is essential for the raw ma terial security of SAIL. 
Captive mining of iron ore refers to the allocation of iron ore mines to steel makers so 
that they can extract iron ore according to the nee ds of the steel unit and utilize the 
same in steel making without the intermediation of stand alone mining companies.   
The Committee were informed that SAIL has some capt ive iron ore mines, of 
which Chiria Mine in South Jharkhand has the largest reserves of high quality iron ore 
in India.  The Expansion Plan of SAIL envisages pro duction of hot metal of 26 million 
tones by 2010 for which 43 MTPA iron ore is require d.  Chiria is the only chief 
potential resource with SAIL which can cater to the  increased production 
requirements of SAIL steel plants.  For brown field  and green field expansion plan, 
the existing iron ore reserves with SAIL will not b e sufficient.  Apart from Chiria, SAIL 
would also require new iron ore resources to meet its growth plan.   
The Committee had noted that SAIL had applied for r enewal of Chiria iron ore 
mining leases from the State Government of Jharkhan d.  However, three out of six 
leases were rejected by the State Government during  2004-05.  SAIL later submitted 
a revision application to mining tribunal.  The min ing tribunal quashed and set aside 
the rejection orders of Jharkhand State Government and directed the State to 
reconsider the renewal of leases. Against the minin g tribunal order, State 
Government of Jharkhand filed a case in the hon. Hi gh Court of Jharkhand.  Till date, 
16 hearings have been held in Hon’ble High Court.  After the hearing held on 22.8.07 
and 23.8.07, Hon’ble High Court kept the judgment r eserved. On 23.8.07, SAIL filed 
an interlocutory application seeking constitution o f committee to resolve the mining 
leases dispute.  Hon’ble High Court quashed the int erlocutory application of SAIL on 
24.9.07.  SAIL filed a Special Leave Petition befor e the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 
13.12.07 against the above order of Hon’ble High Co urt.  During the hearing on 

23  
9.1.08, Hon’ble Supreme Court had granted stay on p roceedings in Hon’ble High 
Court pertaining to case of renewal of mining lease s in Chiria & Gua and directed the 
State Government to file reply on the Special Leave  Petition (SLP) of SAIL. 
Meanwhile, SAIL/Ministry of Steel have been continu ously taking efforts for amicable 
solution of this issue.  In this regard, the Minist ry of Steel in a note submitted the 
steps taken as follows: 
• Secretary (Steel) held meeting with Government of J harkhand regularly. The 
discussions were held on 13.4.05, 24.10.05, 8.12.06, and 2.1.08.  
 
• On the request of Ministry of Steel, the Principal Secretary to the Prime 
Minister intervened and convened a meeting on 07.08 .06 & 04.09.06 to 
resolve the issues of Chiria. The meeting was atten ded by Chief Secretary, 
Jharkhand, Secretary (Steel), Secretary (Mines) and  Chairman SAIL. During 
the meeting,  it emerged that out of the total rese rves of 2 billion tonnes iron 
ore in Chiria and Gua mines : 
 
a) The State Government will renew mining leases fo r reserves of about 1 billion 
tonne immediately. 
b)  For balance reserve of 1 billion tonne, SAIL & the State Government will sign 
an MOU and the State Government would release the r eserves against SAIL 
meeting the milestones. 
 
• Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister convened a meeting on 19.02.07 to 
review the status of implementation of the decision s taken in PMO on 
04.09.2006. During the meeting, it was decided that  Secretary (Mines), GOI 
will asses the requirement of iron ore for 50 years.  
 
• Secretary, Ministry of Mines, Government of India c onvened a meeting on 
16.4.07 to assess the requirement of iron ore for S AIL over fifty-year period. 
Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand, Secretary  (Steel), Government of 
India and Chairman SAIL attended the meeting. Actio n points emerged out of 
the meetings are: 
 
1. State Government to consider the inputs given by  Ministry of Steel and SAIL, 
and send their comments on viability of allotting a dditional iron ore apart from 
the 1 billion tonne agreed to by the State Government. 
 
2. Ministry of Steel would inform the State Governm ent of Jharkhand about the 
revised estimate of iron ore requirement as against  those given in the National 
Steel Policy, 2005.  
 
• Vide its letter dated 6.6.07, Ministry of Steel, Go vernment of India has conveyed 
the revised projection of iron ore requirement for Indian steel industry to 
Government of Jharkhand, as against those given in the National Steel Policy, 
2005. The revised overall iron ore requirement by 2 019-20 for a crude steel 
output of 175 million tones works out to 256 million tones. 
 

24  
•• ••    Hon’ble PM has also made a request vide his letter dated 13.8.07 to Chief 
Minister, Jharkhand to look into this matter person ally to ensure its early 
resolution in the larger national interest.  
 
•• ••    Hon’ble Chief Minister of Jharkhand has replied to Hon’ble PM vide his letter 
dated 3.9.07. The response of the State Government was not encouraging. 
 
•• ••    Hon’ble Minister of Steel, vide letter dated 4.12.0 7 has requested Hon’ble 
Prime Minister to again take up the matter of renewal of leases of Chiria & Gua 
with Chief Minister, Jharkhand. 
 
•• ••    Secretary (Steel) GoI, held discussions with Chief Secretary, Government of 
Jharkhand to assess the status of allocation of min ing blocks to investors in 
the State of Jharkhand to achieve a steel capacity of 60-70 MTPA in the State 
of Jharkhand. During the meeting issue of Chiria leases was also discussed.” 
With regard to Chiria, the representative of Minist ry of Steel further clarified as 
follows: 
“ When so many private sector people started demand ing new leases, the 
State Government thought that they would take away some of our leases and 
re-allot them to the private sector. That is the point of contention.” 
 
When asked as to why leases have been refused to SA IL and at the same 
time they are being given to private parties, the r epresentative of Ministry of Steel 
during the oral evidence stated as follows: 
“The allocating authority can say about it. I cannot say anything on their behalf. 
I can only say that we have a legitimate case and we have not got it. “ 
 
SAIL in a post evidence note about Chiria issue submitted as under: 
 
“Justification for Chiria to remain with SAIL:  
 
Chiria has been property of IISCO for decades.  It is worthwhile to mention that 
IISCO alongwith its Chiria and Gua iron ore mines,  had been available for 
divestment from 1996-2001.  However, not a single global/domestic player had 
shown any interest during the period.  With amalgam ation of IISCO with SAIL 
in 2005, SAIL had to absorb an accumulated loss of about Rs. 910 crores of 
IISCO.  With the reversal in trend of steel market,  new investors are eyeing on 
the deposits of Chiria, which is not considered appropriate.     
 
SAIL has already developed various infrastructures in Chiria and has been 
continuing with the mining at small scale.  SAIL is  ready with the plan for 
development of state-of-art mines at Chiria with la test technology which would 
be environment friendly.  SAIL proposes to develop the Chiria mine to 7 MTPA 
by 2010, 40 MTPA by 2020.  SAIL has already carried  out the preliminary 
activities like preparation of DPR, preparation of mining plan, EIA/EMP study 
including completion of public hearing.   Environme nt clearance proposals is 
awaiting clearance of Government of India. 
 
Early need of Chiria: 

25  
 
If leases of Chiria mine are not renewed immediatel y, SAIL will have serious 
problem in proceeding with modernization & expansio n plan which have 
already commenced in full swing.  Timely implementa tion of SAIL’s growth 
plan to 26 MT by 2010 and about 60 MT by 2020 is in  national interest to meet 
the infrastructural growth.  
 
It is to be mentioned that considering the fast gro wing need of steel for the 
country, SAIL has preponed the implementation of it s Corporate Plan for 
expansion of capacity to 26 MT by 2 years so as to complete by the year 2010 
against original plan of 2012.  SAIL Board has alre ady accorded ‘in-principle’ 
approval for investment of over Rs. 40,000 crs. Thi s necessitates the early 
need of development of Chiria mine.   As per plan, Chiria mine is to be 
developed as a modern mechanized mine which general ly takes 4 to 5 years 
as per any standard.  Hence, it is must for SAIL to  get Governmental 
clearances to start the developmental activities immediately.  
 
Help required:  
 
Considering above, Govt. of Jharkhand should agree with the decisions taken 
during meeting held in PMO on 4.9.06 as given below : 
  
- To agree for renewal of mining leases for reserve o f about 1 billion tonne 
immediately. 
   
- To initiate actions for concluding MOU between SAIL  and State Govt. for 
renewal of leases for balance 1 billion tonne. “ 
 
Regarding Captive Iron Ore Mining, the Ministry of Steel in their written reply 
have stated as follows: 
“The iron ore mines are allocated in accordance wit h the provision of Mines 
and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 a nd Rules framed there 
under. The procedure for grant of mineral concessio n for iron ore provides for 
giving due weightage to technical worthiness of end  use industry vis-à-vis 
stand alone miner at the time of grant of mineral concession.  
 
A high level committee was constituted under the Ch airmanship of Shri 
Anwar-ul-Hoda, Member, Planning Commission, to review the National Mineral 
Policy,1993 and recommend possible amendments to th e Mines and 
Minerals(Development and Regulation)Act,1957. One o f the terms of 
reference of the committee was to review the existi ng procedures for granting 
mineral concessions and suggest ways for their stre amlining and 
simplification.  
 
The committee has submitted its report to the Gover nment.  The 
proposal for implementation of the Report of the Ho da Committee with 
necessary modifications after taking view of State Governments, concerned 
Ministries of Government of India and as per decisi ons of the Group of 
Ministers is under consideration of the Government.  Once the policy is 
finalized, its impact on the SAIL can be evaluated.   
[Page 9, W.R. from Ministry] 

26  
 
 The renewal of iron ore mining leases is of crucia l importance for securing the 
iron ore requirements of SAIL.  In this regard, whi le commenting on ‘renewal of iron 
ore mining leases’, the representative of M/o Steel  during the oral evidence stated as 
follows: 
“The allotment of raw-material leases is now govern ed by the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation)  MMDR Act in India. In terms of that 
Act, the primary role in allocation of mines rests with the State Governments. 
With their recommendation, it comes to the Ministry  of Mines and a final view 
is taken. So, basically, it is the State Government  which makes a sympathetic 
recommendation for getting our captive leases in hand.  
 
In the case of Chiria mines, as you are aware, the Ministry has been 
extremely pro-active at the level of Secretary (Ste el) and also the Minister of 
Steel. A number of meetings have been taken by our officers as well as the 
hon. Minister. We are going to Jharkhand also. A nu mber of formulations were 
posed to the Government of Jharkhand. They wanted s ome comfort regarding 
the green-field capacities within the State of Jhar khand itself. That was also 
indicated to them. But still it has not yet finally  been resolved. That is where it 
stands now. The PMO also intervened. The Minister w ill again have another 
round of discussion.  That is regarding Jharkhand.”   
 
(ii) Development of Iron Ore Mines 
 
 
In order to ensure availability of iron ore for ste el production, the development 
of iron ore mines is of paramount importance. The C ommittee are informed that the 
development of iron ore mines will depend on the re newal of captive iron ore mining 
leases and obtaining forest & environment clearance s. .When asked as to what 
concrete steps have been taken for the development of mines, the management of 
SAIL in their written reply have inter-alia stated as follows: 
“Pending renewal of mining leases, steps have been initiated  for development 
of new mines at Chiria, Rowghat, Thakurani, Taldih,  South Block and Central 
Block and expansion and modernization of existing m ines at Gua, Bolani, 
Barsua & Kalta.  
 
 Kiriburu-Meghahatuburu 
 
Development of South and Central Block 
Environmental Clearance obtained on 27.12.06. 
Forestry Clearance proposals are under consideration by Jharkhand 
Government. 
Process initiated for modernization of existing pro cessing plants for 
qualitative improvement. 
Bolani 
/square4 Capacity enhancement from 3.44 MTPA to 5.65 MTPA 
/square4 Environmental Clearance obtained on 4.12.07 

27  
/square4 600 Tonnes/hour plant commissioned 
/square4 Process for loading capacity enhancement initiated.  Job is under 
progress 
 Taldih        
 
/square4 Feasibility report prepared on 03.02.2006.  
/square4 Mining Plan submitted to IBM for approval on 24.11.07. 
/square4 Environmental Clearance 
/square4 Environment Impact Assessment and Environment Manag ement 
Plan under preparation. 
/square4 Submission of forest clearance proposal is under progress. 
 Chiria 
 
Mining Plan of Ajitaburu is submitted to IBM for approval.  
Public hearing completed on 29.12.06.  
Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF has consid ered the 
environmental clearance proposal in Oct’07. MoEF ha s requested 
for further information/data.  Work is progress.  
Forestry Clearance proposals of Ajitaburu & Budhabu ru leases are 
under advance stage of onward transmission to MoEF,  GoI. Help 
needed to expedite the process. 
Rowghat 
 
IBM, Nagpur approved the Mining plan on 22.3.07. 
Forestry Clearance proposal after getting favouarab le 
recommendations of Forestry Advisory Committee (FAC ) of MoEF 
is under consideration of Hon’ble Supreme Court. He lp needed to 
expedite the process. 
Environmental Clearance is under consideration of M oEF, Govt. of 
India. 
For construction of Rail line from Dalli-Rajhara – Rowghat –
Jagdalpur, an MoU has been signed between Railways SAIL, 
NMDC & Govt. of Chhattisgarh on 11.12.07. 
For construction of the rail line, SAIL has already paid Rs. 53 crores 
as an advance to railways.”  
 
On being further asked as to how the higher require ment of iron ore would be 
met by 2010 without having a clear cut policy regar ding development of mines, the 
SAIL in their written reply stated as follows: 
“The delay in the renewal of mining leases and grant of forest and environment 
clearance is severely affecting the expansion plan of SAIL.  As a result, 
development of new mines at Chiria, Rowghat, Taldih and Thakurani could not 
be effected by 2010-11.” 
 
On being asked as to remedial measures are being ta ken to improve the 
quality of iron ore, the management of SAIL in thei r written reply have stated as 
follows: 
“Iron ore mines of SAIL were developed way back in 60s and 70s with the 
technology available at that time. SAIL has decided  to modernize the 
processing/beneficiation plants of operating mines at Kiriburu, Meghahatuburu, 

28  
Bolani, Barsua and GUA. Moreover, new mines and ben eficiation plants to be 
developed at Chiria, Rowghat, Taldih and Thakurani will have state-of-art 
technology to provide higher quality of iron ore. B eyond 2010-11, SAIL steel 
plants will receive better quality of iron ore.” 
 
 The Committee were informed that SAIL is facing pr oblems in getting 
environmental clearances for the development of iro n ore mines such as Rowghat.  
When asked as to what steps have been taken by the Government to sort out this 
issue, Ministry of Steel in their written reply stated as under: 
“Ministry of Steel has been providing support to SA IL for issues concerning 
forestry and environmental clearances. In this rega rd, meetings have been 
convened under the Chairmanship of Principal Secret ary to Hon’ble Prime 
Minister on 4.10.05 and 29.05.06 for resolving the issue of forestry and 
environmental clearances for Rowghat mining project.  
 
Ministry of Steel is in continuous dialogue with Mi nistry of Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, with respective State Gove rnments and other nodal 
agencies to expedite clearances for the mines.” 
 
  
 
(iii) Export of Iron ore 
 
Regarding the export of iron ore from India, the re presentative of Ministry of 
Steel stated that till 2003-04 iron ore was a surpl us commodity and nobody was 
wanting any fresh leases. The Secretary, Steel, dur ing the oral evidence further 
clarified as follows: 
“Sir, as regards export of iron ore, the Ministry o f Steel’s view is this. This was 
considered by the Group of Ministers which has deci ded that we should try 
and conserve, but it should be through fiscal measu res, not banning on export 
of iron ore. We have suggested that 10 to 15 per ce nt ad valorem duty should 
be levied on the export of iron ore. We believe that we should try and conserve 
iron ore as much as possible. But, at the same time , we do recognise at this 
stage that as against a production of 180 million t onnes or so, we export about 
93 million tonnes. So, banning export of iron ore m ay not be a feasible 
solution. I think what we should try and do is to s ee that we put an export duty 
on this so that we try and conserve it as much as possible.  
  
But, at the same time, I must also mention that as against the reserves 
in China of about 45 billion tonnes, our iron ore r esources are much less and 
considering that quite a substantial part, about 85  per cent of our exports of 
iron ore are to China, I think there is a case for looking at this and see whether 
we should also, like other countries, conserve part icularly so that we do not 
land up in a situation where, at a later stage, whe n we require steel we start 
importing iron ore. This is the point.”   
 

29  
 On being asked as to what steps have been taken fo r curtailing the excessive 
export of iron ore from India, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as follows:  
“There has been a very high level of export of iron ore from India. During 2006-
07, India produced 180.66 million tonnes of iron or e, out of which 93.79 million 
tonnes was exported. While presently the production  of iron ore is sufficient to 
meet both the domestic requirement as well as expor ts, the continued export 
of iron ore will affect the long term availability of iron ore for domestic steel 
production as iron ore reserves are limited and bui lding up of more steel 
capacity domestically will require enhanced quantity of iron ore.  
 
An export duty of Rs.300./- per metric tonne on exp ort of iron ore lumps 
and iron ore fines having Fe content 62% and above and Rs. 50/- per tonne on 
iron ore fines having Fe content less than 62% has already been imposed 
during 2007-08.  The matter is further under consideration of the Government.” 
 
(iv) Gainfull utilisation of Fine iron ore 
 
 
Iron Ore is of two types (i.e.) lump iron ore and f ine iron ore.  The Committee 
have been informed that the fine iron ore is not ga infully utilized by the Company 
particularly in respect of Rajhara and Dhalli mines  of Bhilai Steel Plant.  When asked 
as to comment,  SAIL in their written reply stated as follows: 
 
“With the commissioning of Sinter Plant III (12 th  Dec.2001) the recovery of Iron 
Ore Fines from the old accumulated stocks commenced  and the year-wise 
figures are shown below:” 
 
Year Quantity (Tonnes) 
2002-03 626467 
2003-04 569896 
2004-05 1156291 
2005-06 1439716 
2006-07 655677 
 
In 2006-07, there has been lower recovery of fines from old stock due to 
following: 
“As the Iron ore reserves are depleting, Silica con tent in Iron ore has 
increased, resulting into higher generation of fine s.  Generation of iron ore 
fines was more by 584240 Tonnes in 2006-07 in compa rison to 2005-06.  The 
despatch of the fines from current generation on a “last in first out basis” has 
resulted into lower usage of old fines. 
 
In addition, production of hot metal was also lower  in 2006-07 (as Blast Furnace 7 
was under Capital Repair) resulting into lesser sin ter requirement and so the lesser 
requirement of iron ore fines. This also affected the usage of old fines.” 
 
Production of hot metal, sinter, Iron ore lumps and fines is given below: 
 
                (unit in tonnes) 

30  
Year Production 
 Hot Metal Sinter Iron Ore Lumps Iron Ore Fines 
2004-05 4511179 5740968 3246431 3626736 
2005-06 5178269 6933199 3332729 3663679 
2006-07 4816773 6647275 3326683 4247919 
 
The stock of old fines at IOC Rajhara as on 01.04.2007 was 2824796 Tonnes.  
This stock is envisaged to be consumed in following manner :- 
 
Year Projected off-take of fines from old stock 
(Million Tonnes)  
2007-08 0.244 
2008-09 0.295 
2009-10 0.244 
2010-11 2.043* 
 
*It is envisaged that by 2010-11, hot metal product ion shall be enhanced to 7.36 
Million Tonnes.  
On further being asked whether the Company has prop osed to set up fines 
based steel plants in India, SAIL in their written reply stated as follows: 
 
“The company has not proposed setting up any 100% f ines based steel plant 
in India.  However, the company has planned higher usage of fines in its 
existing plants as well as new plants by enhancing the sinter and pellet usage 
for which the new sinter plants, pellet plants and up gradation of existing sinter 
plants are planned as part of the current expansion plan.” 
 
The Committee were informed that Finex and Corex te chnologies were 
commercialised for higher usage of fines.  When asked as to whether SAIL is planning 
to introduce Corex and Finex technologies in furthe r manufacture of steel and 
whether any R&D project has been undertaken in this  regard, the Company in their 
written reply stated as under: 
“Alternate routes of molten hot metal production th rough processes like 
COREX, FINEX, HISMELT & ROMELT are being developed/ commercialized 
elsewhere in the world. Out of these, COREX has bee n successfully 
commercialized and is in operation at JSW, India, P OSCO Korea and 
SALDANHA & ISCOR South Africa. Other processes ment ioned above are in 
the developmental/commercialization stage. These al ternate routes of iron 
making are under examination for SAIL’s Corporate S trategy beyond the year 
2010.” 
     
 
2. Coking Coal 
 
 
(i) Acquisition of Coking Coal Equity Abroad 
 
 
Coking coal is the second most important raw materi al for the production of 
steel. Due to poor availability of indigenous cokin g coal from CIL, around 75% of the 
present requirement is being met by imports. The Co mmittee were informed that due 

31  
to the shortage of coking coal, there was a decline  in SAIL’s production of saleable 
steel.  In this connection when asked to give reaso ns as to why SAIL has not been 
able to set up joint venture coking coal projects w ith companies abroad, for sourcing 
coking coal in the last three years since the intro duction of Growth plan in 2004 and 
the difficulties faced by SAIL in this regard, SAIL in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“SAIL has been keen to set up joint venture coking coal projects with 
companies abroad and has been making efforts in thi s regard consistently 
during the last three years.  SAIL had participated  in the disinvestment of 25% 
stake in the Tahmoor Coal Mine of M/s. Austral Limi ted in Australia.  Due 
diligence of the mine was undertaken by a team of M erchant Banker / Advisor, 
Technical Consultant, Legal Consultant and a Tax Co nsultant.  Senior officials 
of SAIL had also participated in the due diligence exercise.  However, in the 
final analysis, it emerged that the performance of the Tahmoor Mine had been 
consistently lacking and output of coking coal, muc h in excess of its 
production, had already been committed to other buy ers. Thus, the availability 
of coal from this coal mine for SAIL was limited.  Further, the financial health of 
the company was very poor.  A decision was, therefo re, taken not to submit a 
final and binding bid for acquisition of stake in the mine.  
 
SAIL along with Coal India Limited had jointly part icipated for obtaining 
concession for the Moatize Mine in Mozambique.  The  Government of 
Mozambique awarded the concession to CVRD, a leadin g mining company 
from Brazil.    
 
SAIL has also explored possibilities of obtaining c oking coal of suitable 
quality from countries like Russia and Poland.  SAIL officials have visited these 
countries with a view to identification of suitable  mines.  In Russia, the mines 
are located at a distance of around 2500 kilometres  from the nearest seaport, 
thereby making inland transportation, a major drawback as well as a significant 
component of cost in the movement of coal from the mines to the ports.  
Investments in the mines in Russia are also fraught  with various risks.  There 
are complexities in the grant and operation of licences for coal mining between 
federal and regional governments. Weather condition s, particularly in Siberia 
where the available coal mines are located, are not  conducive to mining round 
the year.  
 
SAIL has registered its interest for participation in the privatization of 
government owned coking coal mines in Poland.  Howe ver, the Polish 
Government has for the time being put the privatization process on the hold.    
 
SAIL had issued an open Expression of Interest (EoI ) on 7 th  January, 
2006 inviting overseas coal mining companies to off er equity stakes to SAIL in 
their coal mines/ projects.  Two serious offers wer e received in response to 
this EoI.  M/s.Excel Coal, Australia had offered eq uity stake to SAIL in their 
Millenium Coal Mine Project.  Soon thereafter, Exce l Coal was taken over with 
all its assets by M/s. Peabody Energy, Australia.  The other offer was received 
from a Canadian Company.  A trial shipment of this coal was obtained.  After 

32  
industrial scale trials in the steel plants, this c oal has not been found suitable 
for use on long term basis.   
 
Due to the overall upturn in the steel industry, th e mining industry has 
also witnessed an unprecedented boom resulting in v ery few offers for equity 
participation by overseas companies in coking coal mines.  The coal mining 
industry, particularly in Australia has witnessed a  process of consolidation 
where the five or six big companies have taken over  the smaller mining 
companies.  Most coal mines in Australia are under a joint venture 
arrangement with Japanese Trading Houses.  Partners  in such joint ventures 
have pre-emptive rights and in the existing buoyant  market conditions do not 
wish to dilute their equity stakes in favour of oth er partners.  Dialogue with 
existing coal companies has revealed that they are in the ‘acquisition mode’ 
rather than in the ‘disinvestment mode’.   
 
SAIL is, however, making all efforts to identify su itable opportunities, 
where coal meeting the quality parameters required for blending with 
indigenous coals could be pursued and clinched.   
The Ministry of Steel is considering a proposal to form an SPV (special 
purpose vehicle) for securing coking coal from fore ign countries. SAIL is also 
one of the proposed members amongst other PSUs like RINL and CIL etc.” 
 
On further being asked as to whether any concrete r esults have been 
achieved by SAIL with regard to “exploratory talks”  with several coking coal-mining 
companies outside India such as BHP-Billiton etc., the reply of the Company was as 
under: 
“SAIL has formally communicated its interest for ac quisition of minority equity 
stake in existing or new mine development projects of the existing long term 
suppliers of coking coal in Australia and New Zeala nd.  Most companies have 
expressed their inability to offer equity to SAIL a s their existing joint venture 
partners have pre-emptive rights and are not willin g to reduce their stake/ 
control over the mines as well as the leases of min es which are to be taken up 
for development.  SAIL is, however, pursuing the ma tter with these long term 
suppliers.   
 
SAIL has also issued an open Expression of Interest  (on 19 th  February, 
2007) inviting overseas coal mining companies to of fer equity/ ownership 
interest in coking coal assets in overseas territor ies.  The response to this 
Expression of Interest has been lukewarm.  Some off ers have been received 
for development of Greenfield properties.  No prosp ecting has been done in 
such properties as yet.  It is, therefore, difficul t to assess the quality of coal 
that would come out from such mines.  Such opportun ities would be further 
explored by the proposed SPV of SAIL, CIL, RINL, NT PC and NMDC. The 
core competence of Coal India Limited would be util ized for exploration, 
development and operation of such Greenfield coal blocks and assets.” 
 
 When asked as to what steps have been taken by the  Government in 
facilitating acquisition of coking goal equity abro ad, the Ministry in their written reply 
have stated as follows: 

33  
“The Government of India has given its approval for  formation of a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) with SAIL, CIL, RINL, NMDC an d NTPC as the 
participating member companies for the purpose of a cquisition of coal 
assets/mines/ companies in overseas territories. Th e SPV would have an 
initial equity base of upto  Rs.3,500 crores. 
 
The main objectives are to ensure secured supply of  imported 
metallurgical coal i.e.  around five million tonnes per annum as a medium term 
target to be achieved by 2011-12. Steel Authority o f India Ltd., (SAIL), 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd., (RINL), Coal India Ltd.  (CIL), National Thermal 
Power Corporation (NTPC) and National Mineral Devel opment Corporation 
(NMDC) are all equity participants from the Public Sector in this SPV which 
would have autonomy and freedom currently accorded to a Navaratana 
company without the formal Navaratna status. The fo llow up process for 
formation of SPV is actively in progress.” 
 
When asked as to where premium-coking coal is procu red from, especially in 
the light of the expansion plan and proposal for se tting up two new steel plants, the 
Company in their written reply stated as under: 
“The main source for premium coking coal would cont inue to be Australia.  
Small quantities would be sourced from New Zealand, USA and Canada.  New 
sources likely to come up in future would be Mozambique and Indonesia.“ 
  
(i)  Long term agreement of duration up to 15 years are being planned 
in the light of our increasing imported coal requirement. 
 
(ii) The proposed SPV would target to (i) acquire v irgin coking coal 
mining blocks / tenements which could be explored a nd developed 
into coal mines giving  substantial annual output; (ii) acquire equity 
in coal companies willing to offer equity on their own in return for 
guaranteed off-take agreements; invest in equity of  coal companies 
through market operations; and (iii) enter into strategic arrangements 
with coal companies merely for long term supply arrangements.   
 
Since the proposed SPV would be set up with only a single agenda i.e. source 
coal for meeting the requirements of the promoter c ompanies, it is expected 
that it would meet with reasonable success.”   
 
(ii) Tapping new resources of coking coal within In dia 
 
 
 On being asked as to what steps have been taken by  the Ministry to tap new 
resources of coking coal within the country, the Mi nistry have in their written reply 
stated as follows: 
“As per Corporate Plan of SAIL, its hot metal capac ity will increase to 26.2 MT 
by 2010-11 which will result in increase of coking coal requirement to the tune 
of 23 MT by 2010-11 against present requirement of around 15 MTPA. Due to 
poor availability of indigenous coking coal from CIL, around 75% of the present 
requirement is being met by imports.  
 

34  
In order to reduce dependence on imported coal, SAI L has planned to 
increase domestic availability of coking coal to th e level of 8-10 MTPA by 
2014-15. In this regard, SAIL is looking at opportu nities for acquiring new 
coking coal blocks for development as well as enter ing into partnership with 
BCCL (a subsidiary of CIL) by funding their project s. SAIL also contemplates 
developing medium coking coal blocks in joint ventu re with Tata Steel. Steps 
taken by SAIL in this regard are as follows :  
 
 Development of New Coal Blocks: 
 
Tasra Coking Coal Block: Tasra Coking Coal Block ha ving 252 MT 
reserves was allocated to SAIL by Ministry of Coal in the year 1996, however 
lease was transferred from BCCL to SAIL in the year 2002.   
   
 Small scale mining in Sector-II is planned to star t by June’08 after grant 
of Environmental Clearance. 
 For development of large open cast mine, Project R eport for 2-3 MTPA 
capacity is being prepared by CMPDIL after which EO I will be issued to select 
a suitable Mine Developer cum Operator. Production from large open cast 
mine is likely to start by April’2010. 
 
  Sitanala Coking Coal Block: Sitanala block having 108 MT geological 
reserves has been allocated to SAIL in April’07 for captive mining.  
 
  Compliance of statutory formalities for transfer of lease is in progress. 
CMPDIL has been engaged for preparation of Project Report. Production from 
the block is scheduled to start by April’2011. 
 
 Partnership with BCCL : 
 
  Development of Moonidih Seam 16 Top – SAIL has en tered into an 
MOU with BCCL in April’06 to provide interest-beari ng fund to the tune of Rs. 
166 Crores for upgradation of its seam 16 Top of Mo onidih mine. Entire output 
of about 0.66 MTPA (ROM) from the scheme would be f or the captive use of 
SAIL plants. BCCL has issued global tender for sele ction of equipment 
supplier cum operator.  
 
Development of Moonidih Seam 15 -  Seam 15 of Mooni dih mine of 
BCCL is planned to be developed for 2 MTPA capacity . SAIL has agreed to 
fund this scheme also in line with funding of devel opment of Moonidih 16 Top 
seam. 
 
  Kapuria Block – The Block has a mineable reserve of  about 37 MT, 
which can be developed into a modern mine of about 2 MTPA capacity. SAIL 
is in dialogue with BCCL, CIL & Ministry of Coal fo r development of this mine 
in joint venture with BCCL. 
 
 Partnership with Tata Steel : 
 
  Development of medium coking coal blocks – SAIL has  entered into an 
Agreement with Tata Steel for formation of a Joint Venture Company for coal 

35  
mining. Initially, a joint working group of SAIL & Tata Steel has identified four 
medium coking coal blocks in CCL command area for joint development.” 
 
When asked as to why there is need for joint ventur e in coal mining despite 
India being a leader in coal mining, the representa tive of Ministry of Steel during the 
oral evidence deposed as follows: 
“As far as the coal is concerned, basically coking coal is with Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited, which is a subsidiary of the Coal Ind ia Limited.  Now, their 
financial health has not been very good over the ye ars, and they have not 
been investing in the new mines for increasing the capacity of the coking coal.  
So, we want to collaborate with the Coal India Limi ted through a joint venture 
or through some other arrangement where we can lend  those funds. If they 
have been having financial constraints in investing  in the coal mines, we being 
the users will guarantee the off take from them on a long-term basis; we will 
also come up with the fund support so that new coal  mines can be developed 
and we reduce our dependence on imported coal.  Tha t is the idea of our joint 
effort.” 
 
  
3. Thermal Coal  
 
 Thermal coal is another important raw material req uired for operating captive 
power plants.  Regarding the need for acquiring the rmal coal blocks by SAIL, the 
management of SAIL in their written replies stated as follows: 
 
“SAIL has captive power plants for generation of el ectricity for its use.  About 
800 MW is being generated to meet partial inherent requirement of steel 
plants.  Future projections of power demand & thermal coal requirement: 
 
Sl. No. Items 2009-10 2016-17 2019-20 
1. Hot Metal(Million Tonnes) 25.0 46.5 60.0 
2. Power demand(MW) 1675 3091 3996 
3. Captive generation capacity(MW) 2082 3957 5207 
4. Capacity addition (MW) 1250 1875 1250 
5. Thermal Coal reqt. (Million Tonnes) 18 33 43 
  
With implementation of Corporate Plan, SAIL’s power  requirement will 
increase substantially. In order to meet power dema nd, additional 1250 MW 
generation capacity is being added to enhance the t otal captive power 
generation capacity to 2082 MW by 2010. This will l ead to increase in thermal 
coal requirement to around 18 MTPA against the pres ent 4-5 MTPA. Beyond 
this and upto 2019-20, the thermal coal requirement  for captive power plants 
shall rise to about 43 MT. 
 
Plans are in place for addition of 500 MW capacity each at Bhilai and 
Bokaro Steel Plants and also, planning is being don e for an addition of 250 
MW at Rourkela Steel Plant.    
 
In order to ensure security of thermal coal availab ility, SAIL along with 
its two Joint Venture Power Companies had submitted  18 applications to 
Ministry of Coal for allocation of thermal coal blo cks. However, none of the 

36  
blocks have been allocated to SAIL. SAIL has again renewed its request to 
Ministry of Coal for allocation of thermal coal blocks. 
 
Considering the above, SAIL may be allocated 2-3 th ermal Coal Blocks 
with reserves of about 1200-1500 million tonnes to meet the captive coal 
requirement for the next 30 years. “        [Page 2 of P.E.R. of SAIL] 
 
The management of SAIL have in their post evidence written replies have 
further submitted as follows: 
“SAIL does not have adequate thermal coal deposits to meet its huge thermal 
coal requirement of 5 million tonnes annually for o perating captive power 
plants. The requirement of SAIL will further increa se significantly  to 18 million 
tones by 2010.  Considering the thermal coal requir ements, SAIL should be 
allocated adequate reserves of thermal coal mines like other competitors. After 
bringing all companies at par, the process of compe titive bidding may be 
considered. 
 
However, bidding for mining leases of coal blocks w ill hurt the interest 
of PSUs due to following reasons:   
 
• In case of the bidding process, the production cost s of the mineral will 
increase, thereby affecting SAIL’s competitiveness,  both in domestic and 
international market.  
• Also by resorting to the bidding route, PSUs will b e in a disadvantageous 
position against its private counterparts due to th e risk involved and the 
prevailing complexities of governance / procedures.  
 
Hence, the environment is not conducive for bidding /auction of mining 
leases.   
 
Incidentally, it is to mention that SAIL never had a coking coal block 
except with erstwhile IISCO steel plant, a small reserve at Chasnalla.” 
 
 When asked as to what steps have been taken by the  Ministry of Steel to 
pressurize the Coal Ministry for allocation of ther mal coal blocks to SAIL, the Ministry 
if their written reply have stated as follows: 
“With implementation of Corporate Plan, SAIL’s powe r requirement will 
increase substantially. In order to meet power dema nd additional 1250 MW 
generation capacity is being added to enhance the t otal captive power 
generation capacity to 2082 MW by 2010-11. This wil l lead to increase in 
thermal coal requirement to around 18 MTPA against the present 4-5 MTPA.  
 
In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability SAIL along with its 
two Joint Venture Power Companies had submitted 18 applications to Ministry 
of Coal for allocation of thermal coal blocks. However, none of the blocks have 
been allocated to SAIL. 
 

37  
SAIL has again renewed its request to Ministry of C oal for allocation of 
thermal coal blocks. Ministry of Steel has also tak en up the issue with Ministry 
of Coal.” 
 
 

38  
CHAPTER-V 
 
EXPANSION & MODERNISATION PROGRAMME 
 
 
Corporate Plan-2010 
 
 
 The Committee were informed that SAIL has embarked  on an expansion and 
modernisation programme involving total investment exceeding Rs.50,000 crores. 
The expected outcome of the Expansion Plan also cal led as Corporate Plan-2010 
include enhancement of production capacity & market  share; world class 
technology & products; international levels in prod uctivity and energy efficiency; 
improved product mix/ proportion of value added pro ducts; enhanced 
environmental conservation etc., 
The Corporate Plan of SAIL is as follows: 
  
 “SAIL drew its Corporate Plan 2012 in 2004, outlin ing the growth path of its 
integrated steel plants.  Initially the company aim ed at increasing its hot metal 
production to 20 MT by 2012 from a level of about 1 3 MT in 2004-05.  
However, with the amalgamation of IISCO and prepara tion of expansion plans 
for special steel plants, the targets were revised to 22.5 MT for 2012.  During 
the detailing of expansion plan of SAIL, SAIL’s ann ual production plan has 
been further revised to 26 MT of hot metal. 
 
 The growth programme, envisaged as per SAIL corpor ate plan, 
originally was planned to be completed by 2012. However, the schedules have 
been compressed to 2010 to derive early advantage on investments. 
  
 The Corporate plan envisages annual growth rate re turn of more than 
8% CAGR during the plan period. Besides capacity en hancement, the growth 
plan adequately addresses the need of SAIL plants t owards eliminating 
technological obsolescence, energy savings, enrichi ng product mix, pollution 
control, developing mines & collieries to meet high er requirement of key 
inputs, to introduce customer centric processes and  matching infrastructure 
facilities in the plant to support higher productio n volumes. This would also 
help in attaining cost and quality competitiveness, along with growth. 
 
 With this growth, the production of hot metal, cru de steel and saleable 
steel will increase to 26 MT, 24.5 MT and 23 MT res pectively from the existing 
level 14.6 MT of hot metal, 13.5 MT of crude and 12.6 MT of saleable steel.”   
 
To a question as to whether the Company has got ade quate funds for 
modernization of existing facilities and what is th e extent of inadequacy of funds and 
how are they proposed to be mobilized, the SAIL in their written reply stated as 
follows: 
“The financing of investment would primarily come from internal resources and 
if required, to meet the balance fund requirement, market borrowing will be 

39  
resorted to. However, efforts would be made to keep  the overall debt to equity 
ratio up to 1:1.  No budgetary support is envisaged at present.” 
 
On further being asked as to how it is proposed to complete the setting up of 
new facilities as envisaged as part of the Corporat e Plan-2010 within the stipulated 
time schedule i.e. by 2010, SAIL in their written reply stated as under: 
“SAIL has taken up many measures to complete the Expansion Plan in time. In 
order to expedite the tendering process, many proac tive steps have been 
taken up as indicated below:  
 
/head2right Strengthening of project organization with fresh re cruitment of 
experienced engineers and transfers of officers from other departments. 
/head2right Standing Committee of Directors constituted to addr ess the issue of 
coordination across plants in implementation of Exp ansion Plans of 
SAIL. 
/head2right Repackaging by breaking into supply, civil, structu ral & auxiliary 
packages for wider participation. 
/head2right Interactions with Global Suppliers for obtaining their views.  
/head2right Modifications in various terms & conditions of tender. 
/head2right Based on difficulties faced in finalizing tenders a t ISP/SSP, corrective 
actions has been taken in other plants. 
/head2right Across the table discussions for faster tender processing. 
 
In addition, all the activities under control of SA IL are being completed 
expeditiously.  Wherever, tenders have been finaliz ed, plants have ensured 
issue of letter of intent within a week of final ap proval. Further, to accelerate 
the implementation process, the draft contract is n ow being prepared by SAIL 
itself instead of the earlier practice of getting t he draft contract from the 
contractor which was taking a couple of months.” 
 
When asked as to what steps are being taken by the Government towards 
monitoring the progress of SAIL’s Expansion Plan 20 10 and whether any mid-term 
review of the Corporate Plan was made, the Ministry  of Steel in their written reply 
stated as follows: 
 “(i) The expansion plans of SAIL are intensively r eviewed by Secretary 
(Steel) and Hon’ble Steel Minister at regular inter vals.  In such reviews, it has 
been decided that efforts are to be directed to com plete the expansion plan by 
2010, instead of the originally planned 2012.  The growth programme 
envisaged as per SAIL’s Corporate Plans are now kno wn as the “Expansion & 
Modernization plan” of SAIL.   
 
  The individual projects are monitored in SAIL by the Plant Level 
Standing Committee comprising of Head of Projects, Head of Works and Head 
of Finance on a monthly basis.  This Plant Level St anding Committee submits 
its action plan to the Managing Director/Chief Exec utive of the Plant for 
remedial actions, if any, to be taken to ensure tha t the projects are completed 
in time.   The Managing Director/Chief Executive of  the Plant reviews the 
projects every month for timely action to complete the projects on schedule.  A 

40  
Board Sub-committee, comprising of two independent Directors, Director 
(Technical) and Managing Director of the Plant, has been constituted to review 
the major projects (Rs.100 crore and above) on a quarterly basis. 
 
(ii) SAIL drew up its Corporate Plan in 2004, outli ning the growth path of its 
integrated steel plants.  Initially the company aim ed at increasing its hot metal 
production to 20 MT by 2012 from a level of about 13 MT in 2004-05.  A review 
exercise was taken in 2005.  It was decided that sp ecial steel plants and 
IISCO should also be part of the growth plan.  Acco rdingly, the output target 
was revised to about 23 MT by 2012.  Furthermore, d uring the detailing of 
expansion plan of SAIL, SAIL’s annual production pl an has been further 
revised to 26 MT of hot metal by 2010-11.” 
 
The Committee were informed that the Corporate plan-2010 of SAIL envisages 
developing mines & Collieries to meet higher requir ement of key inputs. When asked 
about the details of investment made in developing mines & collieries in the last five 
years, SAIL in their reply stated as under : 
“Capital investment made on SAIL mines for the last five years is as under:  
 
Year Amount 
(Rs/Crore) 
2002-03 19.88 
2003-04 28.03 
2004-05 36.58 
2005-06 48.04 
2006-07 24.69 
 
On further being asked to give details about the al location made in the Corporate 
Plan-2010 for developing mines and collieries,SAIL in their reply stated as under:  
“Regarding expenditure for mine development, SAIL h as mine-wise 
broad development plans.  However, the implementati on of plans is not 
progressing well on account of delays in  getting m ining leases & 
clearances for forests etc. 
   
 Though Corporate Plan of SAIL envisaged an investm ent towards 
mines & collieries, exact amount will be worked out  after all clearances 
& preparation of DPR for each mine.” 
 
As regards the problems / difficulties being faced in the implementation of 
Corporate Plan-2010, the CMD of SAIL during the presentation before the Committee 
stated that the non-renewal of mining leases at Chi ria and Gua mines by Jharkhand, 
delay in grant of prospecting license to Thakurani iron ore mine, delay in obtaining 
clearances for Rowghat iron ore mining project in C hattisgarh, non-allocation of 
thermal coal blocks to SAIL for captive power plant s, inadequacy of rail network, 
ports etc are the key concerns in the implementation of Corporate plan.  

41  
On the issue of non-renewal of Chiria leases, SAIL in their post-evidence reply 
stated as under:  
“If leases of Chiria mine are not renewed immediate ly, SAIL will have serious 
problem in proceeding with modernization & expansio n plan which have 
already commenced in full swing.  Timely implementa tion of SAIL’s growth 
plan to 26 MT by 2010 and about 60 MT by 2020 is in  national interest to meet 
the infrastructural growth.  
 
It is to be mentioned that considering the fast gro wing need of steel for the 
country, SAIL has preponed the implementation of it s Corporate Plan for 
expansion of capacity to 26 MT by 2 years so as to complete by the year 2010 
against original plan of 2012.  SAIL Board has alre ady accorded ‘in-principle’ 
approval for investment of over Rs. 40,000 crs. Thi s necessitates the early 
need of development of Chiria mine.   As per plan, Chiria mine is to be 
developed as a modern mechanized mine which general ly takes 4 to 5 years 
as per any standard.  Hence, it is must for SAIL to  get Governmental 
clearances to start the developmental activities immediately.”  
 
Regarding the status of Forest clearance and Enviro nmental clearance for 
Rowghat iron ore mining project in Chhattisgarh, th e CMD of SAIL during the 
presentation before the Committee stated as under : 
/square4 “Forestry Clearance proposal after getting favouara ble recommendations of 
Forestry Advisory Committee(FAC) of MoEF is under c onsideration of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court. Help needed to expedite the process. 
/square4 Environmental Clearance is under consideration of MoEF, Govt. of India. 
/square4 For construction of Rail line from Dalli-Rajhara – Rowghat –Jagdalpur , an 
MoU has been signed between Railways SAIL, NMDC & G ovt. of 
Chhattisgarh on 11.12.07. 
/square4 For construction of the rail line, SAIL has already  paid Rs. 53 crores as an 
advance to railways.”  
 
On the issue of non-allocation of thermal coal to SAIL for captive power plants, 
SAIL in their post-evidence written reply stated as under : 
“With implementation of Corporate Plan, SAIL’s powe r requirement will 
increase substantially. In order to meet power dema nd, additional 1250 MW 
generation capacity is being added to enhance the t otal captive power 
generation capacity to 2082 MW by 2010. This will l ead to increase in thermal 
coal requirement to around 18 MTPA against the pres ent 4-5 MTPA. Beyond 
this and upto 2019-20, the thermal coal requirement  for captive power plants 
shall rise to about 43 MT. 
 
Plans are in place for addition of  500 MW capacity  each at Bhilai and Bokaro 
Steel Plants and also,  planning is being done for an addition of 250 MW at 
Rourkela Steel Plant.    
 
In order to ensure security of thermal coal availab ility, SAIL along with its two 
Joint Venture Power Companies had submitted 18 appl ications to Ministry of 
Coal for allocation of thermal coal blocks. However , none of the blocks have 

42  
been allocated to SAIL. SAIL has again renewed its request to Ministry of Coal 
for allocation of thermal coal blocks. 
 
Considering the above, SAIL may be allocated 2-3 th ermal Coal Blocks with 
reserves of about 1200-1500 million tonnes to meet the captive coal 
requirement for the next 30 years.”   
 
The Committee noted that SAIL is having some proble m with the procurement 
of equipments for their expansion plan due to a sit uation of monopoly in the supply of 
equipments.  In this regard, SAIL is facing some di fficulties about procuring 
equipments from Germany and other places.  When ask ed as to what are the 
problems and whether it is the lack of planning in the Ministry in taking interest in 
helping SAIL, SAIL in a written note submitted as under: 
 
“After tendering, SAIL is getting poor response fro m the bidders, more so in 
technological packages like Blast Furnace (for iron  making), Basic Oxygen 
Furnace (for steel making), Universal Section Mill and Wire Rod Mill, where, 
either a single bid or two bids have been received.  Due to the inadequate 
response by the bidders, the prices quoted in case of a single tender (like M/s 
SMS Demag, Germany for Basic Oxygen Furnace) are mo stly exorbitantly 
higher than the estimated prices of the package. In  case of two bidders also, 
due to lack of competition, prices are higher than the estimates. Further, the 
experience of tendering indicates that in many case s, more than two 
extensions have been asked for by the bidders even after giving sufficient time 
for bidding. Due to these extensions, the normal pe riod of 45 days in 
submission of the bids have got extended by more th an 60 days, thereby the 
time in finalizing the tenders are also getting inc reased. This has a cascading 
effect on the completion of the package and overall  completion of expansion 
plan.  
 
  SAIL had discussions with the bidders and it emer ged that due to global 
expansion of steel plants all over and the technolo gy suppliers being limited in 
case of steel industry, the bidders are unable to participate in the SAIL tenders 
in time and also are reluctant to take up further jobs. Also, during the recession 
phase (1997-2003), many mergers and acquisitions to ok place limiting the 
number of technology/ equipment suppliers.”  
 
When asked as to how far the existing ‘National Min eral Policy’ is conducive to 
the expansion of steel PSUs such as SAIL, the Minis try of Steel in the written reply 
stated as under: 
“The growth plan of SAIL largely depend on the deve lopment of new mines 
and expansion of existing mines of iron ore, coal, limestone, dolomite etc. The 
investment in capacity expansion of SAIL is based o n the assumption that 
existing leases would be renewed and new leases wou ld be granted for a 
considerable period (say 50 years or more) so as to  ensure security of 
supplies of the input raw materials. In view of con siderable time taken for 

43  
obtaining clearances / renewals, the present policy  and procedures are not 
very conducive to SAIL for its raw materials security. 
 
A committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Anwar-ul -Hoda, Member, 
Planning Commission, has submitted its draft report  on new mineral policy, 
simplification of procedures for grant of concessio ns etc. Its impact on SAIL 
can be evaluated after the policy is finalized.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44  
CHAPTER-VI  
 
NEW STRATEGIC INITIATIVES 
 
 
(i)Mergers / Acquisition of  Steel PSUs 
 
 
 Consolidation by way of mergers and acquisitions i s taking place in steel 
industry in India and abroad.  Mergers and acquisit ions of steel plants results in the 
build up of giant steel companies.  This results in  cut in cost of production and 
securing raw materials.  In this regard, when asked  as to whether SAIL is also 
planning to acquire such steel plants elsewhere in the world, the representative of 
Ministry of Steel during the oral evidence stated as follows: 
 
“On mergers and acquisitions, yes you are right tha t there are some players 
who have acquired some units abroad, especially Tat a Steel has acquired 
Cores. Here our submission is that the country need s more steel. Now the 
demand here is growing at the rate of 12 to 14 per cent. Our resources are not 
unlimited. We fix the priority that we should expand within the country because 
we have brown-field infrastructure. So, we are expanding in all our steel plants 
because the country will need more steel. If I acqu ire a steel unit abroad, that 
steel will remain there; it is not going to help ou r country. We have made a 
very ambitious expansion plan to put our resources within the country to grow. 
We are growing organically. That is our submission.” 
 
 As regards merger of steel PSUs within India, the Committee sought to know 
the views of SAIL regarding consolidation / merger of RINL with SAIL.  In this regard, 
SAIL in their written reply stated as follows:  
 
“Consolidation/merger of steel PSUs will help PSUs to acquire global size of 
operation in order to attain global scale and syner gize operation and bring 
down cost of production. 
 
In this regard, merger of SAIL & RINL would lead to  the emergence of 
SAIL as a giant steel PSUs to take on MNC companies .  This will also bring 
down marketing costs and   administrative cost apar t from other costs of 
operations.  A merger of SAIL with RINL was contemp lated, but this will be 
pursued only if a consensus is reached on this issue. ”   
 
On being asked as to what is the latest status of t he proposed merger of RINL 
with SAIL, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as follows: 
 
“The proposal for merger of RINL with SAIL is not p resently under active 
consideration.” 
 
As regards, the merger of small steel PSUs with SAI L, the Committee sought 
to know what is the stand of the Government with regard to merger of Neelachal Ispat 
Nigam Limited with SAIL, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as follows: 

45  
“Draft CoS notes for merger and acquisition of NINL  with SAIL has been 
prepared and sent to Department of Disinvestment, D epartment of Commerce 
and Government of Orissa on 20.12.2007 to offer the ir comments / views.  
Reply from Department of Disinvestment has been rec eived.  Reminder has 
been sent to the Department of Commerce and Government of Orissa.” 
 
The CMD of SAIL during the presentation before the Committee stated that the 
proposal for merger of MEL with SAIL is also under the active consideration of the 
Government. 
(ii) Setting up of new steel plants 
 
 
As per the information furnished to the Committee, the Company intends to set 
up two new steel plants in the State of Jharkhand a nd the other in the State of 
Chhattisgarh as a joint venture.  In this regard, S AIL in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“New Steel plant at Jharkhand: SAIL appointed MECON  as consultant for 
green-field project in Jharkhand. MECON has submitt ed a report, a  copy of  
which has been submitted to the State Government. C onsent of State 
Government is awaited for signing of MOU. A detaile d time frame for setting 
up of the steel plant would be firmed up after sign ing of MoU with the State 
Government for which report of State Government is awaited.   
 
Chhattisgarh: For the proposed new joint venture steel plant in the State 
of Chhattisgarh, an MoU has been signed in August’0 7 between the three 
promoter companies i.e. SAIL, RINL and NMDC.  M/s. MECON Ltd. have been 
appointed as the Consultant to prepare a (i) Site S election Report; and (ii) 
Project Proposal Report.  The Site Selection Report  of MECON is expected 
shortly. Based on the recommendations made by MECON in the Site Selection 
Report, a decision would be taken on how to progres s further with the project 
including issues relating to land acquisition and a llocation of captive iron ore 
deposits by the State Government of Chhattisgarh.   
 
When asked as to whether the Company has fixed/ pro posed to fix any time 
frame for the setting up of the two new steel plant s, SAIL in their written reply stated 
as under: 
“SAIL is all set to implement both the projects in the shortest possible time 
once government approvals & clearances on land, min ing leases etc are 
obtained from the respective state governments.” 
 
 On further being asked as to whether any feasibili ty study for setting up of new 
steel plants in Jharkhand and Chattisgarh has been taken up, SAIL in their written 
reply stated as under: 
“For the green field plant in Jharkhand, M/s MECON has prepared an 
Approach Note and Project Viability Report. The consultant has suggested that 

46  
SAIL may initially plan to set up an integrated ste el plant of capacity 6.2 Mt/yr 
crude steel, which may be increased further to 12.4  Mt/yr of crude steel. A 
copy of this report has been submitted to the State  Government. SAIL is 
awaiting consent of State Government on this project. 
 
For the proposed JV Integrated Steel Plant in Chhat tisgarh, MECON 
has been appointed as the Consultant for preparatio n of Site Selection Report 
and Project Proposal Report. Based on further discu ssions with Government 
of Chhattisgarh and the promoter companies regardin g availability of land and 
iron ore mines, a detailed Feasibility/ DPR would be ordered for preparation.”  
  
To a question as to why SAIL wishes to enter into j oint ventures for the setting 
up of two new steel plants and whether any prospect ive JV partner has been 
identified, SAIL in their written reply stated as under: 
“The proposed green-field plant at Jharkhand is to be developed by SAIL and 
not in Joint Venture.  However, the Integrated Stee l Plant proposed to be set 
up in the State of Chhattisgarh, would be under a j oint venture arrangement 
between SAIL, RINL and NMDC with equal partnership by all the three 
promoters.  While SAIL & RINL will provide expertis e in steel making 
technology and plant operations, NMDC will provide expertise in mining 
activity.” 
 
On being sought to know the proposal to fund the se tting up of two new steel 
plants in India, reply of the Company was under:   
“New Steel plant at Jharkhand– Pursuant to State Go vernments approval on 
the project, SAIL plans funding through internal ac cruals as well as external 
borrowings. The linkages of iron ore shall be mainl y from Chiria and other 
captive mines. Coking coal requirements shall be me t through mines in 
Jharkhand as well as imports.  
 
Chhattisgarh : The JV Integrated Steel Plant in Chhattisgarh is i ntended 
to be funded on a debt : equity structure of 2:1.  Contribution to the equity of 
the JV – Intergrated Steel Plant (ISP)  would be th rough investment in the 
equity of the company by the promoters from their own funds.   
 
Also, the promoters are impressing upon the State G overnment to 
allocate suitable and adequate iron ore reserves to  take care of 50 years iron 
ore requirement of the proposed ISP.  Preliminary d iscussions with the State 
Government officials have indicated that the State Government does not have 
any known reserves of iron ore for allocation to th e JV ISP for prospecting and 
development.” 
 
 In a post evidence note regarding setting up of ne w steel plant at Chhatisgarh, 
the Ministry of Steel stated as under:  
 
“Recently in a meeting held under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Steel Minister 
on 13 March 2008, after discussing various options it was suggested that 
NMDC could consider taking up the equity investment  for the new steel plant 

47  
since they both have adequate cash reserves for the  purpose as well as easy 
access to the primary raw material viz. iron ore. 
 
 In sum, the following decision were taken: 
 
(i) NMDC and its Board would immediately consider t he possibility of 
setting up an integrated steel plant at a suitable location with strategic 
advantages; keeping in view their linkage with iron  ore reserves and the 
availability of investable surplus, subject to appr oval by its Board.  This 
steel plant could be of 3 MTPA capacity. 
(ii) Keeping in view the need to ensure early imple mentation of the project, 
the suggestion of implementing it on a turn-key bas is could be 
considered by the NMDC. 
(iii) Since NMDC did not have the experience and ex pertise of setting up 
steel plants, they could consider the following possibilities: 
 
(a) Engaging an experienced consultant like MECON with experience in 
the design and construction supervision of steel plant. 
(b) NMDC could also consider engaging a steel-makin g PSU like RINL 
for actual supervision of the construction and coul d also enter into 
marketing tie-ups with RINL to make use of their di stribution 
machinery for the produced steel.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48  
CHAPTER VII  
MARKETING  
 
 The information furnished by SAIL as regards the m arketing activities including 
the various products marketed by SAIL is as follows: 
“Long Products 
 
During the year 2006-07, the apparent consumption o f finished long products 
was over 19.6 million tonnes 45% of total finished steel consumption.  
Domestic industry comprises of 3 main producers i.e . SAIL, RINL and TISCO.  
These main producers accounted for approx. 34% of t he market share of 
finished long products.  In addition there are a la rge number of secondary 
producers commanding over 64% of the market share.  Apart from this, 
imports of high value structurals, bars & rods cons titute 2% of the market 
share.  SAIL had a market share of 14.4% in finishe d long products during 
2006-07 in the domestic market.   
 
Flat Products  
During 2006-07, the apparent consumption of finishe d flat products was 24.1 
million tonnes constituting 55% of the total finished steel consumption.  In case 
of flat products, SAIL has a share of approx. 28% i n the domestic market.  In 
case of plates and HR Coils, TISCO, ESSAR Steel, Is pat Industries, JSW, 
Lloyd Steel are the major competitors.    SAIL is t he pre-dominant player for 
plates in the domestic market.  The major competito rs for CR Coils / Sheets 
are TISCO, ESSAR, Uttam, Bhushan and various other cold reducers.   Apart 
from SAIL, GP/GC Sheets are being produced by a hos t of other players 
including TISCO, Bhushan, JSW, Uttam, National, Shr ee Pre-coated, etc. in 
the private sector.   
 
• In order to assess the requirement of steel for var ious sectors including 
building / construction sector and evolve a sales plan attuned to the market 
conditions, a detailed exercise is undertaken befor e the commencement of 
each financial year which inter alia include plantw ise, productwise, 
segmentwise sales plan keeping in view the demand a nd supply scenario 
in the country as well as production capability  of  each of the plants of 
SAIL.   
 
The sales of steel by SAIL, of various products use d in building / 
construction activities, during the last 3 years is as under : 
        
      000 tonnes  
 
Product 
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
TMT/RTS   693    691     888  
Structurals   584    650    722  
Plates 1998  2057  2261  
GP/GC 
Sheets 
    289 
     285      269  
 
SAIL has also stepped up sales of products like TMT /RTS and 
Structurals (which mainly go into the construction sector) by 28% and 24% 
respectively in the last 3 years.  There are also p roducts, where the secondary 

49  
sector has a much larger share of the market.  As stated, SAIL is not the major 
player in finished long products in the domestic market during 2006-07.”  
 
The Committee note that SAIL is not the major playe r in finished long products 
in the domestic market during 2006-07.  When asked to give reasons as to why SAIL 
could not be a major player in this field, SAIL in their written reply stated as follows: 
 
“As per provisional estimates of JPC, during the ye ar 2006-07, the apparent 
consumption of finished long products was over 19.6 million tonnes, which was 
45% of total finished steel consumption.  Domestic industry comprises of 3 
main producers i.e. SAIL, RINL and TISCO.  These main producers accounted 
for approx. 34% of the market share of finished lon g products.  In addition 
there are a large number of secondary producers com manding over 64% of 
the market share.  Apart from this, imports of high  value structurals, bars & 
rods constitute 2% of the market share.  SAIL had a  market share of 14.4% in 
finished long products during 2006-07 in the domestic market.    
 
Finished Long products market constitutes mainly of  Bars and Rods 
(including TMT bars), Structurals and Railway mater ials. While SAIL 
constitutes over 90% share of Railway materials, market share of SAIL in Bars 
& Rods and Structurals is around 8% and 19% respect ively. Due to 
requirement of relatively low capital investment as  compared to Flat Products, 
in Long Products, there are many re-rolling mills w ith small capacities which 
account for more than 65% of market share for Bars & Rods and over 71% for 
Structurals. Although SAIL’s share during 2006-07 w as 14.4 % there was no 
single producer which accounted for a larger market  share. Production of 
finished Long Products by SAIL during 2006-07 was 2 .91 million tonnes and 
sales were 2.86 million tonnes. SAIL could market a lmost entire production of 
its’ finished long products.” 
 
 To a question as to what steps have been taken to improve the market share 
of SAIL in an expanding steel market in the last tw o years and details of future 
marketing strategies being evolved in this regard, SAIL in their written reply stated as 
follows: 
“Since the current expansion plan of SAIL will be in position by 2010 there was 
no additional availability of steel beyond the curr ent capacity of about 13 
million tonnes of saleable steel. The market share hence has not increased 
during the last two years. The current availability  is being catered to project 
customers like NTPC, BHEL and other infrastructural  projects, which are 
important for the economic development of the country. 
 The future marketing strategy evolved in order to market the additional 
availability which is expected by 2010-11 are as under: 
a) Value added steel in order to have better realiz ation and cater to high-
end customers who are currently depending either on  imports or other 
producers. 

50  
b) Retail channels for large-scale distribution of steel in each and every 
corner of India so that consumers can procure SAIL steel at their 
nearest outlet at a competitive price. 
c) E-sales where customers can procure materials di rectly from SAIL 
through online bookings from the comfort of their homes/offices, making 
payments and receiving the materials directly at th eir sites. The entire 
process is available online and the material shall reach without the 
customer taking pains to move from his site. 
d) Modernization of plants in order to produce mate rials which have wide 
marketability and products which are needed by the country for 
development. 
e) Immediate increase in capacity without gestation  period through 
acquisitions / merger by which market share can be enhanced. 
 
 SAIL envisages a major improvement in its market s hare, once the 
expansion plan of its finished steel capacity to ab out 23 MT is implemented by 
2010-11.” 
 
When asked as to  what steps have been taken by SAIL for popularizing  SAIL 
products in the rural market, SAIL in their written reply stated as under:    
“SAIL has taken a massive plan of increasing the di stribution network in every 
district of India by way of appointing district dea lers. These dealers shall be 
marketing mainly TMT and GP/GC, which are used by rural customers for their 
requirement. In order to solve the logistic problem s SAIL has also arranged to 
reach the material to the dealers’ warehouses free of cost and MRRP 
(Maximum Recommended Retail Price) is fixed by SAIL  on monthly basis so 
that uniform price is charged by the dealer to cust omers in a particular district. 
Currently SAIL has already covered 602 out of 603 d istricts with appointment 
of dealers and subsequently process is also on to r each the material to sub-
block levels for easy availability to ultimate cons umers in the rural market. 
Smaller packets / bundles are also being provided t o meet the requirements of 
the small customers.” 
To a question as to whether marketing audit is prop erly conducted in SAIL, the 
Company in their written reply stated as follows: 
“Marketing audit is a fundamental part of the marke ting planning process. It 
considers both internal and external influences on marketing planning as well 
as review of the plan itself. 
 
SAIL CMO is accredited under ISO 9001: 2000 under w hich plan 
reviews are done every quarter by  the  Local Management Review Committee 
and necessary alterations made to the plan after ta king stock of the 
opportunities and threats , on a dynamic basis.” 
 
 
 
 

51  
CHAPTER-VIII  
 
  
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  
 
When asked to furnish a note on research and develo pment activities of the 
Company alongwith major achievements, annual expend iture in terms of percentage 
of total expenditure and also turnover for the last  five years, and the impact of R&D 
activities in improving the working of the Company etc., SAIL in their written reply 
stated as follows: 
“Research and Development centre for Iron and Steel  (RDCIS), the corporate 
Research unit, was set up at Ranchi in 1972. Beside s the main centre at 
Ranchi, there are plant-centres located in each of the SAIL plants, which act 
as an interface between plant and main research centre.  
 
Over the years, it has grown to about 317 highly qu alified research 
engineers (57 PhDs and 92 Post Graduates) and pursu ing R & D programs 
covering major disciplines like Coal & Chemicals, I ron making, Steel making, 
Rolling, Product development, Energy, Environment a nd Automation. With the 
research experience of over 30 years, RDCIS has eme rged as an Institute of 
repute in the field of ferrous metallurgy.  The cen tre has been accredited with 
ISO certification in the year 1994. 
Major Research Facilities 
The research facilities comprise of 15 major labora tories encompassing 
6 pilot facilities and 350 equipment and advanced d iagnostic facilities. The 
pilot facilities and major laboratories are listed below;  
 Pilot Plants & Simulation facilities   
Pilot Coke Oven 
Pot Sintering 
Experimental Hot / Cold Rolling Mill 
Combustion Research Unit for design & testing of burners 
Thermo-mechanical simulator (Gleeble system) 
Hot dip process simulator for coated products 
 Major Laboratories 
Coal, Coke and Chemical  
Mineral Beneficiation 
Sintering and Agglomeration 
High temperature reduction  
Melting and Solidification  
PLC and Software development  
Physical metallurgy  
Mechanical Testing 
Chemical analysis and corrosion engineering 
Refractory  
Tribology 
Environment 

52  
Computational laboratory 
Computer Centre with state-of-art development tools 
 
Brief description of achievements of RDCIS during 2006-07: 
 
Research & Development Centre for Iron and Steel (R DCIS) have 
provided innovative technological inputs to differe nt units of SAIL, with special 
emphasis on cost reduction, quality improvement, pr oduct development, 
energy conservation and automation. 
 
• Product development is one of the core activities, which entail 
development of market oriented value added products  and their 
commercialization. Several new products were developed viz. : 
• High strength corrosion resistant roof bolt for app lication in overhead 
roof support for underground coal mines 
• Spring steel billets at DSP has been developed thro ugh the application 
of EMS (Electro-magnetic Stirring) during continuou s casting. The 
billets were successfully converted to leaf spring assembly at 
customers’ end.  
• Medium carbon hot rolled strips for cold reducing segment; 
• High Strength LPG for export quality cylinders. 
• High strength cold rolled steel for automobiles; 
• Earthquake resistant TMT rebars at DSP & BSP  
• High strength Vanadium Microalloyed Rails were deve loped  at BSP for 
the proposed freight corridor of railways. These ra ils are better than the 
conventional 90 UTS rails. 
Major process related achievements 
A glimpse of major achievements of the centre in di fferent areas is 
outlined below: 
Coal Carbonization: 
• Enhancement of supply-base of imported coking coals  through 
formulation of specification and evaluation of impo rted and indigenous 
coals. Evaluation is done through laboratory charac terization, pilot oven 
tests and industrial scale trials. 
• Coke oven performance evaluation and improvement. 
• Introduction of in-house developed Integrated cokin g control 
system for reduction in specific heat consumption b y 5 % at BSP and 
DSP. 
• Improvement in granulometry of coal charge at RSP 
Mineral Processing and Agglomeration (Sinter making): 
• Modification in beneficiation schemes at iron ore mines of SAIL.  
• Improvement in productivity, quality and reduction in specific 
energy consumption in sinter plants of SAIL.  
• Stabilisation of productivity of sinter plants at DSP. 
 
Iron making: 

53  
• Increase in Blast Furnace productivity (0.80 to 1.3 0 t/m 3/day at 
RSP, 1.35 to 1. 78 t/m 3/day at BSP), through optimization of burden 
distribution, control of blowing parameters, etc. 
• Decrease in BF coke rate 
 (600 to 563 kg/thm in BF#3 at BSL, 
633 to 507 kg/thm at RSP) through improved gas util ization, heat flux 
control, etc. 
• Campaign life of BF enhanced through hearth protect ion 
measures in the form of charging titani–ferrous ore  and injection of 
ilmenite. Campaign life in BF 4, DSP was, increased  by 6 months 
recently. 
• Stabilization of pulverized coal and tar injection at BSP and BSL. 
 
Steel making: 
• Enhancement of BOF converter lining life through de velopment 
of slag splashing technology and improvement in lining design and brick 
quality.  
• Reduction of Aluminum consumption by approximately 1 kg / ton 
of liquid steel through improved deoxidation practi ce at BSP, RSP and 
BSL.  
• Reduced residuals (P & Si) for low carbon extra dee p drawing 
(BSL) and sulphur in rail (BSP) steel through refining technique. 
• Improvement in desulphurization of steel at SMS II at BSP 
 
Continuous Casting:  
• Development of a system for aligning tundish and mo uld in billet 
caster at DSP. 
• Quality improvement of cast slabs e.g. reduction of  centre cracks 
from 7.2 to 1.6 % at BSL and reduced steel defects in high strength 
grade by 4% at BSP.  
• Development of 880 MPA grades rails through BOF-CC route, 
which improved the yield of rails from 77 to 88 %. 
• Internal quality of billets has been improved throu gh automated 
secondary cooling in Caster II at DSP. 
• Enhancement of cast billet quality of 125 mm square  billets at 
DSP. 
• Improvement in castability of Jackal Steel at ASP.     
Refractory: 
• Development of wide varieties of castables for appl ication in 
steel ladles, caster tundish and mill reheating furnaces.  
• Development of MgO-C bricks and in-house manufactur ing for 
converters and steel ladles at RSP, BSP and BSL. 
• Improvement of steel ladle life in SAIL plants (RSP : 49 to 80 
heats, BSP: 38 to 62 heats and ASP: 30-150 heats).  
• Introduction of low thermal mass (Ceramic fiber lin ing) in heat 
treatment and reheating furnaces for energy saving at BSP, RSP, ASP 
and DSP. 
• Improvement in quality of CR coils at continuous an nealing line 
of BSL. 
 Rolling Mills: 

54  
 Flat rolling 
• Productivity improved by 10% at Hot Strip Mill of R SP by 
introduction of longer slabs (7.7 m to 8.6 m). Yield improved from 96.2% 
to 97%  
• Modification of process parameters of Cold Rolled N on-oriented 
(CRNO) coils at Silicon Mill, RSP, improved mill pr oductivity from 5400 
to 7000 tons per month.   
• Next generation cold rolling oils developed for tan dem mills of 
BSL and RSP facilitated in rate by 10 % and surface  reflectance to 85 
% . 
• Accelerated cooling of plates at BSP eliminated nor malizing 
treatment of plates of thickness 14-28 mm for all grades of steel.  
• Automation of Looper and Entry guide control system s 
introduced in hot strip Mill, RSP, resulted in fini shing mill yield 
improvement by reducing number of cobbles from 42 to 10  per annum.  
 Shape rolling 
• Development of Micro alloyed (Nb/V) rails to withst and higher 
axle load.  
• Development of corrosion resistant rail for coastal area.  
• Indigenization  of loco wheel production at DSP 
• Introduction of hot charging and round ingot techno logy 
increased production of superior quality wheels, fr om 43000 to 65000 
nos per year at DSP 
• New loop sensor for wire rod mill, BSP, reduced rej ection by 
15%.  
• Integrated monitoring and display system for fault indication and 
centralized electrical fault indication reduced mill delays. 
Tribology: 
• Condition Based Monitoring System (CBMS) introduced  in all 
plants helped in preventing major break down of critical equipments. 
• Developed plasma spray coating technology for recla mation of 
PBCC rolls at BSP.  
• Superior wear resistance plates for sinter plants e xhauster 
housing of BSL increased working life to 4 years.  
Energy Conservation and Environment Management: 
• Dual fuel burner for rotary kiln of BSP for replaci ng Pitch 
Creosote Mixture (PCM) by coke oven gas. 
• Gaseous fuel burner for reheating furnaces of BSP a nd DSP for 
reduction in heat consumption by 5-10 %. 
• Introduction of multislit burner for sintering at BSL and RSP. 
• Regular monitoring of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarb on (PAH) in 
Coke Oven emissions in all SAIL plants as a statutory requirement.  
• Simulation study and process optimization of biological treatment 
plant at BSP. 
• Improvement in performance of reheating furnaces no . I and II of 
Rail and Structural mill at BSP. 
• Modification in design of ladle heating stands in SMS I at BSL. 

55  
Information Technology:  
• Computerized Human Resource Information System (BSP , DSP 
and RDCIS) 
• Computerized Refractory Management System (BSL, BSP) 
• On line Financial Accounting System at BSP & RDCIS” 
 
The papers published/presented by RDCIS during last three years are given in 
the following table. 
 
Outputs 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
Papers 
• Published 
• Presented 
201 
56 
145 
198 
61 
137 
188 
51 
137 
Nos. of Awards Received 9 10 6 
 
Annual Expenditure in R&D as a percentage of turnov er of SAIL for the past 
five years 
                      (Rs. in crores)  
R&D Expenditure as Year R&D 
Expenditure 
SAIL's Turnover 
% of SAIL's Turnover 
2002-03 54.82 19207  0.29 
2003-04 71.90 24178 0.30 
2004-05 60.55 31800 0.19 
2005-06 62.38 32280 0.19 
2006-07 76.85 39189 0.20 
 
 
To a question whether R& D unit of SAIL could invent any technology for using 
low-grade coal for the manufacturing of steel, SAIL  in their written reply stated as 
follows: 
“RDCIS, a R&D unit of SAIL has carried out extensiv e research and 
development work to maximize use of low grade India n and imported coals for 
coke making. Keeping in view high ash content of (m ore than 18%) in Indian 
coal, we are blending it with imported coal (of ash  content of around 10%). To 
meet the growing demand of coal for SAIL units, the  possibilities of using soft 
Coal to the extent of 5 – 10% in the blend have als o been examined by 
RDCIS. Some of the pioneering work carried out by R DCIS, SAIL in this 
context are: 
 
• Development suitable technology for blending and ch arge preparation. 
For example, “Group wise crushing of coal charge” t echnology 
(patented in India and abroad) has been developed t hrough pilot and 
commercial scale investigations and introduced in its plants. 

56  
• Regular evaluation of new indigenous sources, throu gh beneficiation, 
laboratory characterization and blending tests in p ilot and commercial 
trials to increase supply base of raw coals to wash eries. At present one 
of our major programme is to evaluate new coal sour ces, which have 
potential to produce metallurgical coals, but are b eing used as thermal 
coal, in collaboration with CIMFR, Dhanbad. 
• Use of lower grade coals thorough partial briquetti ng of coal charge, 
selective crushing and complementing imported coals.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57  
CHAPTER IX  
 
EXPORT PERFORMANCE  
 
When asked to furnish a note on the export performa nce of the Company, 
indicating inter-alia the names of the countries to which exports were made, the value 
of exports during each of the last three years and efforts made by the Company to 
augment the exports, SAIL in their reply stated as follows: 
“FOB value of exports of mild steel from SAIL during the last 3 years is as 
under: 
                                                                               (Value in Rs. Crores) 
 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
Exports 897 977 941 
 
The countries to which exports have been made during the last 3 years are: 
 
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, China, Singa pore, Taiwan, 
Phillipines, South Korea, Thailand, Indonesia, Viet nam, Japan, Italy, Belgium, 
Spain, U.K., Germany, France, Netherlands, Australi a, Mexico, UAE, Bahrain, 
Oman and Sudan.   
 
SAIL is primarily a domestic player.  However, as a  part of its marketing 
strategy, SAIL continues to maintain its presence i n the global markets. 
Special thrust has been given on catering to the re quirements of the 
neighbouring markets like Bangladesh, Myanmar, Nepa l and Sri Lanka which 
are also logistically advantageous markets.”  
 
On being asked as to what incentives are being prov ided by the Government 
towards export of steel by the Indian CPSUs like SA IL and steps taken by the 
Government for broadening the export base of steel PSUs in India, the Ministry of 
Steel in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“Government is providing incentive of Duty Entitlem ent Passbook Scheme 
(DEPB) for export of steel and this incentive is also available to PSUs.  
 
Traditionally, SAIL has been exporting a limited ra nge of products 
covering mainly Semis and Plates.  However, after t he current capacity 
expansion of SAIL plants is completed in 2010, the export basket of products 
on offer is likely to widen considerably to include new products.” 

58  
CHAPTER – X  
 
ENERGY CONSERVATION 
 
 
 Energy conservation is one among the important tec hno-efficiency parameters 
of a steel plant.The Committee noted that the issue  of alternate source of energy and 
reduction of coking coal consumption by increased u sage of natural gas in place of 
coking coal will effect the replacement of 5 to 6 p er cent of coking coal in blast 
furnace.  When asked as to what are the prospects o f gaining from increase use of 
natural gas in steel plants, SAIL in their written reply have stated as follows: 
“Natural Gas (NG) is injected as an auxiliary fuel in many of the blast furnaces 
abroad in the range of 60-100 kg/thm. The reported advantages of injecting 
natural gas are as follows: 
 
Easy to handle and inject 
NG is ash-free, so no solid residue after combustion 
Normally natural gas is used in combination with hi gher hot blast 
temperature & oxygen enrichment. 
Coke saving of 0.8 – 0.9 kg/kg of natural gas has been obtained  
 
SAIL is exploring the possibility of getting Natural gas. Arrangements for 
injection of natural gas in SAIL blast furnaces wil l be made whenever it is 
made available to SAIL plants.” 
 
 On being further asked as to whether SAIL approach ed major natural gas 
producing PSUs such as GAIL, ONGC, etc., management  of SAIL in their written 
reply have stated as follows: 
“Continual efforts are being made by SAIL to harness alternative sources of 
energy like Natural Gas, CBM etc.  
 
In this regard, SAIL had signed a MoU with GAIL for  supply of natural 
gas to the steel plants.  No progress has been made till now due to constraints 
faced by GAIL for sourcing of natural gas. 
 
Besides, discussions are in place with ONGC for con sidering supply of 
CBM to SAIL plants .  As per the latest indications, commercial product ion of 
CBM by ONGC is likely to commence by 2009-10 at the earliest.  
 
SAIL is exploring possibility for a tie-up with com panies like ONGC 
subject to an agreement on terms and conditions.” 
 
To a question as to whether the Company has taken a ny steps to reduce 
consumption of coking coal by resorting to use of a lternate fuels and steps taken by 
Research and  Development Centre for Iron and Steel ( RDCIS ) in this regard, SAIL 
in their written reply stated as under:  

59  
 
“SAIL has installed pulverized coal injection and c oal tar injection as a step to 
reduce the consumption of coking coal. The details of the installation of the 
above facility are as follows: 
 
• 6 out of 7 Blast furnaces at Bhilai Steel Plant 
• 3 out of 5 Blast furnaces at Bokaro Steel Plant 
• 1Blast furnace at Durgapur 
 
 Moreover, SAIL has planned to introduce pulverized  coal injection 
facility in all its remaining blast furnaces during  the forthcoming modernization 
and upgradation programme. RDCIS has been closely a ssociated along with 
the concerned plant for utilization of this technol ogy to its maximum possible 
extent under our operating conditions. Some of the steps initiated by RDCIS 
for maximizing the utilization of alternat fuels are: 
 
• Optimization of burden and gas distribution in the blast furnace 
• Adjustment in blowing parameters 
• Improvement in cooling efficiency of coolers in the furnace walls 
 
SAIL has achieved a pulverized coal injection rate of 45-75 kg/thm in 
many of the blast furnaces in the recent past with replacement ratio of about 1 
kg of metallurgical coke for each kg of coal inject ed. Also injection of CBM 
(coal base methane found in coal mines near Dhanbad ) in Blast furnaces is in 
active consideration. After exhaustive lab scale studies at RDCIS, low VM coal 
i.e. Jhama coal from Ram Nagar colliery was utilize d in iron ore sintering. This 
partially substituted the conventional fuel i.e. coke breeze.” 

60  
CHAPTER XI  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
 
 
On being asked as to what type of pollution is caus ed by the activities 
undertaken by the company and what specific measure s have been taken by the 
Company to check/ abate environmental pollution, SA IL in their written reply stated 
as under: 
“Steel being major contributor for development, sav es resources and reduces 
wastes by its capacity to be recycled time and agai n. Though steel is 
environment friendly, the process of steel making h as significant 
environmental ramifications like Air pollution, Water Pollution &  Noise pollution 
&  Solid Waste generation . 
 
Air Pollution Control: 
 
SAIL being an environmentally conscious steel produ cer believes in 
economic growth of the company in tune with the sus tainable development. 
Comprehensive and structured initiatives in SAIL ha s significantly brought 
down the pollution load (stack emission) to 2.5 kg/ tcs from 10.0 kg/tcs in a 
decade. Extending new air pollution control facilit ies in shops and augmenting 
the capacity of the existing ones are helping the s tack emission to comply with 
the statutory norms. The stacks of the special steel plants are 100% complying 
with norms.  
 
The Coke Ovens at SAIL are of recovery types and By - products are 
being recovered from Gas Collecting mains. The emis sions from all the Coke 
Oven Batteries are mostly within norms. This is bei ng done through regular 
maintenance and cleaning of Coke Oven doors. Regula r lid luting are being 
done  to control the leakages from lids. For dust c ontrol at different points 
various pollution control equipment like Multi Cycl ones, Bag Filters have been 
installed.  
 
To clean the off gas from Blast Furnace, all the pl ants are provided with 
efficient Gas Cleaning Plant.  Various pollution co ntrol equipment have been 
provided for the dust extraction from cast house, m aterial handling plants, 
Sinter Storage areas, Cold and hot sinter screens e tc of Blast Furnace and 
Sinter Plants.   
 
Most of the Steel Making operations are after Gas C leaning Plant, the 
by- product gas is recovered and being utilised as a fuel source. There are 
various pollution control equipment like Bag Filter / ESP & Multicyclones which 
are installed to capture the emissions at Mixer hou se, ladle skulling and de 
skulling area, Material Handling areas etc.  
 
Water Pollution Control: 
 
Steel Industry is one of the most water intensive i ndustry. Because of the 
recent statutes, water – though not scarce but has became a costly resource. 

61  
Our concern about water is both for quality  and qu antity. The main areas of 
concern are: 
• Qualitative : Surface and ground water for plants and mines. 
• Quantitative : Reduction of consumption by bringing in less water intensive 
technologies and recycling the effluent wherever possible after proper 
treatment. 
 
SAIL plants are meticulously maintaining the efflue nt treatment plants, 
improving water re-circulation efficiency and quali ty of effluent discharged. 
BSP and BSL are provided with centralized water re- circulation system while 
DSP and RSP are provided with localized water re-ci rculation systems. In the 
last five years SAIL has significantly reduced the specific effluent discharge to 
the tune of 52%. Some of the units of SAIL are plan ning for zero discharge in 
the coming years.   
 
Noise Pollution Control:  
 
In Steel Industry the major contributor of Noise po llution is Blast 
Furnace, Steel Melting Shop (during lancing) & Powe r Plants. Snort Valve 
silencers have been provided to control the emissio ns at Blast Furnaces. 
Employee are provided with ear pugs / ear muffs at the shop floors. 
Employees are also undergoing regular health check ups at health centre.     
 
Solid Waste Management: 
 
In SAIL approximately 560 kg of process wastes are being generated 
per tonne of Steel production. Utilisation of steel  plant wastes, which are non 
toxic, are being made through internal recycling an d selling to outside 
agencies.  Blast Furnace & Steel Melting Slag gener ated from a steel plants 
contribute approximately 88 % of the total wastes g eneration. The present 
utilization of BF & SMS slag is more than 70%.  
 
To increase the utilization of Blast Furnace slag, long term contracts 
have been signed and attractive incentives are bein g  offered to distant 
buyers.  New Cast House Slag Granulation plants hav e been set up and few 
more are coming up.  LD (SMS) slag after crushing a nd screening, is mostly 
being recycled back into the Sinter Plants.  
 
Hazardous wastes generated in steel plants are either being recycled or 
sold to authorized recyclers. The wastes which are neither being sold or 
recycled are being dumped in secured land filled si te. BSL & RSP have 
secured land filled pits. At BSP pit construction p rocess is going on. DSP & 
IISCO have signed long term contracts with Waste Ma nagement Limited 
(under the initiative of West Bengal Pollution Cont rol Board) for centralized 
Hazardous Waste Management & disposal.” 
 
When further asked as to whether SAIL has made any significant progress in 
reducing Green House Gas emissions, the reply of the Company was as under: 
“The production of iron and steel is highly energy intensive process and usage 
of energy is one of the major contributing factors for generation of CO 
2, the 
major Green House Gas (GHG) emitted through burning  of fossil fuels. SAIL 

62  
recognizes, it has a major role to play in conserva tion of energy and thereby 
reducing net greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
SAIL has been taking multi pronged strategy for its existing facilities and 
processes for reduction in specific energy consumpt ion and GHG emissions. 
To name a few where significant progress have been made are as under: 
 
/square4 Phasing out of the old energy intensive process with cleaner technologies 
like 
 
Replacing Open Hearth Furnaces (OHF) by LD converters at Steel Melting 
Shop 
 
Replacement of Single Conversion Single Absoprtion (SCSA) with Double 
Conversion Double Absorption (DCDA) method at Sulphuric Acid plant 
 
Replacement of conventional rolling through ingot mould route by Casters. 
 
Replacement of conventional burners by multi slit burners in Rolling Mills 
 
Conversion of Coal fired to Gas fired boilers at power Plants 
 
/square4 Inspection and monitoring of energy intensive proce sses and their 
emissions 
 
/square4 Strict adherence to Standard Operation Practices (S OPs) and Standard 
Maintenance Procedures (SMPs) 
 
/square4 Implementation of management systems linked with IS O 9000, 14001, 
OHSAS 18000 
 
  Some of the recent initiatives taken towards impr ovement of energy 
efficiency and thereby reduction in GHG emissions i n SAIL plants at different 
technological area are as under: 
 
Coke Ovens: 
 
• Dry gunniting in ovens to plug cross leakages in at BSL  
• Replacement of conventional motors with energy efficient motors at BSL 
 
Blast Furnace: 
 
• Commissioning and operation of Coal Dust Injection (CDI) in BF # 1 & 5,6 
& 7 at BSP and BF# 4,5 at BSL 
• Installation of new energy efficient dry fog dust suppression system at BF 4 
stock house at BSP 
• Partial relining of Stoves at BF 4 to improve hot blast temperature thereby 
reduction in coke rate at ISP. 
 
Steel Melting Shop: 
• Augmentation of LD gas recovery scheme at SMS II re sulting in energy 
reduction of about 15.0 Gcal/year at BSP 

63  
• Commissioning of independent exhaust system for slab caster # 2,3 & 4 at 
BSP 
 
Rolling Mills: 
 
• Erection and commissioning of thyristor control sys tem for 800 T shear at 
Blooming and Billet Mill of BSP 
• Installation of 18 KW motors in place of 24 KW moto rs in 92 nos. of bases 
in Annealing of CRM at BSL 
• Installation of VVVF drives in furnace delivery rol l tables, at Rail and 
Structural Mill resulting in reduction of mechanica l failures and power 
consumption at BSP 
• Up-gradation of instrumentation combustion control of Section Mill to 
improve furnace productivity, specific heat consump tion and scale loss at 
ISP. 
 
Power Plant: 
 
• Switch over of fuel from coal to BF gas in: 
-- Boiler #6 of Power and Blowing Station at BSP 
-- Unit-B boiler at Power Plant of ISP  
 
Use of Renewable Energy 
: 
 
Various units of SAIL have been making efforts sinc e long for the use of solar 
energy in their premises. To name a few efforts are : 
 
/head2right Installation and use of Solar lights in  
/head2right Lighting one of the major cross roads of Bhilai Steel Plant.  
/head2right Remote area of sludge dumping at Salem Steel Plant. 
/head2right Peripheral villages of IISCO Steel Plant viz. Dhira  Village, Leprosy Colony, 
Purosattampur and Ghutghutia. 
/head2right Peripheral villages of Chiria Iron ore Mines, Manoharpur. 
/head2right Solar panels are in place in the Guest House of Bok aro Steel Plant and 
Salem Steel Plant.  
/head2right Solar metereological station has been put up at Purnapani Mines. 
 
 In addition to the above, SAIL has also identified  71 projects having 
potential for reduction in GHG emissions and also a ttracting CDM benefits 
(Clean Development Mechanism under Kyoto Protocol),  at its integrated steel 
plants.  
 
 SAIL, under modernization of its units, has planne d new installations 
with high energy and material efficient technology.  These systems will help in 
pollution abatement and reduction in GHG emissions.  
 
Some of the major technological up-gradation that h ave been emphasized to 
take care of energy and reduction of GHG emissions are: 
 
Coke Oven 
-- Coke dry quenching 
-- Screw type feeding charging cars with telescopic chute 

64  
-- Computerized combustion control process 
-- Taller coke ovens  
 
Blast Furnace 
-- Larger volume Blast Furnace with top gas recovery turbines (TRT) 
-- Cast House slag granulation  
 
Sinter Plants 
-- Energy recovery from Sinter Cooler 
-- Adoption of Multi slit / Low Nox burners 
 
 Steel Melting Shop 
-- 100% production of steel through BOF and continuous casting route 
 
Rolling Mills 
-- Compact Strip Mill 
-- Thin Slab Casting 
-- Bloom Casters 
-- Slab Casters” 
 
 The Committee noted that all the parameters of air and water quality are 
monitored and reports are being sent to State Pollu tion Control Boards (SPCBs) on 
monthly basis.  When asked as to whether SAIL has r eceived any adverse remarks 
from SPCBs, SAIL in their written reply stated as under: 
“As per relevant standards and methodologies, SAIL is monitoring all the air 
and water quality parameters at its different plant s/units. The reports are being 
sent to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) regularly on monthly basis.  
 
SAIL in the recent past, had received three non com pliance reports for 
three of our plants – Durgapur Steel Plant with res pect to water quality and 
IISCO Steel Plant & Alloy Steels Plant with respect  to air quality.  Corrective 
actions have been taken by the respective plants as  per the advice of West 
Bengal pollution Control Board (WBPCB).” 
 

65  
CHAPTER XII  
 
MANPOWER 
 
 
When asked to furnish a note on the total manpower requirements as originally 
assessed for the last three years and the number of  persons actually employed, the 
reply of the Company was as under: 
“In SAIL, the manpower requirement is ascertained t hrough Annual Human 
Resource Plan wherein detailed manpower planning for all plants/units of SAIL 
is carried out.  The projected closing manpower for  last three years vis-à-vis 
actual numbers employed is presented below: 
 
Year Projected closing Manpower 
as per HRP of SAIL 
No. of employees 
employed 
2004-05 123458 126857 
2005-06 122867 123392 
2006-07 119451 119009 
 
 Manpower position in ISP: 
 
Year No. of employees  
2004-05 16218 
2005-06 14819 
2006-07 13964 
 
 * IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) was merged with SAIL dur ing 2005-06.” 
 
On further being asked as to whether the justification for the level of manpower 
and expenditure incurred thereon has been examined vis-à-vis volume of work, the 
Company in their written reply stated as follows: 
 “The focus has been on manpower rationalisation si nce last few years and 
optimal utilisation of manpower.  In last three yea rs while the manpower of 
SAIL including ISP has shown reduction, the product ion has shown an 
increase as evident from table below : 
 
Year Crude Steel Production (MT) Manpower of SAIL 
(incl. ISP) 
2004-05 11.82 143075 
2005-06 13.17 138211 
2006-07 13.51 132973 
 
   Now, SAIL is planning to enhance its capacity to  25 MT.  While 
Corporate Plan envisages enhanced production levels , it simultaneously lays 
emphasis upon achieving higher labour productivity,  manpower rightsizing 
through natural separations and VR and selective re cruitments.  As such the 
manpower strength of SAIL after capacity expansion is likely to be less than 
the manpower strength of 1,32,973 (as on 31.3.07). 
 
Notwithstanding the facts that rationalisation shal l continue further to 
increase competitiveness, simultaneously selective recruitments shall also be 
undertaken to meet skilled manpower requirement for  new projects.  

66  
Recruitment of technical personnel, Diploma holders  and ITI certificates 
holders shall continue to be carried out for meetin g skilled manpower 
requirement in view of the modernisation/expansion plans of SAIL.” 
 
When asked to indicate the value addition per man/m onth and the average 
monthly emoluments per employee during each of the last three years, SAIL in their 
written reply stated as follows: 
 “ Detailed information is as under:  
 
 Value added* Avg. 
Manpower 
Value added 
/ man /month 
Avg. Monthly 
emoluments 
Unit Rs./Crs. Nos. Rs./ month Rs./ month 
2006-07 8467 135592 52037 32747# 
2005-06 5237 140643 31030 27281 
2004-05 9091 129384 58553 26993 
 
 * Value added = Gross Margin – 10% of Capital employed as per MOU guidelines 2005-06.  
    #  Provision for wage revision Rs.170 crs has been excluded 
 
The Committee noted that the number of employees ha s decreased from 
1,23,392 in 2005-06 to 1,19,009 in 2006-07.  When a sked to comment on this, the 
CMD of SAIL during the oral evidence stated as under: 
“SAIL, at one time, in the middle Eighties, we were 2,50,000 employees and at 
that time, we were producing 6 million tonnes, and now with 1,30,000 
employees, we are producing 14 million tonnes. So, our labour productivity 
has almost gone up six time.  It is a tribute to ou r workforce and our 
employees. 
  
Sir, a point was made that how they are able to do it,  we have retrained 
them in multi-skilling.  The reduction of employees  has come only through 
natural process, that is, natural retirement and VRS.  We have not recruited as 
many people as have retired.  But we have been taki ng the new recruits every 
year.  In fact, we are recruiting around 700 engine ers every year. Many of 
these engineers are not from IIT but from engineeri ng colleges across the 
country, who are getting opportunities  to come in our mainstream including 
the girl engineers, who are working on shop floors.   Similarly, we are also 
recruiting in other categories,  that is, Class IV, Class III, Class II  now.   Since, 
we will be going now for extension, there is a skil l dilution. So, we need to 
upgrade skill as well improve our age mix.  We are regularly going for fresh 
employment also in all our plants. 
 
But still our labour productivity as compared to ot her steel plants in the 
country as well as by international standard, is mu ch lower.  For example, in 
one of our plant providing four million tonne, we m ight be having  25,000 to 
30,000 employees while a private sector steel plant  producing four million 
tonne, would be having only about 3,000 employees.  We have to compete 
with them also. So, we are going in a very judiciou s manner.  We also take 
care of the employment aspirations of the people.  At the same time, we do not 
like to recruit people who cannot be employed gainfully.  That is our policy.” 

67  
CHAPTER XIII  
 
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 
 
 
When asked to furnish a note on industrial relation s in SAIL inter-alia  including 
the number of man-days lost on account of strikes, absenteeism and lockouts during 
each of the last three years, etc., and steps taken /proposed to be taken to reduce 
loss of working days due to above reasons, SAIL in their written reply stated as 
under: 
“Industrial Relations in SAIL is guided by the over all HRD mission of the 
Company. SAIL has dedicated team both at Plants/Uni ts level and at 
Corporate level and to maintain smooth and peaceful  industrial relations 
climate. At Plants the personnel officers who opera te at the different shop 
floors remain in constant touch with the employees to clarify their doubts and 
confusion, to resolve their grievances and to educa te them about the 
Company’s policies and decisions. They also keep th e management informed 
about the shop floor developments so that proactive  action can be taken to 
prevent any break-down in industrial relations. A 3 -tier grievance handling 
system is in operation in the plants and units whic h is extremely effective in 
resolving all contentious individual as well as gro up issues at the plant/unit 
level itself. This has immensely added to the effec tiveness of the spirit of 
working together. 
 
  In SAIL, there are more than 250 registered union s functioning at its 
Plants/Units. Though, there is a multiplicity of un ions, however, over a period 
of time, the pattern of bargaining has been evolved . Accordingly, negotiations, 
discussions and collective bargaining on employee-r elated matters take place 
with the recognized unions or with the forum unions  as well as with other 
important unions who have following among the workers. 
 
In SAIL, the experience with different forums of wo rkers’ participation in 
decision-making has been very rich, fruitful and re warding. Workers and 
employers have shown high level of maturity, mutual understanding and active 
co-operation on all organizational issues, and a tr adition of resolving conflicts, 
if any, through discussions across the table, has b een established. Over the 
years, care has been taken to foster a bipartite cu lture. The system in practice 
in steel plants operates at both formal and informa l levels. Over a period of 
time, the system has stabilized itself in the form of formal committees, which 
operate at five levels, i.e. national, corporate, p lant, zonal and shop-floor, a 
glimpse of which is given below: 
 
 National Level:  National Joint Committee for Stee l Industry [NJCS], 
Joint Committee Safety Health & Environment in the Steel Industry [JCSSI] 
 
Corporate Level : Joint Committee of SAIL on Production & Productivity 
 
Plant Level: Separate Committees on Production, Saf ety, Grievance 
and Welfare 
 

68  
Zonal Level: Separate Committees on Production, Saf ety, Grievance, 
Welfare, besides Sports, Education, Medical, Canteen, Township, etc. 
 
Shop Level: Separate Committee on Production, Safety and Welfare. 
 
The informal system of workers’ participation in de cision-making 
operates through Quality Circles, Suggestions Schem e, Shop Improvement 
Groups and by direct contribution of employees to p roduction and productivity 
at the shop floor. 
 
A lot of emphasis has been given on regular communi cation with the 
employees at all levels, right from Managing Direct or to Shift Incharge/ 
Personnel Executives. At main plants Managing Direc tors hold regular mass 
contact exercises with cross section of employees, where employees can raise 
various issues including suggestions for improvemen t in production/ 
productivity and safety of the employees. Since pro mpt decisions are taken in 
such interactions, this leads to creation of an atm osphere of transparency and 
trust among employees.  
 
At Bhilai Steel Plant, Social Accountability Standa rds (SA-8000) has 
been adopted. These standards basically aim at prom oting a socially 
accountable, safe and healthy work culture so as to  enable the employees to 
contribute their best towards attainment of the org anizational goals and 
objectives.  For this purpose Non Management Repres entative (NMRs) have 
been identified to act as communication link betwee n management and the 
employees. 
 
The results and benefits of the above steps are cle arly visible from the 
increasing production & productivity, labour produc tivity, sales turnover, 
adoption of productive practices and in reduction i n energy consumption, etc. 
With these steps SAIL has been able to maintain a r ecord of negligible 
incidents of work stoppages on plant related issues  over the years, despite its 
spread over various states and massive volume of pr oduction and other 
activities it performs. As a matter of fact, SAIL h as been able to sustain itself 
because of active co-operation of its employees for  the steps taken to come 
out of the very difficult business phase. 
 
Man-days loss due to strike: 
 
The incidents of production loss due to workers’ ag itation are very rare 
in SAIL.  However, due to national level strike cal ls and some stray incident of 
work stoppages at plants sometimes loss of man-days  do take place, data in 
that regard is as follows : 
 
Year 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
Man-days lost due to strike call at national level 
in protest of govt. policies 
- 14613 12428 
Man-days lost due to work stoppage etc. 172 - 634 
Total 172 14613 13062 
 
Steps taken to prevent man-days loss due to strike/work stoppages etc. 
 

69  
As apparent from the above that the proactive steps  taken by SAIL like 
workers’ participative in decision making at diffic ult level and regular 
interaction with the employees and their representa tives both at formal and 
informal levels have resulted in maintaining nil or  almost insignificant mandays 
loss due to work stoppages on plant related issues.   In case a strike notice is 
received on plant related issues or any such issue is brought to the notice of 
the management, the workers’ representatives are im mediately engaged into 
dialogue and every possible step is taken to redress the issues. 
 
In SAIL man-days losses have taken place mainly due  to nation wide 
strike calls given by Central Trade Unions on the i ssues related to government 
policies over which the Company has little or no co ntrol.  Even a strike called 
at National level or bandh, we may appeal to unions  and workers to refrain 
from strike and also seek help of labour machinery and Civil Courts.  However, 
the management remains in close coordination with t he Central Trade Unions 
during such strike calls to minimize their impact o n plant operation.  Appeals 
are issued to the employees as well as to the strik ing Unions to reconsider 
their stand and to isolate SAIL from such calls in the interest of the Company 
and the workmen.  The principal on “no work no pay”  is strictly maintained 
during such calls and disciplinary action is also i nitiated for instigating workers 
to go on illegal strike or work stoppages etc. 
 
Man-days loss due to absenteeism: 
 
Man-days losses due to absenteeism have not affecte d the plant 
operations at SAIL. The manpower provided has inbui lt provision for leave 
balance and working system at plants, which has evo lved over the years, 
takes care of the unauthorized absenteeism, which a re in low proportion. 
Steps taken by management like counseling of erring  employees and 
disciplinary actions against them, rewarding the em ployees/departments for 
good attendance etc. has kept the unauthorized absenteeism into check. 
 
Man-days loss due to lockouts: 
 
There has been no lockout in SAIL.” 
 
The Committee have noted that during 2006-07, the m an-days lost due to 
strike were 12,428.  When desired to know what acti on has been taken by the 
Company in this regard, the CMD of SAIL during the oral evidence stated as under: 
“There was one point with regard to man-days lost. We have a system of no 
work no pay. So, if the workers are absent without authorised leave granted, 
then they lose the pay for that part. We do not hav e any industrial relation 
problem but it is due to overall bandhs  and other things. But to that extent, we 
apply no work no pay.” 

70  
CHAPTER-XIV  
 
SAFETY MEASURES 
 
 
 When asked to furnish a note on the safety measure s, the management of 
SAIL in their written reply have stated as follows: 
“Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) lays the e mphasis on safety of human 
resources at par with production and productivity, cost reduction and quality. 
Safety is monitored by Chief Executives to demonstr ate the concern of the 
management. Safety is designed and built into the e very job before any job is 
executed in all SAIL Plants/ units. Safety violatio ns are viewed seriously to the 
extent of penal action on defaulters.  
SAIL has full-fledged Safety Departments in all the  Plants, Subsidiary Units 
and mines to look after safety management of the re spective plants and 
units. In addition, a Corporate Safety Unit named S AIL Safety Organisation 
(SSO) also exists to coordinate and monitor the saf ety activities and to 
provide appropriate corporate thrust on safety management in Company.  
SAIL has a Safety Policy. In consonance with the sa fety policy of the 
Company, safety programmes and safety activities ar e organised in SAIL 
plants/ units.  
Annual Performance Plans (APP) in the areas of safe ty and fire services are 
formulated and review of implementation of APP is d one at plant as well as 
corporate level.  
The Standardization committee IPSS 1:11 on Standard ization of Safety 
Appliances & Procedures is functioning under the Ch airmanship of 
ED(Safety), SSO and Heads of Safety of SAIL Plants/ units. TISCO & RINL 
are also the  members of the committee. Standards o n safety procedures 
have been developed by the committee on the various  safety related 
subjects.  
Internal and external safety audits of major departments particularly hazardous 
areas are conducted every year and points arising f rom these audits are 
liquidated. 
All the necessary Personal Protective Equipment lik e safety shoes, safety 
helmets, breathing apparatus etc. are provided free  of cost to all regular 
employees. PPEs are supplies by the contractor to t heir workers as per 
terms of contract. In case of failure to do so, the se are issued by SAIL on 
cost recovery basis.  
Safety aspects have been incorporated in standard o perating practices (SOP) 
and standard maintenance practices (SMP). 
All major capital repairs/ shut downs are closely m onitored round the clock to 
prevent accidents. 
Periodic drives are conducted to inculcate safety a wareness up to grass-root 
level. 

71  
Regular preventive inspection of unsafe acts & condition, safety interlocks limit 
switches, pull cords, emergency stop switches etc. is being done on the 
basis of check list and corrective actions are taken. 
Bamboo scaffolding has been totally replaced by pip e scaffolding and safety 
belt by full-body harness. 
Use of manual winches for lowering loads has been abolished and work-permit 
system introduced for hazardous jobs. 
Job/area specific safety communications are display ed at vulnerable locations 
to caution employees about hazards and take precautionary measures. 
On-site disaster management plans have been prepare d and mock drills are 
conducted regularly. 
The movement of heavy vehicles is segregated during  shift change time to 
avoid any road accident. 
All accidents and near miss cases are investigated and remedial actions are 
taken to prevent their recurrence. For each fatal a ccident, enquiry 
committee is constituted to look into the reasons, which led to the accident 
and recommend measures to prevent recurrence of acc idents. These are 
monitored by Plant/Corporate Safety Department. 
Safety training is imparted to target group employe es at various levels. HRD 
intervention in the area of safety covers Heads of Departments, Line 
Managers & Departmental Safety Officers. Besides ar ea specific 
workshops are conducted at different location on im portant topics like gas 
safety, rail/road safety, safety in iron, steel & coke making etc. 
Skill oriented job specific safety training is bein g imparted to various groups 
like crane operators, loco operators, porters, rigg ers, welders, gas cutters, 
electricians, heavy earth moving equipment operators etc. 
Safety training has been made mandatory to contract or workers before issue 
of gate pass to them. Job specific safety training is imparted at site by the 
executing agency before starting the job. 
Various awareness programmes are being organized fo r employees like 
undertaking " Roko-Toko" drive to identify violator s of safety practices, 
videography of unsafe acts/conditions and subsequen t telecasting through 
local TV networks. Safety awareness among house-wiv es and children is 
also being generated through various campaigns. 
Use of crash helmet by two wheelers has been made m andatory.  In addition 
surprise checks is being carried out for vehicles p lying inside plants and 
mines.  
Provisions of Factories Act 1948 like testing of pr essure vessels, tools/tackles 
& lifting equipment etc. are fully complied with.  
Electrical jobs are being carried out after taking proper shutdown as per Indian 
Electricity rules. In addition regular checking of earthing of electrical 
equipments is done. 
A bipartite forum named Joint Committee on Safety, Health and Environment 
in Steel Industry (JCSSI) having representatives fr om steel plants in SAIL, 

72  
RINL, TISCO, Ispat Group, NINL and Central  & Plant level Trade Unions is 
functioning at National level. With a view to inculcate safety consciousness, 
JCSSI organizes seminars, workshops, training progr am, safety 
competitions for member organizations. JCSSI with t he co-operation and 
support of Trade Union representatives formulates p olicies and guidelines 
for its member plants and monitors the implementation.” 
 
When asked to indicate the number of accidents/casu alties occurred during 
the each of the last three years, the management of  SAIL in their written reply have 
stated as follows: 
Statistics of fatal accidents in SAIL Plants/ units 
 
Plant 2004 2005 2006 
BSP 1 3 4 
BSL 3 9 5 
DSP 3 3 3 
RSP 3 3 3 
ISP 1 2 2 
ASP - - 2 
RMD 2 3 1 
BSP Mines 3 - 1 
ISP Mines 4 1 2 
CMO Stockyard - 1 - 
Total 20 25 23 
(The above figures includes regular as well as contractor employees)  
 
From the above, it is noted that a number of fatal accidents that occur in 
SAIL’s plants average around 23 in the last three years.  When asked as to why SAIL 
could not achieve zero accidental rate, the managem ent of SAIL in their written reply 
have stated as follows: 
“Although, number of fatal accidents occurred in SA IL Plants/ units average 
around 23 during the last three years, consistent e fforts have been made by 
different plants/ units as well as at SAIL Safety o rganization ( SSO) level to 
reduce it further as evident from the table given below- 
 
Year 03 04 05 06 
BSP  5 1 3 4 
BSL 2 3 9 5 
DSP 1 3 3 3 
ISP 5 1 2 2 
RSP 4 3 3 3 
ASP 0 0 0 2 
MEL 0 0 0 0 
SSP 0 0 0 0 
VISL 9 0 0 0 
CMO 0 0 1 0 
RMD 2 2 3 1 

73  
BSP(M) 2 3 0 1 
ISP(M) 0 4 1 2 
TOTAL 30 20 25 23 
 
Following steps have been taken by different plants /units as well as at 
SSO level for reducing accidents: 
• Safety is monitored by Chief Executives of respecti ve plants/units. This 
demonstrate the concern of the management towards t his vital issue. 
Safety is designed and built into every job before any job is executed in all 
SAIL Plants/ units. Safety violations are viewed se riously & actions are 
being taken against violators. 
• Each Plants/units of SAIL have full-fledged Safety Engineering 
Departments  to look after safety management of the  respective plants and 
units under Head of Works. In addition, a Corporate  Safety Unit named 
SAIL Safety Organisation (SSO) also exists to coord inate and monitor the 
operational /fire safety activities  undertaken at the different plants/units  
and to provide appropriate corporate thrust on safe ty management in 
Company.   
• Internal and external safety audits of major depart ments particularly 
hazardous areas are conducted as per schedule and p oints arising from 
these audits are liquidated. 
• Bamboo scaffolding which is not safe to use has bee n totally replaced by 
pipe scaffolding and safety belt is also being replaced by full-body harness. 
• All the necessary Personal Protective Equipment lik e safety shoes, safety 
helmets, breathing apparatus etc. are provided free  of cost to all regular 
employees. PPEs are supplied by the contractor to t heir workers as per 
terms of contract. In case of failure to do so, the se are issued by SAIL on 
cost recovery basis.  
• Safety aspects have been incorporated in Standard O perating Practices 
(SOP) and Standard Maintenance Practices (SMP). 
• All major capital repairs/ shut downs are closely m onitored round the clock 
to prevent accidents. 
• Periodic campaigns are conducted to inculcate safet y awareness up to 
grass-root level . 
• Regular preventive inspections of unsafe acts & con dition, safety interlocks 
limit switches, pull cords, emergency stop switches  etc. are being done on 
the basis of check list and corrective actions are taken. 
• Use of manual winches for lowering loads which was a safety hazard has 
been abolished . 
•   Protocol system have been introduced for hazardou s maintenance jobs 
like Gas line jobs, Maintenance jobs in electrical installations, Electrically 
Powered Machines, Hydraulic line jobs , for working in  confined space etc. 
• Job/area specific safety communications are display ed at vulnerable 
locations to caution employees about hazards and ta ke precautionary 
measures. 

74  
• On-site disaster management plans have been prepared and mock drills as 
an emergency preparedness are conducted as per the plan. 
• The movement of heavy vehicles is restricted during  shift change hours to 
avoid any road accident. 
• All accidents are investigated and remedial actions  are taken to prevent 
their recurrence. For each fatal accident, enquiry committee is constituted 
to look into the reasons, which led to the accident  and recommend 
measures to prevent recurrence of accidents. These are monitored by 
Plants Safety Engineering Departments & SSO. 
• Safety training by Safety Engineering Department ha s been made 
mandatory for contractor workers before issue of ga te pass to them. In 
addition, Job specific safety training is imparted at site by the executing 
agency before starting the job. 
•  HRD intervention in the area of safety covers Head s of Departments, Line 
Managers & Departmental Safety Officers. Besides ar ea specific 
workshops are conducted at different location on im portant topics like gas 
safety, rail/road safety, safety in iron, steel & coke making etc. 
• Skill oriented job specific safety training is bein g imparted to various target 
groups like Crane Operators, Loco Operators, Porter s, Riggers, Welders, 
Gas Cutters, Electricians, Heavy Earth Moving Equipment Operators etc. 
• Various awareness programmes are being organized fo r employees like 
undertaking “ Roko-Toko” drive to identify violator s of safety practices and 
videography of unsafe acts/conditions & subsequent telecasting through 
local TV networks. Safety awareness among house-wiv es and children is 
also being generated through various campaigns. 
• No person riding two wheelers are allowed entry ins ide plant premises 
without crash helmet. Surprise checks are being car ried out for ensuring 
the same.  
• A bipartite forum named Joint Committee on Safety, Health and 
Environment for Steel Industry (JCSSI) headed by Di rector (Technical), 
SAIL as its Chairman & Executive Director (Safety),  SAIL as Vice 
Chairman and having representatives from steel plan ts & units of SAIL, 
RINL, TISCO ,Ispat Group , NINL and  Central  &  Plant level Trade Unions 
is functioning at National level. With a view to in culcate safety 
consciousness, JCSSI organizes seminars, workshops,  training program, 
safety competitions for member organizations. JCSSI  with the co-operation 
and support of Trade Union representatives formulat es policies and 
guidelines for its member plants and monitors the implementation. 
However, in spite of above-mentioned efforts/action s, accidents are still 
taking place in the plants/units. With continuing e fforts to ensure proper 
upkeep of the plant & equipment particularly from s afety point of view and 
adherence to the standard operating & maintenance p ractices and eliminating 
human errors, accident rate is expected to be reduc ed towards ‘Zero accident’ 
rate. “ 
   

75  
CHAPTER-XV  
 
THE ROLE OF MINISTRY – NATIONAL STEEL POLICY  
 
The role of the Ministry of Steel is as follows :  
/square4 Policy formulation regarding production, distributi on, pricing of iron & 
steel and ferro alloys  
/square4 Development and promotion of iron and steel product ion of iron and 
steel production facilities  
/square4 Development of essential inputs like iron ore mines  and other relatede 
minerals in respect of PSUs  
/square4 Overseeing the performance of public sector underta kings and 
Government managed Bird Group Companies 
Regarding the salient features of National Steel Po licy and the likely impact of 
that policy on SAIL, the management of SAIL have in  their preliminary written reply 
stated as follows:  
“SAIL is one of the largest and most profitable pub lic sector companies with a 
turnover of more than Rs.39,000 crores and a net pr ofit of around Rs. 6,200 
crores in  FY 2006-07.    SAIL supplies inputs to critical sectors of the economy 
which are the backbone to the industrial development of the country.     
 
SAIL’s future plan is envisaged in line with the Na tional Steel Policy.  
The future plan i.e. the Corporate Plan of SAIL, en visages growth to maintain 
market leadership in Indian Steel Sector.   To ensu re this, the thrust has been 
planned on cost and quality competitiveness.   The competitiveness will be 
ensured by efficiency improvement planned both in b ackward and forward 
linkages through technological interventions.   The  backward linkages by 
sourcing the raw material will bring down the cost of input raw material and 
forward linkages will ensure the customized and com petitive products in the 
market.   
 
The National Steel Policy is targeting upto 2019-20  whereas SAIL’s 
Corporate Plan is upto 2010-11.  Beyond the Corpora te Plan, SAIL has 
prepared a broad directional plan upto 2019-20.   H owever, based on the 
achievements of the Corporate Plan implementation &  the market dynamics, 
the future plan would be crystallized.  
 
Accordingly, main features of the National Steel Po licy have been 
outlined and also actions taken/ initiated by SAIL in line with the National Steel 
Policy.  It is understood that the National Steel P olicy is under revision and 
accordingly, SAIL’s Plan would be tuned to meet the  revised targets of 
National Steel Policy in 2019-20. ” 
 

76  
 
S.No. Key features of National Steel Policy Actions  initiated/ taken by SAIL 
 
1 Strategic Goal:  
• Indigenous production of around 110 MT 
per annum by 2019-20. This implies a 
compounded annual growth of 7.3 percent 
per annum. 
 
 
• Steel consumption in the world  around 
1000 MT in 2004 expected to grow by 3% 
(compared to 2% per annum in the last 15 
years) to around 1395 MT in 2015. 
• China to continue to have a dominant share 
in the world steel demand. 
• India’s growth rate of steel  production was 
7% (last 15 years), projected 7.3% per 
annum. 
• Consumption  in 2004-05 of 36 MT 
(production 38 MT + imports 2 MT – exports 
4 MT) to grow to 90 MT by 2019 – 20 
(production 110 MT + imports 6 MT – 
exports 26 MT) 
• Imports  to grow at 7.1% and exports  at 
13.3% and consumption at 6.9%. 
 
 
The Corporate Plan of SAIL envisages 
an annual growth at about 7.1%. SAIL 
plans to produce 25 MTPA of  hot metal  
and 23 MTPA  of saleable steel  by 
2010-11. 
 
SAIL has merged IISCO with itself in 
Feb.’06 to bring synergy and enhance its 
capacity. 
 
SAIL has also envisaged growth through 
acquisitions. Currently, there is a plan to 
acquire NINL, with current capacity of 1 
MT capacity, by which, the capacity will 
increase further. NINL has further 
potential to enhance its capacity, which 
would lead to further increase in growth 
rate.   
 
Beyond 2011, SAIL is firming up plans to 
grow in line with National Steel Policy. 
The production capacity is likely to 
increase to around 60MT by 2019-20. 
 
If market becomes further buoyant, SAIL 
will also enhance its growth rate to 
maintain market dominance by further 
expansion on existing sites or green-
field expansions or by M& A activities  
 2 Raising rural consumption : The rural 
consumption of steel in India remains at around 2 
kg per capita per annum, primarily because steel is 
perceived to be expensive among the village folks. 
Based on the promotional efforts mentioned 
above, and an active focus on opening new block 
level rural stock points, a target is set for raisi ng 
the per capita rural consumption of steel to 4 kg 
per annum by 2019-20, implying a CAGR of 4.4 
percent. 
To increase rural consumption, SAIL has 
taken the following steps :  
• Decision taken to appoint dealers in 
all the 603 districts of India. 
• 653 dealers( including LOIs issued) 
appointed by SAIL in 527 
locations 
• For the balance districts, 
continuous efforts are on. 
• SAIL is also making efforts through 
Institute For Steel Development 
and Growth  (INSDAG) for 
improving usage of steel. 
• SAIL has adopted Model villages 
and is making efforts to improve 
usage of steel in these villages. 
 

77  
 
 
3 Exports : While the business decision to export will 
depend on the prevailing relative prices, the 
Government would encourage strategic alliances 
with buyback arrangements and dedicated export 
production through 100% export-oriented units. A 
growth rate of around 13 %  per annum is envisaged 
up to 2019-20. 
Imports:   The Government would institute 
mechanisms for import surveillance and monitor 
export subsidies in other countries. 
SAIL plans to keep an optimum balance 
between supplies to the domestic and 
export markets to maintain SAIL’s 
continued presence in the international 
market  
4 Critical Inputs: Iron Ore  
In order to ensure availability of 190 mT of iron 
ore for domestic production of steel by 2019-
20, Government would encourage 
investments in creation of an additional 
modern mining and beneficiation capacity of 
200 mT. The size of these investments will 
be around Rs. 20,000 crore. 
The current policy of captive mining leases for 
the private sector would continue, but it is 
necessary that investment plans be put in 
place for idle mining leases.  
State governments would recommend renewal of 
existing leases only against credible mining 
investment plans in a specified period.  
Environmental and forest clearances would be 
granted within a pre-specified time frame. 
Though local value addition would be given 
priority, the Government would encourage 
iron ore trading in order to make this 
essential raw material available to the iron 
and steel industry throughout the country.  
The Government would encourage investments 
in adding value to iron ore fines. 
Scientific mining and economies of scale would 
also be encouraged. 
 
Iron ore requirement for the SAIL plants 
would increase from the present level of 
25 MTPA to 43 MTPA by the year 2010-
11 and based on the Directional Plan 
prepared, to a level of around 100 MTPA 
by 2020.  
The following steps have been 
initiated/envisaged: 
(i) Development of new mines at Chiria 
to produce 7 MTPA initially and 
subsequently increase to 15-20 MTPA 
(ii) Development of new mine at 
Rowghat to produce 14 MTPA as a 
replacement of Rajhara and Dalli mines 
of Bhilai Steel Plant. 
(iii) Development of a new mine at 
Thakurani to produce 2 MTPA 
(iv) Development of new mine at South 
Block and Central Block as a 
replacement of Kiriburu and 
Megahatuburu mine respectively 
(v) Development of Taldih Iron Ore 
Deposit to produce 3-4 MTPA  
Expansion of Bolani mine from present 
level of 3.5 MTPA to 5 MTPA . 
Current initiatives in iron ore mining 
 
•  Efforts for renewal of mining lease 
and reservation of Chiria  
•  Efforts to get the Prospecting 
license for Thakurani  
•  Efforts to get forestry clearance for 
Rowghat  
•  For modernization of mine and 
setting up of a pellet plant, SAIL 
has joined hands with KIOCL for 
Taldih mine  
•  With setting up of 600T/hr. 
crushing plant, capacity of Bolani 
iron ore mine has enhanced  
• South Block and Central Block are 
being developed for giving 
production in FY 2009 and 2008 
respectively to supply iron ore to 
Bokaro Steel Plant 
 

78  
 
5 Coking Coal : 
By 2019-20, about 70 MT of 
coking coal will be required, 
of which 85 percent will 
have to be imported. 
The imperatives of coking coal 
security require that new 
sources of coking coal be 
tapped. Accordingly, the 
Government would aim for 
the coal sector to become 
market-driven, but in the 
meantime continue 
allocation of captive coking 
coal blocks to steel plants, 
and establish mechanisms 
to share their surplus 
resource with other steel 
plants. 
• The Government would 
encourage joint ventures 
and equity participation 
abroad by steel and coal 
companies.  
• Simultaneously, efforts 
would be made to develop 
and adapt technologies, 
which have synergy with 
the natural resource base 
(non-coking coal) of the 
country.  
• The steel industry would 
be encouraged to make 
investments in washing 
and beneficiation of coal. 
Acquisition of Indigenous Coking Coal blocks 
In order to meet the increased coking coal requirem ents, 
SAIL has envisaged acquiring indigenous coking coal  
blocks from Ministry of coal along with forging str ategic 
alliance with domestic coking coal companies to inc rease 
domestic coal availability to level of 8-10 MTPA. 
Moonidih 
:  
/square4 SAIL  had entered into an MoU with BCCL in April’ 0 6 
for funding phase- 1 upgradation of Moonidh Mine at  16 
top seam.   
/square4 SAIL has also agreed in principle to fund developme nt 
of seam 15 of Moonidih mine. 
These two actions will help augment washed coal 
availability by around 1.5MTPA. 
Kapuria: 
 SAIL is also having dialogue with BCCL/CIL, 
Ministry of Steel & Ministry of Coal to become a pa rtner in 
development of Kapuria mine with BCCL. 
Tasra: 
  Development of Tasra Block is in progress.  
Production is planned to start by Sept’ 07. 
Sitanala: 
 The block has been allocated to SAIL for 
captive mining in April’ 07.  Compliance of formali ties for 
transfer of lease and development of block is in progress. 
 
Strategic Alliance with foreign mining companies   
SAIL is aiming to forge strategic alliance which co al 
mining companies in overseas territories through 
acquisition of ownership interest / equity in minin g 
projects. This would provide security in supplies f or 
certain minimum quantity of coking coal. 
It is also proposed to set up an SPV comprising SAI L, 
Coal India, NTPC & RINL for the purpose of acquisit ion of 
suitable coking coal assets. The proposal is awaiti ng 
approval of Cabinet. Govt. support will be sought w here 
intervention is required at Govt. level in other countries. 
6 Natural Gas : Considering the importance of gas 
based steel plants due to (a) environmental 
cleanliness,  (b) shortages of coking coal required for 
other major routes, and (c) natural gas being a 
feedstock for sponge iron plants and not just a 
heating source, the present system of allocation an d 
pricing of natural gas to the steel sector would 
remain under continual review. 
 
SAIL visualized the importance of 
usage of gas in steel plants and has 
taken the following initiatives: 
• SAIL signed an MoU with GAIL in 
Feb.,05 for supply of natural gas by 
2006-07  but due to sourcing 
constraints, GAIL has indicated that 
it may be able to supply from 2009 
onwards. 
•  SAIL also submitted an offer to 
ONGC for supply of Coal Bed 
Methane to BSL from Jharia coal 
field.  
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roads 
: T he existing road network needs to be 
expanded and strengthened considerably for 
reducing the transaction costs of the Indian 
producers. The steel plants and mines need to be 
integrated with the on-going programmes of national  
highway development and also with the proposed 
rural road schemes for expanding the delivery chain  
of steel across the country, especially the rural areas. 
The steel industry would be encouraged to create 
links to the nearest available highways. But the ta sk 
of expanding the highway network would continue 
through public-private partnerships. 
 
• For raw materials transportation, 
SAIL is using roads only for 2% of 
its requirements.  
• For marketing finished steel by 
using road network, it is only 
around 8%.  

79  
 
 
 
 
8 Railways: 
 
• The Railway facilities would need to 
be expanded substantially in view of 
the renewed investor interests in the 
creation of additional steel capacities 
– both in Greenfield and brown-field 
projects.  
• The outlay for railways as a 
percentage of total plan outlay has 
come down from 10.3 percent (up to 
4th Plan) to 6.8 percent (10th Plan).  
• Resource constraints may 
necessitate participation by the steel 
industry in the creation of railway 
infrastructure, especially in the 
capital-intensive areas of laying 
tracks and procuring wagons.  
• Besides ensuring availability, the 
railways would also need to re-
examine their freight structure and 
improve quality of services. 
Dedicated freight trains in the private 
sector would be encouraged. 
 
Freight movement by rail to and from the SAIL 
plants is expected to increase from 60 MT in 06-
07 to around 100 MT by 2010-11. This 
translates to a requirement of 30 additional 
rakes per day by 2010-11 for inward and 
outward bound traffic, compared to around 44 
rakes per day at present.  
SAIL has decided to procure two BOXN rakes 
under the railways wagon investment scheme 
and has submitted its offer. Railways have been 
asked to clarify certain issues and the reply is 
awaited. 
For modification & upgrdation of Rail logistics 
inside steel plants, M/s RITES have been 
engaged to suggest measures. Some of the 
recommendations of RITES are in different 
stages of implementation. Railways may be 
asked to integrate their long term plans with 
RITES recommendation.  
SAIL participated in the EOI for Paradeep-
Haridaspur railway line (Port connectivity 
schemes of railways/GoI) which will ease 
movement of imported coal from Paradeep to 
SAIL steel Plants. SAIL has signed the SHA for 
equity participation. The Traffic Gurantee 
Agreement is in the process of finalization. 
SAIL is also considering to procure 5 BOXN 
rakes under Wagon Investment Scheme for 
movement of iron ore & imported coal.  
Railways have been approached to grant 
necessary permission. 
9 Ports:  The current Government policy 
allows private capital in port 
development. Steel producers would be 
encouraged to develop port and berth 
facilities so as to improve productivity, 
turn around time, capacity to handle 
larger vessels and other operational 
parameters of efficiency. 
 
As per Corporate Plan of SAIL, with the enhanced 
use of imported coking coal envisaged and also 
increased quantum of coal requirement, access to 
better port facilities would be critical.  
SAIL has taken the following actions for meeting th e 
increased requirement of imported coal: 
Long-term agreement signed with BOT operator 
M/s International Seaports (Haldia) Pvt. Ltd. 
with minimum cargo commitment of 2.3 
MTPA of imported coking coal through fully 
mechanized system at berth No.4A of Haldia. 
This berth has since commenced operation. 
Discussions with M/s Vizag Seatport Pvt. Ltd. 
(VSPL) for providing various facilities at 
Vizag Port are in progress.  
Discussions with other private ports in the 
eastern sector have been initiated for utilizing 
their facilities. 

80  
 
10 Power:  
• Requirement of power by 
steel industry would be 
7000MW by 2019-20, 
requiring an investment of Rs 
24,500 crores.. 
• Electricity Act, 2003 & 
National Electricity Policy 
allows captive generation of 
power & trading of surplus 
power-facilitate investment in 
captive power plants by steel 
industry. 
• GoI would encourage 
bringing down specific 
consumption of power, esp in 
the secondary sector. 
 
 
Present requirement of power by SAIL Plants is 
around 800MW per year which would go up to 
1600MW  per year by 2010-11. Additional 
Power requirement would be met by 
augmenting capacity of the JV Power Plants. 
 
Utilising provisions of Electricity Act 2003, 
wheeling of power from DSP to BSP is being 
done since 2004. SAIL has reduced its power 
bills by about 25-30 Cr. p.a. by such wheeling. 
 
Specific power consumption is closely 
monitored and controlled at al SAIL Steel 
Plants.  
 
11 R&D :  Aggressive R&D efforts would, 
therefore, be mounted to create manufacturing 
capability for special types of steel, substitute 
coking coal, enrichment and agglomeration of 
iron ore fines, develop new products suited to 
rural needs, enhance material and energy 
efficiency, utilize waste, and arrest 
environmental degradation. Public sector steel 
companies would enhance R&D expenditure 
in the coming years to finance internal R&D 
efforts and sponsor outside research, which 
may provide a framework for inter-disciplinary 
cooperation with the private sector across 
national boundaries. Government’s 
contribution to fostering basic and applied 
R&D will be enhanced. 
 
SAIL has an R&D Centre at Ranchi.  The 
Centre takes up projects which provide 
technological inputs to SAIL Plants with thrust 
on cost reduction, value addition, quality 
improvement, process innovations and 
development of new products.  During the last 3 
years, 232 No. of projects have been 
completed. 
 
SAIL has spent around Rs77 Cr.  on R& D 
activities in 2006-07.   
12 Financial Resources: 
• To mobilize vast resources, direct 
foreign investment would be 
encouraged. 
• In addition the external commercial 
borrowing norms would be reviewed 
periodically to facilitate smooth 
inflows of debt, and to bring down the 
cost of capital. 
•  Steel is one of the six sectors that 
figure in the index of industrial 
production for “infrastructure,” but the 
fiscal incentives available to the 
infrastructure projects are not 
available to the steel industry. 
Suitable incentives would therefore 
be devised for the steel industry. 
• The efforts of various stakeholders to 
develop risk-hedging instruments like 
futures and derivatives would be 
supported. 
 
 
SAIL has planned an investment of around 
Rs40000 crores by 2010-11 for modernization 
and expansion of steel plants and mines. 
Financing of investment would primarily come 
from internal resources and D.E. ratio would be 
maintained as 1:1. 
SAIL would resort to External borrowings only if 
it is not able to generate internally with an 
appropriate financing plan. 
 

81  
 
 When asked as to what efforts have been taken by S AIL in pursuance of the 
‘National Steel Policy’, the management of SAIL in their written reply stated as 
follows: 
 
“Government of India had announced National Steel P olicy in 2005 which 
addresses necessity of modern and efficient steel i ndustry of world standards, 
catering to diversified steel demand. National Stee l Policy indicates that 
growth of steel consumption is expected to reach ab out 110 million tonnes by 
2019-20 with CAGR of 7.3% (figures being revised by GOI), IISI has estimated 
higher growth and estimated demand in the range of 150-180 Mt by 2020.  
 
The Corporate plan of SAIL envisages CAGR of more t han 8% during 
the plan period. Besides capacity enhancement, the growth plan adequately 
addresses the need of SAIL plants towards eliminati ng technological 
obsolescence, energy savings, improving product qua lity and enriching 
product mix, pollution control, developing mines & collieries to meet higher 
requirement of key inputs, to introduce customer ce ntric processes and 
matching infrastructure facilities in the plant to support higher production 
volumes. This would also help in attaining cost and  quality competitiveness, 
along with growth. 
 
SAIL has embarked on a modernization and expansion programme 
envisaging to substantially raise hot metal product ion from 14.6 MT (2006-07) 
to 26.18 MT by 2010-11.     
 
The National Steel Policy is targeting up to 2019-2 0 whereas SAIL’s 
Corporate Plan is up to 2010-11.  Beyond the Corpor ate Plan, SAIL is 
preparing a directional plan up to 2019-20 to meet the objectives laid down in 
the NSP and also to retain market dominance in this competitive era.” 
 
  
 
 
13 Human Resources 
• Additional workforce of 220,000 by 2020 
for production of 110MT. 
• Creation of 1 man-year of employment in 
the steel industry generates an additional 
3.5 man-years of employment elsewhere 
like transport, mining, construction, 
machinery, and steel fabrication. 
• Total additional employment of around 1 
million. Profile-skilled & semi-skilled. 
• Availability of scientists, engineers & 
technicians in India is 7.05 compared to 
113 in Japan,90 in UK,53 in Korea,54 in 
Australia & 85 in Germany. 
• Technical & professional institutes 
required to impart new competencies & 
capabilities in tune with change in 
technology. 
 
 
SAIL proposes to reduce its 
manpower overall but plans to 
induct skilled manpower whenever 
required particularly when new 
technology is adopted or 
modernisation takes place. This 
year SAIL has inducted around 
1300 employees, including 110 
Junior Manager (Projects) and 
Management Trainees (Tech.) to 
take care of its expansion plans. 
 
 Current manpower of SAIL is 
1,32,973 as on 31.3.07. 

82  
CHAPTER-XVI  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENT 
 
 
 Regarding the current status of port infrastructur e and the constraints being 
faced, SAIL have in their reply stated as follows: 
“Port infrastructure at West Bengal and Orissa  
 
SAIL operates mainly at Haldia port in West Bengal,  and at Paradip in Orissa.  
Kolkata port in West Bengal is used for handling mi nor quantities of imports 
like stores and spares, refractories, rolls etc mainly containerized cargo. Haldia 
port is used for import of coal and export of steel  items and is preferred 
logistically to cater to the Steel Plants at Bokaro , Durgapur and Rourkela.  
Paradip port is also used for import of coking/non- coking coal and serves 
mainly Rourkela Steel Plant.   
 
Meeting the demands of the Company with the present  port 
infrastructure is challenging.  The infrastructure available at Paradip and 
Haldia Ports are not adequate to meet SAIL’s requirements in future.  Some of 
the major constraints at these ports to handle larg e quantity of coking coal are 
as under: 
Haldia: 
 
Draft availability of about 7-8 M restricting handling of large parcels. 
Limited shore unloading facilities thereby affecting  
(a) Efficiency and ability to handle gearless vessels.  
(b) Availability of export vessels 
 
Paradip: 
 
Draft availability of 12.5 M restricts handling of bigger Panamax vessels at 
Paradip. 
Inadequate  shore handling facilities thereby  
(a) Resulting in reduced efficiency 
(b) Resulting in inability to handle gearless vessels. 
Inadequate Railway rake availability  
Inadequate back-up area for storage. 
 
SAIL has a captive berth at Haldia under MOU with B OT operator for handling 
coal vessels.   
 
SAIL has taken up the issues of requirement of nece ssary infrastructure 
development with Haldia Port, Paradip Port.   
 
Deep draft port with private participation is comin g up at Orissa. SAIL is 
exploring the possibility of utilizing these facilities in the future.” 
 

83  
On being further asked as to whether SAIL has taken  up the issue of 
infrastructure development with Haldia Port and Par dip Port, the management of 
SAIL in their written reply have stated as follows: 
“The issue of development of infrastructure at Hald ia Port has been taken up 
with the port authority. As a result, various devel opmental works are being 
contemplated by Haldia Port as given below: 
  
Installation of shore handling facility at Berth No . 2 and 8.  The port 
authority has also planned to reserve the above 2(t wo) berths for handling 
steel industry related cargo.  SAIL has conveyed co mmitment on minimum 
guaranteed throughput of 1.5 million tonnes at Bert h No. 2 and 8 which is 
under examination of port authority.   
  
Haldia Port is planning to develop 2(two) reverine jetty for handling of 
barges.  SAIL has requested to develop the jetty equipped with shore facilities, 
back up area, railway siding etc. for handling of imported cargo.  
 
The port is also developing a multipurpose berth wh ich shall be 
available for export vessels.“ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

84  
PART-II  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE   
 
Recommendation No. 1  
 
Capacity Utilization  
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the capacity utilization of the 
majority of steel plants of SAIL is above 100%.  Ke eping in view the fact that   
domestic demand for steel in construction sector ha s been steadily growing in 
recent times and is estimated to grow further, the Committee recommend that 
SAIL should strive to further improve its techno-ec onomic parameters and 
achieve higher capacity utilization and expedite me asures for upgradation and 
expansion to meet the growing demand of steel in the country. 

85  
Recommendation No. 2  
 
Blast Furnace Productivity  
 
 The Committee note that SAIL has a lower productiv ity of blast furnace 
when compared to other major private/public steel p roducers of the country 
like Tata Iron & Steel Company (TISCO) and Rashtriy a Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL),  
the reason attributed therefor ostensibly is inferi or quality of iron ore content 
and higher impurities.  The Committee have been fur ther informed that the 
blast furnace productivity will improve with the in duction of state of the art 
technology as part of the modernization and expansi on plans.  The Committee, 
feel that SAIL being a navratna company should not lag behind other private 
companies in terms of increasing its blast furnace productivity on the pretext 
of improvement after modernization and desire that the blast furnace 
productivity of SAIL steel plants should be brought  at par with the major 
private/public steel producers of the country.   

86  
Recommendation No. 3  
 
Coke Rate   
 
 The Committee have been informed that the coke rat e according to SAIL 
means the amount of coke consumed per tonne of hot metal produced in the 
blast furnace.   The Committee note that the coke r ate of SAIL is higher than 
the coke rate of major steel producers such as RINL , TISCO.  The Committee 
have been further apprised that to reduce the coke rate, SAIL has taken various 
steps such as maximizing the usage of sinter, using  pulverized coal injection 
and installing bigger volume blast furnace etc.  Th e Committee believe that the 
reduction in coke rate is a key factor for increasi ng the profitability of the 
Company and therefore expect that the reduction in coke rate shall be achieved 
by 2010 as claimed by SAIL authorities. 

87  
Recommendation No. 4  
 
Project Implementation  
 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that some of the  major projects 
currently under execution are unlikely to be commis sioned as per schedule 
due to delays on the part of suppliers in supply & erection of equipment and 
delay in timely handing over of site due to operati onal requirement etc.  The 
Committee strongly feel that speedy implementation of the above projects is 
essential to reap the benefits of the ongoing favou rable market situation and 
full use of the expansion programme of SAIL. The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommend that the issue of timely delivery of equipments and handing over of 
sites should be taken up with the concerned supplie rs at different levels.  The 
Committee further recommend that suitable deterrent  measures be 
incorporated in the agreements with the suppliers t o take care of avoidable 
delays on the above issues. 
As regards the other aspects of project implementat ion, the Committee 
are happy to note that the status of various projec ts is strictly monitored on 
day-to-day basis.  The major projects are found to be further reviewed at the 
level of Secretary, Ministry of Steel and also Mini ster of Steel on quarterly 
basis.  Although effective monitoring mechanism is already in place yet the 
Committee feel that further strong measures are req uired to be taken to 
eliminate delays at various stages of the projects.  
 
   

88  
Recommendation No. 5  
Financial Performance  
 
 The Committee are happy to note that SAIL has turn ed out into a 
profitable company from 2003-04 and has gone on to make a profit of Rs. 6202 
crore in 2006-07.  In this regard, the Committee no te that 45% of the profit has 
come on account of market improvement i.e., increas e in international steel 
prices, while 55% has come from internal efficiency  parameters like increase in 
capacity utilization, reduction in energy consumption, increase in production of 
value added products and right sizing the number of  employees etc.  While 
appreciating the Company’s performance, the Committ ee are of the view that 
one of the factors that has contributed to the Comp any’s profit is availability of 
cheap iron ore from captive mines.  In this regard,  the Committee believe that 
in case SAIL do not get cheap iron ore from captive  mines in future and if they  
have to buy it at international rates, it would cer tainly affect its profitability.  
The Committee therefore recommend that SAIL instead  of caught napping 
should get itself prepared for a situation wherein they would have to source 
iron ore at high international prices and yet make profits.   
 
 

89  
RAW MATERIAL SECURITY  
 
Recommendation No. 6  
 
 The Committee note that iron ore, coking coal and thermal coal are the 
critical raw materials for the steel industry.   
Iron Ore  
 
Grant / Renewal of Captive iron ore mining leases  
 
The Committee note that captive iron ore mining is the main source of 
iron ore for SAIL.  SAIL has some captive iron ore mines, chief of which is the 
Chiria Iron Ore Mine in Jharkhand.  The Committee f urther note that the 
existing iron ore resources with SAIL are limited a nd would exhaust within the 
next few years.  Chiria mines has been identified b y SAIL as the only potential 
source which can cater to the increased production requirements of 26 million 
tonnes by 2010.  Apart from Chiria, SAIL would also  require new iron ore 
resources to meet its growth plan.  The Committee a re, however, concerned to 
note that the issue of grant/renewal of Chiria iron  ore mining lease to SAIL has 
been long pending because of some reservations of t he State Government of 
Jharkhand and the matter is presently sub-judice an d pending in Court.  
Meanwhile, the efforts made by SAIL/Ministry of Ste el for amicable solution of 
the issue has also not yet yielded any positive result in the matter.   
 The Committee observe that due to increasing boom in the steel sector, 
the issue of grant/renewal of iron ore mining lease s is becoming very complex 
issue due to conflicting interests between various stake holders like mining 
companies and exporters, steel producers and the co ncerned State 
Governments.  In view of this, the Committee feel that there is a need for a clear 
national policy to address the concerns of the stak e holders particularly the 
producers contributing immensely to national econom y.  Keeping in mind the 
basic national interests and national goal of econo mic growth as enunciated 

90  
broadly in XI Plan document an appropriate National  Mineral Policy must 
determine the contours which can facilitate Navarat nas like SAIL to use its full 
potential.  Careful consideration need to be given to the views of the key 
operators like SAIL in this regard.  The Committee feel that there is of course a 
need to augment the revenues of States by increasin g the royalty rates. At the 
same time, the Committee like to add that in the pr esent case SAIL has got a 
legitimate case for retaining Chiria iron ore mine as it has already developed 
various infrastructure there besides absorbing an a ccumulated loss of Rs. 910 
crores during amalgamation of Indian Iron & Steel C ompany (IISCO) with SAIL 
in 2005.   It is well known that IISCO alongwith it s properties Chiria and Gua 
iron ore mines were available for disinvestment from 1996-2001 but not a single 
global/domestic player had shown any interest in it  during that period.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend with all t he conviction that the 
Government of India should deal with this issue of national interest at the 
highest priority for grant of mineral concession of Chiria iron ore mine to SAIL.  
The Committee also note that the Government of Indi a is presently 
amending the Mines and Minerals (Development and Re gulation) Act (MMDR) 
Act 1957 for streamlining the procedure for grant/ renewal of mining leases in 
the country.  The Committee feel that any delay in grant/renewal of mining 
leases would immensely harm SAIL and overall national interests.   

91  
Recommendation No. 7  
Development of iron ore mines  
The Committee note that in order to ensure availabi lity of iron ore for 
steel production, the development of iron ore mines  is of paramount 
importance, which depend on the timely grant/renewa l of captive iron ore 
mining leases and obtaining forest & environment cl earances. The Committee 
are unhappy to note that though the Ministry of Ste el is in continuous dialogue 
with Ministry of Environment and Forests, respectiv e State Governments and 
other nodal agencies to expedite forest and environ mental clearances for the 
mines, there has been inordinate delays in granting  these clearances by the 
concerned agencies.  Even the expansion and moderni zation of existing mines 
is also being delayed due to the lengthy, cumbersom e and time-consuming 
procedures associated with getting these forest and  environmental clearances. 
The Committee recommend that the number of stages a nd the levels in the 
processing of applications should be considerably r educed and forest and 
environmental clearances should be granted within a  pre-specified time frame.  
The Committee further recommend that the Government  should examine the 
feasibility of adopting international norms in this  regard, which stipulate fixed 
timeframe for grant of various clearances.  

92  
Recommendation No. 8  
Export of iron ore  
As regards the export of iron ore, the Committee no te that there has 
been a high level of export of iron ore from India.  As per the information made 
available to the Committee during 2006-07, India pr oduced 180.66 millions 
tonnes of iron ore out of which 93.79 million tonne s was exported.  The 
Committee are apprehensive that the continued export of iron ore will affect the 
long term availability of iron ore for domestic ste el production and may even 
lead to a situation, wherein, the country may have to import iron ore for 
producing steel.  The Committee are of the firm opi nion that all out efforts be 
made to conserve the scarce iron ore to safeguard t he future steel 
requirements of the country.  The committee, theref ore, strongly recommend 
that the Government may take all necessary steps to  discourage the export of 
iron ore, may be by means of putting in place some stringent fiscal measures 
like hike in export duty etc. and/or other suitable policy measures.   

93  
Recommendation No. 9  
Gainfull utilization of fine iron ore  
As regards the utilization of fine iron ore, the Co mmittee are unhappy to 
note that the fines are not gainfully utilized by S AIL. The Committee note that 
as part of the current expansion plan, SAIL has pla nned to set up new Sinter 
plants and new pellet plants for higher usage of fi nes. The Committee further 
note that though the new technology in steel making such as Corex which have 
the potential to use fines for steel making has bee n commercialized even in 
India, the same has not yet been applied by SAIL in  its plants but only under 
examination for its corporate strategy beyond the y ear 2010.  The Committee 
therefore while expressing their concern at such sl uggish approach of SAIL 
towards adoption of high end technologies, recommen d that SAIL should 
timely induct such new technologies of steel making  for increasing the gainful 
utilization of fine iron ore.  

94  
Recommendation No. 10  
Coking coal     
Acquisition of coking coal equity abroad  : 
 The Committee note that due to poor availability o f indigenous coking 
coal from Coal India Ltd. (CIL), around 75% of the coking coal requirement of 
steel PSUs is being met by imports.  The quality of  Indian coking coal is also 
not suitable for steel production. Thus the acquisi tion of coking coal equity 
abroad is essential for the raw material security of SAIL. 
 The Committee note that SAIL explored the possibil ities of participating 
in acquiring stakes in coking coal projects in Aust ralia, Mozambique, Russia, 
Poland etc., but could not acquire any stake as non e of the companies abroad 
wished to dilute their equity stakes in favour of o ther partners. In fact most of 
those coking coal companies are found to be in the acquisition mode rather 
than in the disinvestment mode. The response to SAI L’s issue of expression of 
interest, inviting overseas coal mining companies t o offer equity has also been 
lukewarm.  The Committee have been informed that a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) in which SAIL has invested Rs.1000 crores is being set up for securing 
coking coal from foreign countries. The Committee f eel that the proposed SPV 
should have been set up a couple of years earlier. In the present scenario 
where global mergers & acquisitions have already ta ken place for securing raw 
materials, the Committee doubt the possible success  that the SPV could 
achieve in securing coking coal. The Committee neve rtheless recommend that 
the SPV should begin its operations immediately and  should follow suitable 
modalities for achieving its objectives. The Commit tee further recommend that 
the SPV should act on war footing for acquiring coking coal mines abroad.   

95  
The Committee note that the National Steel Policy h as suggested that in 
terms of future policy, exports of iron ore, especi ally high grade lumps would 
be leveraged for imports of coking coal. Keeping in  view large scarcity of 
coking coal, the Committee feel that this is a good  proposition and therefore 
recommend that the Government should make efforts t o secure such 
agreements from those countries.  

96  
Recommendation No. 11  
Tapping new resources of coking coal within India  :   
 The Committee note that SAIL would require 23milli on tones (MT)  of 
coking coal by 2010, as part of its Corporate Plan as against the present 
requirement of 15 million tones per annum (MTPA). T he Committee also note 
that around 75% of the present requirement is being  met by imports. The 
Committee therefore feel that there is an urgent ne ed to tap new resources of 
coking coal within India. The Committee have been i nformed that SAIL is 
acquiring new coking coal blocks such as Tasra bloc k, Sitanala block etc. The 
Committee further note that SAIL is also entering i nto a Joint Venture (JV) with 
Tata Steel for developing medium coking coal blocks . The Committee 
recommend that such proactive steps should be pursu ed to their logical 
conclusion.  

97  
Recommendation No. 12  
Thermal Coal   
The Committee note that thermal coal is another imp ortant raw material 
required for operating captive power plants of SAIL . With implementation of 
Corporate Plan, SAIL’s power requirement will incre ase substantially to around 
18 million tonnes per annum (MTPA) against the pres ent 4-5 MTPA. The 
Committee also note that SAIL had submitted 18 appl ications to Ministry of 
Coal for allocation of thermal coal blocks. However , none of the blocks have 
been allocated to SAIL, which are allotted by the p rocess of competitive 
bidding. The Committee have been informed that the process of competitive 
bidding will hurt the interest of SAIL as the produ ction costs of the mineral will 
increase, thereby affecting SAIL’s competitiveness,  both in domestic and 
international market. Moreover the process of compe titive bidding will prove 
disadvantageous to the PSUs as compared to private sector due to their 
prevailing procedural complexities. Considering the  social obligations 
entrusted to public sector undertakings in the coun try, the Committee 
recommend that SAIL may be allocated atleast 2-3 th ermal Coal Blocks on 
nomination basis with reserves of about 1200-1500 m illion tones to meet their 
captive coal requirement. 
 

98  
EXPANSION AND MODERNISATION PROGRAMME  
 
Recommendation No. 13  
 
Corporate Plan-2010  
 
The Committee note that SAIL has embarked on an exp ansion and 
modernization programme involving total investment exceeding Rs.50,000 
crores. According to SAIL’s corporate plan 2010, th e target of annual 
production has been fixed at 26 million tons (MT) o f hot metal as against the 
present 13 MT. The Committee also note that the Cor porate plan envisages 
annual growth rate return of more than 8% Compounde d Annual Growth Rate 
during the plan period.  Besides capacity enhanceme nt, the growth plan 
adequately addresses the need of SAIL plants toward s eliminating 
technological obsolescence, energy savings, enrichi ng product mix, pollution 
control, developing mines & collieries to meet high er requirement of key 
inputs, to introduce customer centric processes and  matching infrastructure 
facilities in the plants to support higher production volumes.  In this regard, the 
Committee note that SAIL has taken up various measu res like strengthening of 
project organization, coordination across plants, i nteractions with global 
suppliers, across the table discussions for faster tendering process, etc. to 
complete the expansion plan in time.  
The Committee, however, are concerned to note that the implementation 
of Corporate Plan-2010 faces a number of impediment s like non-renewal of 
mining leases of Chiria and Gua by Jharkhand, delay  in grant of prospecting 
license to Thakurani iron ore mine, delay in obtain ing clearances for Rowghat 
iron ore mining project in Chattisgarh, non-allocat ion of thermal coal blocks to 
SAIL for captive power plants, inadequacy of rail n etwork, ports etc. which are 
the key concerns in the implementation of Corporate plan.  

99  
The Committee are extremely concerned to note that if leases of Chiria 
mine are not renewed immediately, SAIL will have se rious problem in 
proceeding with modernization & expansion plan. The  Committee are of the 
view that the renewal of Chiria mining lease is ext remely essential for the 
profitable sustenance of SAIL. The Committee also n ote that delay in forest & 
environment clearances could affect the expansion p lan. The Committee are 
apprehensive that the Chiria issue and the issue of  delay in clearances would 
determine the fate of SAIL. The Committee, therefor e, desire that the 
Government of India should address all these issues  with utmost seriousness 
and help out the SAIL at this critical juncture by making all out efforts in this 
direction.   
 

100  
NEW STRATEGIC INITIATIVES  
 
Recommendation No. 14  
 
Merger / Acquisition of steel PSUs  
 
The Committee note that consolidation/merger of ste el PSUs will help 
PSUs to acquire global size of operation in order t o attain global scale and 
synergize operation and bring down cost of producti on. The Committee are of 
the view that the merger of steel PSUs with SAIL wo uld bring far reaching 
benefits like consolidating their strength in terms  of competitiveness and 
distribution of raw material among the steel PSUs e tc,. The Committee feel that 
strong backward and forward linkages are required t o effectively cope with the 
powerful dynamics of a globalised steel industry. T he Committee note that the 
proposal for merger of Neelanchal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL), Maharashtra 
Electroskmelt Ltd. (MEL), etc. with SAIL are under the active consideration of 
the Ministry of Steel. The Committee recommend that  these proposals should 
be expedited and should be pursued to their logical conclusion. The Committee 
further recommend that the complexities involving t hese mergers should also 
be sorted out soon. The Committee also feel that wh ile merging smaller 
companies with SAIL, due considerations should be g iven to the economies 
and financial impact thereof on SAIL without ignori ng the interests of workers 
and social obligations entrusted to public sector undertakings in the country. 
 As regards the merger of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd . (RINL) with SAIL, 
the Committee have been informed that the proposal for merger of RINL with 
SAIL is not presently under active consideration. The Committee desire that the 
merger of RINL with SAIL should be revisited to see  if any new consensus 
could be reached in the present steel scenario. 
 

101  
Recommendation No. 15  
 
Setting up new steel plants   
 
The Committee are happy to note that SAIL intends t o set up two new 
steel plants, one in the State of Jharkhand and the  other in the State of 
Chhattisgarh as a joint venture.  As regards the se tting up of steel plant in 
Jharkhand, the Committee note that an MOU is yet to  be signed with the 
Jharkhand State Government. The Committee desire th at the process of 
signing an MOU with the Jharkhand Government should  be vigorously 
pursued, as it would secure one billion ton of iron  ore located in Chiria. The 
Committee however recommend that SAIL should assess  the issue cautiously 
while making all out efforts to see that the Chiria  lease is firmed up in favour of 
SAIL.  
As regards the status of steel plant in Chhattisgar h, the Committee 
recommend that necessary strategic initiatives be expedited and hope that new 
steel plant will definitely yield the desired results. 

102  
Recommendation No. 16  
 
Marketing  
 
The Committee note that the market share of SAIL in  finished long 
products is only 14.4% during 2006-07 in the domest ic market. As regards the 
flat products, SAIL has a share of approximately 28 % in the domestic market. 
The Committee also note that SAIL is not a major pl ayer in the finished long 
products (i.e, bars and rods) in the domestic produ ct.  While appreciating the 
fact that SAIL constitutes over 90% share of the Ra ilway materials, the 
Committee are unhappy to note that the market share  of SAIL in Bars & Rods 
and Structurals is around 8% and 19% only and the m arket share of SAIL has 
not increased during the last two years due to non- availability of additional 
steel.  However, the additional steel available aft er 2010 would be marketed by 
evolving future marketing strategies like E-sales, value added steel for high-
end customers, Retail outlets, etc. and as such, th ere will be improvement in 
the market share of SAIL after the implementation of Expansion Plan in 2010 
As regards the steps taken for popularizing SAIL pr oducts in the rural 
market, the Committee note that SAIL has taken a ma ssive plan of increasing 
the distribution network in every district of India  by way of appointing district 
dealers for marketing mainly Thermo Mechanically Tr eated Bars(TMT) and 
Galvanized Plain/Galvanized Corrugated Sheets (GP/G C), which are used by 
rural customers for their requirement. In this dire ction, the SAIL has already 
covered 602 out of 603 districts with appointment o f dealers and subsequently 
process is also on to reach the material to sub-blo ck levels for easy availability 
to ultimate consumers in the rural market.  
In the above backdrop, the Committee recommend that  SAIL, an 
integrated steel major, should pull up its socks an d come out with some 

103  
aggressive marketing strategies at the earliest, to  maintain its pre-eminent 
position in the competitive steel market especially  in finished long products. 
While appreciating the initiatives made by SAIL to penetrate rural market, the 
Committee also desire that in order to promote stee l consumption in rural 
areas, SAIL should organize Grameen Ispat Melas  in villages. The Committee 
further desire that SAIL should try to increase its exports by opening marketing 
offices abroad also. The Committee hope that the ma rketing share of SAIL 
would improve, once additional steel is available, after the expansion plan is 
completed in 2010. 
 
 
 

104  
Recommendation No. 17  
 
Research and Development  
 
 The Committee feel that R&D plays a vital role in the steel sector in 
designing and development of new technologies, deve lopment of new value 
added products, improvement in productivity and qua lity and reduction in 
consumption of raw material. The Committee are happ y to note that SAIL has 
an elaborate research facility comprising 15 major laboratories and have 
achieved distinction in various fields such as coal  carbonization, iron making, 
sinter making, continuous casting, steel making, en ergy conservation, 
information technology, etc. The Committee however note that R&D 
expenditure of SAIL as a percent of turnover is bar ely 0.2%. The Committee 
therefore recommend that SAIL should spend more on R&D, so that it can 
achieve global competitiveness, not only in terms o f cost and quality but also 
in terms of global benchmarks of efficiency and productivity.  
The Committee further note that that SAIL could not  invent any break-
through technology for the using of low grade coal for manufacturing of steel 
in a large way.  The Committee therefore desire tha t the R&D Unit of SAIL 
should take more pro-active steps for using low gra de bituminous coal, which 
is available in plenty in India, for the manufacturing of steel.    
 

105  
Recommendation No. 18  
Export Performance  
 The Committee note that SAIL continues to be prima rily a domestic 
player.  The value of exports of SAIL in 2006-07 ha s declined to Rs. 941 crore 
from Rs. 977 crore in 2005-06 though the Government  is providing export 
incentive by way of Duty Entitlement Passbook Schem e to SAIL.  The 
Committee further note that SAIL’s exports are most ly directed towards 
neighbouring markets like Bangladesh, Myanmar, Nepa l and Sri Lanka. The 
Committee are not convinced with the export perform ance of SAIL. The 
Committee are unhappy to note that a Navratna compa ny of the stature of SAIL 
is exporting a very limited range of products covering mainly Semis and Plates. 
The Committee feel that the export performance of S AIL needs further 
improvement. The Committee recommend that SAIL shou ld take more 
proactive steps by increasing its presence in globa l markets as well as 
including new value added steel products in its export basket. 
 
 

106  
Recommendation No. 19  
 
Energy Conservation  
 
 The Committee note that energy conservation is one  among the 
important techno-economic efficiency parameters of a steel plant. In this 
regard, the Committee note that SAIL is exploring t he possibility of using 
Natural Gas (NG) as an auxiliary fuel in blast furn aces to reduce expensive 
coking coal consumption and has already signed a Mo U with GAIL for supply 
of gas to steel plants and is also exploring a poss ibility of tie-up with ONGC for 
supply of Coal Bed Methane(CBM) to SAIL plants.  Th e Committee are happy to 
note that the issue of alternate sources of energy such as NG and CBM will 
reduce the operating cost and increase the profitab ility of the Company.  To 
facilitate the above tie up, the Committee recommen d that the Ministry of Steel 
should take up this issue of supply of gas with the  Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, for making available CBM from ONGC to SAIL’s plants.  In addition 
to that SAIL may also explore the feasibility of so urcing CBM and Natural Gas 
from private companies. 
The Committee are also happy to note that SAIL has installed pulverized 
coal injection and Coal tar injection as a step to reduce the consumption of 
coking coal. The Committee recommend that SAIL shou ld install this 
pulverized coal injection/Coal tar injection facility in all its blast furnaces within 
the stipulated time frame as planned under the expa nsion and modernisation 
programme i.e. by 2010.  
 

107  
Recommendation No. 20  
 
Environmental Protection  
 
The Committee note that the process of steel making  has significant 
environmental ramifications like Air pollution, Wat er Pollution, Noise pollution 
&  Solid Waste generation . The Committee are happy  to note that SAIL has 
taken various measures to check / abate environment al pollution.  To check air 
pollution, SAIL has taken various steps such as reg ular maintenance of Coke 
Oven Batteries, cleaning of coke oven doors, instal lation of various pollution 
control equipment like Multi Cyclones, Bag Filters,  setting up Gas Cleaning 
Plants in steel plants etc., As regards water pollu tion control, SAIL has taken 
various steps such as recycling the effluents, meti culous maintenance of the 
effluent treatment plants etc.  To curb noise pollu tion, SAIL has provided the 
employees with ear plugs/ ear muffs etc. and on sol id waste management, 
selling steel plant wastes to outside agencies, rec ycling of hazardous wastes 
etc., have been done.  Further, SAIL has made signi ficant progress in reducing 
Green House Gas emissions by taking various steps s uch as phasing out of 
the old energy intensive process with cleaner techn ologies, replacement of 
conventional motors with energy efficient motors, C ommissioning and 
operation of Coal Dust Injection (CDI) in Blast Fur naces (BF), use of solar 
energy in their premises, planning new installation s with high energy and 
material efficient technology under modernization plan etc,.  
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that despite all the 
laudable steps taken for protecting environment, SA IL has received three 
adverse reports from West Bengal Pollution Control Board with respect to 
water and air quality. The Committee recommend that  SAIL should strictly 
monitor all the air and water quality parameters in  all its installations.  As India 

108  
has certain commitments towards ‘Climate Change’ in  the post Kyoto protocol 
period, the Committee desire that SAIL should striv e for meaningful reductions 
in Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. 
 

109  
Recommendation No. 21  
 
Manpower  
The Committee note that the manpower strength of SA IL is 119009 
(excluding IISCO merged in 2005) during 2006-07 and  another 700 engineers as 
well as employees in Class II, Class III, and Class  IV are being added through 
recruitment to take care of capacity expansion.   
As regards the labour productivity, the Committee n ote that the labour 
productivity has almost gone up by six times since the mid eighties. The 
Committee however note that the labour productivity  of SAIL is comparatively 
lower  than some other steel plants in the country as well as by international 
standards. The Committee recommend that the Company  should put in place 
incentive schemes for employees to improve their ef ficiency.  The Committee 
also desire SAIL to ensure that the skills of emplo yees are continuously 
upgraded by regular training in the areas like proc ess control, quality 
management, latest adopted technologies in order to  further improve the 
productivity.  

110  
Recommendation No. 22  
 
Safety Measures  
The Committee note that SAIL has taken various safe ty measures such 
as putting in place a safety policy, setting up of standardization committee on 
safety, internal & external safety audits, preparat ion of on-site disaster 
management plans, mandatory safety training to empl oyees and contractor 
workers also.  Despite all the laudable steps that have been taken by SAIL, 
Committee note that fatal accidents have continued to occur year after year. 
The average number of fatal accidents that have occ urred in SAIL’s plants is 
found to be 23 in a year. The Committee have been i nformed that SAIL has 
been making consistent efforts to reduce the accide nt rate to ‘Zero accident 
rate’.  
The Committee are dismayed to note that given the a ccident cases 
reported in SAIL, the measures taken/being taken by  SAIL have not been found  
to be adequate. Although SAIL has made tall claims about their safety 
measures, yet it has not been able to achieve zero accident rate. The 
Committee would like to emphasize that accidents ar e not only disastrous to 
the workers and the people nearby but also cause da mage to the assets of the 
company. The Committee therefore recommend that SAI L should further 
strengthen its safety measures and ensure their str ict compliance so that the 
intended objective of achieving ‘zero accident rate’ in all its units is achieved.  
 

111  
Recommendation No. 23  
 
The Role of Ministry - National Steel Policy  
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Steel has a n important role to 
play in Policy formulation regarding production, di stribution, pricing of iron & 
steel and ferro alloys. The Committee further note that the Government have 
announced a National Steel Policy-2005 (NSP) to cre ate a modern and efficient 
steel industry of world standards. The Committee no te that National Steel 
policy has a strategic goal of achieving indigenous  production of steel at the 
level of around 110 MT per annum by 2019-20, which implies a compounded 
annual growth of 7.3 percent per annum. Raising rur al consumption of steel 
from 2 kg per capita per annum to 4 kg per annum by  2019-2020, encouraging 
exports, making available critical inputs such as i ron ore, coking coal, natural 
gas, making available good infrastructural faciliti es such as roads, railways, 
ports, power, enhancing R & D expenditure, human re sources etc., are the 
major objectives of the NSP.  
The Committee are dismayed to note that NSP does no t propose any 
concrete mechanism to address important issues such  as problems faced in 
obtaining grant/renewal of mining leases and inordi nate delay in obtaining 
forest/environment clearances etc., which hamper the growth and development 
of steel industry. The Committee note that all ‘Cor porate Plans’ and ‘Expansion 
Plans’ of steel PSUs such as SAIL, RINL, and privat e steel companies, that are 
being implemented in pursuance of the goals of NSP will be adversely affected 
if the above-mentioned difficulties are not addressed in the right earnest. 
The Committee are disappointed to find that the NSP is too inadequate in 
addressing the burning issues. As regards the delay s in obtaining clearances, 
the Committee note that the NSP proposes a single w indow clearance for large 

112  
projects, to be followed by statutory clearances by  the concerned ministries. 
The Committee however note that NSP does not clearl y spell out a time frame 
within which clearances should be granted.  
As regards the issue of grant/renewal of mining lea ses, the NSP states 
that the Government would lay down priorities and g uidelines for the State 
Governments to recommend fresh mining leases, havin g regard to the 
entrepreneur’s mining investment plans and technica l and financial 
capabilities. It has been further stated that State  Governments would 
recommend renewal of existing leases only against c redible mining investment 
plans in a specified period. The Committee are of t he view that this issue has 
not been properly addressed by the NSP, as no clear  cut modalities have been 
spelt out. The Committee are not sure whether the m ineral rich States would 
follow the guidelines of the Central Government in a federal democratic set up. 
The Committee feel that the NSP is not a well structured  policy. The Committee 
understand that the NSP is under revision and hope that Government of India 
will definitely address to the above  important iss ues and propose a single 
window mechanism for all the clearances and timely and adequate availability 
of the steel to steel majors in the country and dis couraging export of quality 
iron ore needed by our domestic steel producers.   
 

113  
Recommendation No. 24  
Infrastructure Requirement  
The Committee note that lack of adequate port infra structure is one of 
the constraints being faced by SAIL. The Committee also note that SAIL 
operates mainly at Haldia and Paradip ports. These ports are used for import of 
coking coal and export of steel. The Committee have  been informed that the 
infrastructure available at these ports are inadequ ate to meet both the present 
and future requirements of SAIL. The major constrai nts at these ports are 
limited shore unloading facilities, inadequate rail way rake availability etc., In 
this regard, the Committee note that SAIL has taken  up the issues of 
development of necessary infrastructure with Haldia  Port and Paradip Port 
authorities.  The Committee feel that adequate port  infrastructure is essential 
for SAIL in view of the expansion plan currently un derway. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that as a facilitator, the Min istry of Steel should 
vigorously pursue this issue with the Department of Shipping. 
 
 

114  
Recommendation No. 25  
General  
 Steel Authority of India Limited was established o n 24 th  January,1973 
with the objective of planning, promoting and organ izing an integrated and 
efficient development of the iron and steel industr y, coordinating the activities 
of its subsidiaries, formulating and recommending t o the Government a 
national policy for the development of iron and steel industry etc.,  
The Committee are happy to note that SAIL has made a turn-around and 
made significant improvements in its performance ov er the last 35 years. SAIL 
has obtained ’Excellent’ MOU ratings from the Gover nment of India during the 
last 3 years.  The Company also has the distinction  of being India’s largest 
producer of iron ore.  It is also owning India’s se cond largest mines network 
with a competitive edge in terms of captive availab ility of iron ore, limestone, 
dolomite, etc. SAIL has established a reputation fo r itself as a consistent and 
reliable supplier of world-class quality products i n the international market as 
well. SAIL has also formed several joint ventures i n different areas ranging 
from power plants to e-commerce.     
While appreciating the above achievements of SAIL, the Committee find 
that in many aspects, such as reducing the coke rat e, project implementation, 
raw material security, gainful utilization of fines , acquisition of coking coal 
equity abroad, development of iron ore mines, marketing, safety measures etc., 
its performance needs further improvement. The Comm ittee observe that the 
steel industry at global level is witnessing phenom enal growth in demand and 
supply.  Indian steel industry is also poised for a  quantum jump in the next 15 
years. The Committee feel that as the coming years would be crucial for the 

115  
growth of steel industry, SAIL has to prepare itsel f for technological and 
productivity improvements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL, 
24 April, 2008 
      Chairman, 
 Vaishakha, 1930(S)          Committee on Public Un dertakings 

116  
MINUTES OF THE 13 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 5 th  DECEMBER, 2007 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1630 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4. Ch. Lal Singh 
5. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
7. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
Secretariat  
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri N.C. Gupta  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
Representatives of Steel Authority of India Limited 
 
1. Shri S.K. Roongta   Chairman 
2. Shri G. Ojha   Director (Personnel)  
3. Shri Soiles Bhattacharya Director (Finance)  
4. Shri Shoeb Ahmed  Director (Commercial)  
 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL) in connection with its comprehensive examination.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of Steel Authority of 
India Limited and also drew their attention to dire ction 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamenta ry Committees.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of SAIL made an audio-visual presen tation about the various aspects 
of the Company.  After the audio-visual presentatio n, Members raised queries on 

117  
various aspects pertaining to the subject and the e xplanations/clarifications on the 
same were made by the representatives of SAIL.  Inf ormation on some of the points 
raised by the Committee was not readily available with the representatives of SAIL.  It 
was, however, promised by them that the same would be furnished to the Committee 
Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  SAIL for providing all the 
material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

118  
MINUTES  OF  THE  15 th    SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON 8 th  February,  2007  
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
Chairman  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha  
2. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
3. Shri Francis K. George 
4. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Mohan Rawale 
8 Shri Ramjilal Suman 
Members, Rajya Sabha  
9 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
10 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
11 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri J.P.Sharma, Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director  
3. Shri N. C. Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Deputy Secretary-II 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
1. Shri J.S.Sarma   Secretary  
2. Shri B.S.Meena   AS & FA 
3. Shri G.Elias     Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Udai Pratap Singh  Joint Secretary 
5. Shri S.K.Roongta    Chairman, SAIL 
6. Shri G.Ojha    Director(Pers.), SAIL 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Ministry of Steel. 
in connection with comprehensive examination of Ste el Authority of (India) Limited 
which has been selected as a subject for examination during the year 2007-2008.  
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of Ministry and also 
drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directi ons by the Speaker relating to 
evidence before the Parliamentary Committee.  There after, Members raised queries 
on various aspects pertaining to the subject and th e explanations/clarifications on the 
same were made by the representatives of Ministry o f Steel.  Information on some of 
the points raised by the Committee was not readily available with the representatives 

119  
of Ministry of Steel.  It was, however, promised by  them that the same would be 
furnished to the Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  Ministry for providing all the 
information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

120  
MINUTES OF THE 22 nd  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 24 th  APRIL, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1630 hours to 1730 hours.  
 
PRESENT
 
 
Chairman, Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
Secretariat  
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N. S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India  
 
   Shri J.N. Gupta    Director General of Audit 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draf t Report on Steel Authority of 
India Limited (SAIL) and adopted the same with some modifications.  
 
3. XXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXXXXXX  XXXXXXX 
 
4.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finali ze the Report for 
presentation. 
 
5. The Committee thereafter, took up for considerat ion the issue of discontinuing 
the practice of laying of Study Tour Reports of COP U in Parliament and passed the 
following Resolution: 
 
“The Committee on Public Undertakings (2007-08) do hereby resolve to 
discontinue the practice of laying of study tour re ports in Parliament which was 
initiated during 13 
th  Lok Sabha (2000-01) as per procedure adopted under  
Rule 281 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of B usiness in Lok Sabha.  
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
7 Shri Mahendra Mohan  

121  
However, the Committee, like other Parliamentary Co mmittees will continue to 
prepare the tour notes and utilize the same in prep aration of their main 
reports.” 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 