  
 
8 
C.P.U.No.894 
 EIGHTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA – LOSS OF REVENUE 
DUE TO DELAY IN AWARD OF LICENCES TO OPERATE 
MONEY EXCHANGE COUNTERS  
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  25.8.2005 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.8.2005 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 August 2005 / Bhadrapada 1927 (S) 
 
 
  

  
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06) 
INTRODUCTION 
PART – I 
REPORT 
 
A. Background.         
B. Tendering          
C. Eligibility Conditions        
D. Legal Challenges.        
E. Revenue Loss.        
F. Remedial measures        
  
PART – II 
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee    
 
ANNEXURES 
1 Audit Para No. 3.3.1 of C&AG Report No. 3 (Comml.) of 2005 on 
Airports Authority of India - Loss of Revenue due to delay i n 
award of licence to operate Money Exchange Counters 
2. Calendar of events        
 
3. Minutes of sittings of Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2005-06) 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal   
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8. Shir Sushil Kumar Modi 
9. Shri Kashiram Rana 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
12. Shri Bagun Sambrui 
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17. Shri Ajay Maroo 
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
19. Shri Jibon Roy 
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui 
21. Smt. Ambika Soni 
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar - Assistant Director 
4. Shri H. Ram Prakash Committee Officer 
(iii) 
  

  
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Eighth Report on Airports Au thority of India – Loss of Revenue Due to Delay in 
Award of Licences to Operate Money Exchange Counters at Airports. 
2. The Committee’s examination of the subject was based on Audit 
Paragraph 3.3.1 contained in the Report on Union Government (Commercial) of 
the Comptroller & Auditor General (No. 3 of 2005) of India.   
3. The Committee took evidence of the r epresentatives of Airports Authority 
of India and Ministry of Civil Aviation on 20th June, 2005. 
4. The Committee on Public Under takings (2005-06) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 23rd August, 2005. 
5. The Committee wish to express their t hanks to Airports Authority of India 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation for placing before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection with examination of the subject.  They also 
wish to thank in particular t he representatives of Airports Authority of India and 
the Ministry of Civil Avia tion, who appeared for evidence and assisted the 
Committee by placing their considered views before the Committee. 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered by the Comptroller & Auditor General of India. 
7. They would also like to place on record their appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
New Delhi       RUPCHAND PAL 
23rd  August, 2005                    CHAIRMAN 
1 Bhadrapada,1927 (S)   COMMITT EE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(v) 
 

  
 
PART-1 
 
REPORT 
A. Background  
 
1. The Audit Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India – Union 
Government (Commercial) – No. 3 of 2005 contained an audit observation in 
Para No. 3.3.1relating to Airports Authorit y of India in awarding of licences to set 
up Money Exchange Counters at  the major Airports.  As per audit the company 
incurred a loss of revenue of Rs. 18.11 cr ore on account of royalty and licence 
fee due to arbitrarily fixing eligibility conditions leadi ng to unnecessary litigation 
which delayed award of licences for Money Exchange Counters at various 
Airports.  
2. The main observations made by A udit in the para can be summarized as 
under:- 
(a) The Airports Authority of India (AAI) issued inst ructions in July 1999 to 
float open tenders for award of licences for setting up money exchange 
counters to reputed aut horised money exchange age ncies, nationalised 
banks and foreign banks at the international airports as per the 
commercial policy in vogue.  Accordingly, tenders were invited from 
agencies to quote a royalty to the Authority as a percentage on their 
gross turnover (GTO) in addition to space rent payable. Deviating from 
the commercial policy in vogue, the eligibility conditions for participation 
in the tender were changed as given below which were impractical and 
discriminatory.  
(i) The prospective agencies/banks should possess minimum 
experience of five years of operating Money Exchange Counters 
at ports/railways/airports and should possess valid licence from 
Reserve Bank of India to condu ct money exchange business at 
the airport. 
 
(ii) The tenderer should posse ss minimum experience of 15 
branches including branches in India and abroad. 
 
(iii) The tenderer participating in  the tenders for International 
Airports viz. Delhi / Mu mbai / Chennai / Kolkata / 
Thiruvananthapuram Airports should also have minimum annual 
turnover of Rs.50 crore during the last financial year. 
 

  
  
(b) These eligibility conditions prec luded most of the Indian firms as 
they were not having overseas branches and could not fulfill 
requirement of five years expe rience as these counters were 
introduced recently at railway stations /sea ports. 
 
 
(c)  Some of the aggrieved firms cha llenged the eligibility conditions in 
Mumbai High Court in August 1999 and in Kolkata High Court in  
October 1999.  While admitting t he petitions, the Mumbai High 
Court observed that the eligibility conditions were totally irrational, 
unreasonable and illegal. Similar petit ions were filed at Bangalore, 
Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad and Th iruvananthapuram High Courts  
in September 1999 and Oc tober 1999.   Despite multiple litigations 
at various High Courts, the AAI di d not re-examine the eligibility 
conditions in October 1999 itself but  modified it only in September 
2001, which led to final award of exchange counters at Mumbai and 
Kolkata after a delay of 30 to 34 months respectively causing loss 
of royalty of Rs.12.67 crore.   At Bangalore, Chennai, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Delhi and Hy derabad, the delay ranged 
between 6 to 37 months   with consequential royalty loss of Rs.1.45 
crore.  
(d) As no time frame was prescribed,  airports at Ahmedabad, Amritsar, 
Goa and Jaipur did not follow the inst ructions at all,  which delayed 
the award of licenses between 18 to  44 months causing a loss of 
royalty of Rs.27.78 lakh. 
 
(e) In addition to royalty loss of Rs. 14.40 crore, the Authority also lost 
Rs.3.71 crore towards space rent in respect of all the above 
airports due to delay in award. 
 
(f) The Ministry stated in October 20 04 that the response to the call of 
tender with pre-qualified s pecification did not unilaterally result in 
litigation all over Indi a. The Ministry’s reply is not factual since 
cases were filed at all Internat ional Airports challenging the 
inclusion of restrictive conditions.  
 
(g) Legal consultation and expeditious modification in eligibility 
conditions would have avoided lit igation at the airports. The 
consequent delay in invitation of fresh tenders and their finalisation 
deprived the Authority of earning revenue am ounting to Rs.18.11 
crore. 
 
3. A copy of the Audit Para as cont ained in the C&AG’s report is given at 
Annexure –1.  The sequence of activities pertaining to the Audit Para as brought 
but during the examination by the Committee have been discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 

  
  
 
 
B. Tendering  
 
 
4. Traditionally, the Money  Exchange Counters at the International Airports 
were operated by the nationalised banks in accordance with the directives issued 
by the Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation vide letter No. AV-24017/10/76 – AA 
dated 18.9.1978.  In addition M/s R.N. Dutta and M/s Pheorze Framroze were 
also operating Money Ex change Counters at Calcutta and Mumbai Airports 
respectively. Further, the Ministry of Finance vide letter no. FA/8/11/BC/92 dated 
15.4.1994 permitted AAI to a llot Money exchange counter s at airports to M/s 
Thomas Cook and later on M/s T.T. Travel s were also permitted to operate the 
money exchange counter at Chennai Airpor t.  Subsequently, Ministry of Finance, 
Govt. of India liberalized the policy on the subject and issued licenses to several 
agencies for money exchange business.  These parties started approaching AAI 
for allotment of space at the airports for operating money exchange counters. 
5. According to Audit, the Airports Aut hority of India deci ded in April 1999 to 
invite open tenders from reputed authorised money exchange agencies, 
nationalized banks and foreign banks for setting up money exchange counters at 
the international airports as per the co mmercial policy in vo gue.  The Authority 
issued instructions to float open tenders in  July 1999 for award of licences and 
tenderers were asked to quote a royalty payable to the Authority as a percentage 
on their gross turnover (GTO) in addition  to space rent payable @ Rs. 3,500 
(domestic)/ Rs. 6,000 (international) per square meter per month.   
6 The Committee enquired whether Airpor ts Authority of India had taken 
approval from the AAI Board before issuin g of tender, AAI st ated in a written 
reply that:- 
 

  
  
 
 
After obtaining due clearances from t he Ministry of Finance vide letter 
dated 19.1.1998 and Ministry of Civ il Aviation, vide letter dated 
27.10.1997, the AAI Board accorded in pr inciple approval for inviting open 
tenders from reputed aut horized money exchange age ncies, nationalised 
banks and foreign banks for setting up of money exchange counters at the 
airports. 
 
7. The Committee wanted to know whet her the Ministry’s approval was taken 
by AAI before the issue of t ender.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation in a written reply 
informed the Committee as under:-  
During the 37th Board Meeting of AAI, Member  (Finance) of AAI explained 
that as per Ministry of Finances gui delines, no approval or  clearance from 
any other authority is required for giving space for Money Exchange 
Counters as long as these agencies have a licence issued by RBI. As 
such, no approval of this Ministry was required. 
 
8 On being enquired about the nature of services rendered by Money 
Exchange Counters at the Airports, AAI in written reply stated that:-  
Money Exchange Counter s render services in  foreign exchange 
transactions at both international and domestic airports. Money Exchange 
Counters at some locations in internat ional airports were also catering to 
the collection of customs duty in addition to the exchange transactions.   
 
 
9 When the Committee asked how the nationalized banks and private 
agencies were operating the money exchange  counters prior to April 1999 and 
under what terms and conditions, AAI in a written reply has stated as under:- 
Prior to 1999, Money Exchange Counters (MECs) at airports were allotted 
to nationalized banks and private agenc ies and were charged for the 
space allotted at the respective airports as below: 
 
   
a) IGI, Delhi/Mumbai Airports   : Rs. 5200/-  per Sqm. per month 
 
b) Trivandrum/Chennai/ Calcutta Airports: Rs. 3500/-  per Sqm. per month           
 
 
    
10. Explaining the rationale for issuing of this tender for setting up money 
exchange counters, the Chairman, AAI during oral evidence submitted as under:- 

  
  
“We have to go through the tendering process for the money exchange 
counters because the traffic at t he airports has been increasing on a 
regular basis. Secondly, the Ministry of  Finance also said that it could be 
opened up and given to other agencies also because of liberalization.  If 
we look at the old system, we had the system of collecting only the 
rentals. Here we have said that we will have a percentage of the royalty on 
the gross turnover, and it could be one of the conditions in it. As a result of 
this measure the Airports Authority can get some additional revenue. We 
have been getting some non-traffic revenues , and we felt that it would be 
one of the avenues for getting revenues for the Airports Authority. This is 
another thinking of the Airports Authority on this issue.”  
 
 
11. On being asked by the Committee about  the guidelines given by the Board 
of AAI in finalizing the setting up of these money exchange counters, AAI, in a 
written note replied as under:- 
The Board had suggested that AAI should restrict itself only to Indian and 
foreign banks and not to other agencie s. It was also suggested that AAI 
may draw up suitable cr iteria wherein the mini mum gross turnover and 
experience in the field may be stipulat ed as one of the conditions of the 
tender documents which may help in attracting reputed agencies for 
operation of such Money Exchange Counters at airports. 
 
 
C. Eligibility Conditions  
12. As per Audit, Airports Authority of India by deviating from the commercial 
policy in vogue, the eligibility condition s for participation in the tender were 
changed as given below which were impractical and discriminatory. 
(i) The prospective agencies/banks should possess minimum 
experience of five years of operating ;money exchange counters at 
ports/railways/airports and should possess valid licence from the 
Reserve Bank of India to conduct  money exchange business at the 
airport. 
(ii) The tenderer should possess mi nimum experience of 15 branches 
including branches in India and abroad. 
 
 

  
  
(iii)  The tenderer participating in th e tenders for International airports 
viz. Delhi/Mumbai/Chennai/Kolka ta/Thiruvananthapuram Airports 
should also have minimum annual tu rnover of Rs. 50 crore during 
the last financial year. 
 
13. When asked whether the new eligibility conditions included in the tender 
were part of the commercial policy that  was being followed by the AAI, the 
Committee were informed by AAI in a written reply that:- 
The revenue from Money Exchange Co unters operated at the airports 
before calling the tenders, was only from  the space rent applicable on the 
allotted area for operations of such counters. It has been the consistent 
endeavour of AAI to optimize it re venue including the non-traffic revenue. 
Corrective actions are also taken form time to time to improve the 
procedures to enhance the revenue. The new eligibility conditions were 
thus introduced to improve non-traffic revenue of the AAI. 
 
 
14. On being enquired about  how the minimum exper ience of 5 years of 
operating money exchange counters at port s /railways/airports was arrived at as 
these facilities are of a new kind of business in India and few parties/agencies 
would have the requisite experience, the Committee were informed that :- 
Indian Railways has specif ied the experience criter ia as 10 years while 
inviting the tenders and AAI had taken into consideration the experience 
criteria as 5 years, keeping in mind the AAI Board’s observations in 
providing quick and efficient services by inducting reputed 
nationalized/foreign banks/ private agencies.  The response to the tenders 
invited by AAI at all the international airports have been very encouraging, 
except for few agencies who went for litigation.   
 
 
Further, in terms of Section 11 of the AAI Act 1994, the Authority is 
empowered to take all such steps and to formulate Rules and Regulations 
as are necessary and are confined for discharging all its functions 
conferred by the Act and the uniform applicability of tenders norms for all 
the airports are acceptable under law. 
 
 
15. When the Committee wanted  to know why AAI restri cted itself to Railways 
/ State Bank of India for collecting dat a in connection with finalisation of a 
eligibility conditions, the Committee were informed that:-  
 

  
  
While AAI laid emphasis on the turnover generated by M/s SBI from the 
Money Exchange business, inquiries we re also made  from other major 
operators like M/s Thomas Cook India Private Ltd. and accordingly fixed 
the eligibility criteria taking the turnover as Rs. 50 crores per annum. 
 
16. When asked whether any other Public Sector Banks /agencies were 
involved in the money exchange business other than State Bank of India, the AAI 
in a written reply sent after evidence informed the Committee that:-  
 It is brought out that in addition to M/ s State Bank of India, there are other 
nationalized banks like; M/s Indian Over seas Bank, M/s Bank of Baroda, 
M/s Punjab National Bank having branches both in India and abroad. 
 
 
17. The Committee wanted to know as to why the State Bank of 
India/Railways were approached for finaliz ing the eligibility conditions in the 
tender as AAI were having enough ex perience in awarding money exchange 
counters at airports. The Chairman, AAI during the oral evidence informed the 
Committee that:- 
“We have been doing this for th e first time. Previously, on the directions of 
the Ministry, we used to allot the count ers. Since we were doing it for the 
first time and since everybody was new, that is, the officer and the 
member who were dealing with it, we wanted to go by certain established 
procedure available within our country. Therefore, we took it from the 
Railways. For deciding the turnover criteria, we turned to the State Bank of 
India, which has its branches at t he airports. When we asked them about 
turnover, they informed us through correspondence that their turnover was 
around Rs. 60 crore. Keepi ng in view the growin g number of passengers 
and the growth that would take place in the coming years, these contracts 
are given for a period of five years.  Therefore, our commercial judgment 
was that our turnover at the internat ional airports could be around Rs. 50 
crore.” 
 
 
18.  The Committee desired to know why did AAI fix an unrealistic amount of 
Rs.50 crore / year as eligibility condition  for participation in the tender keeping in 
view that as SBI being the largest PSU bank was able to do money exchange 
turnover of only Rs.60 crore per year.  The Committee were informed by AAI in a 
written reply as under:- 
 
 
 
Since State Bank of India was operating the Money  Exchange counters at 
all the international airports and at some domestic airports which were 

  
  
declared international, the turnover crit eria of Rs. 50 crores per year was 
based on the turnover achieved by M/s State Bank of India.  However, 
keeping the Board directives to ens ure induction of quality service 
providing reputed parties, the turnover figures as indicated by M/s SBI as 
well as some private agencies like M/ s Thomas Cook were taken into 
consideration in forming the eligibility criteria. 
 
19. The Committee wanted to know about the modifications which were made 
subsequently in the year 2001 in the eligib ility conditions after which most of the 
court cases were either closed or withdr awn. The AAI have stated in a written 
reply that:-  
 The modifications made after Mumbai  High Court order in November 2001 
was that the eligibility criteria was modified to “tenderer should possess 
minimum experience of operating 15 branches / counters or a combination 
of both in India and/or aboard.” 
 
 
20. When the Committee wanted to know whether the modifi ed eligibility 
conditions were approved by the AAI B oard, the Chairman AAI in his oral 
evidence before the Committee stated that:-   
“Actually, if you see the various records and other things, it was brought 
before the Commercial Advisory Board. Earlier, NIT conditions were not 
put up to the Board. It was taken at t he level of the Member in charge and 
then every time it was going to t he Commercial Advisory Board. The 
Commercial Advisory Board has been doing it.” 
 
 
21. When asked who are the Members of the Commercial Advisory Board, the 
AAI Chairman during oral evidence stated as under:- 
 “Functional Members of the Board and Chairman.” 
 
22. When asked about the views of t he Ministry on whether the modified 
eligibility conditions were to be approved by  AAI Board, Secretary, Ministry of 
Civil Aviation during oral evidence replied that:- 
“As a matter of abundant precaution, my own personal view was that this 
matter should have come to the Boar d. You have also referred to the 
responsibility of the Ministry or Government Directors on the Board of AAI. 
Here, I may submit to you that in t he first meeting where the in-principle 
decision was taken, the Government Directors actively participated and 
made suggestions, etc. And their ro le is free from any blame or 

  
  
responsibility in the sense that they  exercised due caut ion and suggested 
certain checks, etc. to be introduced in the scheme.” 
 
23. According to the information furnished by the Ministry of  Civil Aviation, in 
response to the tender called at IGI Ai rport Delhi, Punjab National Bank and 
State Bank of India participated along with M/s Thomas Cook and M/s American 
Express.  The bids of SBI and PNB could not be considered due to non-
fulfillment of the requirem ents of technical bid. In this regard the Committee 
asked the AAI to give details  of the deficiencies observ ed in the bids of SBI and 
PNB which led to their non-fulfillment of certain technical requirements and 
rejection of their tender, keeping in view the fact that both of  them are reputed 
public sector banks.  In a written reply, AAI informed the Committee that. 
The General Terms and Conditions of the NIT included clause in relation 
to clearance of outstanding dues as well as submission of ITCC and copy 
of IT Return for the last financial year.  However, SBI and PNB did not 
submit the ITCC at the time of  opening the tenders and also had not 
settled the outstanding dues.   
 
24. The Committee enquired whet her the modified eligib ility conditions were 
approved by AAI Board.  In reply, AAI Ch airman during oral evidence stated as 
under:- 
“It was approved by the Member concerned and then the Commercial 
Advisory Board. Initially also, when the Board gave the directive, the 
tender conditions of the NIT did not  go to the Board. The Member 
concerned had approved it. Subsequently when the corrections were to be 
made following of the j udgement of the court, the Member who is in 
charge brought it to the Commercial Advisory Board where the Chairman 
and other functional Members of the Board were there.” 
 
25. To a specific query as to whether  the concurrence of the Board was 
obtained as the amendments were made,  the Chairman, AAI during oral 
evidence informed the Committee that:-  
“It did not go to the Board” 
26.  The Committee wanted to know why t he modified eligibility conditions did  
not go to the Board and was it not the procedure followed in the Airports 

  
  
Authority of India that every policy decision is tak en to the Board.  AAI Chairman 
during oral evidence stated that:-  
“The Member in charge approves it and then it goes to the Commercial 
Advisory Board, not to the full Boar d. There is a Commercial Advisory 
Board which takes such commercial decisions.” 
 
27. To a query by the Committee that  t hese two criteria relating to experience 
and having overseas branches had been clear ed by the Airports Authority of 
India Board, the AAI Chairman during evidence stated that:- 
“No, it was not approved by  the Board. In the firs t instance the Board only 
gave a guideline in principle. They said , you should have turnover criteria. 
Apart from turnover and experience, it said ‘reputed parties’. Three 
conditions were put. They gave in-pri nciple approval for that. However, 
how much experience has to be put, etc., was done within the Airports 
Authority.” 
28. On being asked whet her it should have g one to the Board for 
concurrence, the AAI Chairman during oral evidence stated as under:- 
“What made them do so at that time, I am not in a position to state. I am 
functioning now and if such a thing comes I would take it to the Board. 
There was one such case in the commercial and I have informed the 
Board.” 
29. When the Committee wanted to know the view of the Secretary, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation on whether it would ha ve been prudent to take the matter to 
Supreme Court in view of the contradictory High Cour t judgements in Mumbai & 
Chennai, the Secretary during oral evidence stated that:- 
“Keeping in view one judgement of the Madras High Court that had 
already come in and also the interi m stay given by the Bombay High 
Court. If I am allowed to express a personal opinion with the benefit of 
hindsight, yes, I think, that would have been a most prudent course, as a 
number of cases were pending in different High Courts. It is the normal 
practice in most cases to ask for a collective hearing on all these matters 
at the level of the S upreme Court itself. I would suggest and I would 
humbly submit that probably that woul d have been a much better course 
of action.” 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
D. Legal Challenges  
30. According to the Audit, some of the aggrieved firms challenged the 
eligibility conditions in the Mumbai High Court in August 1999 and Kolkata High 
Courts in October 1999.  The Mumbai High Court granted stay in August 1999 on 
the tender proceedings.  While admitting t he petitions in October 1999 the High 
Court observed that the eligibility conditi ons were totally irrational, unreasonable 
and illegal.  The Kolkata High Court follo wed suit in October  1999.  Petitions 
challenging the eligibility c onditions were sim ilarly filed at Bang alore, Chennai, 
Delhi, Hyderabad and Th iruvananthapuram High Cour ts (between September 
1999 and October 1999) where the respecti ve High Courts ordered that the 
award of licences was subject to result of petitions filed before them.  But no stay 
orders were issued.  In this regard, t he Committee wanted to know from AAI who 
were the aggrieved parties who went to the Court against the eligibility 
conditions.  AAI informed the Committee that :- 
The details of the parties who went to court against the eligibility criteria is 
given in the table below.  Since these parties were not meeting the 
eligibility criteria described in the NI T, they were not issued the tender 
forms. 
NAME OF THE AIRPORT NAME OF THE PARTIES 
CHENNAI AIRPORT LKP MERCHANTS FIN.LTD. 
NUCLEUS SECURITIES LTD. 
TRIVANDRUM AIRPORT LKP MERCHANTS FIN. LTD 
NUCLEUS SECURITIES LTD. 
BANGLORE AIRPORT N.L. FOREX LTD. 
LKP MERCHANT FIN. LTD 
KOLKATA AIRPORT LKP MERCHANT FIN. LTD. 
R.N. DUTTA & CO. 
IGI AIRPORT LKP MERCHANT FIN. LTD. 
MUMBAI AIRPORT  NUCLEUS SECURITIES LTD. 
PHEROZE FRAMROZE CO. LTD. 
LKP MERCHANT FIN. LTD. 

  
  
 
 
31. The Committee wanted to know w hat was the observations of various 
High Courts while admitting t he petition challenging the eligibility conditions.  AAI 
in its written reply stated that :- 
Interim stay was granted initially at  Mumbai, Trivandrum and Kolkata 
Airports.  However, no stay was gr anted in respect of Chennai and Delhi 
Airports.  AAI, in order to resolv e the pending litigation proceedings 
agreed to make minor modifications for resolving the issue.  On 
submission of AAI’s views for making the modifications to Clause 3 (a) & 3 
(b), the Mumbai High Court directed for withdrawal of writ petition and 
passed orders accordingly in Nov, 2001. Similarly, the Courts at Delhi and 
Kolkata also passed order disposing off the petitions in November 2002 
and October 2002 in view of the stand taken by AAI for modifying the 
clauses as submitted in Mumbai High Court. 
 
 
32. When the Committee enquired why Supreme Court was not approached 
for directions as Mumbai and Chennai  High Courts had gi ven contradictory 
orders on the same issue, the Executive Director (Law) AAI during oral evidence 
stated as under:- 
“Most humbly, I wish to make my submission regarding the delay in 
litigation. The first court case against  these conditions of contract, as was 
stipulated in our notice inviting tender s, came before the Chennai High 
Court. On 6.10.1999, two writ petitions t hat were filed by two parties were 
dismissed. They have held that t he court cannot interfere with the 
jurisdiction of the respondents in fi xing the terms and conditions, and the 
same was not open to judicial scrutiny.  It was actually based on the Apex 
Court’s decision that t he High Court of Chennai dismissed their petitions. 
At the same time, when we got this  order from Chenn ai High Court, the 
other courts in Delhi and Kolkata refus ed to grant any stay order in this 
regard. After the order of the Chennai High Court, we got an interim stay 
order from Mumbai High Court. Then, we informed the court that we would 
like to argue the matter so that we could get a favourable order on 
whether it was a right or wrong decision.  Unfortunately, that took time. We 
filed several applications for early hearing, but the normal answer of the 
court was that when it would hear the case when the business of the court 
permits. After a long time, that is, on 16 th August, 2001, they heard us. 
After hearing us, they told us that the conditions were such that many 
parties might not participate and it might be found discriminatory. After 
seeing the order of the Mumbai High Court, the Kerala High Court passed 
a stay order. We could not finalise the tenders because of these reasons. 
We felt that if we approach the S upreme Court, there would be further 
delays because we have several matters referred to the Supreme Court 
which takes a minimum of two year s for disposing of even transfer 
petitions. Keeping this in mind, we thought that it would be better to accept 

  
  
the suggestions of the Mumbai High Court as it would not hamper the 
interest of the Airports Authority in any way.” 
 
33. On the above issue, the comments of the Executive Director (Law) AAI 
during oral evidence were as under:-  
“It may be our misjudgment. We are admitting that it may be. But our 
Counsels have never said that to us. They  told us that it is not a case we 
could fight. We had gone to them continuo usly. They told us that this is a 
good case when Chennai High Court judgement was there.” 
 
34. The Committee enquired as to whether the Ministry of Civil Aviation was 
aware of the legal cases against the AAI and, if so, when and what was the 
advice given by them to  AAI in this matter.  In reply, the Ministry stated that the 
Ministry came to know about these legal proceedings against the AAI in various 
High Courts across the country relating to the eligibility conditi ons set out in the 
tenders for inviting bids to run money ex change counters on receipt of draft audit 
paras from the Office of C&AG. As regards the advice given by the Ministry, it 
was submitted that:-
 
AAI functions under AAI Act, 1994 and has delegation of  powers as per 
MOU signed between Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airpor ts Authority of 
India. Commercial decisions are appr oved by AAI Board / Commercial 
Advisory Board or any other AAI O fficial duly authorized. No advice was 
given by MCA for immediate modification of eligibility conditions. 
 
35. On being asked by the Committee about the supervisory role of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in relation to the functioning of the AAI, the Ministry 
stated as under:- 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation is respons ible for the formul ation of policies 
and programmes for development and regul ation of civil aviation and for 
devising and implementi ng schemes leading to t he orderly growth and 
expansion of civil air transport. Its func tions also extend to overseeing the 
provision of airport facilities, air traffic services and carriage of passengers 
and goods by air. 
 

  
  
 
36. On being asked how many officials of the Ministry are Members in the 
Board of Directors of AAI and what are their responsibilities in AAI, the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation in a written reply to the Committee stated as under:- 
 Two officers of the Ministry – Financial Advisor of the rank of Additional 
Secretary / Joint Secretary and the Join t Secretary on the Ministry looking 
after the work of AAI, are Members in  the Board of Directors of AAI. As 
Members in the Board of Directors, t hese officers are required to oversee 
the performance of the AAI and take dec isions with regard to various 
functions of the Authority on the basis of policies of the Government. 
 
37. When enquired whether the Ministry  was not informed about the various 
litigations by AAI, the Secretary Ministry of Civil Aviation, during oral evidence 
stated that:- 
“Sir, I may also submit before th is hon. Committ ee that strangely 
somehow neither was the Board of Air ports Authority nor the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, at any point of time , informed about the various litigations 
that were going on in  various High Courts and the subsequent corrective 
actions that were required to be tak en.  The matter continued to be dealt 
in the Airports Authority.   Finally, all the modifications also came from the 
Airports Authority.” 
 
38. The Committee wanted to know the role  of officials of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation present in the Board of Directors  of AAI in this particular case.  The 
AAI in a written reply informed the Committee as under:- 
Since the finalization of the tender for the money exchange counters were 
well within the powers of the Air ports Authority management viz the 
airports and the corporate  Hqrs., the tenders were finalized with the 
approval of the Commercial Advisory  Board, there was no role for the 
officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation who represent Ministry of Civil Aviation 
in AAI Board, as the matter did not require the approval of AAI Board. 
 
 
E. Revenue Loss  
39. The Audit have observed that the to tal loss of revenue due to delay in 
award of licences to operate Money Exchange Counters at various Airports 
amounted to Rs. 18.11 crore.  The Committee enquired whet her AAI estimated 
the loss of revenue arising out of delay in  finalizing the awarding of licences for 

  
  
operating the Money Exchange  Counters at various Air ports.  The AAI in its 
written reply stated as under:- 
Airports Authority of India had not  viewed the delay as loss since the 
matter was sub-judice at some airports.  Further at the 6 domestic airports 
which were declared international effective from 23 rd June 2000, the 
airports were not fully geared up in se tting up these facilities and some of 
the domestic airports which were decla red international effective from 23 rd 
June 2000 were having banking facilities run by State Bank of India but 
started the money exchange operations as and when the international 
operations had started.   
 
40. On this issue, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in a written reply stated that:-  
The delay is mainly attributable to the lit igations filed in different courts of 
the country. 
 
41. Asked to explain the reasons behind the delay in awarding the licences at 
Chennai and Delhi after the high Court allowed AAI to go ahead, the Chairman, 
AAI during the oral evidence stated that:- 
“We have genuine reasons for the same. At  the time of awarding the work 
in Chennai, some cases were refe rred to the CVO and CVC. The case 
was referred to the CVO and CVC, and t heir reply could come only after a 
delay of six months.  We are ready to submit the re levant papers with 
regard to this issue if it is not available with the Committee. We were 
processing the case, but the matte r was referred to the CVO and CVC 
because a single party was getting more number of counters in Chennai. 
In Delhi also the matter was referr ed to the CVO and CVC. It was referred 
to our Airports Authority CVO, and on the advice of our CVO it was 
referred to the CVC also. Therefore, this process caused some delay in 
Chennai and Delhi.  We have already brought some of the papers related 
to this issue, and we are ready to submit them -- which mention about the 
reasons for the delay in Chennai and De lhi -- to the Committee. The court 
had not passed any order, but we knew that it would be in our favour both 
in Chennai and Delhi.” 
 
42. On being asked whether any time frame was laid down  for completion of 
various activities relating to the tendering process at its various Airports, the AAI 
in a written reply submitted that:- 
 
 
 

  
  
 
Normally on the basis of instructions  from Hqrs., airport should initiate 
tender action based on the prescribed s pecifications and time frame as 
per Commercial Manual.  However, some of the airports took time in 
formulating the procedures  and calling tenders a fter earmarking suitable 
space for the said facility.  However, the facility was being provided to the 
passenger through the existing nationalized banks/private agencies 
operating at that point of time. 
 
43. In response to the Audit observation t hat in the absence of a prescribed 
timeframe, four airports at Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Goa and Jaipur did not follow 
the instructions at all, the  AAI in its written reply stated as under:- 
Since these airports we re newly declared as “I nternational” w.e.f. 23 rd 
June, 2000 and the operation of money  exchange counters were also 
initially started by Nati onalized Banks operating in these airports, the 
airports took time in formulating t he procedures and sought  clarifications 
on certain issues due to which there was some resultant delay.  However, 
subsequently, tenders were called and finalized on the basis of space 
licence fee and royalty on turnover cr iteria.  At some airports like 
Ahmedabad & Goa in spite of r epeated tendering there was no bid 
received and finally after many attempts only, the contract could be 
awarded in September, 2003. 
 
F. Remedial Measures  
44. The Committee enquired the Minist ry about the lessons learnt from 
the entire episode. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in a written reply stated as 
under:- Guidelines on issue of t enders etc. already exist and the 
procedure as laid down in AAI Commercial Manual.  The Manual has been 
revised in 2003 to ac hieve improvement in better monitoring and 
administration of contracts.   Ministry of Civil Av iation through its nominee 
in AAI Board ensures that these im provements are undertaken on regular 
basis.  
Supplementing it during the evidence, the Secret ary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation submitted that:- 
“We have, since then, very strictly a sked the Airports Authority to be very 
vigilant and very careful in matters like this. We have told them that 
matters of this importance should immediately be brought before the 
Board of the Airports Aut hority, and wherever policy directions etc. are to 
be sought, also to the Ministry of Civil Aviation.” 

  
  
Part – II 
Recommendations / Observations of the Committee 
Recommendation No. 1 
Tendering for Money Exchange Counters at the Airports. 
The Committee note that  prior to 1999, money exchange counters 
at some international airports were be ing operated by Pu blic Sector Banks 
mainly the State Bank of India and some of its su bsidiaries alongwith few 
other private agencies as per the directiv es issued by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and the Ministry of Finance. The space for running the counters was 
allotted by the AAI on rental basis. After liberalisation of the economic policies 
by the Government, many other agencies were permitted by the RBI to carry 
on the money exchange business. As a result, many such parties started 
approaching AAI for setti ng up money exchange  counters at various 
international as well as domestic airports. In view of this and  also to enhance 
the non-traffic revenue, the matter was considered in  the Board’s meeting of 
AAI which accorded in principle appr oval for inviting open tenders from 
reputed authorised mone y exchange agencies, na tionalised banks and 
foreign banks for setting up of money exchange counters at  various airports. 
AAI decided to float tenders to awar d licenses to operat e money exchange 
counters on the basis of royalty on the gross turnover of these counters in 
addition to the fixed monthl y rentals. Since the AAI wa s floating th is kind of 
tender for the first time, it was thought appropriate by them to contact certain 
agencies doing this kind of business in order  to fix the eligibility criteria for the 
tenders. Accordingly, AAI approached Railway Authorities who were also  

  
  
inviting tenders for money  exchange business and the State Bank of India 
who were already operating money exchange counters at all the international 
airports. Based on the inputs received fr om these two agencies, the AAI fixed 
the eligibility conditions for the tenders.  However, the eligibility conditions so 
framed proved too harsh, as these had t he effect of precluding most of the 
Indian firms from participation in the tender process, which subsequently led 
to litigation in various cour ts and resulted in delay in award of licenses and 
consequential revenue losses etc. 
The Committee, feel that it was not  proper on the part of AAI to 
approach only two agencies for taking cons ultation in setting out the eligibility 
conditions, particularly when there were many other Public Sector Banks and 
private agencies doing money exchange business. The Committee, therefore, 
are of the view that su ch agencies should also have been consulted for 
enabling the AAI for setting  out realistic and reasonab le conditions. Had that 
been the case, such a situation woul d not have arisen, where a very few 
parties alone were able to qualify for bi dding their tenders, besides having an 
adverse impact on the concept of competitiveness. The Committee 
recommend that while undertaking such ac tivities in future, the AAI, following 
prudent commercial practices, should undertake wider c onsultations, while 
framing eligibility conditions so that there is optimum participation and healthy 
competition. 
 
 

  
  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Modification of eligibility conditions 
 The Committee have been apprised by AAI that of the three eligibility 
conditions, the condition pr escribing gross turnover of  Rs. 50 crore has been 
borrowed from State Bank of India, w hereas the condition prescribing 5 years 
experience in the money exc hange business and having  15 branches in India 
and abroad were based on i nputs from Indian Railways .  These conditions in 
general and the condition of 15 branches  in India and abroad  in particular, 
proved to be so harsh that most of the Indian firms got precluded from tendering.  
As a result, there was very poor response to the tenders, virt ually leading to a 
monopolistic situation for a few firms who were able to grab most of money 
exchange counters (MECs) at major International airports .  The glaring instance 
of such a monopolistic situat ion can be seen from the fact that at IGI Airport, 
Delhi, 14 out of 15 MECs got allotted to M/s Thomas C ook, while in Chennai, all 
the counters went to M/s T.T. Travels an d in Kolkata all the MECs went to M/s 
Thomas Cook.  Aggrieved by the stipul ation of the condit ion of having 15 
branches in India and abroad, some firms approached various high courts 
immediately after the Notice Inviting Tenders were issued, between August 1999 
to October 1999.  In Oct ober 1999, some High Courts  termed these eligibility 
conditions as highly irrational, unrealist ic and discriminatory.   But the Airports 
Authority, after a lapse of 2 years, in September 2001,  modified the eligibility 
conditions from ‘15 branches  in India and abroa d’ to ‘15 branches in India and / 
or abroad’. After the modi fication, these fi rms got all the ca ses withdrawn / 
closed. 
 Keeping in view all the facts ment ioned above, the Co mmittee are of the 
view that the AAI should have promptly acted soon after the observation of 

  
  
Mumbai High Court in Octo ber 1999 was rece ived, without waiting for another 2 
years to amend the eligibility conditions.  By doing so, the Committee believe that 
the revenue losses coul d have certainly been minimized. The Committee 
recommend that responsibilit y should be fixed for the revenue loss and suitable 
action be taken in the matter. 
 This instance clearly reveals that the decision-making mechanism in AAI 
requires a serious review and the Committee re commend that a review in this 
regard should be ca rried out so that qu ick decisions are made in future in all 
matters having revenue implications.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Guidance  of AAI Board in all important matters 
 Although the AAI Board had accorded  in principle approval for inviting 
tenders from reputed money exchange agencies, unfortunately the Board was at 
no point of time apprised of the litigation cases in various High Courts against the 
eligibility conditions.  It is true that the Commercial Advisory Board (CAB) headed 
by Chairman, AAI was competent to take  decisions in comme rcial matters. But 
the Committee feel that such sensitive issues should have been placed before 
the Board and also the Ministry for their guidance.   
 The Committee therefore, recommend that the AAI should immediately lay 
down suitable guidelines in their Co mmercial Manual providing for seeking 
Board’s directions in such crucial matters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Need for proper handling of the litigations  
 The Committee note that in view of the stringent eligibility conditions, 
many Indian firms got straightaway pr ecluded from tender ing for the Money 
Exchange Counters.  Such a ggrieved parties challenged the eligibility conditions 
in various High Courts at Mumbai, Ko lkata, Bangalore,  Chennai, Delhi, 
Hyderabad and Thiruvanthapuram during August 1999 to October, 1999. While 
the Mumbai High Court and Kolkata High Court granted stay on tender 
proceedings, the other High Courts, though not issuing any stay orders, ordered 
that the award of licences was subjected to the result  of petitions filed before 
them.  Further, while admi tting the petition s in October, 1999, the Mumbai High 
Court observed that the elig ibility conditions were to tally irrational, unreasonable 
and illegal.  Similarly, the Kerala High Court, while setting as ide the eligibility 
conditions in August , 2001, stated that  the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) was 
unreasonable, arbitrary and discriminatory.   On the contrary , the Madras High 
Court dismissed the petition on the ground that the court cannot interfere with the 
jurisdiction of AAI in  fixing the terms and conditions of the tender and as such it 
was not open to judicial sc rutiny.  The observation of  the Delhi High Court was 
that though the eligibility conditions did not suffer any arbitrariness or irrationality, 
the same would have been happily wo rded and made more  precise.  The 
Committee further note that it was only in the year 2001 that the Airports 
Authority of India, for the sake of reso lving the pending liti gation proceedings, 
made required modifica tions in the eligibility conditions which ultimately resulted 
in withdrawal / closure of the court cases. 

  
  
 Keeping in view the fa ct that a large number of  cases were filed in 
different High Courts of the country by various firms  against the eligibility 
conditions and different types of observations were being given on these 
petitions, the Committee feel that the Authority had failed to effectively handle the 
situation due to lack of sound legal counselling.  In the opinion of the  Committee, 
the most prudent course for the Author ity under such circumstances was to 
approach the Supreme Court for collective hearing on all these matters.  The 
Secretary, MOCA as well as representa tives of AAI during evidence before the 
Committee also subscribed to  this view point.  Unfort unately, the Authority did 
not pursue this course  of action, as no such adv ice was given by their legal 
counsel.  The Committee are not at all happy with such an inept handling of the 
litigations and therefore strongly reco mmend that AAI, shou ld strengthen their 
legal machinery for handling such type of situations in future more effectively. 

  
  
Recommendation No. 5 
Delay in award of licences resulting in revenue loss. 
 
 The Committee note that the Authority issued instructio ns to various 
domestic/ international airpor ts in July, 1999 to float open tenders for award of 
licenses.  Although the air ports were advised to make all out efforts for inviting, 
processing and finalizing the facility expe ditiously, no time - frame within which 
the entire process was to be completed had been prescribed.  In this regard, the 
Committee observe that on acco unt of litigations in vari ous High Courts, delays 
ranging from 30 to 34 months in the case of Mumbai and Kolkata airports, 6 to 37 
months in the case of Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi & Hyderabad airports and delay 
of 25 months in the case of Thiruvanthapuram airport, took place in awarding of 
licenses.  Further, in the absence of any prescribed time-frame, the airports at 
Ahemdabad, Amritsar, Goa and Jaipur did not follow the instructions at all and as 
a result, the award of licenses delayed which ranged between 18 and 44 months.  
According to the Audit, thes e delays have resulted in a loss of revenue of Rs. 
18.11 crore to the Authority on account of royalty and the license fee.  
 The Committee further note that acco rding to AAI, the de lay in awarding 
the licences had occurred main ly on account of petitions filed in different courts 
challenging the eligibility conditions.  The other reas ons include, reference made 
to CVO/CVC in respect of  awarding contracts at Delhi & Chennai airport, 
declaration of few airpor ts as International on ly from 23.6.2000 and 
consequential revision of space license fee, delay in vacation of counters by 
State Bank of India at few airports ; and repeated tender attempts due to 
technical deficiencies etc. The Committee are not  

  
  
convinced by the reasoning put-forth by the Authority because th e Authority itself 
is to be blamed for their inept handling of the litigati ons.  The Committee find the 
other reasons as petty in nature which could have been taken care of if proper 
planning, coordination and follow – up was done by the AAI Headquarters. 
 The Committee strongly feel that appropriate legal consultations and 
carrying out of expeditious modifications in the eligibility conditions soon after the 
observation of the Mumbai High Court in October, 1999 would have definitely 
avoided loss of revenue to the Authority.   
 Another factor in the opinion of th e Committee which has been attributed 
to the delay in awarding of  tenders was that no time-f rame was prescribed for 
completion of the whole proc ess.  In the absence of the said parameter, many 
airports did not follow the tendering instructions at al l.  The Committee find such 
approach highly casual and irregular keeping in view the fact that as per the 
Commercial Manual of the Authority, t he tender instructio ns should clearly 
stipulate the time-frame for completion of the whole process.  The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the Authority did not view th e delay in awarding the 
licences as a revenue loss propositi on.  The Committee believe that had the 
Authority acted as a truly pr ofessional organization in  promptly ad dressing the 
causes of delay, the reve nue loss could have certai nly been minimized.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that in future, the procedure laid down in the 
Commercial Manual should be  strictly adhered to so as to avoid recurrence of 
such lapses in future. 

  
  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Need for strengthening the Monitoring Mechanism of the Ministry 
 
 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry came to know about the 
legal proceedings against the AAI in various High Courts relating to eligibility conditions 
set out in the tender for setting up Money Exchange Counters only through the draft 
audit paras from the C&AG. 
    The Ministry has stated that their representatives are the Members of AAI Board. 
Since the Commercial Advisory Board (CAB) of AAI who is competent to take decision 
with regard to commercial practices did not bring this issue to AAI Board, the Ministry’s 
representatives or the Ministry were not aware of the litigations faced by AAI.  This 
explanation is not acceptable to the Committee as the senior officers of the Ministry who 
deal with AAI, are completely accountable for the performance of AAI.  Another 
important point which has come to the notice of the Committee  is that on perusal of item 
No. 13 of AAI Commercial Manual of 1993 which was  in vogue till 2001, it has been 
noted that Money Exchange Counters were also to be allotted as per directives issued 
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation from time to time.  In view of this, the Ministry cannot be 
absolved of its responsibilities in regard to the controversies generated during the said 
allotment of Money Exchange Counters (MECs).  This shows that there was  poor 
coordination and lack of supervision of the Ministry over the AAI. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Civil Aviation should strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism and conduct periodical reviews of the PSUs and provide suitable guidance 
to them.  
 
N e w  D e l h i        R U P C H A N D  P A L  
23rd August, 2005            C H A I R M A N  
1 Bhadrapada, 1927 (S)  COMMI TTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 

  
  
ANNEXURE -I 
 
Audit Para No. 3.3.1 of C&AG Report No. 3 (Commercial) of 2005. 
Loss of revenue due to del ay in award of licences to  operate money exchange 
counters. 
 
Arbitrary fixing eligibi lity conditions for money exchange counters by 
Airports Authority of India led to unneces sary litigation, whic h delayed award of 
licences for money exchange counters at va rious airports.  This resulted in loss 
of revenue of Rs. 18.11 crore on account of royalty and licence fee. 
 The money exchange counters of nat ionalized banks and private parties 
are in operation at major airports of the Airports Authority of  India (Authority).  
The Authority decided in April 1999 to  invite open tenders from reputed 
authorised money exchange agencies, nat ionalised banks and foreign banks for 
setting up money exchange counters at the international airports as per the 
commercial policy in vogue.  The Authority issued instructions to float open 
tenders (July 1999) for awar d of licences and tenderers were asked to quote a 
royalty payable to the Authority as a percentage on their gross turnover (GTO) in 
addition to space rent payable @ Rs. 3, 500 (domestic) Rs. 6, 000 (international) 
per square meter per month.  It further advised that the eleven airports make all 
out efforts for inviting, processing and fi nalizing the facility expeditiously.  The 
Authority did not however, lay down an ytime-frame within which the entire 
process was to be completed.  Deviati ng from the commercial policy in vogue, 
the eligibility conditions for participat ion in the tender were changed as given 
below which were impractical and discriminatory. 
(i) The prospective agencies/banks should possess minimum experience 
of five years of operating money exchange counters at 
ports/railways/airports and should possess valid licence from the 

  
  
Reserve Bank of India to condu ct money exchange business at the 
airport. 
(ii) The tenderer should possess minimum experience of 15 branches 
including branches in India and abroad. 
The tenderer participating in the tender s for International Airports viz. 
Delhi/Mumbai/Chennai/Kolkata/Thiruvananthapuram Airports should also 
have minimum annual turnover of Rs. 50 crore during the last financial year. 
 The eligibility condition s mentioned above straight away precluded most of 
the Indian firms from tender ing as they were not having overseas branches.  
The firms which were operating money exchange counters at seaports and 
railway stations could not fulfill the requi rement of five years experience as 
these exchange counters had been introduced only recently at ports/railway 
stations in India. 
 Some of the aggrieved firms challenged the eligibility conditions in the 
Mumbai (August 1999) and Kolkata Hig h Courts (October 1999).  The 
Mumbai High Court granted stay (Augus t 1999) on the tender proceedings.  
While admitting the petitions (October 1999) the High Court observed that the 
eligibility conditions were totally i rrational, unreasonable and illegal.  The 
Kolkata High Court followed suit (Oct ober 1999).  Petitions challenging the 
eligibility conditions were similarly filed at Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi 
Hyderabad and Thiruvananthapuram High Courts (between September  1999 
and October 1999) where the respective High Courts ordered that the award 
of licences was subject to result of pet itions filed before them.  But no stay 
orders were issued. 
  
 

  
  
Keeping in view the multiple litigati on at various High Courts, the Authority 
should have re-examined the eligibility cond itions in October 1999 itself.  The 
Authority decided as late as in Sept ember 2001 to modify the eligibility 
conditions and intimated this to all the airports after which the pending 
petitions were withdrawn/closed.  T he licences were finally awarded at 
Mumbai and Kolkata airpor ts after a delay of 30 and 34 months respectively 
causing loss of royalty of Rs. 12.67 crore.  At other airports (Bangalore, 
Chennai, Delhi and Hyderabad airports) the delay in issuing licences ranged 
between six and 37 months caus ing a loss of royalty of Rs. 1.03 crore.  As 
regards the Thiruvananthapuram airpor t fresh tenders with modified 
conditions were called for (November  2001) and licence was awarded in 
February 2002.  Thus, there was a delay of 25 months in award of licences 
causing a loss of loyalty of Rs. 41.90 lakh. 
 Meanwhile it was observed in Audit that in the absence of a prescribed 
timeframe, four airports at Ahm edabad, Amritsar, Goa and Jaipur did not 
follow the instructions at all. 
 These airports initiated the tender process only after repeated instructions 
by the Headquarters.  The award of licences was delayed which ranged 
between 18 and 44 months causing a loss of royalty of Rs. 27.78 lakh to the 
Authority. 
 The total loss of Rs. 14.40 crore due to delay in award of licences could 
have been avoided had the M anagement drafted the eligibility conditions and 
time schedule with due care initiall y and completed the process by 31 
December 1999.  Besides, the Authorit y also lost Rs. 3.71 crore towards 
space rent (licence fee) in respect of these airports due to delay in award of  
 

  
  
licence for money exchange counters.  It  could have, thus , started earning 
royalty and licence fee revenue from J anuary 2000 itself, if timely action had 
been taken.  
 The Management in its reply (Ma y 2003) relating to delay at 
Thiruvananthapuram airpor t stated that tenders were invited (September 
1999) on the directives of Headquarters.  As a result of the delay, the airport 
got a higher rate of royalty from the same party against the subsequent 
tender, which proved beneficial to the Authority. 
  The Ministry stated (October 2004) t hat the response to the call of tender 
with pre-modified specificat ion did not unilaterally resu lt in litigation all over 
India.  Further, tender action was successful at Delhi and Chennai.  Hence no 
need was felt to change the conditions at that stage. 
 The reply of the Managem ent is not tenable as the Authority was well 
aware of adverse observations made by Mumbai High Court on discriminatory 
eligibility conditions at the admission stage itself (October 1999) but did not 
modify them till September  2001.  The Kerala High Court, while setting aside 
the eligibility conditions, stated (august 2001) that the court was convinced 
that notice inviting tender  was unreasonable, arbitr ary and discriminatory.  
The modified eligibility conditions generated more competition and more 
number of tenderers participated, which made the tender process competitive 
leading to offers of higher percentage of royalty, thus, further substantiating 
Audit stand that enough care was not take n in drafting the tender conditions.  
The Ministry’s reply that pre-modified spec ifications did not result in unilateral 
litigation all over India is not factual si nce cases were filed at all International 
Airports challenging the inclusion of restrictive conditions. 

  
  
 Legal consultation and expeditious m odification in eligibility conditions 
would have avoided litigation at the airports.  The consequent delay in 
invitation of fresh tenders and their fi nalisation deprived the Authority of 
revenue amounting to Rs. 18.11 crore. 
 

  
  
 
Calendar of events 
Subject:- Airports Authorit y of India – Loss of revenue due to delay in award 
of licence to operate Money Exchange Counters (Audit Para 
No.3.3.1of C& AG Report No-3 (Commercial) of 2005). 
 
 
18-9-1978 Directives issued by Mi nistry of Civil Aviation to 
operate money exchange counters. 
15-4-1994 Min of Finance permitted AAI to allot MEC to M/S 
Thomas Cook and M/S T.T.Travels. 
27-10-1997 Min of Civil Aviation gave clearance to AAI for issue of 
open tenders 
19-1-1998   Min Of Finance gives clearance to AAI.  
8,April 1999   AAI Board gave in pr inciple approval to float tenders. 
 
July 1999   AAI issued instru ctions to float open tenders. 
 
12, August 1999 Aggrieved firms cha llenged eligibility conditions at 
Mumbai High Court. Granted stay. 
September 1999 to  Petiti on filed at various High Courts in respect of 
October 1999 tendering for Bangalore,Chennai, Delhi ,Hyderabad  
 and Trivandrum Airports. 
16, September 1999 Delhi High Court gave Permission to AAI to award the 
licence subject to Court decision. 
October 1999 Aggrieved firms cha llenged eligibility conditions at 
Kolkata High Court. stay granted 
11, October 1999 Chennai High Court gave clearance to AAI to award 
the tender. 

  
  
 
28, Feb.2000 CVO. AAI referred the IGI Delhi, on monopolistic 
situation of M/s Thomas Cook matter to CVC. 
5, May 2000  CVC replied back to AAI. 
 
1, June 2000 AAI awarded 14 out of 15 counters at Delhi to M/s 
Thomas Cook. 
23, June 2000 6 Airports namel y Goa, Hyderabad, Banglore, 
Ahemdabad, Amritsar and Guwahati declared 
international  
16, August 2001  Kerala High Court set aside the eligibility conditions. 
16, August 2001 Mumbai High Court a sked the AAI to reconsider the 
specification. 
7,September 2001 AAI decided to modi fy the eligibility conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  4th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  20  JUNE,  2005 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1640 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
5. Shri Mohan Rawale 
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
8. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
8. Shri Ajay Maroo 
9. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10. Shri Jibon Roy 
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri T. G. Srinivasan, Dy. CAG (Comml) 
2. Ms. Vijaya Moorthy, Pr. Director (Comml) 
3. Ms. Sandhya Shukla, Asstt. CAG (Comml) 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman 
2. Shri J. M. Kharbanda,  Executive Director (F&A) 
3. Dr. P. K. Ray, Executive Director (Law) 
4. Shri R. V. Narayana, GM (Commercial) 
 

  
  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
1. Shri Ajay Prasad, Secretary 
2. Shri Prashant Kumar Mi shra, Addl. Secretary & FA 
3. Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. The Committee first took oral ev idence of the repr esentatives of 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) in connection wit h examination of Audit 
Para No.3.3.1 of C&AG Report No.3  of 2005 (Comml) regarding `Airports 
Authority of India – Loss of revenue of Rs.18.11 crore due to delay in 
award of license to o perate Money Exchange Count ers’. To some of the 
queries raised by the Members, the repr esentatives of AAI were asked to 
furnish written replies in  2 – 3 days time. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took or al evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the above mentioned Audit Para. 
 
4. XXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX 
5. Verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept on record 
separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
  
MINUTES  OF  THE  7th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  23rd   AUGUST,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
7. Shri Kashiram Rana 
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
10. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
3.        Shri Ajay  Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA 
 
1. Ms. Vijaya Moorthy Princi pal Director (Commercial) 
2. Ms. Anjali Singh Director (Audit),  
 
  
2. The Committee considered the Draft R eport on Airports Authority of India 
based on Audit Para No. 3.3.1 of C&AG’s Report  No.3 (Commercial) of 2005 
relating to ‘ Loss of revenue due to delay in award of licences to operate Money 
Exchange Counters at Airports’ and adopted the same with minor modification. 
 

 
 
 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report for 
presentation. 
The Committee then adjourned.  