C.P.U. NO. 902 
16
  
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2006  - 2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
SPECIAL CONTINGENCY POLICIES ON MOBILE HANDSETS 
 BY INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
[Based on Chapter X of C&AG Report (Commercial)  
No. 4 of 2005] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15th December 2006 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15th December 2006 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2006/ Agrahayana1928(S) 
 
 

CONTENTS         Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07)    (iii)     
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( v )  
 
PART – I 
 
CHAPTER-I  INTRODUCTION 
          A.   Ba ckground of the subject    1 
 
CHAPTER-II  NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
A. Power to issue Special Contingency Policies  3  
B. Reinsurance protection     10 
C. Cancellation Clause in the SCPs   11 
D. Settlement of claims     13 
E. Alternate Risk Transfer (ART)    17 
F. Role of the then concerned CMD   18 
 
CHAPTER-III ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
A. Issue of Policy      20 
B. Settlement of claims     24 
 
CHAPTER-IV MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
          A.  Role of Ministry      27 
 
 
 
PART-II 
 
Recommendations / Observations of the Committee    31-41 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I Chapter X of Audit Para Repor t No. 4 (Commercial) of 2005 on 
special contingency policy on m obile handsets by Insurance 
Companies.  
42 
II Minutes of the sittings of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2006-07) 
53 
 
(i) 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2006 – 2007) 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
9. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Kashiram Rana 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
 
16. 
 
Shri Rishang Keishing 
 
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
19. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
20. Shri Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
21. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
       SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri. S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri N.C. Gupta  Under Secretary 
 4. Shri H. Ram Prakash Committee Officer 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Publ ic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to present th e Report on their behalf, present this  
Sixteenth Report on “Special Contingency Policy on Mobile Handsets.” 
2. The subject was selected for exam ination by the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2006-07).  The Committee’s examination of the subject was based 
on the Report of the Comptroller & Audito r General of India – Union Government 
No. 4(Commercial) of 2005.  
3. The Committee on Public Undertaki ngs (2006-07) took oral evidence on 
the subject of the representatives of  National Insurance Company Limited  
(NICL) on 12 th October 2006, The Committee also invited Shri. P. 
Bandhyopadhyay, Chief Vigilance Office (Retd), National Insurance Company 
Limited, and Shri. B. Chakraborti, forme r CMD, NICL and presently CMD, New 
India Assurance Co. Ltd. Mumbai  to tender oral ev idence on the subject on           
30th October, 2006 and the representatives of  The Oriental Insurance Company 
Limited (OICL) and the Ministry of Finance on 30th October 2006.    
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
National Insurance Company Ltd, the Or iental Insurance Company Limited and 
Ministry of Finance for placing before them the material and information they 
required in connection with the examination of the subject.   
5. The C.O.P.U. (2006-07) considered and adopted the Report at their sitting 
held on 12.12.2006.  The Committee also pl ace on record their appreciation for 
the assistance rendered by the officials of  the Comptroller & Auditor General of 
India.  The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to them by officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND PAL  
12th December, 2006                CHAIRMAN  
21 Agrahayana, 1928 (S)      COMM ITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 (v) 

 1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
A. BACKGROUND 
 
1. General Insurance business is traditi onally divided into Fire, Marine and 
Miscellaneous. Miscellaneous insurance includes 
 in its scope Special Cont ingency Policy (SCP) or tailor-made policy. The risks 
associated with ‘Mobile handsets’, wh ich could not be covered under the 
standard policies, were covered under SCP.  
 
2. The Chapter X of Audit Report of the C&AG-Union Government 
(Commercial) No –4 of 2005 contai ned Audit observations on special 
contingency policies on mobile handsets.  The observations contained the 
deficiencies in the issue of special contingencies policie s and consequential 
losses on account of the policies to the two Insurance Companies namely 
National Insurance Company Limited an d to Oriental Insurance Company 
Limited.  The highlights of the Audit observations are given below.  
 
Highlights  
Two insurance Companies suffered heavy losses in the issue of tailor made 
insurance policies because of non-compliance to technical parameters and non-
evaluation of risk factors involved.  
(Para 10.4)  
The failure on the part of  the Management to obtain reinsurance protection, 
ensure the compliance of Insurance R egularity and Development Authority 
(IRDA)/ General Insurance Public Sector Association (GIPSA) guidelines as well 
as non-inclusion of the loading clause deprived the Company of  the opportunity 
to reduce its losses in all the Special Contingency Policies (SCPs) issued during 
2002-03 to 2004-05.  
(Paras 10.5.2, 10.5.3, 10.5.4 and 10.5.6)  
In handsets all risk cover issued under  SCP on 18 December 2002 to Reliance 
Industries Limited (RIL), National Insu rance Company Limite d (NIC) received 
claims for Rs.91.23 crore upto October 2004 against t he premium of Rs.27.39 
crore (excluding service tax) realis ed during December 2002 to October 2004. 
Out of these, it settled claims for Rs .24.69 crore and the balance claims for 
Rs.66.54 crore were pending settlement.  
(Para 10.5.6)  

 2 
 
In the default policy iss ued to RIL on 25 J une 2003, NIC received claims for 
Rs.152.34 crore against the premium of Rs.55.71 cror e realised upto October 
2004. Out of these it settled claims fo r Rs.120.60 crore and the balance claims 
for Rs.31.74 crore were pending.  
(Para 10.6.3)  
In the default policy issued to Tata Tele Services Limited on 1 April 2004 NIC 
received claims of Rs.9.54 crore against the premium of Rs.6.20 crore realised 
upto October 2004. Out of t hese, it settled claims for Rs.3.42 crore and the 
balance claims for Rs.6.12 crore were pending.  
(Para 10.7)  
In the default policy issued by OIC in  August 2003 to RIL for handsets the 
insured reported 61193 claims for Rs. 63.53 crore. The Company had so far 
settled 18706 claims for Rs.19.64 crore an d balance claims involving estimated 
outgo of Rs.13.81 crore, after taking into consideration repudiated claims, were 
pending.             (Para 10.8)  
 
NIC failed to arrange the reinsurance protec tion. With a view to finance the huge 
flow of claims, it obtained Alternate Risk Transfer (ART) cover from foreign 
reinsurer and paid Rs.13.38 crore as one time upfront fee. This upfront fee 
further reduced the already low premium income.       (Para 10.9) 
 
 
 A copy of the full Audit Para as c ontained in the C&AG Report is given at 
Annexure – I. The sequence of activities as brought out during the examination of 
the above Audit Para by the Committ ee are discussed in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
 

 3 
 
CHAPTER II  
 
NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED (NICL) 
 
 
A. POWER TO ISSUE SPECIAL CONTINGENCIES POLICIES  
 
2.1. Audit in Para 10.3 of Chapter X of Audit Report No. 4 (Commercial) of 
2005 has stated that an analysis of the insu rance policies issued by NICL under 
SCPs revealed that they were devised prim arily to suit the requirements of the 
insured, without safeguarding the insurers ’ interest owing to non-adoption of the 
prudent underwriting guidelines as brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
2.2 Audit in Para 10.4 relating to Non-evaluation of technical aspects 
observed the following :- 
Before issuing the SCPs, all the operat ing offices were required to comply 
with the following technical parameters to ensure that t he risk would not 
make the rating unviable:  
 (i)  Prior sanction of the Reinsu rance Department of the Company to 
be obtained before acceptance of  risks beyond the prescribed 
limits, as advised by Reinsurance Department from time to time.  
 (ii)  The Excess clause
♣ 
must be clearly indicat ed against each item or 
section.  
 (iii)  Basis of sum insured i.e. whether market value, reinstatement, 
replacement, non-recoverable cost  etc. as applicable, to be 
indicated to avoid disputes.  
 (iv)  In case of non-standard pr oducts/risks like financial risks, asset 
protection and stock exchange ri sks, the pricing, terms and 
conditions should be in line with t he requirement of reinsurer as 
contemplated in the Company’s reinsurance programme.  
♣ 
Excess clause means that part of loss, which would be borne by the insured in order to 
avoid high frequency low value losses/claims to be paid by the insurer.  
 
2.3  The Committee were informed that  a total of 52,04,194 handsets were 
insured under Speical Contingency Policies . The NICL however could not inform 
the Committee about the break up of ordi nary and premium handsets that were 
covered under SCP.  The Committee were  furnished the details of the SCP 
policies issued to Reliance Industries by NICL which are as follows:: 
 
 
 

 4 
 
(a) Handset all Risk Cover 
 
 Policy No 253200/46/02/ 9500248.  This policy covered the Handsets 
purchased by subscribers against physi cal loss or damage for a period of 
three years and fraudulent misuse of the set following loss/theft.. 
 
(b) Default Liability Policy 
 
 Policy No. 253200/46/03/9500087.  This policy covered loss suffered by 
Reliance Industries on account of failure  of the subscribers to pay service 
charges or return the handset upto a maximum of Rs. 11,000/- per 
connection.” 
 
2.4. Audit have made t he following observations in Para 10.5.1. 
“As per NIC’s guidelines issued in  March 1999, the power to develop a 
new product under SCP was retai ned with the Head Office of the 
Company. Kalyan D.O. based on MOU dated 6 December 2002 with RIL, 
devised a new SCP to cover the loss or damage to the mobile handsets 
involving repair and fraudulent use.  Being a new product, it required 
approval of headquarters before its implementation. However, this was not 
obtained.  
Besides this, as per Company’s guidelines all fresh proposals under SCP 
where the sum insured exceeded Rs.50 lakh were to be referred to Head 
Office for approval. However, Kalyan D.O issued the above-cited SCP for 
mobile handsets for the sum insured of  Rs.6.50 crore with a clause that 
sum insured would increase with s ubsequent sales of  mobile handsets 
upto the expiry of period of the poli cy i.e. 17 December 2005. As the sum 
insured had far exceeded the prescribed limit of Rs.50 lakh, the Kalyan 
D.O, by not obtaining prior approval of Head Office, had exceeded its 
powers.” 
 
2.5  On the basis of the above audit comments, the Committee wanted to know 
the details of Special Contingency Policies (SCPs) and when Insurance 
Companies preferred to issue SCP’s. In reply, NIC in their note stated as under: 
 
“Special Contingency Policies are iss ued when the covers sought are not 
available under any existing Standard Policies.  For instance, Paintings or 
other objects of Art while sent for exhibitions when the cover is sought 
while in transit, during exhibition and return to original place of 
storage/display. 
 
Similarly, cover in respect of equipment carried by employees of insured in 
connection with work such  as laptops, testing equ ipment etc. where the 
cover sought is against Fire, A ccidental Damage, Breakdown, Theft, 
damages whilst in use. 

 5 
 
Another example is event insurance such as cricket matches, cultural 
programmes etc. against the risk of cancellation due to perils such as Fire, 
Acts of God, Illness or accident to leading performers, terrorism etc.” 
 
2.6  When asked by the Committee to ex plain the procedure adopted by NICL 
in the issuance of Special Contingency Policies( SCP), , NICL  stated as under: 
 
“The underwriting offices obtain the det ails of cover required from the 
proposer and the same is referred to head office through the Regional 
offices alongwith the recommendations of the latter to enable Head office 
to take a decision regarding accept ance of the proposal. Once the Head 
office communicates the acceptance,  the underwriting offices issue the 
policy.” 
 
2.7 When the Committee want ed to know what was the premium charged by 
National Insurance Company Ltd. (NIC L) on plans covering normal electronic 
household gadgets and how it compared with the premium charged for insurance 
of mobile hand sets under Special Contingency Policies to Reliance, NICL stated 
as under: 
 
  “The normal rates for insuring normal electronic household gadgets were 
around 1%.  The premium charged from RIL was   0.25% i.e. one fourth.” 
 
2.8. The Committee asked as to when and how did Head Office (H.O.) of NIC 
came to know about the issue of SCP for m obile handsets to RIL.  In reply, NICL 
stated as under-: 
 
“A reference was made to Head Office by the Regional Office prior to 
issuance of cover.  The coverage was against the risk of accidental 
physical loss or damage to  the Handsets including theft which was almost 
akin to our standard ‘All risks insur ance’.  Since the value at risk per 
handset was Rs. 11000/Rs. 24000 only , Head Office advised that the 
matter fell within the delegated authorit y of the Regional offices to 
underwrite special contingency policie s and the same may be decided by 
the Regional Office on merits.” 
 
2.9 As the risk was the first of its kind covered in India, Committee asked as to 
whether any attempt was made by NICL to inquire from the International Market 
about the ratings, terms and conditions etc. followed by them in such cases.  
NICL in their written reply stated the following: 
 
“No such attempts were made.  Attempts through Reinsurance brokers 
also did not yield any in formation on any policies designed / available to 
cover such handsets.” 
 
 

 6 
 
2.10.  Audit have made the following observations under para no. 10.6 
“Based on another MOU entered into between NIC and RIL on 25 June 
2003, the Kalyan DO issued an SCP to RIL to cover the default liability 
risk in respect of mobile handsets fo r the period from 25 June 2003 to 24 
June 2006. The premium rate per  handset/connection was charged at 
Rs.100 (including eight per cent servic e tax). The scope of cover included 
net ascertained financial losses arising out of telecom services of the 
insured and/or cost of the handset from default due to fraudulent activity of 
the subscriber subject to a maximu m loss of Rs.11,000 per handset. The 
fraudulent activity included default of  periodical payment/dues by the 
subscriber for any reasons whatsoev er. Further, the parties had no option 
to cancel the policy during the validity period of the policy. “ 
 
2.11. Asked by the Committee about how  the Kalyan D.O /MUMBAI R.O was 
allowed to underwrite the po licies, the present Chairm an of NICL during oral 
evidence on 12th Oct, 06 interalia stated the following: 
 
 “In this case also our  underwriting rules and regulat ions say that since we 
take into account the individual’s sum insured per individual, each office 
can have certain underwriting limit.  Based on that they underwrite this 
particular issue of special conti ngency policy or the individual handset 
policy  which has been given by t he Kalyan DO and RO.  They have 
probably taken this factor and issued the policy.  However, it is something 
like a special policy  which was probably o ffered to us for the first time in 
the history, it was referred to the head office for the sake of approval.  I will 
have to frankly admit that it is unfor tunate that the head office has taken a 
stand that it falls within your aut hority and you can deal  with that case 
based on merit.”  
 
Elaborating further he stated: - 
 
“….The second is the Default Li ability Policy which was actually 
issued after six months from the da te of the issue of the original 
handset policy.   Default Liability means if a subscriber fails to pay 
the amount, coverage was given to  Reliance for reimbursing the 
outstanding amount wh ich has not been paid by the various 
subscribers.  As per the audit findings and records, nearly 1,38,879 
claims were lodged by Reliance In dustries and out of that, 1,03,928 
claims were investigated and a to tal amount of about Rs. 120 crore 
was paid.  The balance amount fo r 34,000 claims were not paid 
because by the time the claims started pouring in, the balance 
34,000 were not investigated by us .  In respect of  handset claims, 
claims for an amount of Rs. 91.2 3 crore were reported and out of 
that, claims to the extent of Rs . 24.69 crore were settled.   The 

 7 
 
balance claims which were settled as  on date were Rs. 66.54 crore.  
In these cases also, investigations with more amount of claims were 
reported and we could not investigate them. This is the amount that 
is pending as on date.  This is the crux of the two policies issued and 
the details of the claims settled by the National Insurance Company.” 
 
2.12. Asked further as to whether it was proper on the part of H.O. of NICL to 
have allowed the D.O./R.O. to underwrite the SCP, the present Chairman of 
NICL, stated:- 
 
“It should have been done by the Head Office”. 
 
2.13 The Committee were informed by the Mi nistry that the  then CVO of  NICL, 
Shri P.Bandhyopadhyay had investigated a nd submitted reports on the issue.  
The Committee decided to examine the CVO(now retired)  When the Committee 
enquired whether the Kalyan Divisional Office was within its powers to issue the 
SCP, the then Chief Vigilance Officer of NICL (now retired), Shri. P. 
Bandyopadhyay, who had investigated the matter, stated the following during 
oral-evidence:- 
 
“Now, there are two policies here.  One is handset policy and the second 
is the default liability policy.  These policies are called special contingency 
policies.  Special contingency policy means that this is not a standard 
policy of the company.  This special contingency policy is a customized 
policy according to the need of the in surer, special contingency policy is 
issued and the pricing is  also done after diligenc e study on the basis on 
the evaluation and also should be done on the basis of indemnity.  It found 
that the handset policy was there w here the sum assured was Rs. 12,000 
and it contained a lot of other things li ke fire, RSMD, that is, riot, strike, 
damage, STFI, that is, storm, t ycoon, flood, earthquake, burglary, 
electrical and electronic damage, t heft, accidents and mechanical 
background.  The coverage is so wide because the word accident has got 
many connotations.  An MOU was signed on December 2002.  The crux of 
the problem is this actually.  Whether a Regional Office or Divisional Office 
can underwrite such business.  If Rs. 12, 000 is the sum assured, then it is 
within the limit of the Divis ional Office .  But if you sell ‘n’ number of sets, 
then the sum assured is Rs. 12,000 multip lied by ‘n’.  As a result of that, 
with a lot of endorsement s, the entire risk cove red under the handset 
policy went upto Rs. 3849 cr ore.  …………………………… The second 
point is, this is the new type of a plan.  What type of  pricing to be 
followed?  There was a circular bec ause of electronic gadgets, etc, 
insurance premium should be at least 1 to 1.5 per cent.    But people who 
actually underwritten it  had charged only .25 per c ent.  It means, in their 
wisdom, they found that the risk is one-fourth of the other electronic 
goods.” 
 

 8 
 
Elucidating further on the issue, he stated as under:- 
 
“They wanted to take the permission of the Head Office.   If I remember 
correctly, on 12th June, 2002, a letter was wri tten by the then AGM of the 
Mumbai Regional Office to the Head Office seeking permission.  In that 
letter, the words theft and burglar y were not used and the MoU was 
signed, meaning thereby that they did not wait for the Head Office 
approval or it may well happen that subsequent letter dated 12 th June, 
2002, which was in the file, was subsequ ently inserted.  Anyway that is a 
different question.  It is a matter of conj ecture.  My opinion is this that it 
was not within the financial powers of the Regional Office to underwrite it.  
The Head Office gave a reply that the Probable Maximum Loss (PML) is 
within your power……”
 
 
Elaborating further on the default liability policy, he added 
 
“…….. I found that the default liability policy is a highly risky business.  
Here, the maximum sum assured per loss is Rs. 11,000.   Firstly, default 
liability policy, in my opinion, is not an insurable risk.   Financial guarantee, 
goodwill etc. cannot be insu red and if the default liab ility is insured, then 
different type of customers were necessary.  When the customers are 
general public -- so many people, hundr eds and thousands of people, that 
type of default is simply uninsurable in  my opinion.  I have put it in my 
record, in my note before the then CM D, Shri H.S. Wadhwa, in the month 
of November, 2004.  In all my subs equent correspondences till I retired 
from the service, I consistently took the stand that this default liability is 
not insurable.    There were di fferences of opinion, sometimes in 
discussions.   However, I was not convinced and I consistently took the 
stand that the default is uni nsurable.  This is t he underwriting mistake.  
Ultimately, what the total risk cover comes to is Rs. 9,000 crore.”   
 
 
2.14. The Committee also decided to have  the views of the CMD who took over 
from Shri. H.S. Wadhwa, namely, Shri. B. Chakrabor ti who was CMD from Jan 
2005 to Nov 2005. When asked by the Comm ittee to make his observation about 
the issue of SCP by NICL,  Shri Charkaborti stated as under:- 
 
 
“If my memory goes right – because I am not there for the last over one 
year – I would not like to quote the figures absolutely but the facts are 
known to me.  I think, I have written to IRDA and to the others that the 
underwriting, perhaps, was not proper; it could ha ve been done better.  
Certain precautions, certain terms and conditions, pricing, checking up 
with the RI arrangements – these are all prerequisites – could have been 
done better.  Maybe at the time of settlement of claims, certain steps could 
have been taken to try and see minimizing the losses.  I was also told after 

 9 
 
joining there that there was some bus iness decision that they never had 
much business from that concerned group.  So, as a commercial decision, 
perhaps, they could get an entry into the account and could perhaps look 
for some more business from that group, could have been a decision as 
well.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to  talk freely.  My priorities were 
different at that particular point of time.  Since you are the owners here, I 
must share my views.  Underwriting is not correct; it could have been done 
better.  But, when I joined there, so much of media reports, so much of 
talks, so much of informations were  coming out in various newspapers.  
As a matter of fact, for an organisa tion to which I had just joined, the 
credibility and image factor  were of immense importance for continuation 
of business.  So, that was my first criteria.” 
 
Elaborating further on the issue of Policy, he added:- 
 
“Oriental did it, National did it, and New India at that was not 
interested. That time I was working in the United India in Madras as 
a General Manager before my promot ion. There was a talk on that. 
But we have not shown much in terest because we have not 
understood the risk.  So, how can we  come to the conclusion that 
somebody has mooted it? I cannot say like th at because if that had 
been the case all the fo ur companies would not have been involved. 
GIC came into the picture as a re -insurer.  If my memory goes right, 
they also took a 20 per cent obligatory insurance. So, I cannot 
logically come to that conclusion . How come Orient al has done it? 
How come the proposal came to New India to  my predecessor who 
was not interested for whatever re ason. In the United India it was 
being discussed and then we thought it was too risky.” 
 
2.15 .When asked whether such an under writing decision could have been 
taken by a local office without the approval of the Head Office, the                   
Shri. B. Chakraborti replied: 
 
“The Head Office ought to know about it.”   
 
On further questioning about the issue, Shri. B. Chakraborti added: 
 
“My reaction again is the same thing.  First of all,  in such situations some 
senior executive writing a letter saying t hat it is within your  authority is the 
number one issue.  As a CMD, I ought  to know such a big business.  
Exactly how much one person knows or does not know or whether right or 
wrong, I cannot comment.  But as a CMD, I am supposed to know and I 
ought to know.” 
 

 10 
 
B. REINSURANCE PROTECTION 
 
2.16. Audit in their observations under Para 10.5.2 regarding Reinsurance 
Protection have made the following comments. 
 
“The Company every year draws up its reinsurance programme for 
various classes of risks in order to fix retention limit of risks commensurate 
with its financial strength. Insur ance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) guidelines also sti pulate that the maximum loss retention 
should not exceed five per cent of the networth of the Company. However, 
the D O did not make any reference to Re-insurance Department for 
taking reinsurance cover. In the absenc e of this, the risk retention limit 
could not be calculated. The sum in sured as on 31 October 2004 was 
Rs.3850 crore (and would increase furt her as validity of the policy was 
upto 17 December 2005). Thus, there was no reinsurance to protect the 
Company’s risk except 20 per cent ob ligatory share of risk accepted by 
the General Insurance Corporation ( GIC). The GIC allowed 25 per cent 
commission on premium received on account of obligatory reinsurance.  
As already mentioned, as per I RDA guidelines and the Company’s 
reinsurance programme, the Company, before undertaking any cover, 
must obtain reinsurance support. However, the Kalyan D.O. in the instant 
case of ‘Default cover policy’ also did not take any reinsurance protection 
before issue of the policy, even though the aggregate sum insured was 
Rs.5,500 crore.” 
 
2.17 From a note furnished by NICL by the Committee, it is noted that 
reinsurance department at H.O. wa s not approached by Kalyan D.O. for 
obtaining reinsurance support.  Giving th e reasons for not taking reinsurance 
support, NICL in their note st ated that the risk was looked  at exposure of value 
per handset which was 11 000 /Rs.24000 only.  T he total risk cover under 
handset policy and default liability policy are Rs. 4931 crores and Rs. 4981 
crores respectively. 
 
2.18. The Committee enqui red how the Reinsuranc e requirement of the 
Company are assessed, to which NICL in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The Reinsurance programme of t he company is advised to all the 
underwriting offices.  The procedure to be followed in the event of any 
such exposure being beyond the retenti on limits of the co mpany is also 
informed therein.  The underwriting offi ces provide the requisite details in 
the periodical returns submitted to Head Office in accordance with the 
reporting procedures laid down in the programme.” 
 

 11 
 
2.19 When asked why was reinsurance not taken keeping in view the impact of 
the collective sum insured of numerous Handsets Covered under the Policy.  
NICL in their written reply stated the following: 
 
“The risk was looked at from the ex posure of value per Handset which 
was Rs.11000/Rs.24000 only. In policies such as Group personal accident 
insurance requirement for arranging reinsurance is decided based on the 
highest sum insured for any insured person. A similar view was taken in 
this case and therefore Reinsura nce Department was not approached for 
obtaining Reinsurance support.” 
 
2.20.  The Committee pointed out that fi nancial interest of the organisation had 
been put in jeopardy as D.O. had not in formed the H.O. about requirement of 
reinsurance, and asked as to what mechanism existed in the H.O. to check such 
cases. The NICL in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The company’s Reinsurance arr angements in respect of Standard 
policies provide against such eventualities.  As the authority to issue SCPs 
is centralized at Head Office, decis ions regarding requirements of 
Reinsurance support is taken at Head Office.” 
 
2.21. The Committee were informed that GIC provides obligatory reinsurance 
cover up to 20% in respect of all t he business underwritten by PSUs Insurance 
Companies. 
 
2.22. The Committee noted that in view of the fact that larg e number of mobile 
sets were to be insured the collective liability for NIC w ould be in hundreds of 
crores.  The Committee therefore sought to know was it not financially prudent to 
seek reinsurance so as to obviate colossal losses incurred to the company.  To 
this, the Committee were informed as under by NICL. 
 
“All Reinsurance contracts have a deducti ble, i.e. they shall cover losses 
only above a particular amount/level of each and every loss.  In the case 
of covers granted to Reliance Industr ies although the total insured value 
were a huge amount running into hundreds of  crores, the limit of liability in 
respect of each connection under both the policies were so low that no 
Reinsurance covers would have been available.” 
 
C. CANCELLATION CLAUSE IN THE SCP’S 
 
2.23. Audit have made the following observations in Para No. 10.5.6 regarding 
Non-invoking of cancellation clause by NICL. 
“As per clause eight of the MOU entered into between NIC and RIL for the 
Handsets all risk policy, there was a prov ision for cancellation of policy by 
giving seven days notice to the in sured. Despite the number of 
deficiencies in the implementation of the terms and conditions of the MOU, 

 12 
 
NIC did not invoke the cancellation clause. The reasons to justify the non-
invoking of the cancellation clause were  not available in the records made 
available to Audit.” 
 
2.24 The Committee enquired as to why NIC did not invoke the Cancellation 
Clause as provided for in the MOU even a fter getting adverse claims ratio and  
whether any action was taken against anybody in this regard.  In reply the NICL 
stated the following: 
 
“Ninety percent of the to tal premium was already received in the first year 
itself by which time the full impact of  claims were not known.  Hence, the 
cancellation clause was not invoked and no action was taken against any 
employee.” 
 
2.25. The Committee note that the clauses  such as cancellation of policy, 
periodic review of the prem ium, excess loading etc. were in the MOU. These 
were however not included in the def ault liability policy. The Committee, 
therefore, asked as to why the cove r was extended beyond the scope of the 
MOU, NICL stated the following in their reply. 
 
 “RIL wanted to protect against the eventuality of their post paid 
subscribers defaulting in payment of service charges they wanted to guard 
against their receivables not being protected by insurance.  Hence, 
cancellation clause was not incorpor ated in the policy as per the request 
of the insured. The policy was envisaged for a three year period to 
coincide with the period the subscri ber was to hold the connection with 
RIL and there was no scope to amend t he pricing during the contract 
period.  Normally such loadings bas ed on claims experience are effected 
at the time of next renew al of the contract. Initially, the cover was sought 
for a sum insured of Rs. 11000.  Subs equently with the introduction of the 
higher value handsets of RI L wanted those sets also to be covered.  
Hence, the policy was extended to cover such sets also.” 
 
2.26. From the Audit report, the Commi ttee note that in the MOU for handset 
policy signed in December  2002 between NIC and RI L there was a clause for 
cancellation of policy by giving seven days notice in writing by either side 
whereas In the MOU dated 25 June 2003, for default liability policy, the option to 
cancel the policy was not available. Asked as to why this clause was not included 
in Default Liability Policy, NICL stated as under: 
 
“Since the cover was in respect of defau lt by the subscriber to pay service 
charges, RIL wanted no cancellation clause to be incorporated.” 
 
 
 

 13 
 
D. SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS BY NICL 
2.27 Audit in Para 10.6.3( d) observed the following with regard to the default 
liability policy issued to RIL:  
 “……….NIC received claims for Rs. 152.34 crore against the premium of 
Rs.55.71 crore upto Oc tober 2004. The Company settled claims for 
Rs.120.60 crore and the balance claims  for Rs.31.74 crore were pending. 
Though the currency of policy was thre e years, the liability of the 
Company would extend beyond the st ipulated period as each policy 
endorsement carried coverage period of  three years from the date of 
issue. As such the Com pany would be liable for any future default/claims 
upto June 2009. On the basis of paid/outstanding claims after taking into 
account premium ceded and commission received on account of 
reinsurance the Company had suffer ed a loss of Rs.96.63 crore (NIC 
Rs.74.51 crore and GIC Rs.22.12 crore) upto October 2004.  
 
2.28 STATEMENT SHOWING DETAILS OF PREMIUM RECEIVED AND 
POSITION OF CLAIMS IN RESP ECT OF POLICIES ISSUED TO 
RELIANCE INDUSTRIES LIMITED ARE AS UNDER 
 
1) Default Policy     
 
Year Premium received Claims received Claims settled Claim outstanding
2003-
04 
Rs.41,39,81,481 Rs.152,33,46,334 Rs 70,18,000 Rs.151,63,28,334 
2004-
05 
Rs.  1,15,74,074 NIL Rs.119,89,28,334 Rs. 31,74,00,000 
2005-
06 
NIL NIL NIL Rs.  31.74,00,000 
 
 
2) Hand Set Policy  
 
        
Year 
Premium received Claims received Claims settled Claim outstanding
2002-
03 
Rs.2,99,25,000 Rs.14,63,473 Rs.10,87,271 Rs.3,76,202 
2003-
04 
Rs.24,06,00,694 Rs.39,25,19,939 Rs.24,51,71,340 Rs.14,77,24,801 
2004-
05 
Rs.32,32,769 Rs.53,72,02,689 Rs.5,68,38,490 Rs.62,80,89,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14 
 
Tata Tele Services Ltd. 
 
1) Default Policy 
         
Year Premium 
received 
Claims received Claims settled Claim outstanding
2004-05 Rs.4,19,35,900 Rs.12,75,64,779 Rs.46,02,539 Rs.12,29,62,240 
2005-06 Rs.4,31,93,264 Rs.60,48,46,078 Rs.4,25,89,316 Rs.66,52,19,002 
 
2.29. The Committee asked NICL as to what safeguards were  there with them 
to detect lodging of false claims.  NICL in a written reply stated as under:- 
 
“Both the Handset and Default cover had laid down the pr ocedure to be 
followed and the documentation required to establish a claim.” 
 
2.30. The Committee enquired NICL whether claims were settled without proper 
scrutiny.  The present Chairman NICL du ring oral evidence inter-alia stated the 
following: 
 
“I do not know whether I can comment on it or not.   But in the claim 
settlement, some lapses have been noticed. I am sorry.  I do not know 
whether there was a deliber ate attempt or not.  Bu t I concede that claims 
were prepared without verification of the document.” 
 
2.31  The Committee wanted to know whet her cases of settlement of false 
claims came to the notice of NIC.  If so, what action was taken by NICL to 
recover amount of such Claims.  To this, 
.  NICL in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
 
 “No false claim under the Handset Policy have come to our notice. As 
regards Default insurance cover investigation have brought to light the fact 
of subscribers not being in existence or  address being fictitious.  We had 
raised a demand on RIL to repay an amount of Rs.6,97,84,000 on account 
of such connections, claims in res pect of which had been settled.  RIL 
have not accepted our contention and not repaid any amount.” 
 
2.32. The CVO note to the Ministry of Finance in Sept 2005, a copy of which 
was furnished to this Committee, makes the following observations regarding the 
claims management system adopted by the NICL. 
 
“If the underwriting  was bad, the clai m management was still worse.  The 
claim for handset and def ault liability were paid making bunch of 50 and 
40 claims respectively.  No verification was done regarding the 
genuineness of the most of the claims.  The claim form does not contain 
the signature of the user or the details viz. the date on which the 
connection was provided.  The cl aim forms were not supported with 
documentary proof like disco nnection certificate, c opy of the unpaid bill, 

 15 
 
copy of the notices, details of the SMS message sent.  The disconnection 
certificate does not show  the name and address of  the customer and any 
intimation of default.  For loss or the ft claims neither FIR nor final police 
report was collected before settlement of  the claim.  Ignoring, the basic 
requirements for settlement of claim, discharge voucher to the tune of Rs. 
75.21 crores were given to Reliance I ndustries Ltd. thereby creating a 
pressure on Head Office to release the fund. 
 
 After incurring huge loss, a decis ion was taken to investigate the 
genuineness of the claims.  The Orient al Insurance Company Ltd.  has 
issued similar type of policy.  But r eportedly out of 61,193 claims as many 
as 29,334 claims were repudiated on investigation.  But the National 
Insurance Co. Ltd. did not carry out investigation till payment to the tune of 
Rs. 123 crores was made to Reliance.  On the contrary the concerned 
Assistant Manager was advised not to insist on documents in each case 
on the plea that all records are av ailable with Reli ance.  Now two 
investigators based at Ahmedabad and Mumbai were appointed to 
investigate 20,000 pending case s at fees ranging fr om Rs. 300/- to Rs. 
700/- per case.  The selection of the Investigation Report was very poor.  
They have not collected any paper to  show that they carried out any 
investigation into the matter.  Taking advantage of this deficiency the 
Insured in their letter dated 10.1.2005 has contested the Company’s claim 
for refund.” 
 
2.33. To a query as how the CVO menti oned in his report that the Asst Manager 
was advised not to insist on documents fo r settlement of claims, and whether he 
believed that the Asst Manager was co llaborating with some people in Head 
Office., the then CVO Shri P. Bandyo padhyay who was called to tender his 
evidence before the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“This inference is very logical”. 
 
2.34 . When asked by the Committee  to  brief about the investigations carried 
out  by the CVO, the then CVO during oral evidence replied as under:  
 
“It is regarding claims. The first inve stigation dealt with underwriting. The 
second investigation dealt with claims . There were a number of cases. 
Naturally, my team took some time. They had to work very hard to come 
to the conclusion. They should know who were the customers, what efforts 
were made by the company to realise the bill etc.  Even for the sake or 
argument, I am telling that there was nothing wrong in underwriting. But at 
the time of claims settlement, all the claims are not payable. Some sort of 
a searching, some sort of a filtra tion, screening should be done. Every 
insurer in the world does it. The second investigation was there to arrive at 
the measures being adopted while settling the claims.” 
 

 16 
 
2.35. When probed by the Committee as to whether the laxity in underwriting 
and settlement of claims was an error or a deliberate attempt by a few officials, 
the CVO (retd)  stated the following: 
 
“: It is very difficult to say.  But the inference of having pre-knowledge or 
prior knowledge - if not encouraging,  remaining passive and allowing 
things to drift away - is there. One is capable of drawing that inference.” 
 
2.36. When the Committee questioned NICL  as to why no investigation by 
Surveyors was conducted before settling th e claims, and whether they admit that 
if proper procedure had been adopted, the amount settled could have been much 
less.  To this NICL in a written reply stated as under:- 
 
   “Given the quantum and number of claims it would have been 
inconvenient to have each and every claim surveyed.  The Insurance   Act 
also does not require losses below Rs.20,000 to be surveyed.  Even had 
surveys been conducted, with the att endant costs, we are of the opinion 
that no tangible reduction in losses would have been achieved.” 
 
2.37 When the Committee enquired as to whom should be held responsible for 
complaints arising out of claims settlem ent, the present Chairman NICL, Shri. V. 
Ramasaamy interalia stated the following: 
 
“When a complaint comes, CMD has to interfere for any delay in 
settlement, CMD is responsible”. 
 
2.38 As the claims to tune of Rs. 31.74 crore under De fault Liability Policy, Rs. 
62.8 crore under handset policy and Rs. 66.52 crore under Default Policy to Tata 
tele service were yet to be settled, Co mmittee desired to know as to how NICL 
proposed to settle the outstanding claims.  The NICL in their written replies 
stated the following:- 
 
 “Following the CBI investigations into the matter pertaining to   Reliance 
Industries the settlement of claims  had almost ceased. The Company’s 
Board has directed that a panel of  investigators be formed through a 
tender process and thereafter have the claims investigated to establish the 
veracity of the claims as well as exis tence of the subscribers.   A decision 
regarding settlement of the claims  shall be taken subsequently upon 
receipt of reports.” 

 17 
 
E.  ALTERNATE RISK TRANSFER (ART) 
 
2.39. Audit in their Report under Para 10.9 have stat ed the following regarding 
Alternate Risk Transfer: 
 
“The Alternate Risk Transfer (ART) cover is generally taken where 
substantial losses are appr ehended. The main object of ART cover is risk 
financing and not risk-sharing. The def ault cover policies were given to 
RIL without any reinsurance protection.  After steady flow of claims, the 
Company searched for reinsurance pr otection but could not arrange any 
conventional reinsurance. Ultimately,  through broker, it could obtain non-
conventional risk financing under ART protection from foreign reinsurer. 
Under the ART cover, insurer (NIC) would require to pay back the entire 
amount received from reinsurer to settle claims within two to three years to 
smoothen the effect on balance sheet.” 
 
2.40 Committee were informed that the Reinsurance arrangement (ART Cover) 
was arranged through K M Dastur Reinsu rance Brokers Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai and 
Alexander Forbes Risk Services UK Ltd. London with Imagine Insurance Company 
Ltd. Barbados. 
 
2.41 When the Committee wanted to know  what was the purpose of ART and 
when it is resorted to by Insurance Compan ies, the NICL in their written replies 
have stated the following 
 
“The ART cover being a Non-traditional Reinsurance facility had been 
adopted for the first time in the Com pany.  This type of arrangement is 
resorted to when the exposu re per risk, event, locati on or person is small 
but the number of such exposures are large.  In  such cases traditional 
Reinsurance covers are not available and ART is resorted to, to guard 
against aggregate annual losses beyond a selected level.” 
 
2.42 The Committee asked NIC to explain t he reason for resorting to ART. In  a 
written reply NIC stated as under:- 
 
“As suitable R/I cover was not availa ble from the traditional market, ART 
cover was arranged and finalized.  Tho ugh National was confident of its 
underwriting procedures on the direct side it was not possible to anticipate 
the intensity and frequency of unprecedent ed claims which by nature are 
fortuitous in nature.  Even in policies where utmost under writing prudence 
is exercised on the direct side, reinsurance is arranged to mitigate losses.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 18 
 
2.43 When asked by the Committee to furn ish their comments on the fact that 
ART is only a risk-financing measure to smoothen the balance sheet and not a 
risk-sharing mechanism, NICL stated the following in their written reply:- 
 
“In the ART cover if there is losses reported, reinsurers give recovery 
credit in the first year, which is then repaid over a period as agreed.  This 
gives the reinsured the benefit of sp reading the loss over a period thereby 
smoothening and protecting the balance s heet from sudden surge in loss 
figures.” 
 
2.44. To a query by the Committee as to whether the issue regarding Alternate 
Risk Transfer (ART) was discussed in the B oard of Director’s meeting or in any 
other Committee of National Insurance Com pany Limited (NICL).  NICL stated as 
under :-  
 
“The ART cover was approved by the Board at its 284 th Board Meeting on 
12.06.2004.”                                                      
 
2.45 Asked further by the Committee as  to what benefits NICL obtained by 
resorting to ART, NICL in their note stated: 
 
“No benefits were obtained by the Company by obtaining the ART cover.” 
 
F. ROLE OF FORMER CMD 
 
2.46 In view of the fact that SCP was issued and cl aims were settled without 
proper scrutiny, the Committ ee desired to know as to whether the then CMD of 
NICL was aware of the happenings in the Company. The Committee found that 
CVO had commented about the role  of CMD, NICL in his report to Ministry of 
Finance as under: 
 
“While examining the role of Head Office Officials we find from the file that 
Shri. H. S. Wadhwa, the t hen CMD, in his letter of 10 th July 2003 thanked 
Reliance Chairman for patronizing NICL for default insurance and assured 
Reliance of prompt settlem ent of claim.  This shows that he was aware of 
the business.  As a CMD he should have foreseen the potent loss in 
underwriting such business.  From the correspondences exchanged 
between Reliance and CMD it was clear  that he had promised them to 
make payment of claims to the extent of Rs. 72 crores in three 
instalments.” 
 
2.47 Elaborating further on the role of the then CMD before the Committee, the 
then CVO during his oral evidence stated as under: 
 
“I have all along been maintaining that the Head Office has failed in its role 
of mentoring and coaching. The Head Office was aware that such 

 19 
 
business is going to be under-written.  Head Office was aware that huge 
claims are coming.  Then, who will ta ke the steps?  They will come from 
the leader. The steps were not taken.  When I am saying that there was a 
lacuna in claims management, when t he claims are coming, already the 
lacuna in the underwriting is known to  them. Then, what should be the 
natural reaction of the response management?  It would have been to plug 
the loopholes in claims management. That was not done.”   
 
2.48 When the Committee sought to know whether the then CMD, Shri H. S. 
Wadhwa should be held responsible along with the other for the loss incurred by 
NICL, Shri. B. Chakraborti who took over charge as CMD from Shri HJ.S. 
Wadhwa: 
 
“As a CMD now and as the CMD earlier, whatever happens in some 
place, I am also held responsible.  I cannot deny my responsibility.” 
 
2.49 When the Committee enquired as to whether the Ministry of Finance 
sought any explanation from t he then CMD on this issue, the Ministry of Finance 
in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The Ministry had sought the explan ation of the then CMD, NIC on 
receiving a complaint from the office of the CVC and sent the explanation 
as such to the CVC for further action.” 
 
 
 
 

 20 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
A. ISSUE OF POLICY 
 
3.1 C&AG in their Report No. 4 of 2005 have discus sed the special 
contingency policy issued by Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. to RIL in Para 
10.8. 
The highlights of the Para are as follows: 
 
 “In the default policy issued by OIC in August 2003 to RIL for handsets the 
insured reported 61193 claims for Rs .63.53 crore. The Company had so 
far settled 18706 claims for Rs.19.64 crore and balance claims involving 
estimated outgo of Rs.13. 81 crore, after taking into consideration 
repudiated claims, were pending.” 
 
 
3.2 STATEMENT REGARDING THE NUM BER OF HANDSETS INSURED 
UNDER DEFAULT LIABILITY IN SURANCE POLICY AND PREMIUM 
COLLECTED YEAR-WISE;- 
 
Year 
 
Premium collected (Rs. 
in Crore) 
No. of handsets 
insured* 
2003-04 16.20 1,6,66,938 
2004-05 00.83 83,647 
2005-06 00.00 00 
TOTAL 17.03 17,50,585 
 
3.3 When asked about the guidelines that  were prevailing in OIC when this 
default policy was issued by  Mumbai Regional Office, OICL stated the following 
in their written reply: 
 
“There were no guidelines prevailing for above Special Contingency Policy 
(Default Liability Cover).  This was the first Default Policy of this nature 
which was issued by us.” 
 
3.4 Asked by the Committee as to whet her the approval of Head Office was 
necessary for issuance of he SCP Policy, the OICL in its written reply stated the 
following: 
 
 “The above policy was underwritten by Divisional Office 18 Mumbai which 
was dealing with other insurance business of Reliance Group of 
Industries.  The policy was discu ssed between Head Office, Delhi and 

 21 
 
Mumbai Office at several occasions and it was issued  with due diligence 
and with the consent of the Head Office.”  
 
3.5. The Committee were informed that the proposal for issuance of such a 
policy was mooted by the insured i.e. Re liance Industries Limited.  When the 
Committee sought to know whether OIC has brought any polic y subsequent to 
issuing of Default Liability Policy for insuring mobile handsets for individual, the 
OIC replied in negative. 
 
3.6 When the Committee desired to know whether the Head Office assessed 
the risk of the Policy being issued and su ggested any measures to mitigate the 
risk, the OICL in their written reply stated the following: 
  
“Mumbai Office vide their letter dat ed 16.07.2003 sought the guidance of 
Head Office for this policy.  Head Offi ce vide their letter dated 9-8-2003 
referring various documents received from  Mumbai Office advised various 
suggestions which are summarised as under :-  
a) No exclusive arrangement  to be signed with Reliance. 
b) Policy to be kept confidential. 
a) Promotional offers by  Reliance to be excluded. 
b) Basis of loss assessment and claim procedure to be added. 
c) Default due to dispute or death of subscriber to be excluded.  
d) Follow cancellation clause as per standard policy clause. 
e) Claim procedure to be spelt out. 
   
The points suggested by Head Office  were discussed wit h the clients and 
they did not agree.  Thei r contention was that the Oriental’s policy should 
be on the similar lines that of po licy issued by National Insurance 
Company in June 2003. However, ‘O riental’ succeeded in prevailing upon 
the client for two changes in our policy vis.a.vis National Insurance Policy. 
 
 (i)  Policy Excess 
(ii) Modified Cancellation Clause.” 
 
3.7 When asked by the Committee to gi ve details about the risk assessment 
and the internal projections regarding the default liability policy issued by OICL, 
the Company gave the following in their written reply: 
 
 “We confirm that this was the first time such a policy was being issued and 
hence we did not have previous exper ience in such risks.  The risk 
assessment of the default liability poli cy was perceived to be spread over 
entire length and breadth of  the country and possibilit y of large number of 
subscribers defaulting on payment simu ltaneously at any given time was 
less.  As per market information, t he expectation on default rate was 2%.  
As per actual statistics 61193 claims  were lodged out of 17.51 lacs 
connections actually insured.  This amounting to 3.5% of subscribers 

 22 
 
insured.  It  can be noticed that ac tual results have not gone much out of 
the market information. 
 
 Also we had taken into account the then premium in come and potential 
from the customer, most of which were highly profitable, in fact much more 
profitable than the loss incurred under this policy.” 
 
3.8 When asked whether OICL Head Office agreed with the R.O. even after 
its conditions were not accepted, the OICL in their written reply stated the 
following: 
 
“The suggestions of Head Office were not incorporated due to non 
acceptance by the insured.  After ta king oral consent of the Head Office, 
the policy was issued covering t he connections to be issued from 15
th 
August 2003.”   
 
3.9  When asked by the Committee whether  oral consent is an accepted form 
of approval, the Chairman, OICL, during the oral evidence stated the following: 
 
“There was a communication from t he Mumbai R.O. to the Head Office 
saying that this is what we hav e done and the Head Office did not come 
back asking us to cancel it. So it was an indirect approval.” 
 
 On further probing by the Committee on this issue, t he CMD, Oriental 
Insurance Company during the oral evidence stated: 
         
“Even today Head Office owns it………. The H.O. has never taken a stand 
that it was issued without their approval.” 
 
3.10 When asked to justify the issuance of Default Liability Policy by the 
Committee, OICL in their reply stated as under:  
 
“We may say that though the above De fault Liability Policy issued to 
Reliance Infocom, the Company earned a premium of Rs. 17 crores and 
settled claims of Rs.28 crores thereby incurring a loss of Rs.11 crores, this 
enabled the Company to get a Fire and Engineering premium to the tune 
of Rs.75 crores in the year 2003-04. Therefore, the pricing and conditions 
of the above policy was a commercial decision mainly to get a better share 
of other profitable lines  of business from Reliance Group.  Also we 
successfully negotiated with the client to  agree for a Deductible Excess of 
Rs.500 for ordinary handset and Rs .1000 for premium handset for each 
and every claim and modifi ed Cancellation Clause. In claim processing 
also, we observed due diligence and got investigation done through 
outside independent agency about identity and residence of the defaulting 
subscriber. This due diligence in claim processing helped the company in 
reducing the claim outgo of Rs.38.56 crores. 

 23 
 
It may be pointed out that even today due to severe competition in the 
market, all the Companies including pr ivate sector companies are forced 
to price detariffed policies in a very  competitive way with a view to get 
other profitable lines of business like Fire and Engineering which are 
tariffed as on date.  Ther efore, the Companies are looking at a profitability 
of the account as a whole instead of profitability of every policy.  This is 
how the market dynamics are changed and as a commercial organization, 
we are also forced to price our detariffed products in tune with the market, 
taking into account the overall profit ability of the client rather than 
profitability of every policy.  We are forced to write some unprofitable lines 
of business knowingly mainly to get ot her profitable lines of business from 
the client.  This is the basic reason for writing the above risk at a very 
competitive rate.” 
 
3.11 The Committee wanted to know whet her cross-subsidis ation of policies 
are not in violation under GIPSA/IRDA guidelines and asked OICL to justify them.  
OICL stated as under in a written reply: 
 
“There is no GIPSA guideline on such issues.  As for IRDA is concerned, 
wherever tariffed rates are to be follo wed, IRDA through its arm of Tariff 
Advisory Committee (TAC) ensures that all insurers follow tariff guidelines.  
Special Contingency is a non-tariff portfolio and therefore there is no IRDA 
rule as well.  This is indeed a cro ss-product subsidization.  Like any 
prudent businessman, who would like to sell a product at a small loss in 
exchange for a bigger profit able business, we have also accepted the risk 
although at a small loss.  The final st atistics comparing the premium and 
loss proves that our decision was just ified and Oriental only gained from 
the customer contact.  Even the gui delines issued by IRDA for framing 
Underwriting policy to be adopted by each insurance Company in the face 
of detariffing with effect from 1.1.2007., provides that “each Company has 
to decide whether they look into the pr ofitability of each policy or for each 
client while underwriting and  quoting premium”.  Hence it is not prohibited 
and rightly so.  Only consideration shall be that the Company’s Solvency 
Margin should not be adversely impacted.” 
 
3.12 The Committee enquired whether t he SCP ought to be treated as an 
Aggregate Risk from the poin t of Reinsurance protection as 50 lac connections 
were to be covered under t he default liability policy.  To this OICL in their Post-
evidence written replies gave the following comments: 
 
“We have not treated the Special C ontingency Policy as aggregate risk 
from reinsurance point of view and considered each connection as an 
independent risk, therefor e, there was no need for arranging reinsurance 
as it was falling within Company’s retention and accordingly no 
reinsurance was arranged. 
The default liability insurance policy issued covers the liability of Rs. 
11,000/- for ordinary handsets and Rs . 24,000/- for premium handsets.  

 24 
 
The 50 lac connections covered under the policy were spread over entire 
length and breadth  of the country and were to  be issued during the 
currency of the policy.  In the year 2003-04, we insured 16.66 lacs 
connections and in the year 2004- 05, and 0.83 lacs connections and no 
connection were insured in the year 2005-06.  The occurrence of any 
subscriber defaulting for payment would happen at different time and 
place and there was little possibility of large number of subscribers 
resulting into default simu ltaneously at one time.  Each default is treated 
as an independent event and claim.  In view of this probability, there was 
no need to take reinsurance protection.   The ART offered to us was also 
not found suitable because it was only a method of financing payment of 
claims without any real reinsuranc e protection and any such arrangement 
would involve further outgo.” 
 
B. SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS 
 
3.13 Audit under Para 10.8 in its R eport have observed the following: 
“The business results available upto December 2004 indi cated that the 
Company could get premium of Rs.17.02 crore (excluding service tax). 
The insured reported 61193 claims of  the total handsets for Rs.63.53 
crore covered under the default cases upto November 2004. Out of 61193 
claims reported, verification of 53670 claims was carried out by the 
investigator appointed by the Company upto February 2005 by incurring 
an expenditure of Rs.3.76 crore. Base d on verification report of the 53670 
claims given by investigator, the Company repudiated 29,334 claims for 
Rs.30.08 crore on the gr ounds of (i) non-existence of addresses (3278 
claims) (ii) non-existence of persons at the given address (16289 claims), 
(iii) persons not subscribed to Relianc e Mobile (5438 claims), (iv) persons 
moved away from the given address (3345 claims) and (v) continuance of 
mobile service even after default ( 984 claims) and settled 18706 claims of 
Rs.19.64 crore in aggregate. The balance 13,153 claims of Rs.13.81 crore 
were outstanding for want of further verification.” 

 25 
 
 
3.14 STATEMENT FURNISHED BY  OIC TO THE COMMITTEE ON 
POSITION OF CLAIMS SETTLED A ND OUTSTANDING CLAIMS TILL DATE, 
IN RESPECT OF DEFAULT LIABILITY POLICY TO RIL IS AS UNDER:  
(Rs. in Crores) 
No. of claims 
received 
Claims Settled Outstanding 
claims 
Remarks  
Year 
No. of 
hand- 
sets 
Amount No. of 
hand- 
sets 
Amt No. of 
hand- 
sets 
Amt 
2003-04 49280 51.74 22 0.0231 49258 51.72
2004-05 11913 12.51 22037 23.055 5992 6.29
2005-06 00 00 2406 1.98 00 00
Total 61193 64.25 24465 25.058 NIL NIL
Besides claim payment 
of Rs. 25.058 crores 
expenses on 
investigation fee was 
Rs.2.072 Crs. So total 
comes to Rs.28.13 
Crores. No. of Claims 
repudiated were 36728 
amounting to Rs.38.56 
crore. 
 
 
3.15 When the Committee wanted  to know as to whether any assessment with 
regard to claims that may arise was made.  In reply OICL stated: 
 
“As per the market information, it was expected number of default around 
2% of the total number of connections issued.  Since the number of 
subscribers were spread all over Indi a, therefore sudden occurrence of 
large number of claims was not c ontemplated due to vast geographical 
spread of subscribers.  Ho wever, it is pertinent to note that the claim 
amount including investi gation charges was Rs. 28.13 Crores against a 
premium of Rs.17.03 Crores resulting into an incurr ed claim ratio of 165% 
only.” 
 
3.16 When asked by the Committee as to how the policy was a good business 
proportion, the Chairman explained as below during the oral evidence: 
 
“At that time, the overall business consideration of the group was 
paramount. We were looking at about Rs.500-Rs.600 crore premium 
which the client may be giving to us . Our growth rate was very much less 
at that time. It was ultimately one per cent at that time. Commercial 
consideration was the main thing. Co ming to this policy as such, we 
covered per policy, a liability of Rs. 11,000, charging a premium of Rs.100 
per hand set. It works out to be something like one per cent. We had the 
market data, that a person not pay ing the bills, the risk was around two 
per cent. Even today, we checked up with Airtel and others; the default is 
around half a per cent or one per cent  only. Therefor e, charging a 
premium of one per cent was not bad. Everybody says that this is a new 
policy. We are taking risk. We are ta king the risk with a bigger premium in 

 26 
 
mind and the pricing was roughly with the market indulgence. Knowing full 
well that you cannot issue the mobile  set to any Tom, Dick and Harry, you 
have to verify every subscriber before giving that. With that consideration 
perhaps, it was thought that this is a viable proposition. But after one year, 
we were saddled with so many claims that naturally we got upset because 
how can we handle all these claims  which are all payable? Then, we 
undertook to examine each and every cl aim. So, the premise on which we 
took the risk assuming greater control on the subscriber installations, and 
later on, with the claims that were co ming, we felt that not much control 
was exercised. Therefore, we came very heavily on the claim settlement 
and rejected almost 60 per cent of the claims. That is why, we managed it 
and that is why, we could come out with less losses, I would say.” 
 
3.17. When asked by the Committee as to whether any action was taken 
against RIL for submission of false claims especially  when 36728 out of 53670 
claims were repudiated, the OICL informed the Committee in a written reply: 
 
“As per the practice, whenever any cl aim is found to be not payable under 
the terms and conditions of the policy,  the insurance company repudiates 
the claim by citing the reasons of repudi ation. But there is no practice to 
take action against the insured having filed the claim which was found to 
be not payable under the policy.”        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 27 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
 
4.1 When the Committee wanted to know how and when did the Ministry 
come to know about the issue of SCP to RIL by NICL, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated the following: 
 
“On 13 th August 2004, a complaint was received from the Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) agai nst the Chairman-cum-Managing 
Director of the National Insurance Company (NIC).  A report on the 
complaint was sought from him and the same was forwarded to the CVC 
in November 2004 for further appropria te action.  Another complaint 
already from an officer of NIC wa s received in September 2004 against 
the top executives of the Company in which reference to the issuance of a 
defective policy to Reliance India mob ile was made.  On this complaint, 
the CVO of the Company was asked to  enquire and submit report.  He 
sent his report in December 2004 stati ng that, prima-facie, some officers 
from NIC were involved in irregula r underwriting of business and issuance 
of defective insurance policy to M/ s Reliance Infocom.  The Insurance 
Division has directed the Company to initiate action against the concerned 
officers.  Thereafter, in Decem ber 2004, the Principal Director of 
Commercial Audit forwarded to this Mi nistry for comments a Mini review 
on the Special Contingency Policies on mobile handsets issued by the two 
companies before including this in t he Audit Report No. 4 of 2005.  The 
same was forwarded to the respective companies for comments.  
However, in March 2005 this draft audit Para was included and published 
in the Audit report of the C&AG (Chapter X).  In May 2005, while 
highlighting one of the recommendation viz,, “the matter needs to be 
investigated thoroughly  and appropriate Depart mental and legal action 
taken”, the concerned companies were requested to furnish their 
comments and Action Taken Notes.  Based on the comments received 
from the insurance companies, an AT R was sent to CAG in October 
2005.” 
 
4.2 When the Committee wanted to know  what action was taken by the 
Ministry on the observations of C&AG Audit regarding NIC and OIC about the 
issue of SCPs, and whether the Ministry have fixed any responsibility, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated the following” 
 
“The Ministry conveyed the observations of C&AG to NIC and OIC.  The 
companies themselves reviewed t heir underwriting policies and made 
amends to avoid recurrence of such an event in future.  Since the CVC 
was already seized with the matter, the Ministry provided whatever 

 28 
 
information was required by it to proper ly investigate and fix responsibility 
in the case.” 
 
4.3 When the Committee enquired as to  whether any investigation was 
undertaken in the matter by Vigilance / CB I or any other agencies, and if so, the 
present status, the Ministry of Finance stated the following in their written replies: 
 
“The vigilance department of the Company conducted detailed 
Departmental investigat ion and the Central Vi gilance Commission was 
kept informed of the case.  The matter is also under investigation by CBI.” 
 
4.4 When the Committee wanted to know whether the Ministry had at any time 
called the then CMD of NIC for discussion on this issue and sought explanation, 
the Ministry stated the following in a written reply: 
 
“The Ministry had sought the explan ation of the then CMD, NIC on 
receiving a complaint from the office of the CVC and sent the explanation 
as such to the CVC for further action.” 
 
4.5 In view of the fact that the then CVO of NIC had made certain 
observations against the then CMD in his report to Ministry of Finance, the 
Committee asked what was the reaction of  the Finance Ministry to the CVO’s 
observations about CMD’s role. Secretary (Fin. Sec) stated the following during 
the oral evidence:- 
 
“The report was sought from  us by the CVC.  We got the details from the 
company.  And since it has been sought  from the CVC, the action which 
the Government took is – we do not  have investigatin g agency – that we 
made everything available to t he CVC.  The CVC may have an 
investigation conducted th rough whatever channels th ey wanted to and if 
it is the Board level appointee, then the CVC will get in touch with the 
Government and if it is an appointee in the company, then the CVC will 
instruct the management of the company to take action against that 
particular appointee.” 
 
4.6 When the Committee asked for the views of the Ministry regarding non-
invoking of Cancellation clause by NIC, the Ministry stated the following: 
 
“The company should have invoked the cancellation clause to limit the 
losses under the handset policy.” 

 29 
 
 
4.7 Asked by the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry to obviate 
recurrence of such instances in future and also to safeguard the financial interest 
of the Company, the Secretary (Fin Sec) stated the following:- 
 
“As stated earlier, the public  sector insurance companies are Board run.  
The Board is supposed to decide the broad policies and strategies.  Other 
day-to-day decisions are taken by the management.  The management is 
also to seek the guidance of the Board, if required.  Any deviation from the 
policies/strategies, as decided by the Board, is to be br ought to the notice 
of the Board.  The Government, however , does not directly come into the 
picture so far as the procurement of business or the settlement of claims is 
concerned.” 
 
4.8 The Committee sought to know from the Ministry of Finance whether the 
nominee of the Ministry on t he Board of NICL communicat ed to the Ministry that 
such a serious matter had taken place. The Secretary, (Financial Sector), 
Ministry of Finance during his oral-evidence replied as under: 
 
“The Ministry has a nominee on the Board of the Insu rance Companies 
including the NICL.  He was present in the Board meeting and I have a 
copy of the agenda note which was pl aced in the Board. The agenda note 
on Board does not make any reference to the coverage of insurance of the 
mobile handsets or the default liability . It was only specific for alternate 
Risk Transfer Facility that the company  sought approval of  the Board. I 
have a copy of that and I will place that before the Committee. The issue 
was not that the Head Office or t he Board has given an approval to 
indemnify. The issue before the B oard was whether an additional or 
alternate Risk Transfer Facility can be created or not.” 
 
Elaborating further, he stated:- 
 
“Sir, ordinarily the issue of business or commercial interest which have 
large repercussion on the company  always come to the Board for 
discussion. They should be discussed. There is no doubt about that.” 
 
 4.9 When asked by the Committee about the opinion of the Ministry about 
issuance of this particular policy due to which NICL and OICL suffered losses, 
the Secretary replied the following: 
 
“Let me emphasise that commercial ent erprises whether it is a public 
sector or private sector are always on the look out for innovative methods 
by which they can increase their balance sheet size and their profits, etc.  
It is a question of when you are going to  try the innovative projects and 
trying to emphasise (1) risk calculation of a very mature kind and (2) trying 
to ensure that prudentially you are tota lly covered from all risk exposure.  

 30 
 
Oriental had handled a si milar case in one way and National had handled 
it in a different way.  It remains to be seen as to who has been more 
prudent in handling it.   Of  course, from the losses that have occurred or 
the claim settlements that have taken place for the same kind of policy, 
Oriental’s handling has turned out to be very mature than the National in 
this particular case.  Overall, we feel that probably some element of 
caution should have been exercised in undertaking a policy of this kind 
and also ensure that there is suffici ent amount of risk transfer while taking 
a policy.” 
 
4.10 When the Committee asked to explain why such a uni que and novel policy 
about which there were no global experience was not discussed in the Board, the 
Secretary (Fin Sec) during the oral evidence stated: 
 
“The Risk Transfer is a routine thing. The Board had to take a decision on 
a policy already taken earlier. The issue that came before the Board was 
of Risk Transfer Facility and that was the only document which was before 
the Director who was representing the Government. My only submission is 
that the part-time Directors on Pub lic Sector Compani es or banks or 
insurance companies suffer from a handicap and that is, the information 
that we go with on the B oard meeting is only that information which is 
placed before us. We do not have access to files, or the decision-making 
process. To the extent the information is revealed in the agenda note is all 
that we have. We can certainly, while sitting on the Board, ask for 
additional information in case we so r equire it and it is made available to 
us. That is all the information that  was made available to the Director 
also.” 
 
4.11 The Committee pointed out that when the Board was taking a wrong 
decision the Company incur losses. The Committee desire to know whether 
Government have any role to play in such  cases, for which the Secretary during 
oral-evidence replied the following: 
 
“We regularly review the performanc e of each of the public sector 
enterprise.  Each of t he company executes a Stat ement of Intent or an 
MoU with us.  In the MoU we give a large number of points which need to 
be covered in it.  We monitor the performance of the Company as per that 
Memorandum.  So far as the loss or gain in regard to a particular venture 
is concerned, Government does not gi ve any direction on the commercial 
operations.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 31 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS 
 
NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 1 
 
POWER TO ISSUE SPECIAL CONTINGENCY POLICY (SCP) 
 
The Committee note that NICL i ssued two policies under Special 
Contingency Policies (SCPs), namely, Handset all risks cover and Default 
liability policy to Reliance Industries Li mited. As per audit Default liability 
policy was also issued to Tata Teleservices Limited.  These policies were 
issued during the year from 2002–04.  
The Committee were informed th at Special Contingency Policies 
(SCP) are issued by the insurance companies, when covers are not 
available under any existing standard policies.  Normally SCP’s are issued 
for events like art exhibitions, cultural  programmes, cricket  matches, etc. 
which are specific event related.  However, the Committee are surprised 
that NICL resorted to issue of SCP for covering mobile handsets which do 
not fall under the above categories of activities.  
The Committee were also informed that the power to issue the SCP 
does not lie with either the Divisional Office (D.O.) or Regional Office  (R.O). 
and all SCPs are referred to Head Office before acceptance of the proposal.  
In the extant case Committee note that the Head Office (H. O.)  did not 
exercise proper due diligence when the D.O. / R.O.  sent the proposal to 
them for approval. The Committee re gret to note that without fully 
analyzing the implications of the po licy, the H.O. communicated to Mumbai 
Regional Office that as the maximum val ue per Handset was within their 
acceptance limits they may take an appr opriate decision in the matter. As 
the number of handsets to be covered were approximately 50 lakhs and the 
aggregate risk was about Rs. 4931cror e for Handset policy and Rs. 4981 
crore for Default liability policy, the Committee strongly feel that the stand 
of H.O. to allow Kalyan D.O. to take appropriate decision in the matter was 
not proper and in their opinion, it reflects nothing but their evasive attitude.    

 32 
 
The Committee understand that the proposal for the policies 
covering the mobile handsets from RI L and for default liability were 
received by all the PSU insurers.  However, only National Insurance 
Company Ltd. (NIC) and Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OICL) 
accepted the proposal and other PSU insurers did not agree for the same 
as they considered it to be a very ri sky venture.  As no such policy had 
been issued both before and after th e issue of extant SCP, the Committee 
would like to conclude that the NICL acted with undue haste without fully 
assessing the risk involved and antici pating the claims that could be 
lodged.     
The issue of SCP and settlement of claims without proper scrutiny, is 
indicative of lack of accountability and failure of supervisory mechanism in 
NICL.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry / NICL should take 
appropriate remedial measures to strengthen internal controls and 
supervisory mechanisms so that, instances of this kind do not recur in 
future.   
In view of the above the Committ ee recommend that Ministry of 
Finance in consultation with IRDA should amend the guidelines suitably so 
as to plug the loopholes in the issuance  of Special Contingency Policies 
and tailor-made Policies to the customers in future.  

 33 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
REINSURANCE  PROTECTION FOR SCP 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Insurance Companies 
have Reinsurance Departments which decide on the Reinsurance 
arrangements to be made by th e Company.  The Reinsurance 
arrangements in respect of standard policies are well laid down.   
The Committee note that before issuing the mobile handset and 
default liability policies, NIC did not carry out any exercise to evaluate the 
risks associated with the policy.  As the SCP’s policies were being given 
for the first time in the country, the Committee feel that the NICL ought to 
have checked for the availability of re insurance protection. The Committee 
do not agree with the contention that  NICL did not check for Reinsurance 
before the issue of the policy, considering the low value per Handsets..   As 
the aggregate risk amounts covered u nder the two policies are Rs. 4931 
crores under Handset Policy and Rs. 498 1 crores under Default Policy,  the 
Committee feel that it was imperative on  the part of NICL to have arranged 
for reinsurance.  
The Committee highly deplore the inaction on the part of H.O. 
officials to arrange for reinsurance of SCP.  Had the Reinsurance Division 
properly evaluated risk involved in i ssuance of SCP in question and taken 
Reinsurance cover before the issue of policy , the colossal losses to the 
company could have been avoided   The Committee recommend  that 
before issuing any policy in future NICL should make proper assessment of 
risk involved in the policy and take adequate steps for reinsurance cover.  
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that such guidelines 
should be amended so as to make reinsurance mandatory for SCPs also.   

 34 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
CANCELLATION CLAUSE IN THE SCP 
  
The Committee note that in the MOU signed on December, 2002 
between NICL and RIL for SCP cove ring handsets all risks, the MOU  
contained a condition  that either si de might cancel the policy by giving 
seven days notice in writing. 
 After the policy came into force,  the Committee note that within a 
short time, the NIC got huge claims.   In view of large claims and huge 
amount involved for settlement the Comm ittee are surprised that NICL had 
not thought it fit to invoke the cancellation clause provided for in the policy 
even after the claims ratio was becomi ng worse.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reply of NICL that 90% of the total premium was already 
received in the first year and hence,  cancellation clause was not invoked. 
Even the Ministry of Finance has expressed the view that the company 
ought to have cancelled the policy by invoking the cancellation clause. The 
Committee, therefore, deplore their actions of NICL for not invoking the 
cancellation clause despite the fact th at claim ratio exceeded to alarming 
proportions.  
The committee also note that in the default liability policy, Reliance 
wanted to protect their financial in terest and hence did not want any 
cancellation clause to be incorporated. The committee strongly opine that 
PSU insurance companies like NICL should instead of yielding to the 
demands of customers protect their commercial interest too. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 35 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 
SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS 
 
The Committee were informed that  out of 1,38,879 claims lodged by 
Reliance Industries under Default Liab ility Policy (DLP) only 103928 could 
be investigated. The balance 34,000 claims were not settled because 
further new claims started pouring in.  Similarly many claims filed under 
handset policy could not be investigated. As a result, outstanding claims to 
tune of Rs. 31. 74 crores under DL P and around Rs. 62.80 crores under 
handset policy remain unsettled.   Besi des claims to the tune of Rs. 66.52 
crores in respect of Default Liability Po licy issued to Tata  Teleservices are 
still outstanding.    
The fact that such huge number of claims  are still outstanding 
indicate a very sorry state of  affairs in NICL in the matter of settlement of 
claims.  This is also evident from the fact that with regard to settlement of 
claims, CVO’s note dated September 5, 2005 inter-alia observed  “If the 
underwriting was bad, the claim mana gement was still worse.   No 
verification was done regarding the genuineness of the claims.” The 
Committee deplore that not only NIC fa iled to investigate all the cases of 
claims which were filed but it also did not exercise proper care to check the 
veracity of such claims. No wonder that  such callous approach of NIC in 
settlement of claims caused huge losses to the company.  
The Committee believe that NICL could have contained their losses 
to a large extent, if it had done prop er claim investigation.  Here the 
Committee would like to refer to the cl aim investigation done by OIC, in 
which, out of 61193 clai ms lodged for settlement, OICL repudiated around 
36728 claims. The Committee th erefore feel that the responsibility for such 
acts of omission squarely lies with H .O./R.O. of NICL as they failed to 
properly advise Kalyan D.O. and initat e corrective steps. The committee 
further note that NICL had raised a demand on RIL to repay an amount of 
Rs 6.97 cr on claims that were wrongly settled. However RIL did not accept 

 36 
 
NICL’s contention and have not repaid  any amount. This also indicates the 
undue haste with which NICL first set tled the claims and sought refund 
later. 
The Committee, desire that a t horough enquiry should be conducted 
in the matter of settlement of claims for fixing of responsibility on officials 
on whose behest claims were settled without proper documents.  
As significant number of claims are still pending, the Committee 
desire that a panel of investigators as directed by NICL’s Board be formed 
for proper investigation of claims and th eir settlement. Action on this front 
should be time specific and expedited .  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress on this issue within the next six months.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 37 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
ALTERNATE RISK TRANSFER (ART) 
The Committee note that as SCP policies were not covered by 
Reinsurance Protection, the company had to bear the brunt on the financial 
front due to the large outgo of funds  on the settlement of claim. Having 
understood the implications of su ch outgo of funds on its financial 
performance, NIC looked for Alternate Risk Transfer (ART) to smoothen the  
balance sheet of the company. The company even paid Rs. 12.6 crore as 
upfront fee for ART which yielded no benefits to the Company.   
The Committee note that unlike re insurance where risk is covered 
Alternate Risk Transfer is an arrange ment of risk-financing and not risk-
sharing.  The Committee take strong exception to NI C’S attempt to mislead 
them as also their Board which is evident  from the fact that in their agenda 
paper of Board Meeting held on 12 June 2004, ART was camouflaged as an 
reinsurance protection. The Committee would also like to reprimand the 
Board of Directors of NI CL for failing to seek proper justification for ART 
before granting approval for ART 
The Committee strongly believe that happening of this nature do not 
augur well for Public sector Insurance Companies.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry  should impress upon all public sector 
insurance companies that they should refrain from resorting to ART in a 
casual manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 38 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
ROLE OF THE THEN CONCERNED CMD OF NICL 
 
The Committee believe that the executive accountability in a 
commercial organization begins with the CMD.  From the audit para, CVO’s 
note and as also Committee’s own examinat ion, the Committee feel that in 
the entire  business beginning from  the issue of SCP, settlement of claims, 
opting for ART, lack of reinsurance, non-invoking of cancellation clause 
etc., the role and conduct of the concerned CMD was far from satisfactory.  
From the CVO’s note of Septem ber, 2005, the Committee observe 
that, the then CMD of NICL, was fully aware of the issuance of SCP and he 
had written a letter on 10 th July 2003 to Reliance Infocom Chairman 
thanking him for patronizing NICL  an d assuring him of prompt settlement 
of claims.  The Committ ee are highly constrained to note that when the 
claims were settled and losses were mounting, the CMD did not act to 
protect the financial interests of the Company.   He took no steps either to 
cancel the policy or to make proper invest igation into settlement of claims.  
Further when the company was r eeling under huge losses on account of 
single policy, the CMD should have brought the matter to the Board’s 
notice for their appropriate direction. However, instead of seeking direction 
of Board, the Committee note that then  CMD tried to mislead the Board by 
seeking ART cover and camouflaging it as reinsurance support.  All these 
facts/points the needle of suspicion to the concerned CMD.    
Despite the fact that issue of SC P had resulted into huge losses to 
company the Committee are surprised to  note that the Ministry did not 
deem it fit to put the CMD on notice and seek explanation on the issue.  The 
Committee strongly believe that without the knowledge of the then CMD, 
things could not have gone thus fa r.  Hence the Committee strongly 
recommend that Ministry should prefer  CBI to investigate the role of the 
then CMD in the entire issue relating to SCP to RIL separately and a report 
of action taken thereon may be given to the Committee.  

 39 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
The Committee note that Oriental Insurance Company Limited also 
underwrote the default liability polic y of RIL as was done by NICL. They 
insured 17.10 lakhs handsets under defaul t liability policy (DLP).   The 
Committee regret to note that the OICL without carrying out in-house 
assessment with regard to pros and cons of SCPs, underwrote the policy 
mainly because NICL had already issued  a similar policy and also in order 
to gain entry into the business of Reliance Industries Ltd. 
The Committee have been informed that OICL had expected default 
of around 2% of the total number of conn ections issued in the instant case 
wherein 17.5 lakh handsets were insu red. Claims settled by OICL were 
24,465 only which are less than 2%.  The Committee wonder why even 
though default was less than anticipated 2% yet OICL incurred losses 
which shows that at the time of issuance of SCP proper assessment in 
fixing the premium was not done.  Had OICL fixed the premium as per the 
perceived risk losses altogether could have been avoided.  
OICL has justified the issuance of SCP on the ground that the overall 
business portfolio was profitable even though this particular policy had 
incurred losses The committee however find that issue of SCP to gain entry 
into the business of RIL is against GIPSA guidelines which says that each 
policy should be treated separately and cross-subsidisation is not 
permissible.  The Committee deplore th e action of OICL for underwriting a 
business knowing fully well that particular business will bring losses to the 
company. In the opinion of the Commi ttee, the PSUs are to function as 
commercially viable business and they should focus on strong business 
models for the long term rather than achieving growth through short-term 
methods.  
 
 
 

 40 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
 
CONTROL AND SUPERVISION BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
The Committee note that the Nati onal Insurance Company Ltd. and 
Oriental Insurance Company Limited co me under the Ministry of Finance.  
The Ministry has two nominees as part-ti me Directors in the Board of these 
companies.  As they are non-executive positions, these nominees attend 
Board Meetings, which are infrequent and agenda driven.  The Ministry 
reviews their overall financial and ph ysical performance at the end of 
financial year . 
While committee appreciate that by way of functional and financial 
autonomy to PSUs, Ministries should not  interfere into their day to day 
activities they feel that Ministries ought not be alt ogether ignorant of such 
happenings like issuance of SCP and consequent losses in Public Sector 
Undertakings under their control. In the extant case, the Committee feel 
that the response of the Ministry to  the happenings have been shoddy and 
apathetic.  When the Ministry recei ved a complaint from the CVC against 
the then CMD, NICL, they forwarded the same to him for explanation.  The 
Committee are unable to understand as to how CMD of a company  would 
send an adverse report against himself. This speaks volume of the type of 
action taken by senior officials of the Ministry particularly associated with 
vigilance matters.  
Further, the Committee are of the view  that the role of the part-time 
Government Directors was merely that of passive listeners as they failed to  
seek any clarification when the issue of approval for ART was discussed in 
the Board Meeting on 12 th June, 2004. The Secretary (Financial Sectors) 
during his evidence agreed that the part-time Government Directors could 
have sought more information on any of  the agenda matters placed before 
the Board of NICL as Go vt.nominees.  This reflects very poorly on the part-
time Directors occupying the positi on.   They should be aware of the 
responsibilities they discharge as Part-ti me Directors and also should take 

 41 
 
full cognizance of the fact that they  are representing the Government of 
India.   
The Committee, therefore, feel th at present system of control and 
supervision of the PSUs by the Ministry  needs to be further strengthened.  
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should appoint a group of 
experts to study the weaknesses of the present system to suggest remedial 
measures for ensuring better supervisi on by the Ministry.  The Committee 
further recommend that the feasibilit y of inducting Inde pendent Directors 
who can function without any fear or f avour in the Board of PSU insurance 
companies  should also be explored.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND PAL  
12th December, 2006                CHAIRMAN  
21 Agrahayana, 1928 (S)      COMM ITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 42 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS- INSURANCE DIVISION  
CHAPTER   X  
National Insurance Company Limited  
Oriental Insurance Company Limited  
Special contingency policies on mobile handsets.  
Highlights  
Two insurance Companies suffered heavy losses in the issue of tailor made 
insurance policies because of non-compliance to technical parameters and non-
evaluation of risk factors involved.  
(Para 10.4)  
The failure on the part of  the Management to obtain reinsurance protection, 
ensure the compliance of Insurance R egularity and Development Authority 
(IRDA)/ General Insurance Public Sector Association (GIPSA) guidelines as well 
as non-inclusion of the loading clause deprived the Company of the opportunity 
to reduce its losses in all the Special Contingency Policies (SCPs) issued during 
2002-03 to 2004-05.  
(Paras 10.5.2, 10.5.3, 10.5.4 and 10.5.6)  
In handsets all risk cover issued under  SCP on 18 December 2002 to Reliance 
Industries Limited (RIL), National Insu rance Company Limite d (NIC) received 
claims for Rs.91.23 crore upto October 2004 against t he premium of Rs.27.39 
crore (excluding service tax) realis ed during December 2002 to October 2004. 
Out of these, it settled claims for Rs .24.69 crore and the balance claims for 
Rs.66.54 crore were pending settlement.  
(Para 10.5.6)  
In the default policy iss ued to RIL on 25 J une 2003, NIC received claims for 
Rs.152.34 crore against the premium of Rs.55.71 cror e realised upto October 
2004. Out of these it settled claims fo r Rs.120.60 crore and the balance claims 
for Rs.31.74 crore were pending.  
(Para 10.6.3)  
In the default policy issued to Tata Tele Services Limited on 1 April 2004 NIC 
received claims of Rs.9.54 crore against the premium of Rs.6.20 crore realised 
upto October 2004. Out of t hese, it settled claims fo r Rs.3.42 crore and the 
balance claims for Rs.6.12 crore were pending.  
(Para 10.7)  
 
 
 
 

 43 
 
 
In the default policy issued by OIC in  August 2003 to RIL for handsets the 
insured reported 61193 claims for Rs. 63.53 crore. The Company had so far 
settled 18706 claims for Rs.19.64 crore an d balance claims involving estimated 
outgo of Rs.13.81 crore, after taking into consideration repudiated claims, were 
pending.  
(Para 10.8)  
 
NIC failed to arrange the reinsurance protec tion. With a view to finance the huge 
flow of claims, it obtained Alternate Risk Transfer (ART) cover from foreign 
reinsurer and paid Rs.13.38 crore as one time upfront fee. This upfront fee 
further reduced the already low premium income.  
(Para 10.9)  
10.1 Introduction  
General Insurance business is tradition ally divided into Fire, Marine and 
Miscellaneous. Miscellaneous insuranc e includes in its scope Special 
Contingency Policy (SCP) or tailor-made policy. The risks associated with ‘Mobile 
handsets’, which could not be covered under the standard policies, were covered 
under SCP. SCP covers were issued to dealers and manufacturers.  
The Mumbai Divisional Offices of the National Insurance Co mpany Limited (NIC) 
issued two policies in 2002-03 and 2003- 04 respectively to the Reliance 
Industries Limited, Reliance Infocom Limited and its associates (hereinafter 
referred to as RIL) and one policy to Tata Tele Services Limited during the year 
2004-05 and the Mumbai-based Divisional Office of the Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited (OIC) also issued a po licy during the year 2003-04 to RIL to 
underwrite the risks associat ed with mobile handsets without  careful evaluation 
of the risk involved and other technical aspects, which resulted in heavy losses to 
these companies.  
10.2 Scope  
The review of the insurance cover issued by the Mumbai-based Divisional 
Offices of NIC and OIC during the year s 2002-03 to 2004-05 to cover the risks 
related to mobile handset s under SCPs was conducted during the period from 
September 2004 to November 2004.  
10.3 Audit Findings  
An analysis by Audit of the insurance policies under SCPs revealed that they 
were devised primarily to suit the requirements of the insured, without 
safeguarding the insurers’ interest owing to non-adopti on of the prudent 
underwriting guidelines as brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
 

 44 
 
10.4 Non-evaluation of technical aspects  
Before issuing the SCPs, all the operating offices were required to comply with 
the following technical parameters to ens ure that the risk would not make the 
rating unviable:  
 (i) Prior sanction of the Reinsuranc e Department of the Company to be 
obtained before acceptance of risks beyond the prescribed limits, as 
advised by Reinsurance Department from time to time.  
 (ii) The excess clause
♣ 
must be clearly indicat ed against each item or 
section.  
 (iii) Basis of sum insured i.e. w hether market value, reinstatement, 
replacement, non-recoverable cost et c. as applicable, to be indicated 
to avoid disputes.  
 
♣ 
Excess clause means that part of loss, which would be borne by the 
insured in order to avoid high frequency low value losses/claims to be paid 
by the insurer.  
 
  (iv) In case of non-standard pr oducts/risks like financial risks, asset 
protection and stock exchange risks, the pricing, terms and conditions 
should be in line with the requirement of reinsurer as contemplated in 
the Company’s reinsurance programme.  
 
However, an analysis in audit revealed t hat during the course of finalisation of 
terms and conditions of policy documents for the issue of insurance cover for 
SCP for the mobile handsets by the operating offices of NIC and OIC, the above-
cited instructions were not  complied with as brought out in paragraphs 10.5.2 to 
10.5.4, 10.6.1 and 10.6.3.  
10.5 Handsets all risks cover with RIL  
The Kalyan Divisional Office (D.O) under the Mumbai Regional Office (R.O)-I of 
NIC, issued a SCP for mobile handset s on 18 December 2002 to RIL, which was 
valid for three years, based on a Me morandum of Understanding (MOU) signed 
on 6 December 2002 with RIL. It covered t he risk of physical loss or damage to 
the mobile handsets necessitating repai r and fraudulent use consequent upon 
misplacement/theft, suffered by the persons  to whom the mobile handsets were 
sold by the insured, subject to a ma ximum of Rs.12,000 per accident. Premium 
at the rate of 0.25 per cent per annum was charged on the declared sum insured.  
The salient features of the MOU were as under:  
 (i) The policy was issued with the c oncept of periodical increase in sum 
insured by progressive coverage.  

 45 
 
 (ii) Either side (insurer or insured) might cancel the policy by giving seven 
days notice in writing.  
 (iii) The insured would undertake peri odic declaration of invoice number, 
date of sales, value, and details of customer (name, city) to the insurer;  
 
A review of the MOU referred to above revealed that the following important 
guidelines were not followed by the operating offices:  
10.5.1 Approval from Head Office:  
As per NIC’s guidelines issued in March 1999 the power to develop a new 
product under SCP was retained with t he Head Office of the Company. The 
Kalyan D.O. based on MOU dated 6 Decem ber 2002 with RIL, devised a new 
SCP to cover the loss or damage to the mobile handsets involving repair and 
fraudulent use. Being a new product, it required approval of headquarters before 
its implementation. However, this was not obtained before its implementation.  
Besides this, as per Company’s guidelin es all fresh proposal s under SCP where 
the sum insured exceeded Rs.50 lakh were to be referred to Head Office for 
approval. However, Kalyan D.O issued t he above-cited SCP for mobile handsets 
for the sum insured of Rs.6.50 crore wi th a clause that sum insured would 
increase with subsequent sale s of mobile handsets upto the expiry of period of 
the policy i.e. 17 De cember 2005. As the sum insured had far exceeded the 
prescribed limit of Rs.50 lakh, the Kalyan D.O, by not obtaining prior approval of 
Head Office, had exceeded its powers.  
10.5.2 Re-insurance protection:  
The Company every year draws up its reinsurance programme for various 
classes of risks in order to fix retent ion limit of risks commensurate with its 
financial strength. Insur ance Regulatory and Develo pment Authority (IRDA) 
guidelines also stipulate t hat the maximum loss retenti on should not exceed five 
per cent of the networth of the Company. However, the D O did not make any 
reference to Re-insurance Department for taking reinsurance cover. In the 
absence of this, the risk ret ention limit could not be ca lculated. The sum insured 
as on 31 October 2004 was Rs.3850 crore (and would increase further as validity 
of the policy was upto 17 December 2005). Thus, there was no reinsurance to 
protect the Company’s risk except 20 per cent obligatory share of risk accepted 
by the General Insurance Corporation (GIC). The GIC allowed 25 per cent 
commission on premium received on account of obligatory reinsurance.  
10.5.3 Absence of risk analysis  
As per IRDA guidelines NIC was to indi cate how the products would be priced, 
the database that would be used to det ermine the premium basis and the terms 
and conditions and the statisti cal system that would be established to review the 
adequacy of rates. NIC did not make any ex ercise based on statistical data of 
similar industry to evaluate the adequacy of rating and risk involved.  
10.5.4 Absence of viable clause of loading.  

 46 
 
As per General Insurance Public Se ctor Association (GIPSA) guidelines 
circulated by the Company in June 2001, the rates quoted were to be suitably 
loaded based on claims experience of each year so as to bring the incurred claim 
ratio to 70 per cent in case of adverse claims. However, the policy was issued on 
long-term basis for three years without in clusion of above-cited clause, which 
ultimately made the rating of the policy unviable.  
10.5.5 Inaccurate pricing  
In March 1996 the Company formulated a scheme for 
wholesalers/dealers/manufacturers for no rmal coverage of damage and theft of 
mobile phone on trial basis for a period of one year at a suggested rate of 0.25 
per cent per annum. Although the scope of risk involved in the SCP for handsets 
policy issued to RIL was increased to co ver the new element of loss due to 
fraudulent act in addition to normal losses on account of damage and theft of 
mobile phone, the Divisional office of NIC did not charge any premium for the 
additional coverage of risk.  This resulted in exte nding undue benefit to the 
insured.  
10.5.6 Non-invoking of cancellation clause  
As per clause eight of the MOU entered into between NIC and  RIL there was a 
provision for cancellation of policy by giving seven days notice to the insured. 
Despite the number of deficiencies in the implementation of the terms and 
conditions of the MOU, NIC did not invoke the cance llation clause. The reasons 
to justify the non-invoking of the cance llation clause were not available in the 
records made available to Audit.  
The technical department of Head Office observed in February 2003 that the 
operating office should have included a suit able clause for rapid obsolescence of 
the equipment and fall in its market price, unexpl ained losses/malicious act and 
settlement of claims on market value basis after deduction of depreciation. By not 
referring the above policy to Head Office fo r their technical concurrence, the 
above-cited aspects were left out of the policy conditions.  
The failure on the part of  the Management to obtain reinsurance protection as 
well as non-inclusion of the loading  clause deprived the Company of the 
opportunity to reduce its losses. As a re sult of this, against the premium of 
Rs.27.39 crore (excluding service tax) realised during December 2002 to October 
2004, it received claims for Rs.91.23 cr ore upto October 2004. Out of these, 
claims for only Rs.24.69 crore were settled and the balance claims for Rs.66.54 
crore were pending settlement. On the bas is of paid/outstanding claims after 
taking into account premium ceded and commission received on account of 
reinsurance the Company h ad suffered a loss of Rs. 63.84 crore (NIC Rs.49.70 
crore and GIC Rs.14.14 crore).  
10.6 Default policy issued to RIL  
Based on another MOU entered into bet ween NIC and RIL on 25 June 2003, the 
Kalyan DO issued an SCP to RIL to cove r the default liability risk in respect of 
mobile handsets for the period from 25 June 2003 to 24 June 2006. The premium 

 47 
 
rate per handset/connection was charged at  Rs.100 (including eight per cent 
service tax). The scope of cover include d net ascertained financial losses arising 
out of telecom services of the insured and/or cost of the handset from default due 
to fraudulent activity of the subscriber subject to a maximum loss of Rs.11,000 
per handset. The fraudulent activity incl uded default of periodical payment/dues 
by the subscriber for any reasons what soever. Further, the parties had no option 
to cancel the policy during the validity period of the policy.  
A review of records relating to the under writing of the risk under this default 
policy revealed the following deficiencies that led to huge losses to the Company:  
 
10.6.1 Non-conventional Policy  
The SCP for handsets issued in 2002 covered the risks of damage/theft suffered 
by the users on account of fraudulent use of the handsets consequent on 
misplacement/theft. The Kalyan D.O, based on the MOU si gned in June 2003, 
devised a new product enlarging the scope of risk. The cover was given to RIL 
with sum insured of Rs.5500 crore to indemnify their financial loss on account of 
default of periodic payment/ dues by the subscribers for any reasons including 
fraudulent activity. This type of non-conv entional policy covering financial risk 
was issued for the first time in the Indian market. Despite the substantial increase 
in the amount of the sum in sured over the prescribed limit of only Rs.50 lakh, the 
Kalyan D.O in this case also did not obtain the approval of  Head Office before 
issue of SCP for default cover for handset s. Thus, the same D.O exceeded its 
powers in issuing the above-cited cover.  
In this context the Head Office of NIC al so observed while reviewing the policy in 
March 2004 that any non-conventional, tailor-made or contingency proposal 
should not have been committed without it s authorisation and more serious 
thought should have been given and prude nce should have been observed in 
ascertaining the aggregate risk exposure.  
10.6.2 Absence of reinsurance protection  
As already mentioned as per IRDA gu idelines and the Company’s reinsurance 
programme, the Company, before under taking any cover, must obtain 
reinsurance support. However, the Kalyan D.O. in the instant case of ‘Default 
cover policy’ also did not take any re insurance protection before issue of the 
policy, even though the aggregate sum insured was Rs.5,500 crore.  
10.6.3 Deficiencies in MOU  
(a) No clause for cancellation  
In the earlier MOU (December 2002) entered into between NIC and RIL, there 
was a clause for cancellation of policy by giving seven days notice in writing by 
either side. In the MOU dated 25 Ju ne 2003, however, this condition was 
excluded. Thus, the Management had forgone the right to take any remedial 
action. As a result, the Company woul d be bound to accept claims under policy 
endorsements issued upto 24 June 2006.  

 48 
 
(b) No provision for loading and periodic review  
Despite the Head Office specific instruct ions of February 2003 that the SCP in 
any case should be renewed on yearly bas is, this provision was not considered 
in the MOU entered into with RIL in June 2003. The default policy was issued to 
RIL for three years without any provision for periodic review of premium including 
loading factor for adverse claims.  
(c) Risk coverage beyond the scope of MOU  
The D.O. had also extended the risk cove rage to coloured handsets by charging 
premium of Rs.140 per set (including service tax) with a sum insured of 
Rs.24,000 per set and thereby increased t he total sum insured from Rs.5,500 
crore to Rs.6,150 crore, even though no such provision existed in the MOU.  
(d) Absence of excess clause  
No excess clause to limit the overall loss amount was included in the MOU in 
order to minimize /restrict the loss of the Company.  
In view of the deficiencies narrated abov e, NIC received claims for Rs.152.34 
crore against the premium of Rs.55.71 crore upto October 2004. The Company 
settled claims for Rs.120.60 crore and t he balance claims for Rs.31.74 crore 
were pending. Though the currency of policy was three years, the liability of the 
Company would extend beyond the st ipulated period as each policy 
endorsement carried coverage period of thr ee years from the date of issue. As 
such the Company would be liable for any future default/claims upto June 2009. 
On the basis of paid/outst anding claims after taking in to account premium ceded 
and commission received on account of reinsurance the Company had suffered a 
loss of Rs.96.63 crore (NIC Rs.74.51 crore and GIC Rs.22.12 crore) upto 
October 2004.  
The request of the Managem ent to RIL for enhancement of premium in April 
2004 stating that pricing done was not proper considering the nature of risk and 
that the magnitude of loss would reduce the networth,  substantiated the audit 
findings.  
10.7 Default Policy with TATA TELE Services Limited  
While the Company had alr eady suffered huge loss in underwriting the default 
cover of RIL at a very low premium as mentioned above, the Mumbai based 
Divisional Office under the same Regional  office entered into MOU on 1 April 
2004 for a three year period with TATA TELE  Services Limited for giving default 
cover similar to the cover given to RIL.  The premium rate was Rs.92 (excluding 
service tax at fixed rate) for one year instead of three years in the case of RIL. In 
the issue of insurance cover to TATA TELE Services Limited also NIC committed 
the deficiencies as brought out in paragraphs 10.6.2 and 10.6.3 (a) and (d).  
NIC had received claims of Rs.9.54 cror e, against the premium of Rs.6.20 crore 
realised upto September 2004. The Com pany had settled claims for Rs.3.42 
crore upto October 2004 and t he balance claims for Rs.6.12 crore were pending, 
based on settled/outstanding claim position after taking into account premium 

 49 
 
ceded and commission received on account of reinsurance the Company had 
suffered a loss of Rs.3.34 crore (NIC: Rs .2.37 crore and GIC: Rs.97 lakh) on this 
policy. This indicated that the company  had been venturing to underwrite risks 
even though it was clear that this would be a loss-making portfolio.  
10.8 Default Policy issued by the Oriental Insurance Company Limited  
The Oriental Insurance Company Limit ed (OIC) also agreed (August 2003) to 
underwrite the default insurance policy covering the period from 1 August 2003 to 
31 July 2006 with RIL at the agreed rate of Rs.92+ Se rvice Tax of eight per cent. 
In the issue of default policy cover to RI L, OIC committed the same deficiencies 
as brought out in paragraphs 10.6.1, 10.6.2 and 10.6.3 (a) and (b) viz. not 
obtaining approval of H.O., absence of reinsurance prot ection, non-inclusion of 
cancellation clause and non-provision for periodic review.  
The gist of OIC replies (December  2004) to paragraphs 10.6.1, 10.6.2, 
and 10.6.3 (a) and 10.6.3 (b) and t he audit comments thereon are given 
below:  
(i) While accepting the fact that such  cover was issued for the first time 
OIC stated that the policy was issued by the Regional Office (RO) after 
exercising due diligence and the detail ed information was sent to Head 
Office for information and necessary action  
The above contention of OIC is not tenabl e as many claims were subsequently 
found to be false and were repudiated due to non-existence of the subscribers at 
the given addresses. Inclus ion of persons who had not  subscribed to Reliance 
mobile services substantiated the fact that due diligence was not exercised by 
the Company before the issue of the policy to the insured.  
Further, the contention of OIC that the detailed information was sent to Head 
Office for information and necessary action is also not acceptable as in the 
absence of the details as to when the matter was referred by the R.O. to the 
Head Office (H.O.) and the action by the H.O. thereon before the issue of the 
policy, the correctness of the facts stated in the Management’s reply could not be 
verified in Audit. Some suggestions sent by  the H.O. after the issue of the policy 
i.e. on 9 August 2003 on inclusion of th e cancellation/claim procedure clauses 
were also found not complied with.  
(ii) The contention of t he Management with regard to para 10.6.2 that the 
Company did not take reinsurance protec tion before the issue of the policy cover 
as it treated each connection as an independent risk and not as an aggregate 
risk is not tenable because sum insured und er SCP for ‘Default Insurance Cover’ 
issued to RIL-Mumbai for Rs.6150 cror e covering 50 lakh mobile handsets 
substantiated that the risk was treat ed as an aggregate risk and not as an 
independent risk. Further, the total risk under the policy which is spread all over 
the country is similar to floater policy where-under aggregate of risk is considered 
as a single risk irrespective of their lo cation. On the analogy of floater policy 
approval from competent authority should have been taken, considering need for 
reinsurance and underwriting the aggregate risk.  

 50 
 
(iii) In reply to para 10.6.3. (a), the Management stated that they had included the 
cancellation clause to protect their interest. The above contention of the 
Management is not correct because as pe r terms of the cancellation clause 
included in the insurance po licy the insurer and the insu red had agreed to waive 
any right of cancellation of the insuranc e agreement for a peri od of three years. 
Thus, the option for cancellation could be  exercised only afte r expiry of three 
year period of the policy. It shows t hat the Management ca nnot cancel the 
insurance policy during the currency of policy to protect its interest.  
(iv) In reply to para 10.6.3 . (b), the Management stated that since it was the first 
policy of its kind underwritt en by them it did not have the features like review, 
which was normally incorpor ated on renewal of a policy if claim experience was 
adverse. The above contention of the Management is not acceptable because as 
per the general rules and r egulations of insurance no insurance may be granted 
for a longer period than one year. Thus, the Company should have included the 
provisions for review of the premium/ adv erse claim ratio on yearly basis instead 
of for three years.  
The business results available upto De cember 2004 indicated that the Company 
could get premium of Rs .17.02 crore (excluding se rvice tax). The insured 
reported 61193 claims of the total handsets for Rs.63.53 crore covered under the 
default cases upto November 2004. Out of 61193 claims reported, verification of 
53670 claims was carried out by the investigator appointed by the Company upto 
February 2005 by incurring an expenditu re of Rs.3.76 crore. Based on 
verification report of the 53670 claims  given by investigator, the Company 
repudiated 29,334 claims for Rs.30.08 crore on the grounds of (i) non-existence 
of addresses (3278 claims) (ii) non-existe nce of persons at the given address 
(16289 claims), (iii) persons not subscribed to Reliance Mobile (5438 claims), (iv) 
persons moved away from the given a ddress (3345 claims) and (v) continuance 
of mobile service even after default (984 claims) and settled 18706 claims of 
Rs.19.64 crore in aggregate. The balance 13,153 claims of Rs .13.81 crore were 
outstanding for want of further verification.  
Based on the current claim settled/outst anding after taking into account premium 
ceded and commission received on account of reinsurance, OIC has suffered a 
loss of Rs.16.05 crore (including inve stigation charges) and GIC a loss of 
Rs.4.14 crore.  
10.9 Alternate Risk Transfer  
The Alternate Risk Transfer (ART) cover is generally taken where substantial 
losses are apprehended. The main object of  ART cover is risk financing and not 
risk-sharing. The default cover policies were given to RIL without any reinsurance 
protection. After steady flow of claims , the Company searched for reinsurance 
protection but could not arrange any conventional reinsurance. Ultimately, 
through broker, it could obtain non- conventional risk financing under ART 
protection from foreign reinsurer. Under  the ART cover, in surer (NIC) would 
require to pay back the entire amount rece ived from reinsurer to settle claims 
within two to three years to smoothen the effect on balance sheet.  

 51 
 
NIC paid Rs.13.38 crore to the reinsurer as one time upfront fee. This upfront fee 
further reduced the already low premium income. In ART,  the caps for number of 
mobile phones and recover able loss were kept at 50 lakh and Rs.482.03 crore 
respectively. So, the probable loss, whic h the company would suffer as per its 
own estimation under this policy, worked out to Rs.482.03 crore.  
The Chairman and Managing Director of NIC in  reply to the Ministry mentioned 
(April 2004) that the Company was facing loss in the default liability policy 
(Reliance Infocom Limited). He added that  the claims might far exceed the 
premium collected. Since no traditional cover was availa ble in the international 
market, the Company opted for a non-tradit ional cover known as ART. Efforts 
were being made to impress upon RIL for additional premium for ART cover.  
The lapses in the policy are further subst antiated by the fact that the concerned 
Regional Office approached the Head Offi ce for conventional reinsurance 
protection after experiencing huge flow  of claims. The Company, as per 
guidelines, should have undertaken the risk only after obtaining the conventional 
reinsurance protection.  
Thus, failure on the part of NIC/OIC to  extend SCPs on mob ile handsets without 
risk analysis and reinsurance protection resulted in loss of  Rs.65.79 crore 
(including investigation charges) and liability of Rs.118.21 crore on account of 
pending claims. On the basis of paid/outstanding claims and expenses, NIC and 
OIC had so far suffered loss of Rs.142. 63 crore (NIC Rs. 126.58 crore and OIC 
Rs.16.05 crore) and made GIC suffer loss amounting to Rs.41.37 crore.  
10.10 Inadequate internal control system  
As per IRDA guidelines t he Company was required to  formulate the procedure 
and norms with regard to underwriting an d policy issue for t he pricing of new 
products, claims processing and settl ement. The Financial Advisor of NIC 
observed (September 2004) that the system of  internal control existing in the 
Company was ineffective and inadequate and needed to be strengthened.  
In reply NIC while admitting the facts and accepting the deficiencies as pointed 
out in Audit stated (March 2005) that the new default lia bility cover of RIL was 
perceived by them as an opportunity to get into the big account of Reliance 
Group. The Management agreed with all the recommendations made by audit 
and assured that the authority to issue SCP, Tailor made policy and long term 
policy would be centralised at Headquarters  to safeguard the interest of the 
Company.  
10.11 Conclusion  
While underwriting the non-conventional policies, which had serious financial 
implications, the operating offices did not exercise due diligence and caution and 
did not ensure the compliance of guidelin es issued by IRDA, GIPSA and H.O of 
NIC/OIC which resulted in huge loss amounting to Rs.142.63 crore (NIC 
Rs.126.58 crore and OIC Rs.16.05 crore) and made GIC suffer loss amounting to 
Rs.41.37 crore. No responsibility has been fixed for the Regional/Divisional 

 52 
 
Offices having exceeded thei r powers and exposing t he Companies to such 
heavy risk and loss.  
10.12 Recommendations  
 (a) There is urgent need to ensure that all the instructions issued by IRDA, 
GIPSA and Head Office are complied with by all the operating offices 
through better Management Information System.  
 (b) The terms and conditions of the insurance policies for the new 
products should be formulated by in corporating suitable clauses for 
premium loading and for per iodical review of policy so as to ensure that 
rating of the policy does not become unviable.  
 (c) The internal control system needs to be strengthened in order to 
ensure that the recurrence of such cases is avoided.  
 (d) The matter needs to be invest igated thoroughly and appropriate 
departmental and legal action taken.  
 
The para was issued to Ministry in De cember 2004; its reply was awaited (March 
2005).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 53 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
M I N U T E S   O F   T H E   9TH SITTING  OF  THE  CO MMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  12TH OCTOBER,  2006 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Mohan Rawale 
8. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Shri Rishang Keishing  
12. Shri Ajay Maroo  
13. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
14. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
15. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
16. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
17. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
2. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
3. Ms. Gurveen S. Chophy  Director (Commercial) 
 
 

 54 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
1. Shri V. Ramasaamy  Chairman and Managing Director 
2. Shri R. Shiv Kumar  Chief Manager 
 
2. At the outset, the Dy. C&AG-cum-Chairman, Audit Board briefed the 
Committee in connection with examination of  Chapter X of C&AG’s Report No. 4 
(Commercial) of 2005 on Special Contingency Policies on mobile handsets which 
has been selected as a subject for exam ination during 2006-2007.  After the 
briefing, the Members sought some clarific ations on certain points.  The same 
were clarified by the officials of C&AG. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of 
National Insurance Company Limited (NICL).  The Hon’ble Chairman, COPU, 
welcomed the repres entatives of NICL.  Member s raised queries on various 
aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same 
were made by the representatives of NI CL.  Information on some of the points 
raised by the Committee was not readily available with the r epresentatives of 
NICL.  It was, however, promised by them  that the same w ould be furnished to 
the Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the represent atives of NICL for providing the 
material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record separately . 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 55 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  10 TH SITTING  OF  THE  CO MMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  30TH OCTOBER,  2006 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1415 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
3. Dr. M. Jagannath 
4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
 
MEMBERS – RAJYA SABHA  
 
8. Shri Ajay Maroo  
9. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
10. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
2. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
3. Ms. Gurveen S. Chop hy Director (Commercial ) 
 
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri P. Bandyopadhyay     Retired CVO of National Insurance 
Company Limited 
2. Shri B. Chakrabarti Former CMD of National Insurance 
Company Limited an d presently CMD, 
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. 
 
 

 56 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
1. Shri M. Ramadoss  C hairman-cum-Managing Director 
2. Shri Yogesh Lohiya  General Manager 
3. Shri B. Vaidyanathan  Company Secretary 
 
OFFICIALS OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
1. Shri Vinod Rai   Secretary (FS) 
2. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi  Joint Secretary (B&I) 
3. Shri Lalit Kumar   Dy. Secretary (Insurance) 
4. Shri S.P.S. Sangwan  Under Secretary (Vigilance) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the non-official witness, Shri P. 
Bandyopadhyay, Retired CVO of NICL.  The Committee then took oral evidence 
of the non-official witness in connection with the examination of Chapter-X of 
C&AG’s Report No. 4 (Commercial) of 2005 regarding Special Contingency 
Policies on mobile handsets. 
(The non-official then withdrew) 
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the non-official witness, Shri B. 
Chakrabarti, Former CMD of NICL.  The Committee then took oral evidence of 
the non-official witness in connection wi th the examination of Chapter-X of 
C&AG’s Report No. 4 (Commercial) of 2005 regarding Special Contingency 
Policies on mobile handsets. 
 
(The non-official then withdrew) 
 
4. Then, the Committee took  the oral evidence of the representatives of 
Oriental Insurance Company Limited.   Members raised queries on various 
aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same 
were made by the representatives of OIC L.  Information on some of the points 
raised by the Committee were not readily available with the representatives of 
OICL.  It was promised that the same would be furnished to the Committee 
Secretariat in due course. 
 
(Representatives of OICL then withdrew) 
 
5. Finally, the Committee took oral ev idence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Finance.  Members sought cert ain clarifications on the subject from 
him and the same were clarified.  Information on some of the points raised by the 
Committee were not readily available with the representatives of Ministry.  It was 
promised that the same would be furnishe d to the Committee Secretariat in due 
course. 
 
(Representatives of Ministry of Finance then withdrew) 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 

 57 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE 13 th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  12th  DECEMBER,  2006 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6 Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
9. Dr. M. Jagannath 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
 
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
12. Shri Ajay Maroo 
13. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. P.Sharma, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDITOR  GENERAL  
OF  INDIA 
 
 Shri A. K. Avasthi, Director General(Commercial)  
 
 
 

 58 
 
 
 
 
2. The Committee considered the Draft Reports on (i) ‘Special 
Contingency Policies on Mobile Hands ets by Insurance Companies’ -- 
Based on Chapter X of C & AG Report (Commercial) No.4 of 2005 and  
(ii) xxxxx   xxxxxx       xxxxxx 
3. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation. 
4.  xxx               xxx               xxx                      xxx               xxx  
The Committee then adjourned.  
 