C.P.U. No. 922  
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA – SAFETY AND SECURITY ASPECTS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.04.2008 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.04.2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2008 / Vaisakha 1930 (S) 
29  

2  
CONTENTS  
 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS (vii) 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS (ix) 
PART A  
REPORT  
Chapter I 
  
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA AND AVIATION SAFETY 
AND SECURITY – AN OVERVIEW 
(i) Background 
(ii) AAI - Role and Functions 
(iii) Regulatory Bodies 
(iv) Other Concerned Organizations 
(v) Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
Chapter II SAFETY FUNCTIONS OF AAI 
 
(i) Overview 
(ii) Safety on the ground 
(iii) Emergency/Disaster Management 
(iv) Flight Safety 
(v) Corporation of ATS 
(vi) Safety Audit 
(vii) Safety Regulation 
 
 
Chapter III SECURITY FUNCTIONS OF AAI 
(i) Overview 
(ii) Role of Airport Director 
(iii) Systems & Equipments 
(iv) Threat Response Mechanism 
(v) Security Regulation 
 
 
Chapter IV AAI AND MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
(i) Overview 
 
 PART B 
 
 
 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
i Ground Incidents / Accidents   
ii Airprox Incident in Civil Airspace under the Jur isdiction of AAI 
during the Year 2004-2006. 
 
 
iii Minutes of Sittings of Committee  
 

3  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2007-2008)  
 
 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal         -       Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. *Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. *Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 
 
**Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 **Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 **Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
4. Shri N.C. Gupta  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Executive Officer 
 
___________________________________________________ _____________ 
*  Elected w.e.f. 17.5.2004 Dr. Rameshwar Oraon and  Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be Members of the 
Committee consequent on their appointment as Minist ers of States w.e.f. 6.04.2008. 
** ceased to be Members of the Committee consequent  on their retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
02.04.2008 and 09.04.2008. 
 
(iii) 

4  
INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings  having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report o n their behalf, present this 
Twenty Ninth Report on Airports Authority of India – Safety and Security Aspects. 
 
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2007-2008). 
 
3. The Committee took a briefing on the subject fro m representatives of 
Ministry of Home Affairs, the Directorate General o f Civil Aviation, the Bureau of 
Civil Aviation and the Central Industrial Security Force on 3 
rd  August 2007.  The 
Committee also took oral evidence of representative s of the Airports Authority of 
India on 20 th  December 2007.  They further took oral evidence of  representatives 
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 27 th  February 2008. 
 
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2007-08) c onsidered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 24 
th  April 2008.  The Committee feel 
obliged to the Members of the Committee on Public U ndertakings (2007-08).  
They would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation for the 
valuable assistance rendered to them by officials o f Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Airports Authority of India for placin g before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection with examination of the subject.  They also 
wish to thank in particular the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
Airports Authority of India, Ministry of Home Affai rs, the Directorate General of 
Civil Aviation, the Bureau of Civil Aviation and th e Central Industrial Security 
Force who gave evidence and placed their considered  views before the 
Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                          RUPCHAND PAL  
28 April 2008                              CHAIRMAN  
8 Vaisakha, 1928                    COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
(v) 

5  
CHAPTER - I  
 
AAI AND AVIATION SAFETY & SECURITY – AN OVERVIEW  
 
1.1 BACKGROUND 
 
 The unprecedented growth in air traffic in the Ind ian skies during the last 
five years and the looming threat of international terrorism have raised numerous 
challenges for concerned agencies and authorities i n the Civil Aviation sector, 
including issues concerning safety and security.  T he Airports Authority of India, 
as the primary airport operator in the country, has  responsibilities that are critical 
to aviation safety and security.  Some of such safe ty and security related 
responsibilities of the Authority are ingrained in its role of airport infrastructure 
provider-cum-operator and CNS/ATM service provider,  while some of its other 
responsibilities, especially those relating to secu rity are in the nature of 
obligations to fit into the larger framework of nat ional security, its own security of 
assets. 
 
1.2 AAI – ROLE AND FUNCTIONS: 
The safety and security related activities of Airpo rts Authority of India as 
furnished to the Committee are as follows: 
“Provision of safety in the field of Air Traffic Ser vices and Airport 
Operations is managed by Airports Authority of Indi a in accordance with 
the National /ICAO Regulations whereas security is managed under the 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security.  
 
AAI have established a Directorate of Aviation Safe ty in 1998 with 
the objective of carrying out the mission of Aviati on Safety by process of 
auditing, monitoring and safety promotion.  These o bjectives are achieved 
by carrying out the Aviation Safety objective at th e field stations and 
subsequently doing the coordination with the Heads of different wings for 
further improvement in the system.  One of the prim e objectives of 
Directorate of Aviation Safety is to assess complia nce with the ICAO 
standards and recommended practices and ensure adhe rence to the 
prescribed standards and procedures, circulars and recommendations etc. 
to determine the effectiveness of safety standards and to verify the 
efficacy of safety management against safety hazard s. In order to achieve 
the goal, safety audit is being conducted in accord ance with ICAO’s 

6  
requirement of surveillance obligations of safety m anagement system and 
universal safety oversight audit programme. 
 
Security 
 
   As the airport operator, AAI has been entrusted with the following 
security related activities: 
 
a) Anti-hijacking measures 
b) Measures against terrorist attacks 
c) Access Control 
d) Perimeter Security 
e) Anti-sabotage measures 
f) Surveillance arrangements 
g) Contingency arrangements 
h) Installation / provision / maintenance of securi ty equipments” 
 
Outlining the scope and functions of AAI, the repre sentative of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation stated before the Committee as un der: 
“…….the Airports Authority of India is the prime ai rport operator in the 
country.  It manages 125 airports out of which 90 a re operational.  These 
include 28 civil enclaves in Defence Airfileds, 14 international airports and 
8 customs airports.  AAI also provides CNS/ATM faci lities at other airports 
including Delhi, Mumbai and Cochin which they do no t operate and 
manage. The year 2006-07 saw 510 lakh passengers mo ving through AAI 
airports with 6.58 lakh aircraft movements. This re presented an increase 
of 39 per cent and 33 per cent respectively over th e previous year. During 
the current financial year as well there has been a  significant growth in the 
air traffic. Domestic passenger traffic has been in creasing at the rate of 
about 35 percent in 2007-08.” 
 
1.3 REGULATORY BODIES 
 Referring to the regulatory authorities that look after the safety and 
security aspects of the Civil Aviation Industry, the representative of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation stated thus: 
“The Directorate General of Civil Aviation, which i s an attached office of 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, is the safety regul ator for the entire civil 
aviation sector including airports. Similarly, the Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security, another attached office of the Ministry, is the regulator for civil 
aviation security. Both these organisations have be en taking measures to 
address the challenges posed by the recent growth i n the sector. They 
have endeavoured to update the safety/security manu als, instructions as 
well as upgrade the skills.”  

7  
1.4 OTHER CONCERNED ORGANIZATIONS 
 The Central Industrial Security Force or CISF, thr ough its Airport group 
performs security functions at most of the function al airports in the country.  
Airport unit of State Police Forces perform securit y functions at airports where 
CISF is not deployed. 
 Respective airline operators are responsible for m aintenance of aircraft 
airworthiness and other flight safety and security requirements under regulations 
by the DGCA and BCAS.  Besides, there are caterers and cargo operators who 
have responsibilities with regard to safety and sec urity under regulations issued 
by DGCA and BCAS. 
 
1.5 Ministry of Civil Aviation 
The Airports Authority of India (AAI) Section in th e Ministry is the 
administrative Section for the Airports Authority o f India. The Section works 
through an Under Secretary, Director and Joint Secr etary under the overall 
supervision and guidance of the Secretary.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8  
CHAPTER - II  
SAFETY FUNCTIONS OF AAI 
2.1 OVERVIEW 
 As an airport operator and the ANS provider in the  country, AAI have 
safety related functions and responsibilities which  span several critical functional 
spheres in the aviation safety management.  Asked t o furnish a note on their 
safety functions, AAI stated as under:  
“Provision of safety in the field of Air Traffic Ser vices and Airport 
Operations is managed by Airports Authority of Indi a in accordance with 
the National /ICAO Regulations whereas security is managed under the 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security.  
 
AAI had established a Directorate of Aviation Safet y in 1998 with 
the objective of carrying out the mission of Aviati on Safety by process of 
auditing, monitoring and safety promotion.  These o bjectives are achieved 
by carrying out the Aviation Safety objective at th e field stations and 
subsequently doing the coordination with the Heads of different wings for 
further improvement in the system.  One of the prim e objectives of 
Directorate of Aviation Safety is to assess complia nce with the ICAO 
standards and recommended practices and ensure adhe rence to the 
prescribed standards and procedures, circulars and recommendations etc. 
to determine the effectiveness of safety standards and to verify the 
efficacy of safety management against safety hazard s. In order to achieve 
the goal, safety audit is being conducted in accord ance with ICAO’s 
requirement of surveillance obligations of safety m anagement system and 
universal safety oversight audit programme.” 
 
2.2   SAFETY ON THE GROUND:  
Safe operation of airports consisting of several fu nctional areas like (a) fire 
safety, (b) runway safety, (c) apron control, etc. at airports operated by AAI is 
their responsibility, in their capacity as airport operator.  On its responsibilities 
related to ground safety, AAI stated: 
“The responsibilities enumerated are as under: 
 
(i) Surface Movement and Guidance Control 
(ii) Preparation of plans for Airport Emergency Ser vices. 
(iii) Bird eradication programme. 
(iv) Co-ordination and clearance of repair works/ n ew projects with 
Departments of Planning, Electrical, Civil &ATM. 

9  
(v) Monitoring and follow up action on proceedings of the 
Operational Inspection Committee, Airport Security Committee 
and Airfield Environment Management Committee. 
(vi) Co-ordination for licensing of airports. 
(vii) Projection, coordination and implementation i n respect of 
aircrafts operations for updation of Aeronautical I nformation 
Publication and Jeppsen Charts, Correspondence rela ted to 
ICAO and Co-ordination with DGCA and IATA. 
 
Apart from above, at other airports Aerodrome Contr ol Tower 
officers exercised surveillance on the apron and the associated areas. The 
fire crew in the fire station also keeps surveillan ce on the overall control 
and supervision of Airport Incharge.” 
 
A. Fire Safety 
 Asked about fire safety infrastructure, and traine d firemen, AAI stated as 
under: 
“Fire safety infrastructure at AAI operated airport s are maintained as per 
ICAO guidelines….AAI is operating two training cent ers to meet the 
requirement of trained and qualified fire safety pe rsonnel of AAI….Level of 
Fire protection for the safety of the passengers ar e maintained by Airport 
Fire Services, round the clock as per ICAO guidelin es,  under the overall 
administrative/Operational control of Airport Direc tor of the respective 
airports” 
 
 On the existence of an inspectorate over its fire safety system, the AAI 
stated: 
“…..Internal AAI’s Aviation Safety Directorate carr ies out inspection to 
check the infrastructure, preparedness and technica l competence of fire 
safety.  External agencies like DGCA/ICAO carry out such inspections.” 
 
B. Runway Safety 
 
 Runway safety has various facets like prevention o f runway intrusions, 
friction co-efficiency, surface movement and guidan ce control, coordination of 
repair works/new projects with Air Traffic Management, signages, lighting, etc. 
Runway Intrusions 
 Asked to furnish the organizational structure in p lace for handling ground 
safety in the light of media reports on several ins tances of runway intrusions the 
AAI stated: 

10   
“Department of Ground and Flight Safety at… the air ports is headed by Jt. 
GM/DGM who is assisted by GM/Sr. Manager.  In this Department, there 
is an apron control unit functioning round the cloc k manned by Manager/ 
Assistant Manager and Sr. Assistant…. Apart from ab ove, at other airports 
Aerodrome Control Tower Officers exercised surveill ance on the apron 
and the associated areas….” 
 
 Asked to furnish instances of accidents/fatalities  and runway intrusions 
during the past three years, AAI are able to furnis h details related to airports at 
Kolkata, Chennai and Trivandrum only. 
 
 Drawing reference to Audit’s comments in their Rep ort No. 17 of 2007 
about friction tester machines being under utilized  due to non-availability of 
spares and absence of trained personnel, AAI were a sked to comment on action 
taken thereof.  They replied thus: 
 “AAI has inducted total 09 Nos. friction testers a nd positioned at 05 Nos. 
Regional E&M Workshops -New Delhi, Chennai, Mumabi,  Kolkata, 
Guwahati and 04 Nos. Sub-Regional Workshops-Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, 
Lucknow and Imphal (presently positioned at New Del hi). These machines 
are being utilized for friction testing of various airports within Region as 
per DARA Circular Guidelines(DARA Circular No. 6/2006).  
 
• Central E&M Workshop, New Delhi of AAI is nodal age ncy for 
monitoring of serviceability and   maintenance of a dequate essential 
spares parts of all 09 Nos. friction testers. Perio dical procurement of 
essential maintenance spares are being procured bas ed on feed-
back from Regional & Sub-Regional Workshops. 
 
• Regional Workshops are headed by Deputy General Man ager and 
Sub-Regional Workshops are headed by Sr. Manager le vel officers 
who have been trained by Original Equipment Manufac turer for 
operation & maintenance of these friction testers. In addition to these 
officers necessary training on operation & maintena nce of friction 
testers were also imparted to lower level executive s & staff also by 
Engineers of Original Equipment Manufacturer in Ind ia during the 
commissioning of these friction testers.” 
 
Asked about the organizational structure in place w ithin AAI for ensuring 
adequate friction co-efficiency of runways and its responsibilities, AAI replied: 
“The Regional Workshops/Sub-Regional Workshops are under respective 
Regional Executive Director. 
 

11   
• The officials (of the regional workshops) carry out  the friction 
measurement of various airports within the region i n co-ordination 
with G.M.(ATM)-Region of respective Region. 
 
• These measurement with reports provides to Airport In-charges for 
necessary corrective action, if requires with the h elp of Engineering 
wing of AAI.” 
 
 On whether they have training facility to train th e technical staff for friction 
tests, AAI stated: 
“AAI do not have training center for technical staf f. AAI officers and staff 
are being trained by Original Equipment Manufacture r for operation & 
maintenance of these friction testers.“ 
 
To a query as to whether any inspectorate to monito r these friction test 
operators exists within or outside AAI, AAI also replied in the negative. 
 
Surface Movement and Guidance 
 In the light of reports about pilots being given m aps of runways that are 
not updated and the weak airstrip signages in airpo rts, the Committee desired to 
know the structure of units looking after these asp ects.  in their reply AAI stated 
as under:  
 
“Before pilots undertake flying, they take briefing  from ATS Reporting 
officer where latest operational information and airport details are provided 
to them.  Airlines generally procure Jeppesen charts for their flight crew.   
 
 Organizational structure responsible for providing  updated maps of 
runways undergoing modernization for airports owned  by AAI is as 
follows: -  
 
 ED [ATM] supported by GM [ATM], GM [Ops.], GM [AIS ], GM [IAL], GM 
[AGA], GM [Carto.] and the Airport In-charges.   
 
 Map-making process is accomplished by compilation of information and 
their vetting by AIS, Operations, IAL, AGA, S&P, Co mmunication and 
Engg. Sections and finally it is put up for approval of ED [ATM].   
 
 Maps for runways at Delhi, Mumbai, Cochin Internat ional airports are 
provided by their respective operators. 
 
At Delhi, Mumbai and Cochin International airports,  the respective 
aerodrome operator is responsible for airstrip signages.  
 

12   
At AAI airports, the concerned Airport Director / A irport-Incharge is 
responsible to look after Airstrip signages.” 
 
 On the system of monitoring/inspection over the fu nctioning of such units 
and the frequency of inspection, AAI in their reply stated: 
“Internal checking and verification process within Cartography and vetting 
of maps by IAL, AIS, Ops., AGA, S&P and concerned a irport is followed.  
Then, ED (ATM) approves map.  Final regulatory authority is DGCA.” 
 
 
C. Apron Control / Ground Traffic: 
 
 As per information furnished by AAI regarding the details of 
accidents/incidents at airports under AAI, it was n oted that the majority of such 
mishaps occurred in the apron and taxiways of airpo rts.  Vehicular movement in 
these areas appeared to be highly unregulated as ev ident from the details of 
incidents furnished of three sample airports.  See (Annex-I) 
 Asked as to whether any inspectorate to monitor th e functioning of such 
ground traffic safety set-up was in place, AAI in reply stated,  
“Within AAI, Directorate of Aviation Safety has bee n established which 
carried out audits of the airports” 
 
From the figures furnished by AAI, it is noted that  fines ranging upto Rs. 
500 and cancellation of permits/licenses was resort ed to as a penalty on the 
personnel responsible for accidents. (refer to Anne x-I) 
 
2.3. EMERGENCY/DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 To the Committee’s query as to whether AAI has an organizational 
structure to handle disasters at airports, AAI stated as follows: 
 “No.  However, majority of the officers have under gone training on 
Disaster management conducted by National Civil Def ense College 
Nagpur.” 
 
 Upon further probing by the Committee as to why no  disaster 
management system is in place, the AAI in their pos t evidence note stated: 

13   
“Roles to be played by AAI and its different units at airports have been 
indicated in Local Emergency Procedure and Continge ncy Plan.  While 
dealing with the following: - 
i)         Aircraft emergencies 
ii)        Airport Terminal Building Evacuation Plan 
iii) Other incidents at airport 
 
As such AAI has its own Airport Fire service being upgraded for 
other disaster as well in terms of training of offi cers from fire department 
on disaster management being conducted by National Defence College, 
Nagpur and also procurement of equipment vehicles l ike Mobile 
Command post vehicle, temporary shelter [collapsible type].” 
 
 
 Replying to a query on whether any training centre  for Disaster 
Management exists during evidence, AAI stated: 
“National Civil Defense College, Nagpur is the trai ning center for training 
in the disaster management.  This institute comes u nder Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Govt. of India.” 
  
On whether adequate medical infrastructure and pers onnel are at hand in 
the airports to meet exigencies that may arise out of disasters/emergencies, AAI 
replied as under: 
 “AAI is providing Medical Inspection facilities/ f irst aid facilities at airports 
under its control. 
 
  Medical inspection rooms have been established at  Chennai, 
Kolkata and Trivandrum airports and are being manne d by medical 
officials of Airports Authority of India (AAI).  At  Ahmedabad, Bangalore, 
Hyderabad, Calicut and Goa airports, medical inspec tion rooms are being 
maintained by reputed nursing homes/ hospitals.  At  other AAI airports, 
the facility of first aid is available. 
  In addition, in order to meet different type of e mergencies, Airport 
emergency Plans have been established for each airp ort, which provide a 
framework for coordinated efforts by all Organizati ons and agencies, 
functioning at airports, as well as, off airport Or ganizations/ agencies such 
as Municipal Authorities, City Fire Brigade, City H ospitals, Doctors in the 
city on the panel of Airports Authority of India.” 
 
 Asked to furnish details of equipments made availa ble at airports to 
manage disaster situations, AAI in their reply stated: 
“Disarming and rescue tools are maintained in all r escue and fire fighting 
vehicles.” 

14   
 On the issue of harnessing technology during emerg encies, AAI in their 
reply stated: 
“The Mobile Command Posts…are being used during the  aircraft 
emergencies.  These…carry necessary communication e quipments and 
supporting material, which may be required during a ircraft emergencies.  
This helps in establishing communication from the p oint of accident/ 
incident with the base stations within no time.” 
 
 When asked to furnish the technical capability of Mobile Command Posts, 
drawing reference to media reports on AAI’s plans t o establish MCPs at 66 of its 
airports, AAI stated in reply: 
“A technical specification of Mobile Command Posts is under review and 
finalization.” 
 
2.4 FLIGHT SAFETY 
 Safe navigation of aircraft is another function of  AAI in their capacity as 
the Air Traffic Service (ATS) provider in the count ry.  ATS is in itself a composite 
function of Communication, Navigation & Surveillanc e and Air Traffic 
Management (CNS & ATM). 
 
Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS) 
 CNS functions as detailed in the Safety Management  Manual (SMM) 
furnished before the Committee consists of the foll owing: 
 
 
/head2right Maintenance of all Communications Navigation and Su rveillance 
facilities such as Very High Frequency Omni Range ( VOR), Non 
Directional Beacon (NDB), Instrument Landing System  (ILS), 
Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR) Air route Surveill ance Radar 
(ARSR); 
/head2right Monitoring the Flight Calibration of Sensitive equipment so that they 
work with optimum efficiency and accuracy; 
/head2right Management of man power including their training fo r smooth 
operation of Communications navigational Aids and Radar facilities; 
/head2right Monitoring of new projects related to installation of NAV-AIDS, and 
radars at different airports in India; and  
/head2right Purchase and testing of Spare Parts for effective m aintenance of 
equipment. 
 

15   
The organization structure of CNS Directorate in AA I as furnished by 
them, is headed by ED(CNS-O&M), who report to Membe r(Ops).  The ED(CNS-
O&M) is supported by GMs, DGM and Managers. 
Asked to give a note on the technical qualification  required of CNS 
personnel, AAI in reply stated: 
“Presently, induction level of executive for mainte nance of CNS facilities in 
AAI is Jr. Executive (Electronics).  The requirement of basic qualification is 
1st class Engineering graduate in Electronics and C ommunication 
engineering.  On appointment, they are imparted ab- initio training at 
CATC, Bamrauli, Allahabad for a period of 20 weeks including 2 weeks of 
familiarization at an international /major airports .  On successful 
completion of training they are posted to airports for maintenance and 
operational duties.  The same executive grows in th eir carrier by 
promotion to the post of Asstt.Mgr, Manager, Sr.Man ager, DGM, GM etc.  
The Incharge for maintenance of radars is of the le vel of DGM who is 
assisted by SMs, Manager and other supporting staff . These executives 
are trained on radar system at factory premises of manufacturer or CATC, 
Allahabad or at Regional Training Centre located at  Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kolkata & Chennai.  On completion of training, they  are examined in 
theoretical papers followed by practical and viva-v oce examination.  
Successful executives are graded as proficient in m aintenance of radar 
system. 
 
An executive of the level of Manager, Assistant Man ager and JET 
(Electronics) are entrusted with the responsibiliti es of maintenance of 
communication system.  These executives are also tr ained and examined 
before declaring them proficient for maintenance of  the facilities.” 
 
Replying to a query regarding the induction of late st technology and 
equipment for Communication, Navigation and Surveil lance which are critical to 
the safe management of Air Traffic, the representat ive of AAI stated before the 
Committee:  
“…….I would like to mention that there is a plan an d it is almost 
implemented. It is about the VHF coverage in the en tire Indian air space. 
That is mostly the continental airspace for which w e are doing remote 
control Air Ground Communication System using satel lite. Two 
transponders have been hired from the Indian satell ite. That project is 
through. We are putting nearly 80 V-SAT systems at the airports so that 
the entire airspace is covered. When the pilot is f lying, he does not have 
any gap in the VHF cover. As I said, the entire air  space is covered. That 
is almost done at more than 60 Airports. Probably, in a month or so, we 

16   
will complete the 80 V-SAT systems that will enhanc e the VHF cover in 
the entire airspace.” 
 
 The representative further stated: 
“……we are also in the process of having a number of  frequencies. We 
have studied about approach frequency, tower freque ncy and the air 
control frequency. Wherever there is workload and m ore congestion, we 
have bifurcated. Recently, in Chennai, last week, w e bifurcated the air 
control centre, East and West. Like that, we have b een doing sectorisation 
so that the workload, the frequency and more occupa ncy of the channel 
by the pilot is reduced. We have already initiated action on this. We will be 
initiating action wherever the workload is more. We are definitely doing it.” 
 
 In reply to queries raised during evidence on Pilo t-ATCO communication 
problems arising out of deficient equipments, AAI i n their written reply stated: 
“For Pilot-ATCO communication, a number of VHF freq uencies have been 
provided at all airports. More number of frequencie s are provided if need 
arises. Since communication on VHF is limited to li ne of sight, for 
enhanced range Remote Control Air to Ground (RCAG) VHF Stations 
have been set up at a number of locations. It is ex pected that whole of the 
continental airspace will be brought under RCAG VHF  coverage for en-
route traffic by 3rd quarter of 2008.  It is also p roposed to convert the pre-
departure clearance at Delhi and Mumbai to the data  mode instead of 
voice for more efficiency and unambiguous clearance s.” 
 
 On whether any inspectorate organization to monito r the working & 
efficiency of CNS personnel exists, AAI in their reply stated: 
 
 “There is no separate inspectorate organization to  monitor the working 
and efficiency of personnel as well as technology i n management of CNS 
facilities.  The work is presently being carried by  CNS operation & 
maintenance directorate of Corporate headquarter as sisted by Regional 
General Manager (Com) posted at each Regional headq uarter Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai & Guwahati. 
 
It is further intimated that Airports Authority of India vide their letter 
No.  A60011/45/2004-PP dated 30th January 2006 has issued proficiency 
policies in respect of CNS discipline. Among others , the policy envisages 
refresher training of the CNS personnel followed by  examination. 
Successful completion of these refresher courses va lidates the proficiency 
on the CNS facilities. 
 
 

17   
Air Traffic Management 
 
 The safety role of Air Traffic Management Director ate in Airports Authority 
of India as listed in the Safety Management Manual furnished before the 
Committee comprises: 
 
/head2right Provision of Air Traffic Services to all arriving, departing and 
enroute aircraft over flying Indian airspace; 
/head2right Establishment of ATS routes, realignment of existin g air routes in 
consultation with user airlines and international b odies such as 
IATA and ICAO. 
/head2right Establishment of control zones and control areas an d changes to 
existing control zones and areas; 
/head2right Establishment of Danger/prohibited and Restricted a reas and 
changes to mentioned areas in coordination with Mil itary 
Authorities; 
/head2right Providing search and rescue coordination for aircraft in distress; 
/head2right Providing Aeronautical Information Services (AIS) a s prescribed by 
ICAO to all domestic and international airlines and  AIS of other 
countries; 
/head2right Survey of airports, publication of aeronautical map s and charts; 
/head2right Development of Instrument Approach to land (IAL) pr ocedures & 
IAL charts; 
/head2right Monitoring and control of obstructions/construction s around airport 
to ensure compliance with the SARPs of ICAO; 
/head2right Coordination with International Civil Aviation Organization, Regional 
office Bangkok and Headquarters Montreal, Canada on  matters 
relating to airspace management and aviation rules and regulation; 
/head2right Manpower planning, training and award of ratings to  Air Traffic 
Controllers in conformity with ICAO rules and regul ations as stated 
in Annex I (Personnel Licensing); 
/head2right Monitoring of standards and procedures in the provision of ATS; 
/head2right Investigation of Air Traffic incidents in coordinat ion with DGCA and 
corrective actions thereupon; 
/head2right Matters related to aviation security; 
/head2right Monitoring of environmental hazards at airports; 
/head2right Management of courses to be conducted for training and 
development of ATCOs at CATC; 
/head2right Preparing and maintaining a roster of training prog rammes to be 
conducted at CATC from ATM prospective; and 
/head2right Carrying out investigation of ATC incidents to dete ct system/human 
errors to take immediate steps for prevention of su ch occurrences. 
 
Normally, aircraft accident investigation will be c onducted by 
DGCA, however as the organization has a responsibil ity to quickly 

18   
identify any AAI contributory factors behind an inc ident or accident, 
AAI may conduct an internal investigation, separate from DGCA. 
 
 This internal investigation team may comprise pers onnel 
from Aviation Safety Directorate, ATM, CNS and Airp orts 
Directorates.” 
 
 The ATM Directorate in AAI is headed by ED(ATM) wh o reports to 
Member (Ops) and who in turn reports to Chairman, A AI.  The ED is supported 
by GM(ATM), GM(Ops), GM(AIS), GM(IAL), GM(AGA) and GM(Carto), etc. as 
furnished by AAI. 
 
 On the structure of organization and responsibilit ies for management of 
Indian Airspace for commercial traffic, the AAI fur nished the following reply: 
 Airspace Structure  
 
 Indian Airspace is divided into Four Flight Inform ation Regions [FIRs] 
 1. Delhi FIR 
 2. Mumbai FIR 
 3. Chennai FIR 
 4. Kolkata FIR with Guwahati Sub FIR. 
 
Each FIR is managed by Flight Information Centre [F IC] working at Delhi, 
Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Guwahati. 
 
Each FIR has Area Control Centre/s, Approach Contro l Unit/s and 
Aerodrome Control Towers to provide Air Traffic Services. 
 
 Responsibilities 
 
1. Flight information service provided by flight in formation centre 
 
Provides advice and information useful for the safe  and efficient 
conduct of flights. 
2. Area control service provided by area control ce ntres 
 
The provision of air traffic control service for co ntrolled flights, 
except for those parts of such flights which are un der the jurisdiction of 
Approach Control or Aerodrome Control to accomplish  following 
objectives: - 
 
 a) prevent  collisions between aircraft; 
 b) expedite and maintain an orderly flow of air tr affic; 

19   
 
3. Approach control service provided by approach co ntrol units 
 
The provision of air traffic control service for th ose parts of 
controlled flights associated with arrival of depar ture, in order to 
accomplish following objectives:- 
 
 a) prevent collisions between aircraft; 
 b) expedite and maintain an orderly flow of air tr affic; 
 
4. Aerodrome control service provided by aerodrome control towers 
 
The provision of air traffic control service for ae rodrome traffic, 
except for those parts of flights which are under t he jurisdiction of 
Approach Control to accomplish following objectives: - 
  
a) prevent collisions between aircraft; 
b) prevent collisions between aircraft on the maneu vering area and   
obstructions on that area; 
 c) expedite and maintain an orderly flow of air tr affic. 
 
Asked if AAI has a training centre for Air Traffic Controllers, and if so, the 
content of such training, they replied stating: 
 AAI has a training center for training the Air Tra ffic Controllers.  The 
training centre is know as Civil Aviation Training College and is situated in 
Allahabad. 
 
Fresh recruits of the Air Traffic Management discip line, called 
Junior Executive Trainees (ATC) undergo a 24 week t raining programme 
in which they are trained in procedural control in the following areas: 
 
• Aerodrome Surface Movement Control 
• Aerodrome control 
• Approach Control 
 
In addition to the Air Traffic Control, during the various phases of 
training, the trainees are taught about air navigat ion systems, aviation 
meteorology, procedures and actions to be taken by the controllers in 
case of aircraft in emergency, coordination of search and rescue of aircraft 
and passengers in case of aircraft and passengers i n case of aircraft 
accidents, and Aerodrome Ground Aids.  All these en hance the 
understanding of the job and efficiency of the cont rollers. 
 
At the end of the training, the trainees will under go an examination 
and those who qualify in the examinations in this t raining are posted as 

20   
Junior Executives (ATC) at airports, where they hav e to undergo on-the-
job training and pass the station level examination  to become rated 
controllers to handle traffic independently. 
 
2. After acquiring ratings and experience in ATC wo rk at the airports, 
these executives will return to CATC, Allahabad for an advanced course of 
8 weeks in Area Control service.  This course is in tended for training the 
controllers for upper air space management.  Like b efore, on successful 
completion of training in CATC, Allahabad, they hav e to undergo on-the-
job training in Area Control service units in the a irports and pass the 
station level examination to become rated Area Cont rollers. 
 
3. Procedural air traffic control systems have the inherent factor of 
certain minimum separation standards.  In the prese nt day rapid growth of 
aviation, more efficient tools like radars are need ed to expedite traffic 
while keeping the safety aspect in tact.  All our m etro airports and busy 
airports have been provided with radars.  Those who  have acquired 
ratings in all the procedural control jobs will be trained at CATC, Allahabad 
in air traffic control through radar, in the rar si mulator for 10 weeks.  After 
the trainee controllers qualify the examination on the radar simulator, they 
have to undergo on-the-job training at radar statio ns and pass the station 
level examination to become rated radar controllers.” 
 
 On the issue of enhancing the skills and competenc e of ATCOs through 
international exposure, the AAI submitted: 
 “In the year 2006, AAI had sent 34 ATCOs to the in ternational airports of 
UK, USA and Amsterdam and in the year 2007, AAI has  sent 33 ATCOs 
to USA and Italy for different type of training use ful to ATCOs. 
 
  CATC has plans to develop advanced Air Traffic Ma nagement 
courses under the guidance of reputed ATS providers  like National Air 
Traffic Services (NATS), U.K., and Air Service Aust ralia (ASA) for 
enhancing skills and competence of controllers to k eep pace with newer 
technologies. 
  
  There is a proposal to establish an advanced air traffic services 
training institute at Begumpet airport, Hyderabad s hortly after commercial 
aircraft operations shift to the new Greenfield air port at Shamshabad, 
Hyderabad next year, for the purpose of enhancing s kills and competence 
of the controllers. 
 
Skill Appraisal 
 
 On a query whether established methods to test com petence of such ATC 
personnel are in place, AAI in their reply stated: 

21   
 “Yes there is an established procedure to check th e efficiency of Air Space 
Controllers i.e. ATC Officers. 
  
To enhance air safety in Indian airspace, one of th e safety audit 
system is monitoring the efficiency and proficiency  of air traffic controllers 
through assessments of their performances at the op erating positions.” 
  
Asked about the system in place for inspection of A TC units, AAI stated: 
 “Proficiency assessment at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai are 
conducted by respective GM (ATM)/DGM (S&P)/WSOs and  at all other 
stations by the ATS in-charge at regular intervals. 
  
1. Proficiency checks of all rated controllers are carried out by a team 
of officers of Standardization & Procedures Section  of ATM 
Directorate in Corporate Office, once every year, a t all the 
international airports, the ACC Centres and other m ajor airports on 
rotational basis. 
  
 Conducting proficiency assessment at regular inter vals is primarily 
aimed at rectification of mistakes, wrong perceptio ns/ practices and 
the aberrations that creep in the system. 
 
   2. Random ATC tape Transcript sent by various Ai rports on monthly 
basis are analyzed and necessary recommendations, i f required, are 
sent to the concerned stations for rectification of  mistakes and 
improving the efficiency of ATC personnel.” 
 
Licensing  
 Asked as to whether ATC personnel are licensed tec hnicians like the 
pilots and maintenance engineers, AAI in reply stated: 
 “The issue of licensing of ATCOs is being pursued by DGCA.” 
 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their reply to the above query stated: 
“Matter of licensing of ATCOs is under active consideration.” 
 
 While replying to queries during evidence, the rep resentative of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation stated as follows: 
“……..Parliament has passed the Aircraft Amendment A ct making it 
operational w.e.f. 1 
st  January 2008 very recently whereunder the licensin g 
of airports and the licensing of air traffic contro llers will now be made.” 
 

22   
 Concerned about frequent media reports on near mis ses of aircraft 
collision in the Indian Airspace, the Committee wan ted the figures for such 
incidents of potential mishap.  The figures supplie d by AAI revealed that in 2004 
there were a total of ten airprox incidents, sevent een in 2005, sixteen in 2006 
and 21 in 2007. (refer annex VII) 
 An analysis of the incidents revealed that out of the ten airprox incidents 
during the year 2004, eight incidents were attribut ed to ATC personnel error.  
Similarly, out of the seventeen incidents during th e year 2005, twelve incidents 
were due to ATC personnel error.  Fourteen out of s ixteen incidents in 2006 were 
also attributed to ATC personnel error.  Collision avoidance in most cases of 
airprox incidents in 2007 were attributed to Airbor ne Collision Avoidance System 
(ACAS) in the aircrafts.  When these facts were poi nted out during evidence, the 
representative of AAI stated: 
 “Sometimes, the fault is of pilot also.” 
 
 Elaborating on the steps taken to remedy the high percentage of airprox 
incidents being attributed to ATC personnel, a representative of the AAI stated: 
“In such cases, the officer is withdrawn from duty and he is made to go for 
a rigorous training.  Then, he is again tested by t he instructor and, when 
found fit, is being deployed for the duty.” 
 
 Explaining the increase in the number of incidents  from 10 in 2004 to 16 in 
2006, the representative of AAI stated: 
“In 2006, the number is 16 and that is with 40 perc ent increase in air 
traffic.” 
  
The Committee observed during evidence that sending  erring officials for 
more rigorous training cannot be the only remedy fo r increasing incidents of 
error, even with the increase in traffic.  This, th e Committee felt, reflected a lag in 
the expansion of capacities in tandem with the grow ing traffic, and a systemic 
fault which needed to be identified and redressed.   
In their post evidence reply, the AAI listed the st eps taken by them to 
check airprox incidents. 

23   
“Apart from giving corrective training to the contr ollers other actions as 
detailed below are taken:- 
(i) New high-speed exit taxi-bays at Delhi and    M umbai airports 
have been constructed and also few are being constr ucted.  A 
parallel taxi-track has been constructed at Delhi a irport by which 
runway occupancy time has been reduced considerably. 
(ii) Improved ATC procedures have been framed. 
(iii) Clearance Delivery Position has been establis hed at Mumbai 
and Delhi airports.      
(iv) Ban on general aviation aircraft during peak p eriod at Delhi and 
Mumbai Airport has been imposed. 
(v) ATC Automation System at Delhi and Mumbai are b eing 
upgraded. 
(vi) Surface Movement Radar has been installed and in operation at 
Delhi Airport. 
(vii) Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Contro l System 
[ASMGCS] is being installed at Delhi and being plan ned for 
Mumbai, Kolkata & Chennai Airports. 
(viii) Air Traffic Flow Management System is being worked out. 
(ix) Kolkata ILS is being upgraded to CAT II ILS. 
(x) Provision of short-term conflict warning and mi nimum safe 
altitude warning in the radar systems to avoid airb orne 
collisions.  
(xi) Varanasi TMA extended to have increased radar coverage. 
(xii) Mangalore TMA, which was available for limite d period, is made 
available for 24 hours. 
(xiii) Sectorization of Nagpur and Chennai airspace  is planned for 
better surveillance and to reduce the stress of the  controllers.  
(xiv) Safety management system, which is a pro-acti ve measure for 
removing system deficiencies, is under implementation.  
(xv) Automatic dependant surveillance and CPDLC hav e been 
installed at many Indian airports.  
(xvi) Refresher courses for controllers are conduct ed every year and 
the deficiencies observed in the previous incidents  are being 
analyzed as a case study, so that they do not recur in future.  
(xvii) Proficiency checks of controller are carried  out regularly to 
ensure/maintain the skill levels of ATCOs. at optim um level.   
(xviii) Up-gradation of ATC automation system at De lhi, Mumbai, 
Chennai, Kolkata and other major ATC centre is unde rway to 
reduce controller work load and enhance safety.”    
 
Manpower Shortage 
 

24   
 Asked to furnish details regarding shortage of Air  Traffic Controllers, 
including the figures of actual strength, annual intake and attrition for the past five 
years, AAI submitted as follows: 
 
 
Year S/S A/S Intake Retirement Resignation Terminat ion 
2002 1012 983 - 21 02 - 
2003  - 29 02 - 
2004  - 35 - - 
2005  78 33 03 - 
2006 
 
 144 35 02 - 
2007   184 31 32 01 
 
 The reply also stated ‘manpower shortage at presen t is approximately 
20%.” 
 
In a subsequent note, the AAI stated that the above  figures of intake 
showed only direct recruitments and did not take in to account the promotion of 
non-executive to executive cadre.  The revised info rmation furnished by them in 
this regard is as follows: 
Year S/S A/S Intake Retirement Resignation Terminat ion 
2002 1012 983 -- 21 02 - 
2003  28 29 02 - 
2004  75 35 - - 
2005  205 33 03 - 
2006 
 
 195 35 02 - 
2007 2030 1504 204 31 32 01 
Total   747 184 41 01 
 
Note:  
Actual strength of executive in ATC Discipline in the year 2002 = 983 
Intake between 2002 and 2007        = 747 
Total            =  1730 
Retirement/Resignation/Termination between 2002-07    = 226 
Actual strength in 2007         = 1504 (1730-226) 
 
 Replying to queries on the shortage of manpower (A TCOs) and steps 
taken to remedy the same, AAI in reply wrote: 
“The traffic growth during the last five years has been phenomenal.  In 
order to meet the sudden unprecedented traffic grow th AAI had 
implemented additional ATC working positions at Mum bai, Delhi, Kolkata, 
Chennai and other major airports.  Additional operational shifts hours have 
been implemented to cover the new flight services a t many small airports 

25   
also.  These new implementations have resulted in r equirement of 
additional ATC manpower. 
AAI has, therefore, started recruitment and trainin g of new ATCOs 
on priority.  Starting from the year 2005, 405 new ATCOs have been 
recruited, trained and deployed at various airports .  Recruitment process 
for 68 vacancies of Manager [ATC] and 100 Jr. Execu tives [ATC] have 
already been commenced.  These ATCOs will be availa ble for deployment 
approx. by August 2008.  
            This will adequately cover the immediat e requirement.   To meet 
the future requirements of ATCOs, 150 Jr. Executive s will be recruited 
every six months for the next 2 years which will wi pe out the additional 
requirement. ” 
 
Working Hours 
 On the login period/duty hours of ATC officers, AA I, declining to draw a 
comparison with best international practice, stated in their reply as follows: 
“The working hours in respect of ATCOs in 42 hours per week on 
rotational shift pattern.” 
 
 Asked whether breath analyzer test for ATCOs are i n place, the AAI in 
their reply wrote: 
 
“
The ATCOs are performing ground based duties and ar e under the direct 
supervision and control of Sr. Officers in the shif t.  Shift supervisor 
exercise constant surveillance of the performance o f ATCO.  The 
personnel who are not in physical and mental condit ion are not allowed to 
perform ATC duties.”  
 
The mismatch between the upshot in air traffic on t he one hand and the 
inadequate infrastructure and manpower for manageme nt of air traffic being a 
concern, the Committee wanted to know whether the A AI had been consulted 
before allowing various airlines to operate.  The Ministry replied stating: 
“The proposal of various companies for grant of ini tial NOC to operate Air 
Transport Services are considered by a Committee ca lled Aircraft 
Acquisition Committee (ACC).  Chairman, AAI, DGCA a nd Commissioner, 
BCAS are the members of this Committee and their re presentatives take 
part in the deliberations of the Committee.” 
 

26   
2.5 CORPORATIZATION OF ATS 
 
 Drawing reference to the Naresh Chandra Committee Report’s 
recommendation for Corporatization of ATS (CNS+ATM) , the Committee sought 
the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The M inistry in their written reply 
stated: 
“In terms of International Conventions, provision o f air navigation services 
and management of airspace is a sovereign responsib ility.  In our country, 
AAI undertakes this responsibility on behalf of the  Government. The 
increasing growth in air traffic, besides underlini ng physical infrastructural 
constraints at ground, has also highlighted the nee d for technological 
upgradation and better air space management.  In th is background, ANS 
(consisting of CNS and ATM wings of AAI) have acqui red greater 
prominence.  It is felt that there is a need to upg rade ANS services on an 
accelerated basis for which undivided attention is required to be paid to 
this crucial area. Further, internationally also, t here has been an 
increasing trend towards corporatization of ANS ser vices. The Naresh 
Chandra Committee on  ‘A Roadmap for Civil Aviation  Sector’ has also 
recommended for creation of a separate ANS Corporat ion. It would not be 
out of place to mention here that a number of airpo rts are coming up with 
private participation.  Therefore, there could be a  perception of conflict of 
interest if ANS services remain directly under cont rol of AAI who is also an 
airport operator.  It is in this background that th e Ministry of Civil Aviation 
decided to get the issue of creation of a separate corporate entity for ANS 
services examined through independent Consultants. The two models, 
which have been posed for consideration, are creati on of a separate 
corporation under Government ownership or creation of a wholly owned 
subsidiary of AAI.  In both these cases, the owners hip and control of ANS 
services would remain with the Government. AAI have  appointed M/s. 
KPMG to advise in the matter.  Once the report of t he Consultants is 
received, the same will be examined and a final dec ision will be taken with 
the approval of the competent authority.” 
 
2.6 SAFETY AUDIT 
 The Committee wanted to be informed about the syst em in place for 
safety audit, both within the AAI and the civil aviation sector in general. 
 On whether AAI has a safety manual, they replied: 
“A Corporate Safety Management Manual has been deve loped and 
submitted to DGCA.” 
 

27   
 In reply to the question on the system of safety a udit and details related to 
it, the AAI in their reply stated: 
 “The Directorate of Aviation Safety carries out th e annual safety audit of all 
functional AAI Airports, civil enclaves and other f acilities.  The safety audit 
of non-functional airports is carried out once in t wo years.   
  The number of safety audits conducted by Aviation  Safety 
Directorate is as follows: 
 
  2005: 26 
  2006: 13 
2007: 33 
 
At the conclusion of each safety audit the verbal r eport of 
deficiencies observed is given in the debriefing me eting with the Airport 
Director or Controller of Aerodromes and subsequent ly a detailed audit 
report is sent to the concerned Airport for taking suitable remedial or 
corrective measures.” 
 
 Asked if any international agency had ever been en gaged to conduct a 
safety Audit of the AAI’s operations, their reply stated: 
 “The International Civil Aviation Organisation (IC AO) the apex world body 
in the field of aviation under United Nations had c onducted audit of India 
from 10-20 October 2006 under Universal Safety Over sight Audit 
Programme (USOAP).  They visited Delhi and Mumbai A irport as a part of 
this audit.” 
 
 The Ministry of Civil Aviation, in reply to a simi lar query, stated:  
“Safety audit of the DGCA, India was conducted by I CAO from 10 
th  to 
20 th  October, 2006 under their Universal Safety Oversig ht Audit 
Programme wherein all safety related provisos in th e 18 ICAO 
Annexures were included except facilitation and sec urity.  In preparation 
for the audit, India had to submit information on a  format to respond to 
questionnaire pertaining to the State’s aviation ac tivities and compliance 
checklist in respect of the ICAO Annexures.  On rec eipt of the above 
information supported by documentation like regulat ions, civil aviation 
requirements, procedures/guidelines, ICAO in their evaluation had 
observed that India complies with 98.37% of the Sta ndards in the ICAO 
Annexes. 
 
In their subsequent on-sight audit, ICAO had made a  total of 70 
recommendations, which are as follows: 
 
• Legislation       7 
• Organisation       5 

28   
• Personnel licensing      6 
• Operation of Aircraft     7 
• Airworthiness of aircraft     5 
• Aircraft accident and incident investigation 20 
• Air navigation services    11 
• Aerodromes        9 
 
In their report, the areas of concern were on lack of legislation for 
air navigation services in the Aircraft Act, lack o f regulatory functions 
pertaining to air navigation services including tot al independent accident 
investigation authority, lack of availability of te chnical manpower 
including training and lack of punitive measures li ke fines in the 
enforcement of aviation regulations. 
 
The Aircraft (Amendment) Act of 2007 notified in December 6, 2007 
has introduced powers to the Central Government for  issuing licences to 
the personnel engaged in air traffic control, certi fications, inspection and 
regulation of CNS/ATM facilities.  The amended Act has also enhanced 
the quantum of penalties for violations of the prov isions of the Act 
wherein the fine in Sections 11 and 11A would now b e Rs.10 lakhs with 
imprisonment to two years for Section 11 and for Se ction 11A from six 
months to two years respectively.  Similar enhancem ent of fines have 
also made in Section 11 B. 
 
 As regards manpower enhancement in the DGCA, the G overnment 
is taking action for implementing the Kaw Committee  recommendations 
in the matter.  The Government is also considering separating the 
investigating branch presently within the DGCA as a separate entity. 
 
 In addition to the above ICAO Safety Audit, in Oct ober, 1999 with 
the follow up in 2001, India was audited by ICAO on  areas of personnel 
licensing, operation of aircraft and airworthiness aspects vis-à-vis  the 
standards and recommended practices contained in th e corresponding 
ICAO Annexes (1, 6 and 8).  The report indicated th e Aircraft Act and the 
Rules constituted a comprehensive regulatory framew ork for governing 
DGCA’s responsibilities and duties with relation to  surveillance of aircraft 
operations, airworthiness of aircraft and personnel  licensing.  The report 
further indicated that the system established in th e DGCA for certification 
and surveillance of aircraft operations was satisfa ctory and enabled the 
State to comply with its obligations. 
 
Prior to the above, in 1997 FAA, USA also carried o ut an audit of 
DGCA, India and had been rated it in Category 1 (hi ghest category) with 
respect to regulations, certification and surveillance functions.” 
 

29   
 The Committee took note of the good rating obtaine d by DGCA from 
international Audit agencies as far as organization  structures and regulations in 
place are concerned.  However, concerns remained re garding the actual 
functioning of these structures and the implementat ion of regulations.  The 
Committee therefore wanted to know if any plan to s et up an independent 
inspectorate is in the pipeline.  The Ministry in their reply wrote: 
“DGCA is the safety regulator for the entire civil aviation sector including 
airlines and airports.  Keeping in view the changin g aviation scenario and 
the rapid growth in this sector, Government had con stituted a Committee 
under the chairmanship of Shri M.K. Kaw, former Sec retary, Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, to review the functioning of DGCA.  Recommendations of 
the Kaw Committee are under implementation.  Thus, the Government 
have been taking all necessary steps to strengthen the organization of 
DGCA so as to upgrade its capabilities to international standards.” 
 
While replying to queries related to findings of th e ICAO Audit during 
evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated: 
“There are issues which remain the areas of concern .  One is separating 
the accident and investigating agency from the regu latory authority that is, 
the DGCA.  We hope and pray that we do not have to face accidents, but 
the process to carry this forward us under the cons ideration of the 
Government.”  
 
 Further elaborating on the issue, the representati ve added: 
“The international practice is that the regulator i s different and if and when 
an accident does happen, then the investigating age ncy is different, we 
are proceeding in that direction.” 
 
2.7 SAFETY REGULATION 
 
 The safety related activities of AAI are under regu lation. Their 
performance is also rated with reference to complia nce to these regulations from 
the Directorate General of Civil Aviation.  The com mittee, therefore, sought to 
briefed about the organization and functions of the  DGCA. 
 Outlining the functions of the DGCA during evidenc e, the representative of 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated: 

30   
“The Directorate General of Civil Aviation, which i s an attached office of 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, in the safety regul ator for the entire civil 
aviation sector including airports.” 
 
 While replying to queries, the representative of t he Ministry further 
elaborated: 
“If it is the safety issue, the DGCA has all the Le gislative Competence to 
lay down the rules.  It lays down the norms which a re required to be 
followed by all these to whom those requirements ap ply.  They draw their 
strength from the recommended practices enunciated by the International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and make those a pplicable to domestic 
as well as international airlines.” 
 
 When asked about the findings of the ICAO audit re garding lack of 
legislation for air navigation services, lack of re gulation over air navigation 
services, etc., the representative of the Ministry stated: 
“The certification and regulation of the communicat ion and navigation 
services which are very important dimensions will b e subject to legislative 
supervision.” 
 
 The Committee wanted to know whether the regulator y body has been 
able to cope with the unprecedented growth in their  civil aviation sector in terms 
of its manpower.  The DGCA in their reply wrote: 
“As regards the DGCA, there is a serious shortage o f manpower due to 
increase, growth of civil aviation activities.  Gov ernment appointed a 
Committee headed by Shri M.K. Kaw, former Civil Avi ation Secretary to 
look into role, functions and infrastructure of DGCA.  Committee has made 
several recommendations including manpower which ha ve been accepted 
by the Government for implementation.” 
 
 In order to gauge the extent of shortage, the Comm ittee wanted the 
numbers of Civil Commercial Aircrafts in India agai nst the number of flight 
inspectors in the DGCA.  The Ministry in their written reply stated: 
“The number of Civil Commercial Airplanes, as on da te,  is 573 and the 
number of sanctioned strength of Flight Operations Inspector is 15 
including 01 Chief Flight Operations Inspector sinc e the year 2001. 
Number of civil commercial airplanes and pilots has  increased sizably 
since then. The process for induction  ‘8’ eligible  candidates is being 
followed up through UPSC as per recruitment rules. At present the 
available strength is one Chief Flight Operations I nspector with two Flight 
Inspectors on fixed wing aircraft and one Flight Inspector for helicopters.” 

31   
 
 Admitting the huge shortage of manpower in the DGC A, the 
representative of the Ministry stated during evidence: 
 
“Regarding technical manpower, in so far as the DGC A’s manpower is 
concerned, the DGCA has seen an exodus of trained m anpower in the 
recent past and the position today is that the DGCA ’s total sanctioned 
strength is 683 out of which the officer level stre ngth is 257, the rest are 
support staff etc. The actual availability for deployment is 534 and strength 
of officers available is 167. Therefore, there are 90 vacancies at the level 
of officers and the total number of vacancies is 14 9. We are actively 
working towards redressing this issue because all said and done adequate 
trained manpower is very important for the regulator.” 
 

32   
CHAPTER - III   
SECURITY FUNCTIONS OF AAI 
 
3.1 OVERVIEW  
 
 While Aviation Security in India is under regulati on and overall monitoring 
of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), AA I in its capacity as an Airport 
operator has certain responsibilities.  Placing the  role of various agencies in the 
aviation security administration, including the air port operators like AAI, into 
perspective, the BCAS in a concise para of the brie f furnished to the Committee 
wrote: 
“While security is a ‘sovereign’ function, with the  Government designating 
a Security Regulator (‘Appropriate Authority’) for laying down security 
policy, standards, quality control and oversight, t he execution of security 
functions and controls at the ground level is a joi nt endeavour involving 
governmental and private agencies operating under a n overarching 
NCASP approved by the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  This has been the 
practice over the past several years.  In most deve loped countries, 
aviation security regimes are similarly designed.” 
 
3.2 ROLE OF AIRPORT DIRECTOR 
Asked to furnish a detailed note on the role of AAI  in aviation security, AAI 
in their written reply stated: 
 “The AVSEC responsibilities of airport operators ( AAI) as mentioned in 
National Civil Aviation Security Programme (NCASP) are as under: 
 
i) Establishing and maintenance of a written Airpor t Security 
Programme for each airport. 
ii) To comply with the provisions of approved secur ity programme. 
iii) No commencement of operations at any airport w ithout obtaining 
security clearance from COS (CA). 
iv) To provide administration, maintenance, communi cation, fire 
fighting, air traffic services and other operational services.  
v) To provide the security equipments and carry out  proper 
maintenance of such equipments.  
vi) To provide physical infrastructure required for  the implementation of 
security measures. 
vii) Display signboards for educating the passenger s / airport 
employees. 

33   
viii) To coordinate in the event of any contingency  at the airport like 
bomb threat / unlawful seizure / hijacking of aircraft etc.  
ix) To establish Airport Security Committee (APSC) in conformity with 
National Civil Aviation Security Programme (NCASP) issued by 
BCAS. 
x) To convene Aerodrome Committee Meeting twice a y ear or in the 
event of any contingency. 
xi) Integrating the needs of civil aviation securit y into the design and 
construction of new facility and alterations to existing facilities.  
xii) Reimbursement of expenditure on account of dep loyment of CISF / 
state / UT police, for airport security duties. 
xiii) Preparation of contingency plan / bomb threat  contingency plan and 
circulate to the concerned members after approval b y COS (CA). 
xiv) Issuance of vehicle permits for operational ve hicles of the agencies 
working at airports. 
xv) To develop, implement and maintain the Airport Aviation Security 
Quality Control Programme duly approved by COS (CA). 
xvi) Airport Director / In-charge shall be responsi ble for coordinating the 
implementation of security control at the airports and  
xvii) Any other AVSEC responsibilities allocated by  the COS (CA).” 
 
 The security functions of AAI are allotted under t he National Civil Aviation 
Security Programme (NCASP) developed by the Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security.  A note furnished by the BCAS to the Comm ittee on Security Control 
describes the security functions allotted to Airport operators as follows: 
“Airport Operators (AAI/JVs/State Government airpor ts/private airports): 
The Airport Director has a key/nodal role in securi ty at an airport in view of 
the following functions assigned to him: Chairman/C onvener/Member of 
various airport committees including the Airport Se curity Committee and 
Airport Committee on dealing with a hijack situatio n; Chairman/Member of 
Airport Entry Permit (AEP) Committee; preparation o f Airport Security 
Programme, Contingency Programmes, etc.; multifario us responsibilities 
in preparing for and handing a hijack situation; an d provision of security 
equipment and security infrastructure at the airport.” 
 
 Taking note of the multiple agencies involved in i mplementing aviation 
security, the Committee wanted to know the mechanis m of coordination between 
these agencies.  AAI in their written reply stated: 
 “Directorate of Security has been established at C HQ, as per the 
directions of the Ministry of Civil aviation, to en sure smooth and efficient 
security at airports.  To achieve this, a full time  Director (Security) 

34   
responsible for airport security has been inducted in AAI since March 
2001. 
 
As per S.O.P approved by MCA “the Director (Securit y) of AAI shall 
be the Nodal Officer to coordinate with CISF, BCAS and MCA for effective 
deployment, efficient performance, administrative a rrangements, 
operational supervision of CISF personnel and for i mplementation of 
aviation security standards laid down by the BCAS.  He will be the person 
to deal and communicate with all agencies for airpo rt security”.   
  
 Asked to furnish the role & responsibility of the Airport Director in the 
security set-up of Airports, AAI in their reply sta ted that the role of Airport 
operator is to ensure that all security responsibil ities of the Airport operator under 
the NCASP are complied with. 
 
3.3 EQUIPMENTS AND SYSTEMS 
In the light of C&AG observations in their report N o. 17 of 2007 about X-
ray machines installed by AAI lacking in bomb detec tion capability, the 
Committee sought to be enlightened on the issue.  I n their written reply, the AAI 
stated: 
“X-ray machines, installed at Airports in stand-alo ne mode are capable of 
identifying the organic, non-organic, and high-dens ity materials. Explosive 
materials fall under the category of organic materials, which is displayed in 
pseudo orange colour. X-ray machines have facility of marking the organic 
materials with red circle indicating that there cou ld be some explosive 
material. However, merely this capability does not make X-ray machine 
capable of bomb detection.   
 
Display of organic objects along with triggering me chanism like 
battery, leads/wires, detonators etc., indicate pre sence of suspected 
Explosive System.  Under such conditions, relevant bag is to be examined 
physically. 
 
Small quantity of explosives or other organic mater ials do not 
generate red circles on X-ray image display even th ough these materials 
are displayed in pseudo orange colour. 
 
Thus, X-ray machines cannot detect explosive materi als with 100% 
certainty.  
 
In order to detect Explosives with certainty, Explo sive Trace Detectors are 
deployed now at the Airports.” 

35   
 Asked to give details about the actual installatio n of Explosive Trace 
Detectors (ETDs) in the various airports under them , the AAI in their post-
evidence note to the Committee submitted: 
“A total of 200 Explosive Trace Detectors (ETDs) ha ve been procured by 
the AAI. 195 ETDs have been delivered to various ai rports. A distribution 
list of ETDs at different airports is enclosed as A nnexure III.” 
 
 Asked to furnish the organizational structure main taining and operating 
security equipments, AAI in their reply wrote: 
 “The maintenance of Security Equipments including X-Ray Baggage 
Inspection System, Hand Held Metal Detectors, Door Frame Metal 
Detectors, Explosive Trace Detectors etc. is carrie d out by CNS personnel 
at all airports except for Kolkata, Chennai and Tri vandrum, where it is 
being done by executives of electronics.” 
 
 The Committee wanted to be apprised of the interna tional developments 
in terms of system and technologies for management of aviation security and the 
steps taken to adapt these in the domestic set-up.  The representative of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation stated during evidence: 
“The hon. Chairman had enquired on what are the fut uristic things which 
the world is doing in terms of security, and whethe r we are moving in that 
direction or not.  I would like to mention that thi s is something, which is 
constantly being addressed by the regulator, that i s the Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security.  They have been looking at vario us things.  For 
instance, presently you talked of the baggage havin g to be screened and 
then given at the counter etc.  In the world, there  are in-line baggage 
screening systems where you just go to the counter;  you give your bag.  
After it is taken, it goes through a process of scr eening and it goes to the 
aircraft.  If there is something, which is found in  screening, and they need 
the passenger, then the passenger is asked to come or his bag is opened.  
These systems are being put in place in the country .  Very shortly, we will 
have those in-line baggage screening systems.  Ther e will be no need to 
have the bags screened and then given at the counte r.  That also leads to 
various queues and congestion at the busy airports.  Then I come to the 
biometric based electronic access control systems.   
 
This is what is fairly common in the airports of th e developed world.  
This is also being taken up. Of course, perimeter i ntrusion detection 
systems, bomb disposal system, dog squads, and vari ous equipment and 
gadgets, which upgrade the technological aspects of  security 
management, are being constantly considered by the Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security.  What they finalize becomes the prescription.  The 

36   
BCAS is like a doctor who prescribes the medicine.  Every airport operator 
and every airline is then obliged in terms of secur ity aspect.  Just as they 
are obliged to listen to the  DGCA for safety, they  are obliged to have all 
those equipments either in the airports or in relation to the aircrafts.   
 
You had enquired about the National Aviation Safety  Team.  The 
Team had its first meeting a week or ten days' ago.   The DGCA informed 
me that they considered very generally the modaliti es to identify the major 
safety concerns, for instance the runway incursions which cause accidents 
to aircraft operations by vehicles and personal mov ement and so on.  
They are basically trying to identify the areas tha t they need to focus on, 
they system and procedures they need to put in plac e.  As the name 
indicates, this is more an operational committee wh ich will try and 
coordinate the efforts of the various stakeholders. ” 
 
3.4 THREAT RESPONSE MECHANISM 
 In reply to an unstarred question No. 436 to be an swered on 28 February 
2008 regarding threats of terrorist attacks at airports and plane hijackings and the 
steps taken thereupon, the Minister replied: 
“Information regarding likelihood of attempts at hi jacking from civil Indian 
airports and terrorists attacks are received from t ime to time both from 
Government agencies as well as unverified sources.  However, every 
information received is assessed, categorized and necessary action taken. 
 
 Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) by way of  formulating 
procedures and measures on aviation security in com pliance with the 
National Aviation Security Programme approved by th e Government, has 
taken adequate and effective steps to regulate avia tion security. 
 
 The following plans have been formulated to provid e adequate 
security at airports to meet the threat perceptions: - 
  
(i) Contingency Plan to deal with unlawful interfer ence with the 
civil aviation operations has been circulated to al l airports in 
the country for keeping up their preparedness again st any 
unlawful interference at all time; 
(ii) Counter Terrorist Plan has also been prepared to effectively 
deal with any contingencies; 
(iii) BCAS also prepares National Aviation Security  Quality 
Control Plan every year for aviation security Audit , 
Inspections, tests etc. to ensure compliance of avi ation 
security standards and procedures by all agencies.” 
 

37   
 The Committee also wanted to be informed of the st ructural mechanism in 
place to handle hijack situations.  The Ministry of  Civil Aviation in their written 
reply stated: 
“Following structural mechanism is put into place t o handle situation of 
hijacking of civil aircraft: 
 
       1(a). A three-tier mechanism is in place to handle such situations:  
(i)  Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack (C OSAH): - The 
COSAH headed by Cabinet Secretary  (supported by 
necessary staff/ specialists) is the apex body to h andle such 
situations.  
(ii) Central Committee (CC), chaired by Director Ge neral Civil 
Aviation (DGCA), is responsible for implementing CO SAH 
orders and handling Hijack situation at operational level.  
(iii) Aerodrome Committee is constituted for each a irport to 
handle hijack situation at ground level. 
 1 (b). Joint Control and Analysis Centre (JCAC) fo r:-  
 (i)  Joint control and analysis of  the situation;  
 (ii)  Categorization of threat level; 
(iv) Operational Direction Centre (ODC) to resolve the threat. 
 
1(c). Quick Reaction Teams (QRT) are deployed at th e airports to  
handle any emergency situation.   
 
1(d). Various measures as per Contingency Plan and Counter 
Terrorist Plan (CTP) approved by the Cabinet have b een put into 
place to prevent and handle any emergency situation. 
 
 II. Preventive Technology and Equipments: - 
(i)  Airport Access Control- Airport Access Control  is an 
important aspect of Airport Security which is ensur ed by 
issue of Airport Entry Permit (AEP) and entry Permi ts after 
due security verification.  
(ii) Perimeter Security- BCAS has set the minimum s tandards 
for Civil Aviation security equipment including the  “Perimeter 
Intruder Detection System”.  Technical specificatio n 
committee has drawn technical specification in this  regard 
and circulated to all concerned for mandatory compl iance.  
(iii) X-ray screening of baggage and checking / fri sking of 
passengers. 
 
Various security equipments like Door Framed Metal Detectors 
(DFMD), Hand Held Metal Detectors (HHMD), Explosive  Trace/Detection 
Devises (ETDs), Inline X-ray Screening Baggage Scre ening Systems, 

38   
Integrated CCTV Surveillance and Control Rooms are put into place to 
prevent any sabotage and unlawful interference in civil aircraft operations.” 
 
3.5 SAFETY REGULATION 
 
 Taking note of the fact that AAI’s role in securit y management is limited to 
providing the infrastructure and equipments and imp lementing BCAS guidelines 
on aviation security, and apprised of the important  role played by the BCAS in 
the management of aviation security, the Committee desired to be informed 
about the organizational and functional details of the BCAS. 
 
 Outlining the functional responsibilities of the B CAS as featured in the 
comprehensive aviation security regime established in the country as required 
under annex 17 to the Chicago convention, 1944, the  BCAS furnished 
information as give below: 
“The following are some of the salient features of the comprehensive 
aviation security regime established in the country  as required under 
Annex 17: 
 
(i) The Commissioner of Security (CA), BCAS has bee n designated 
and specified to the ICAO as the ‘Appropriate Autho rity’ (nodal 
authority) within the Indian administration respons ible for the 
development and implementation of the National Civi l Aviation 
Security Programme (NCASP).  The Commissioner, BCAS  is 
responsible for defining and allocating tasks betwe en all agencies 
(governmental and non-governmental) involved in imp lementation 
of the NCASP; 
(ii) The BCAS has been designated as the authority for developing and 
implementing regulations, practices and procedures to safeguard 
civil aviation against acts of unlawful interferenc e keeping in view of 
the safety, regularity and efficiency of flights; 
(iii) The BCAS has formulated a written National Ci vil Aviation Security 
Programme, approved by the MCA, to safeguard civil aviation 
operations against acts of unlawful interference; 
(iv) The BCAS has also formulated the National Civi l Aviation Security 
Training Programme (NCASTP) and the National Civil Aviation 
Quality Control Programme (NCAQCP) to supplement the NCASP; 
(v) The following additional programmes, to impleme nt the NCASP, 
have been formulated by various operators and appro ved by the 
BCAS to safeguard civil aviation, i.e., Airport Sec urity Programmes 
for each airport in the country, Airline Operators Security 

39   
Programmes for each airline operating to and from I ndia and 
Contingency Plans to handle hijack and bomb threats  at each 
airport.” 
 
Asked whether the BCAS is under-staffed and the ext ent of shortage, if 
any, the BCAS in a note furnished to the Committee stated: 
“Till May 2007, there were 04 Assistant Commissione rs of Security as 
against 18 sanctioned posts; and five DCOS rank off icers as against 10 
sanctioned posts.  (This sanction of staff was give n at the five time of 
formation of BCAS in 1987)” 
 
 When such huge manpower shortage was pointed out t o the Ministry and 
asked to comment, the Ministry came up with a diffe rent set of figures.  They 
stated: 
“In May 2007, sanctioned and actual strength of ACO S and DCOS was as 
under: 
 
 Posts   Sanctioned   Actual 
 DCOS           7        5 
 ACOS          13       4 
 
 Asked to furnish the present strength in these pos ts, the Ministry wrote in 
reply: 
 “Present strength of the above mentioned ranks of the BCAS is as under: 
  Posts   Sanctioned   Actual 
  DCOS           7        5 
  ACOS          13       9 
 On the steps taken to fill such vacancies, the Min istry replied: 
“As per existing Recruitment Rules, the vacancies a re filled up through 
calling applications from central police organizati ons, IB, etc. and 
recruitments are being effected through UPSC. 
 
As regards ACOS vacancies, BCAS have been asked to expedite 
the necessary action.  
 
Out of two vacant posts of DCOS, proposal for filli ng up one post is 
presently under consideration of the UPSC. The othe r vacancy, which has 
arisen in January, 2008 has already been notified i n Employment News in 
February 2008. A formal proposal for UPSC shall be prepared on the 
basis of nominations received against the same.”  
 

40   
 On whether any plans are in place to restructure/s trengthen the BCAS in 
view of the booming aviation sector and the emergen t AVSEC scenario, the 
Ministry replied: 
“Taking into account Aviation Security scenario in the country a 
comprehensive proposal for strengthening and restru cturing of BCAS is 
under active consideration in the Ministry.” 
 
 

41   
CHAPTER - IV   
AAI AND THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
4.1 OVERVIEW 
Ministry of Civil Aviation is the nodal Ministry re sponsible for the 
formulation of national policies and programmes for  development and regulation 
of Civil Aviation and for devising and implementing  schemes for the orderly 
growth and expansion of civil air transport. Its fu nctions also extend to 
overseeing airport facilities, air traffic services  and carriage of passengers and 
goods by air. The Ministry also administers impleme ntation of the Aircraft Act, 
1934 and is administratively responsible for the Co mmission of Railways Safety, 
a statutory body set up under The Indian Railways A ct. It has under its purview 
the following organisations:  
1. Attached / Autonomous Organisations   
• Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
• Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
• Commission of Railway Safety 
• Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
 
2.     Air Carriers   
• Air India Ltd. 
• Indian Airlines Ltd. 
• Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd.  
 
3.     Airports  
• Airports Authority of India  
 
Composition of the Ministry  
 
The Secretary is the head of the Ministry and is as sisted by one Additional 
Secretary & Financial Adviser, three Joint Secretar ies, seven officers of the level 
of Director / Deputy Secretary / Financial Controller and ten officers of the level of 
Under Secretary.  Functions of the Ministry are distributed under sixteen Sections 

42   
and one Pay & Account Office. In addition to framin g policies, the Ministry 
provides guidance to the organisations listed above  in the implementation of 
policy guidelines and also monitors and evaluates t heir interface with Parliament 
and other statutory bodies. It also supervises impl ementation by the 
organisations of special programmes of Government, particularly those intended 
for weaker sections.  
 
 Asked about the structure in the Ministry that ove rsees the Airports 
Authority of India, The Ministry wrote in reply; 
 “The Airports Authority of India (AAI) Section in the Ministry is the 
administrative Section for the Airports Authority o f India. The Section 
works through an Under Secretary, Director and Join t Secretary under the 
overall supervision and guidance of the Secretary.”   
On whether any assessment/consultation with the Dir ectorate General of 
Civil Aviation (DGCA) and Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) was done to 
ascertain the adequacy of the safety and security i nfrastructure and capacity 
before allowing the astronomical growth in the sector by allowing a host of private 
Air Transport Operators, the ministry in their reply submitted; 
“The proposal of various companies for grant of ini tial NOC to operate Air 
Transport Services are considered by a Committee ca lled Aircraft 
Acquisition Committee (AAC). Chairman, AAI, DGCA an d Commissioner, 
BCAS are the members of this Committee and their re presentatives take 
part in the deliberations of the Committee.  
 
Further, the adequacy of infrastructure in terms of maintenance and 
operation of aircraft by the proposed airlines/inte nded operator is 
assessed in the DGCA by conducting preparedness mee tings  with the 
operators/ airlines . 
 
AAC is an Empowered Committee to consider and decid e all cases 
referred to/placed before it, at its own level.   H owever, all cases 
pertaining to entry of a new scheduled airline are put up to Secretary (Civil 
Aviation) before orders are issued. Approval of Sec urity Manual by BCAS 
before grant of Operating Permit has also been made  mandatory by the 
provisions of Civil Aviation Requirement.”  

43   
Asked as to how the Ministry assesses the performan ce of the regulatory 
authorities on Safety and Security in the aviation sector namely the DGCA and 
the BCAS, the Ministry stated:  
“Apart from day to day interaction with DGCA & BCAS  officials, their 
performance   is reviewed at the level of Minister – in charge, Secretary 
and Joint Secretary, at regular intervals, against the performance 
indicators.  The last review meeting was taken by S ecretary on 18 th  May 
2007.  Minister of Civil Aviation has taken a revie w meeting on 18 th  July 
2007, and Joint Secretary on 26 th  October 2007.  They reviewed all 
aspects of Aviation Security vis-à-vis the responsi bilities and performance 
parameters of all agencies including BCAS.  The sta tus was again 
reviewed on 6 th  February 2008 by the Joint Secretary.   
 
A fortnightly meeting is taken at Joint Secretary l evel with DGCA 
wherein all-important issues relating to DGCA are d iscussed and their 
progress monitored.  The last such meeting was held  on 04-01-2008 
wherein DGCA was inter-alia impressed upon to exped ite proposals for 
strengthening its Air Safety Directorate, keeping i n view the increase in 
workload as a result of expanding civil aviation se ctor.  Implementation of 
ICAO safety audit recommendations are also reviewed.” 
 
The Committee are aware of the formation of the Nat ional Aviation Safety 
Team (NAST) and wanted to know about its objectives . The Ministry in their reply 
wrote: 
“NAST was formed on 7 th  November, 2007 and after completing the 
preliminary functions of informing the members etc. , the first meeting of 
NAST has been called on 11 th  February, 2008.  
 
NAST will review the safety issues unique to our co untry and will 
develop interventions, where necessary.  It will al so review and implement 
safety intervention developed by other internationa l bodies SARAST, 
CAST, IHST which are working on various safety issu es worldwide. NAST 
will also closely interact with airlines, aircraft manufacturers, Associations 
of Technical Personnel etc., for effective implemen tations of safety 
measures.” 
 
On the role played by the Ministry in facilitating International Cooperation and 
exchange of expertise in the promotion of aviation safety and security, the Ministry 
in their reply furnished the following details.  
 

44   
“Ministry has been endeavouring to facilitate and i ncrease international 
cooperation in the field of aviation safety and aer onautical engineering.  
Some of the important programmes are as under: 
 
An Aviation Cooperation Programme (ACP) has been si gned with 
USA during the visit of the Minister (Civil Aviatio n) on 21-22 June 2007, 
which is to be funded through USTDA. The proposed A CP is a 
public/private partnership between the USTDA, the F AA and US Aviation 
companies.  This Programme is designed to provide a  Forum for 
communication between the Government of India and U S public and 
private sector entities in India.  The initial fund ing of the Programme is 
proposed through the public institutions of USA and  private companies 
having stakes in aviation. 
 
The ACP’s specific objectives are: - 
(i) To promote increased safety, operational effici ency and 
system capacity in the Indian aviation sector; 
 
(ii) Facilitate and coordinate aviation industry tr aining and 
technical ties between the U.S. and India; and 
 
(iii)  Strengthen overall US- India aviation cooper ation. 
 
The Government of India in the Department of Econom ic Affairs and 
USTDA have also signed a Co-operation Framework Agr eement on 9 
th  
November, 2005 to outline the general procedures whereby USTDA would 
consider prospective opportunities for technical as sistance for Indian 
Government entities for activities such as project preparation, trade 
capacity building, investment analysis and sector d evelopment.   It has 
also been decided that activities to be funded by U STDA will be identified 
and selected by Indian entities and communicated to  USTDA by the 
Department of Economic Affairs.  This proposed ACP would be one step 
forward on civil aviation sector under the above umbrella MOU.” 
 
I. Joint Action Plan with EU: 
 
The following commitments relating to civil aviation have been made in the 
Joint Action Plan finalized between India and Europ ean Union, which reads as 
under: 
(i) Launch broad based dialogue in the sectors of c ivil aviation 
including closer cooperation in air transport techn ology, regulation 
and infrastructure and assess the scope for mutual benefits that 
could derive from such dialogue. 
 

45   
(ii) Explore the possibility of continuing and expa nding the scope of the 
existing civil aviation project and continue discus sions, as a matter 
of priority, on a horizontal agreement between Indi a and EU 
resolving legal issues in bilateral air services agreement. 
 
The first EU-India civil aviation project, which wa s one of the largest 
economic cooperation project between India and EU c ompleted in November 
2006. 
In order to commence 2 nd  phase of India-EU civil aviation co-operation, 
the EU side has proposed a draft Programme of Insti tutional Capacity Building in 
the Civil Aviation sector in India (ICAA), prepared  by them. The project of ICAA 
will be a Centralized management project with a EC contribution of Euro 
12,500,000 and Government of India contribution of Euro 3,000,000 and private 
contribution of Euro 2,700,000. The overall objecti ve of the project is to remove 
constraints to sustainable economic growth in India  imposed by unbalanced 
development of the rapidly expanding aviation secto r, particularly within the 
regulatory functions of the Government. Therefore, efforts will be focussed on 
institutional and capacity development of civil avi ation regulators in India 
ensuring a safe and secure aviation environment thr ough good governance and 
harmonization with EU standards in cooperation with  European aviation 
agencies. 
I. Safety Audit: 
 
Safety Audit of DGCA was conducted by ICAO under th eir Universal 
Safety Oversight Audit Programme in October 2006.   They have expressed 
positivism in the Certification Processes, Regulato ry Provisions, Guidance 
Material, and Surveillances.  They have also assess ed that India has more than 
98% compliance with Standard and Recommended Practi ces of ICAO Annexes. 
Earlier in 1997, Audit was carried out by FAA, USA who have rated India in 
Category I i.e. highest category with respect to re gulations, certification and 
surveillance functions.  
In October 1999 also with follow up in 2001, ICAO h ad carried out Audit 
on, Personnel Licensing, Operations of Aircraft and  Airworthiness aspects vis-à-
vis SARPS contained in corresponding ICAO Annexes 1 , 6 and 8 and has 

46   
certified that the system established for certifica tion and surveillance of aircraft 
operations was satisfactory and a sound system of c ontrol and supervision of air 
operators and AMOs existed supported by comprehensi ve regulatory frame 
work.  
II. South Asia Initiative.  
Under the EU - South Asia programme South Asia Regi onal Initiative 
(SARI) has   taken a lead role in adoption of Inter national Regulations. 
V. Cooperative Development of Operational Safety and C ontinuing 
Airworthiness  – South Asia (COSCAP – SA) :  This programme under the 
aegis of Government has been approved by the Minist ry of Civil Aviation.  
Presently in its 3 rd  phase of existence, a forum aided training and tec hnical 
assistance to the 7 South Asian States.  The 3 rd  phase envisages stress on 
implementation of regulations in standardized and h armonized manner. 
 
VI . Technical Arrangement with Russia:  
India and Russia have signed an (Implementation Pro cedure) in 2005 
under the aegis of Ministry of Civil Aviation.  Und er this procedure India and 
Russia accept aeronautical products designed and ma nufactured by either 
countries after due inspection. 
 
VII . Technical Arrangement have also been signed with Israel and Chile, 
under which the countries have agreed to extend coo peration to each other in 
design, certification and manufacture of aeronautic al products. 
On the status the National Civil Aviation Policy, t he Ministry in their written 
reply stated; 
“The Draft National Civil Aviation Policy was submitted for consideration of 
the Union Cabinet in May, 2007.  The Cabinet decide d that the Draft 
Policy be, in the first instance, considered by a G roup of Ministers (GOM).  
The GOM has held two meetings till date.”    
 
Asked about the major provisions related to aviatio n safety and security 
addressed in the draft National Civil Aviation Poli cy, the ministry in their reply 
wrote: 
“The draft National Civil Aviation Policy addresses  major issues relating 
to strengthening of safety mechanism / Directorate General of Civil 

47   
Aviation.  Similar provisions have also been incorp orated in respect of 
aviation security/ BCAS.” 
 
 On whether the absence of a National Civil Aviatio n Policy document have 
impacted on the performance of sectoral players and  their overall coordination, 
the representative of the Ministry during evidence stated: 
 
“It is true that the civil aviation policy is still  under the consideration of the 
Government, but the lack of a specific policy docum ent, which is more like 
any other policy document as and when it comes usua lly more in the 
nature of a larger picture, will be presented regar ding what the situation is 
and how the Government expects this sector to move and in what 
direction.  But, it does not, in any way, hinder, a nd has not hindered, the 
operating procedures followed by the different agen cies which are to do 
their different tasks.  If it is the safety issue, the DGCA has all the 
legislative competence to lay down the rules.  It l ays down the norms 
which are required to be followed by all those to whom those requirements 
apply.  If it is the security issue, they draw thei r strength from the 
recommended practices enunciated by the Internation al Civil Aviation 
Organisation.  They draw their strength and make th ose applicable to 
domestic as well as international airlines.” 
 
Asked whether the Government is convinced that it i s doing equally well in 
the absence of such a policy framework and there is  no urgent necessity of 
having it in place, the representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation replied: 
“Sir, about the policy document, the Government, in  the recent past, has 
notified the policy statements for various sectors,  namely, telecom, steel, 
petroleum and so on and so forth.  I am sure, when the Civil Aviation 
Policy comes, it would be no different from other policy statements.  These 
are the broad statements telling about what are the  larger views or goals, 
which that sector can or should move.  It would be nothing more than 
that.” 
 
 Asked how the Ministry coped with all the activiti es in the absence of the 
policy document and to draw an international compar ison, the representative 
stated: 
“I am coming to that. I am addressing it.  Now, as part of Civil Aviation, 
there are various segments. There will be infrastru cture, there will be 
safety; and there will be security, which you have addressed today.  In 
those programmes and activities, there are specific  goals, specific 
components and specific programmes, which are part of 5-Year Plans, 
which could be provided for from the budgetary supp ort of the 

48   
Government, or they could be done by various agenci es.  So, none of the 
actual professional activities is, in any way, suffering or held up. 
As far as other countries are concerned, most of   the countries do 
not have a larger vision statement or policy docume nt because those 
activities are not substantially, mainly driven by the Government.  So, it 
works in those countries in that manner.  This is m ore just to lay down a 
broad roadmap so that everybody, who looks at the s ector or who looks at 
civil aviation in India is aware that this is likely to be the roadmap.” 
 
With reference to the privatization of major airpor ts and the increasing 
reports of mishaps and near misses in these airport s, the committee wanted to 
be apprised of the system to regulate the safety pe rformance of these private 
operators. The ministry in reply wrote: 
“As provided in Part XII of the Aircraft Rules, 193 7, all aerodromes are 
under the safety oversight of the DGCA. Main provis ions in this regard in 
this regard are as under:- 
 
(i) All aerodromes have to be licensed by DGCA (Rul e 78 & 80). 
(ii) Aerodrome Manual has to be prepared as specifi ed by DGCA 
(Rule 81). 
(iii) DGCA or any officer authorized by him has a r ight to inspect 
any aerodrome (Rule 82). 
(iv) Licence is granted or renewed, subject to such  condition as 
DGCA considers necessary, to ensure compliance with  the 
Convention and the safety of aircraft operations (R ule 83). 
 
Further, DGCA issues various Civil Aviation Require ments (CARs) 
from time to time to cover various aerodrome safety  issues. These 
provisions are equally applicable to restructured a irports at Delhi and 
Mumbai and private airports at Cochin.  
 
It is also submitted that during issue/renewal of l icenses for the 
Aerodromes, all aspects of safety, security etc., a re examined as per 
procedures laid down in the Civil Aviation Requirements. 
 
All the private operators are required to establish  a safety 
management system approved by DGCA. Operators are a lso subjected to 
surveillance checks/Inspections at regular interval s to oversee the 
implementation of safety instructions. Operators are also required to report 
all incidents in their aerodromes which are investi gated to establish their 
adherence to safety regulation/instructions issued from time to time.” 
 

49   
On whether foreign airlines are subject to safety i nspection by the DGCA 
when they operate in domestic airspace and landed i n our airports, the ministry 
wrote; 
“Process of checking Foreign Air Operators while tr ansiting through Indian 
Airports has commenced on 25 th  January, 2008. Two operators, namely 
Lufthansa & Virgin Atlantic were subjected to inspe ction. Some 
irregularities were found and the process of corres pondence with 
Regulatory Authority of LBA/CAA, UK is in progress. Other inspections are 
planned for February and March, 2008 and this proce ss is ongoing.” 
Taking note of the Aviation Safety Week organised b y the ministry of civil 
aviation in December 2007, the committee desired to  be apprised of the 
objectives sought to be achieved through the exerci se. The ministry in their reply 
stated: 
“Under the auspices of Ministry of Civil Aviation, the DGCA and airports 
Authority of India jointly organised Aviation Safet y Week in December, 
2007.  The objectives of the safety week are as fol lows: - 
 
• Reviewing proactive safety system in airline and ae rodrome 
operators. 
• Holding of seminars by the airliners and the aerodr ome operators on 
ramp and operational area safety. 
• Intensifying spot checks/audits by the operators an d DGCA to identify 
safety hazards and deficiencies. 
• Adopting preventive measures to mitigate safety hazards. 
• Emphasis on CRM. Human Factors by the operators. 
• Monitoring FDTL, pre-flight medical and load & trim sheet activities. 
• Interactive meetings between pilots, engineers and ATCOs with 
DGCA officials. 
• Display of safety banners and posts in aviation rel ated services to 
infuse safety awareness amongst the personnel. 
During the safety week, which was inaugurated by th e Hon’ble 
Minister, media briefing was also held and topics o n various safety 
aspects were presented and discussed in the seminar s.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50   
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
Recommendation – 1 
 
 
NEED FOR PLANNED GROWTH IN AVIATION SECTOR 
 
The Airport Authority of India is the primary airpo rt operator and the 
lone Air Navigation Services (ANS) provider in the country and has 
responsibilities that are critical to aviation safe ty and security.  The 
Committee note that there has been phenomenal growt h in air traffic during 
the last 5 years especially at the metro airports.  The air traffic has been 
growing at the approximate rate of over 30% per ann um during the last five 
years.  With the opening of aviation sector to private airlines, the number of 
scheduled air transport operators has also increase d from five in 2002 to 
fifteen in 2007.  All these have put a great strain  on airport infrastructure 
and Air Traffic Services, which have not been augme nted in proportion to 
the increased traffic.  The Committee also note tha t the DGCA, which is the 
safety regulator, and the BCAS that regulate aviati on security are severely 
under staffed to handle the expanding responsibilit ies arising from the 
growth in air traffic.  They observe that timely ac tion to enhance the 
capacity of these institutions has not been taken b y the Government.  The 
Committee have been informed that AAI has taken sev eral steps to cope 
with the increasing traffic like simultaneous use o f runways, new high 
speed exit taxi-bays, parallel taxi-tracks, ATC aut omations, etc.  The 
Committee while appreciating these measures would a lso like to caution 
that safety and security of air travel should not b e compromised, and 
emphasize that international norms of safety and se curity should be 
scrupulously adhered to while taking steps to cope up with the increase in 
air traffic. 
 The Committee recommend that permission to the new  operators, as 
well as additional operations by existing operators , should be granted only 
after thorough assessment of infrastructure availab ility vis-à-vis safety 
requirements.  The Committee further recommend that  the Government 

51   
should take steps to synchronize all future growth in aviation sector with a 
corresponding enhancement of the organizational and technical capacity of 
the aviation safety and security regulators.  

52   
Recommendation - 2  
 
DATABASE ON INCIDENTS / ACCIDENTS 
 
The Committee note with regret that AAI could furni sh details of 
accidents / incidents at only three airports, namel y, Kolkata, 
Thiruvananthapuram and Chennai Airports, when asked  to furnish the 
details in respect of all airports operated by them .  The Committee observe 
that the system of reporting of accidents/incidents  at airports and the 
maintenance of centralized data thereof is weak, as  evident from AAI’s 
inability to furnish such data for all airports ope rated by them.  The 
Committee would like to stress that compilation and  collation of data is of 
paramount importance for identifying and rectifying  the 
shortcomings/deficiencies in the airport operations.   
  
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that AAI  should make 
a comprehensive review of the system of incident/ac cident reporting and 
take urgent steps to set up a centralized database of incidents of runway 
intrusions and accidents of any description within the precincts of its 
airports.  Further, the Committee desire that the D GCA should make it 
obligatory on all Airport operators to put a modern  system in place and 
submit the data to DGCA every quarter. 
 
 
 
 
 

53   
Recommendation - 3  
GROUND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
 
The Committee note that in the three airports about  which 
information was furnished regarding accidents/incid ents, 24 accidents/ 
incidents took place within a span of three years a nd a majority of such 
accidents/incidents occurred in the apron/ taxiways  of airports. This is 
indicative of the fact that adequate attention is n ot being paid to the 
management, monitoring and improvement of movement of service 
vehicles, passenger ferry buses, equipments and per sons in the apron 
area.   Further, the Committee observe that inadequ ate attention given to 
the management of human, equipment and vehicle move ments in the apron 
and taxiways of airports have caused several accidents and incidents.  
 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that a proper sys tem of ground 
traffic management with a structured and accountabl e organization be put 
in place at each airport.  Further, the Committee d esire that cases of 
accidents may be properly enquired into, responsibi lities be fixed and the 
penalties for violations leading to accidents must be made harsher and 
heftier so that they have deterrent effect.  Furthe r, the Committee also 
desire that DGCA should regulate this matter by making it mandatory for all 
airport operators to put in place a structured and functional system to 
manage human, equipment and vehicular traffic in th e apron and taxiways 
of airports. 
 
 
 
 
 

54   
Recommendation - 4  
EMERGENCY DRILLS AND THEIR REGULATION 
 
The Committee have been informed that AAI have no s eparate 
organizational structure to handle disasters and em ergencies.  Instead, the 
officers in AAI have been imparted training on disa ster management in 
general and assigned a definite role in the Local E mergency Procedure and 
Contingency Plan.   
While appreciating the above arrangements, the Comm ittee are of 
the firm view that there is a need to buttress the functionality of the Local 
Emergency Procedure and Contingency Plan and theref ore recommend 
that regular mock drills at specified intervals should be made mandatory so 
as to improve the effectiveness of the system and m inimize the response 
time to handle any emergency.  The Committee furthe r desire that the 
DGCA make it mandatory for all Airport operators to  put such a system in 
place by issuing appropriate regulations.  
 
 

55   
Recommendation - 5  
UPGRADATION AND REGULATION OF ANS SYSTEMS & EQUIPMENTS 
 
The Committee observe that despite the number and f requency of 
airprox incidents in the Indian skies comparing fav ourably to incidents in 
other countries, the fact remained that the absolut e figures in India are on 
the rise, from 10 in 2004 to 21 in 2007.  Further, the Committee note with 
concern that a high percentage of such airprox inci dents are due to errors 
by Air Traffic Controllers or due to procedural and  technical shortcomings 
in the communication, navigation and surveillance ( CNS) and Air Traffic 
Management (ATM) services, commonly known as the Ai r Navigation 
Services (ANS).  The Committee appreciate the effor ts made by AAI to 
minimize air proximity incidents.  Nevertheless, th ey feel there is an urgent 
need to speed up the process. 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that AAI should t ake steps to 
accelerate the pace of implementation of improvemen ts in procedures and 
the introduction of latest systems and equipments, especially relating to 
ATC procedures, ATC automation, surface movement ra dar, air traffic flow 
management and safety management system.  The Commi ttee further 
desire that AAI should take urgent steps for implem entation of 
improvements in the ANS system and upgradation of e quipments in all 
major airports in a phased manner.  The Committee f urther recommend 
that system improvements and equipment upgrades by the ANS provider 
should be adequately regulated by the DGCA to ensur e strict adherence to 
international norms and standards. 

56   
Recommendation - 6  
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL - STRENGTH AND EFFICIENCY 
 
The Committee observe that despite continuously ris ing air traffic 
beginning from 2002, no recruitment of Air Traffic Control Officers has 
been carried out till 2005 and gap between sanction ed and actual strength 
of ATCs increased from 29 in 2002 to 526 in 2007.  The Committee also 
observed that substantial number of non-executives of ATC discipline had 
been elevated to executive levels.  The upgradation  of non-executives to 
executive cadre in such large numbers, the Committe e feel may 
compromise on quality of ATCOs.  One of the finding s of ICAO Audit of 
2006 inter-alia  relates to lack of policies, procedures and progra mmes for 
determining the short, medium and longterm staffing  requirements for the 
provision of an adequate ATS system, including the timely recruitment of 
ATM staff.  The Committee further observe that in t he backdrop of rising air 
traffic, failure on the part of AAI to put in place  necessary policies, 
procedures and programmes for staffing as pointed o ut by ICAO Audit, 
resulting in shortage of manpower, has imposed long  hours of work on 
ATCOs whose jobs require undivided attention.  The 42 hours per week 
working hours are higher than that of a civil serva nt with a job that is less 
strenuous at 40 hours per week.  The Committee also  note that of late 
attrition rate of ATCOs is also rising which is evi dent from the fact that 
during the year 2007, 32 ATCOs left the job. 
 
Taking into account the stressful and sensitive nat ure of job an 
ATCO performs, and the revelation that a high perce ntage of airprox 
incidents have been attributed to Air Traffic Contr ol personnel, the 
Committee strongly recommend that AAI should take p rompt measures to 
attract, recruit and retain adequate number of qual ified ATCOs by 
reviewing working hours, making working conditions more attractive and 
upgrading suitably the salary structure and career progression.  As high 

57   
alertness of ATC personnel is crucial to the safety  of air operations, it is 
incumbent upon everyone of them to perform their du ties with utmost care 
and caution.  In this regard, the Committee recomme nd that a system of 
breath analysis/alcohol tests as is done in the cas e of pilots be introduced 
for ATCOs before logging-in for duty. 
 
 

58   
Recommendation - 7  
CORPORATIZATION OF ANS 
 
The Committee take note of the critical role of Air  Navigation 
Services (ANS) in the management of aviation safety .  The Committee also 
are in agreement about the need to separate ANS pro vision from Airport 
operators.  Most importantly, the Committee feel th at Air Navigation 
Service needs to be managed effectively and with no  compromise on 
standards.  The Committee feel that challenges such  as attracting and 
retaining adequate trained manpower, development of  safety procedures, 
introduction of advanced systems and induction of n ew and emerging 
technologies demand urgent and sustained attention.   Besides, AAI as an 
airport operator, cannot be allowed to be ANS provi der in an environment 
where private airport operators are fast emerging.   
 
The Committee therefore recommend that a separate corporate entity 
should be created under 100% Government ownership a nd steps taken to 
expeditiously make it a world class ANS provider. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59   
Recommendation - 8  
NEED FOR SEPARATION OF SAFETY INSPECTION AND ACCIDE NT 
INVESTIGATION FROM REGULATORY FUNCTION 
 
 
The Committee appreciate the submission made by the  Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding the considerat ion given by the 
Government to separate the accident investigating f unctions from the 
regulatory authority.  However, in addition to sepa rating the accident 
investigation functions from the regulatory authori ty, i.e. DGCA, the 
Committee are of the opinion that the new agency th at shall be created 
should also be vested with inspectorate functions c urrently handled by 
DGCA.  The Committee are informed that all the safe ty related functions of 
the AAI like fire safety, air traffic services, gro und traffic management, etc. 
are subject to internal inspections and internal sa fety audits. They also 
found the DGCA as severely ill-equipped in terms of  adequate trained 
personnel to deliver its functions of safety inspec tion and audit over 
Airport & Airline operators.  Besides, it was not m andated to regulate and 
inspect ANS activities until recently.   The Commit tee strongly believe that 
there is a need for an independent, efficient and c redible system of safety 
inspection and safety audit over the safety functio ns of Airport operators, 
Air Transport operators and ANS provider.  They app reciate the internal 
inspection and monitoring that exists and desire th is to continue with 
enhanced rigour.  However, the Committee are of the  opinion that internal 
inspections and audits are executive functions aime d at enhancing 
efficiency and effectiveness and needs to be compli mented with the 
existence of an independent and external agency for  inspection and 
investigation.  Besides, the Committee feel that re gulatory functions of 
DGCA will also be rendered more efficiently once th e added 
responsibilities of inspection and investigation are offloaded from it.   
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that exp editious steps 
should be taken to set up an independent agency, wh ich should carry out 

60   
inspections and safety audit of all safety related activities of all players in 
the sector including Air Transport operators, Airpo rt operators, the ANS 
provider, etc., and should also be vested with resp onsibility of accident 
investigation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61   
Recommendation - 9  
RESTRUCTURING OF DGCA 
 
The Committee observe that while the number of airl ine operators 
was allowed to increase and airlines were allowed t o expand, the 
Government have failed to take necessary steps to r estructure and 
strengthen the regulatory authority, i.e., the DGCA  in tandem with the 
growth in the sector.  Further, the Committee feel that burdening the 
regulator with inspectorate functions not only put pressure on the 
organization but also stand to compromise its indep endent functioning as 
far as inspection and safety audits are concerned.  The Committee are 
aware that the M.K. Kaw Committee constituted by Go vernment had 
submitted its report on restructuring the DGCA.   
 
While the Government is implementing the Kaw Commit tee 
recommendations, the Committee would like to stress  upon the need for an 
independent agency for aviation safety inspections,  audit and accident 
investigation, as distinct from the regulator, DGCA , which should be 
outside the administrative control of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The 
Committee therefore urge the Government to keep thi s aspect into 
consideration while implementing the Kaw Committee recommendations.  
Further, the Committee is of the view that (in plac e of the present one-man 
Director-General of Civil Aviation) a multi-member body consisting of 
preferably three members, one of whom as Chairman, may be set up and 
the criteria/qualification for selection of such me mbers shall be as per the 
international norms for such posts.   
 
 
 
 
 

62   
Recommendation - 10  
SECURITY ROLE OF AIRPORT DIRECTOR 
 
The Committee observe that the Airport Director has  been allocated 
a very critical function of overall management and coordination of security 
matters in the airports.  In view of the trend of p rivatization of Airports and 
their management, and also to enable the Airport Di rector to devote more 
attention to safety management, the Committee feel that it is necessary that 
the Airport Director is relieved of the primary res ponsibility over security 
matters.  In the opinion of the Committee, it may n ot be advisable that an 
Airport Director of a private airport be entrusted with such vast security 
related responsibilities in the interest of National Security. 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that the Governme nt should 
take immediate steps to relieve the Airport Directo rs of the responsibility of 
overall management and coordination of airport secu rity and desire that an 
officer of the BCAS should be put in charge of secu rity at each airport.  The 
Committee further desire that the Airport Director should be made 
accountable to the security incharge of the airport in all matters of security. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63   
Recommendation - 11  
REVIEW OF STRUCTURAL MECHANISM TO HANDLE AIRCRAFT HIJACK 
 
The Committee observe that the Central Committee ch aired by the 
DGCA is responsible for implementing the orders of the Committee of 
Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack (COSAH) and handling  hijack situations at 
operational level. 
 
While appreciative of the existence of a structural  mechanism to 
handle aircraft hijack situations, the Committee ar e of the opinion that the 
Chairing of the Central Committee which is responsi ble for implementing 
orders of the Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack (COSAH), and 
handling hijack situation at operational level by t he DGCA, which is the 
authority on safety, needs to be reviewed.  Conside ring the fact that 
hijacking of aircrafts have increasingly assumed th e character of a serious 
security threat, the Committee desire that the poss ibility of having an 
authority on security, like the COS (CA) of the BCA S, at the chair of such a 
Committee may be seriously explored.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64   
Recommendation - 12  
BCAS – REVIEWING STRENGTH, FUNCTIONS AND EFFICIENCY  
 
The Committee observe that the Bureau of Civil Avia tion Security is 
the regulator and overall supervisor of aviation se curity. The committee, 
while applauding the BCAS are appalled at the callo us treatment meted out 
to this important institution.  The number of sanct ioned strength of critical 
positions in the BCAS remained unrevised since its formation in 1987 
despite tremendous expansion in its responsibilitie s with the growth in 
civil aviation sector.  Worse, the actual strength of ACOS and DCOS 
officers in the BCAS did not even meet 50% of the s anctioned strength till 
May 2007.  Further, the Committee observe that due to acute shortage of 
manpower, the BCAS has been reduced to a body merel y issuing 
regulations without having adequate capacity to ove rsee adherence by 
concerned agencies to such regulations.  
 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that ste ps be taken by 
the Government to expedite the plans to restructure  and strengthen the 
BCAS on priority.  The Committee further recommend that besides the 
regulatory functions of the BCAS, its supervisory a nd inspectorial 
functions and responsibilities may be enhanced to c ope up with the 
Aviation Security challenges posed by unprecedented  growth in the 
domestic civil aviation sector as also the entry of  the private airport & 
airline operators. 

65   
Recommendation – 13  
 
NATIONAL POLICY ON CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
 The Committee observe that even after more than a decade into the 
liberlization of the Civil Aviation Sector, the Min istry has not put in place a 
National Policy Framework for the Civil Aviation Se ctor.  The Committee 
further observe with regret that despite being awar e of the larger growth 
path that a policy framework can provide to the sec tor, the Ministry are still 
in no hurry to draw up such a roadmap and are showi ng a lackadaisical 
approach to the whole issue, saying its absence does not affect the sector.  
  
The Committee feel that lack of a much needed wider  perspective 
and the Ministry’s failure in providing a clear vis ion to the sector is largely 
responsible for the haphazard growth in the sector.   The Committee 
strongly disapprove the lackadaisical approach of t he Ministry resulting in 
unsynchronised decisions and sporadic growth in the  sector.  The 
Committee feel that such developments have, among o ther things, 
seriously undermined safety and security concerns.  The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Government should expe dite the process of 
having the National Policy on Civil Aviation in pla ce at the earliest, after 
obtaining inputs from experts in the field, who may  be given lateral entry 
into the Ministry on contractual basis, if required. 

66   
Recommendation - 14  
SAFETY NORMS  
 
 The Committee observe that safety inspection of tr ansiting foreign 
air transport operators’ aircrafts was started by t he DGCA as recently as 
January 2008.  The Committee also noted that an Avi ation Safety Week was 
organized during December 2007.  The Committee expr ess shock over the 
laxity in inspecting the foreign operators while tr ansiting Indian airspace 
and Indian Airports. The Committee also feel that a viation safety needs to 
be ensured through systematic and sustained efforts  towards continuous 
improvements, and desire that the lessons learnt fr om events such as the 
Aviation Safety Week should be properly assessed and gainfully utilised.  
 
The Committee recommend that a proper and fool proo f system to 
ensure adherence to safety norms by all the aircraf ts operating/transiting 
the national airspace should be put in place by the  Government through 
the DGCA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                          RUPCHAND PAL  
28 April 2008                              CHAIRMAN  
8 Vaisakha, 1928                    COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
  
 

67   
Annexure-I 
GROUND INCIDENTS / ACCIDENTS 
NSCBI Airport 
 
Year 2005 Details of incident / accident Penalty im posed 
January On 03-01-2005 at 1150 hrs., Indian Airlines  tractor No.27 driven by 
Shri Gurdev Singh, Operator, while maneuvering trac tor hit Indian 
Airlines aircraft Flt. No.IC-401 (type of Aircraft AB 320, registration 
marking VT-ESH) parked on bay No.22.  Due to this i mpact, the rear 
portion of fuselage below port side was slightly damaged.   
 
The airside Driving 
Permit of the operator 
was withdrawn.  
July On 04.-07-2005 at about 2335 hrs. Air India st ep ladder damaged the 
aerobridge limit switch at parking bay No.23 when t he same was in 
process to connect with the Air Deccan flight No.DN -632 parked on 
bay No.23.  As a result the said aerobridge become unserviceable.  
The ADP and vehicle 
pass of the 
stepladder driver was 
confiscated and 
penalty of Rs.200/- 
was imposed.  
September On 06-09-2005 at about 1105hrs. Air India  Flight No. AI-151 while on 
its push back maneuver made a deviation from centre  line marking by 
about 5 meters.  This resulted in locking of nose w heel and affected 
the star-board main landing gear alignment. (Sector  Dhaka-Kolkata-
London, Type of Aircraft B-777-200, Registration ma rking VT-AIL, 
POB-268)  All precautions were taken immediately to  close down the 
affected portion of taxi track “F” and the other ai rcrafts on the adjacent 
bays were provided with “Follow-Me” service for saf e and smooth 
operations. 
 
 
Year 2006 Details of incident / accident Penalty im posed 
May On 05-05-2006 at about 1815 hrs. the step ladde r of aerobridge on 
parking stand No.23, while being retrieved back aft er serving the 
departing aircraft dashed with a Bolero Jeep belong ing to M/s 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. which was park ed on the 
Aerobridge maneuvering area.  
The ADP and vehicle 
permit of the driver 
was confiscated and 
a token penalty of 
Rs.200/- was 
imposed.  
July On 27-07-2006 at about 0705 hrs. CISF QRT vehi cle bearing Regn. 
No.WB 23A 8130 (type of vehicle Tata Sumo) met with  an accident on 
perimeter road eastern side near CISF post No.5A.  
 
 
September On 20-09-2006 at around 2115 hrs. Jet Air ways tractor Regn. No. DH-
20-10G was hit on the rear left side by Indigo pass enger coach 
bearing Regn. No.WB-111 BA 18210M near bay no.22 ba ggage make 
up area of domestic apron. The passenger coach of I ndigo got slightly 
damaged.  Two loaders of M/s. Jet Airways who were standing on the 
tractor fell down resulting in minor injuries.  
 
 
November On 30-11-2006 at 1048 hrs. a non-scheduled  aircraft while landing 
swing / skid on the runway and was bogged down on t he basic strip 
approximately at a distance of 22 mtrs. from the si de strip of the RWY 
19L.  
 
 
Year 2007  
 
For the year 2007 no ground incident / accident occurred.  

68   
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
AIRPROX INCIDENT IN CIVIL AIRSPACE UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF AAI DURING THE 
YEAR 2004-2006  
 
 
YEAR 2004 2005 2006 
No. of Airprox 
(Near-miss) 
 
 
10 
 
17 
 
16 
 
 
AIRPROX INCIDENT IN CIVIL AIRSPACE UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF AAI DURING THE 
YEAR 2004  
 
Sl No Date Type of aircraft Brief Description of 
incident 
Reason 
 
Action Taken 
01 04-02-2004 
In Chennai 
Emirates  Boeing 
777  
Malaysian Airlines 
Airbus 330 
UAE 347 WMKK – OMDB 
on N571 reported TCAS 
warning between BIKEN 
and IDASO. MAS 7365 
was claimed through the 
level of UAE 347 
1. ATC Personnel 
error 
 
2. Non-availability 
of Automatic 
Dependence 
Surveillance 
equipment 
1. The ATS in-charge 
Chennai has been 
instructed to warn 
the controller for 
his errors.  
2. The controller has 
also been in 
recommended to 
undergo corrective 
training under the 
supervision of 
Instructor. 
3. GM (Aero), 
Chennai has been 
advised to 
reschedule hours 
of operation of 
ADS to cover the 
period of peak 
traffic. 
02 11-06-2004 
In Kolkata 
Gulf Air Boeing 767 
Eva Airlines BD-11 
 
GFA458 while 
descending from F370 to 
F330 stopped descend at 
F350 over CEA due to 
traffic EVA671 at F340. 
The controller thought 
that EVA671 was 
maintaining F320 based 
on FPS. EVA671 always 
reported maintaining 
F340 on R/T. 
ATC personnel 
error. 
1. Concern 
controllers were 
subjected to 
corrective training 
with emphasis on 
attentiveness to 
monitor aircraft 
transmission and 
proper strip 
marking. 
2. Instruction issued 
to do all intra unit 
coordination on 
recorded 
channels. 

69   
03 
 
15-07-2004 
Trivandrum 
 
Royal Jordanian 
Airbus 310 
Oman Airlines  
Boeing 737 
RJA194 OJAI-N300-VCBI 
F330 estimating CLC 
0021 OMA827 OOMS-
M300-VOCI F370 
estimating CLC 0021. 
RSR controller gave 
descend to OMA827 to 
F170 forgetting about 
RJA194. At time 0019 
RJA194 reported traffic 
crossing ahead at the 
same level 100 feet.   
ATC personnel 
error. 
 
1. The concerned 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. Circular issued by 
ATS in-charge 
emphasizing better 
coordination 
between radar and 
non-radar 
controller for climb 
& descent of 
aircraft. 
04 12-08-2004 
In Mumbai 
Air Deccan ATR 42 
Jet Airways 
 Boeing 737 
DNK303 ATR from 
Mumbai to Kolhapur was 
cleared to climb to FL100 
by ASR controller. JAI406 
B737 Cochin to Mumbai 
was descended to FL110. 
JAI406 was on a heading 
of 020. At time 042847 
UTC the controller 
observed that DKN303 
had climbed to FL106. 
JAI406 reported an 
aircraft passing FL100. 
 
Air Deccan pilot’s 
error 
DGCA initiated action 
against the Pilot of 
Air Deccan Aircraft. 
05 
 
18-09-2004 
 
In Kolkata  
Pakistan Airlines  
Air Bus 310 
Gulf Air Boeing 767 
The ACC(W) controller 
descended PIA266 A310 
from Karachi to Dhaka 
from FL370 to FL330 
near CEA VOR without 
visualizing the opposite 
direction traffic was 
GFA251 B767 from 
Dhaka to Bahrain 
maintaining FL360. The 
OJT instructor 
immediately negated the 
incorrect clearance and 
advised PIA266 to 
maintain FL370. The 
aircraft did not 
acknowledge the 
instruction. Instructor 
gave an emergency 
avoiding Hdg. of 240 to 
GFA251. PIA266 
descended immediately 
on receipt of the 
instruction by 100 feet 
and received advisory 
warning. 
ATC personnel 
error 
The trainee controller 
was subjected to 
theoretical training at 
RTC Kolkata in 
separation methods 
and standards and 
his training period 
extended by 25 
hours. 
 
 

70   
06 
 
23-09-2004 
In Mumbai 
Jet Airways 
Boeing 737 
The trainee ARSR/MSSR 
controller descended 
JAI371 Udaipur to 
Mumbai from FL380 to 
FL330 at approx. 100NM 
from BBB VOR. The 
aircraft passed through 
the level of same 
direction traffic JAI312 
Delhi to Mumbai, which 
was maintaining FL340. 
JAI312 raised airprox 
violation. 
 
1.  ATC personnel 
error 
2.  ATC system 
deficiency. 
1. The airspace in 
Mumbai FIC was 
redefined in the 
automation system 
so that volume of 
airspace 
comprising 
Ahmedabad TMA, 
above certain level 
may be defined as 
a separate sector 
and merged with 
R1. 
2. Fresh instruction 
issued for 
consolidation of 
airspace in 
respective sectors. 
3. Suitable guidelines 
issued regarding 
hand-off 
procedures 
between FIC/OCC 
and ARSR. 
4. Training period of 
trainee increased. 
 
07 14-09-2004 
In Delhi 
Thai Airways  
Boeing 777 
British Airways 
Boeing 747 
 
The ARSR controller 
permitted THA316, which 
had deviated nearly 
20NM left of track to 
climb to FL330 
unrestricted between 
KADAS and LLK. 
Opposite direction traffic 
BAW10 maintaining 
FL320 came very close to 
THA316 and reported 
airprox. 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. The concerned 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. Training period of 
trainee increased. 
 
08 
 
12-11-2004 
In Kolkata 
Malaysian Airlines 
Boeing 747 
Bangladesh Viman 
DC-10 
A breach of separation 
took place between 
MAS20 and BBC049 over 
OTABA when both the 
traffic passed OTABA at 
FL320 with four minutes 
separation. 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. The controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. GM (Aero) issued 
circular to assess 
separation at 
crossing point on 
receipt of estimate/ 
FPS. 
09 
 
5-12-2004 
In Mumbai 
Saudia Airlines 
Boeing 747 
Lufthansa Airlines 
Boeing 747 
Airprox between SVA748 
and DLH8418 took place 
near NOBAT when both 
the traffic was 
maintaining FL350 and 
passed NOBAT with 
three to four NM 
difference. 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. Controller 
subjected to 
corrective training.  
2. RSR controller 
was advised to 
keep global FPS 
with them. 
3.  It was reitera ted to 

71   
the controllers that 
on receipt of 
change of 
level/estimate they 
should reassess 
traffic scenario to 
detect  
conflict/separation 
loss before 
approving the 
level. 
 
AIRPROX INCIDENT IN CIVIL AIRSPACE UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF AAI DURING THE 
YEAR 2005  
 
 
SLNo. Date & 
Place 
Type of aircraft Brief Description of 
incident 
Reasons 
 
Action Taken 
01 23-01-2005 
In Delhi 
Air India Airbus 310 
IAF Fighter 
(Sukhoi) 
AIC348 was holding at 
FL210 between 50-60 
NM from Delhi on 
radial213. IAF fighter 
(sukhoi) was given climb 
to FL200 but climbed to 
FL210 and AIC348 
carried out TCAS climb to 
FL220. 
Error by Indian Air 
force Pilot 
1. IAF initiated action 
against the Sukhoi 
Pilot. 
2. Revised procedure 
was framed 
keeping more 
separation with 
IAF aircraft during 
air exercise. 
02 07-02-2005 
In Chennai 
Indonesian Airlines 
Boeing 767 
Sri Lankan Airlines 
Airbus 320 
 
GIA1308F from WAAA to 
OMAL executed TCAS 
decent from FL 380 due 
to traffic ALK176 from 
VOHY to VCBI at FL 380. 
 
ATC personnel 
error. 
1. Corrective training 
for both the 
controllers for two 
weeks and 
assessment by 
local board. 
2. GM(aero) Chennai 
was advised to 
issue a local 
circular regarding 
use of RBT line to 
assess separation 
at crossing points. 
 
03 
 
12-02-2005 
In Chennai 
 
Indian Airlines 
 Airbus 320 
 Jet airways 
 Boeing 737 
IAC610 from VOBG to 
VABB EST BBI 1254 
climbing to FL340 got 
traffic on TCAS JAI461 
from VABB/VOMM at 
FL330. 
ATC personnel 
error. 
1. The controller 
counselled 
regarding casual 
attitude while 
putting the 
estimates on 
FDPS. 
2. Controller was 
advised to verify 
the printed 
estimates at the 
entry point before 
handing over the 

72   
strips to delta 
controller. 
 
04 24-02-2005 
In Chennai 
Air India Airbus 310 
Emirates Airbus 
330 
AIC663 was given decent 
to FL 105 & UAE3545 
was given unrestricted 
climb to FL 380 by TAR 
controller. UAE3545 got 
TCAS advisory while 
passing FL 130, same is 
received by AIC 663, 
ATC personnel 
error. 
 
 
No action could be 
taken against the 
controller since he 
has retired before 
completion of the 
incident. 
 
05 01-03-2005 
In Kolkata 
Lufthansa 
Boeing747 
Ph 
uket Airlines  
Boeing 757 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DLH744, B744 from 
EDDF to VTBD following 
ATS route R460 
maintaining FL370 
estimating CEA 0605 and 
VAP818, B752 from 
OMDB to VGEG was 
following ATS route G450 
maintaining FL370 
estimating CEA 
0608.VAP818 came in 
VHF contact at time 0540 
and DLH744 came in 
VHF contact at time 
0544. DLH744 appeared 
on Radarscope after 
TEPAL and VAP818 
appeared on Radarscope 
after JJS. The controller 
did not identify the 
aircraft. At time 0608 
DLH744 reported carrying 
out TCAS descend. Both 
DLH744 and VAP818 
passed overhead CEA 
almost at the same time. 
 
ATC personnel 
error 
The concerned 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training 
with regard to the 
error on his part. 
06 
 
12-03-2005 
In Mumbai 
Emirates Air Bus 
330 
Jet Airways  Boeing 
737 
 
Approach radar controller 
descended UAE502 
EA33, OMDB-VABB and 
JAI424 B737, VOCL-
VABB to FL090. Both the 
aircraft were on a 
converging heading. 
Approach controller failed 
to provide adequate radar 
separation. By the time 
the controller became 
aware of the situation and 
initiate corrective actions, 
the aircraft started getting 
TCAS advisories. Both 
aircraft followed RA. The 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. The practice of 
descending more 
than one aircraft at 
the same level 
should be avoided 
because 
communication 
congestion, heavy 
traffic or 
communication 
failure may lead to 
a situation beyond 
the control of any 
individual. Circular 
issued to all 
controllers to 

73   
minimum separation 
between UAE502 and 
JAI424 was 2 NM, when 
both aircraft were 
maintaining FL90. 
 
desist from such 
practices. 
2. Controllers were 
advised to vector 
number of aircraft 
than can safely be 
handled. 
3. The aircraft much 
later in the 
sequence should 
be allowed to 
continue their 
navigation and 
issued suitable 
holding 
instructions. They 
should be taken 
for vectoring only 
for sequencing or 
deriving some 
operational 
advantages. 
 
4. The concerned 
controller 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
 
07 1-04-2005 
In Kolkata 
Qantas Airlines 
Boeing 747 
Lufthansa Airbus 
340  
 
QFA5 WSSS-L759/L333-
EDDF FL340 and 
DLH783 VTBD-
B209/L333-EDDF at 
FL340 reported KKJ with 
five miles separation. 
QFA5 reported traffic 
(DLH783) five miles 
ahead and followed 
TCAS. Both aircraft were 
suppose to follow same 
route i.e., L333 from KKJ. 
Delhi RSR controller 
descended DLH783 to 
FL330 in co-ordination 
with planning controller 
and subsequently 
descended the aircraft to 
FL320. Both aircraft were 
beyond the radar 
coverage of Delhi 
ARSR/MSSR. Kolkata 
ACC (West) planning 
controller missed the 
converging traffic over 
KKJ. 
 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. All involved 
controllers of 
Kolkata and Delhi 
were subjected to 
corrective training. 
 
2. GM (Aero) Kolkata 
was advised to 
provide additional 
manpower for 
coordination 
purpose during 
peak traffic period. 
 
 

74   
08 
 
23-05-2005 
In Mumbai 
Private aircraft 
registration CFTMS 
Type- Citation 
C550 
Emirates Boeing 
777 
 
Breach of separation 
between CFTMS C550 
OMDB-L301-VABB and 
UAE418 B773 OMDB-
L301-VTBD both at 
FL370. Near NOBAT 
UAE418 reported traffic 
just ahead at same level. 
UAE418 was given Hdg 
180 by RSR controller to 
save the situation when 
UAE418 came in contact. 
ATC personnel 
Dubai and Muscat 
1. GM (Aero) 
Mumbai was 
advised to 
commission 
ADS/CPDLC at 
the earliest for 
suitably equipped 
aircraft. 
 
2. RED Mumbai was 
advised to improve 
HFRTF at 
Mumbai. 
 
09 
 
17-06-2005 
In Kolkata 
Indian airlines  
Airbus 320 
And British Airways 
Boeing747 
IAC294 VTBD-VEGT 
FL360 and BAW3464 
VHHH-VIDP FL360 
crossed near LLP at 
same level (crossing of 
routes W104 and A201), 
BAW3464 descended to 
FL355 and subsequently 
FL350 on TCAS. 
 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
1. All the involved 
controllers were 
warned in writing 
to be careful in 
future. 
2. GM (Aero) Kolkata 
was advised to 
reiterate 
Operational 
Circular 20 of 2003 
on duties of “A” 
controller. 
3. Kolkata was 
advised to rectify 
fault if any in the 
FDPS software. 
They were further 
advised to issue 
local instructions 
for making manual 
strips if FDPS or 
printer was un-
serviceable or strip 
did not print. 
 
10 20-09-200 
In Mumbai 
Jet Airways 
Boeing737 
And Indian Airlines 
Airbus320 
JAI412 did not accept 
radar heading given by 
radar controller due to 
weather and deviated left 
thereby conflicting with 
departing aircraft IAC688. 
The vertical separation 
reduced to 500 feet and 
lateral separation 
reduced to 4NM. 
 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. The radar 
controller was put 
through corrective 
training.  
2. GM (Aero), 
Mumbai was 
advised to issue a 
general circular to 
all controllers to 
follow “CONFLICT 
ALERT 
PROCEDURES” 
as published in 
Chapter 22 of 
MATS Part 2.  
 
3.  Controllers were 

75   
advised that during 
weather deviation 
when aircraft won’t 
take desired 
heading the 
number of aircraft 
that can be safely 
handled is less 
than under normal 
circumstances. 
This factor may be 
explained to the 
controllers through 
a circular or 
classroom 
lectures. 
 
11 11-10-2005 
In Mumbai 
Air India Airbus 310  
Jet Airways 
Boeing737 
Airprox incident took 
place between arriving 
traffic AIC631, EA31, 
VAAH-VABB and 
departing traffic JAI333, 
VABB-VIDP at time 
0338UTC in Mumbai 
Approach Radar. 
ATC personnel 
error 
The radar controller 
was subjected to 
corrective training 
12 18-10-2005 
Hyderabad 
Dornier228 
registration VTEUM 
and Indian Airlines 
Airbus320 
Breach of separation 
between IAC617 and 
VTEUM. IAC617 arriving 
aircraft was descended to 
5600 feet and departing 
aircraft VTEUM was 
climbed to 4600 feet. By 
mistake VTEUM climbed 
up to 5200 feet resulting 
in RA. 
 
Error by private 
airlines pilot. 
DGCA initiated action 
against the Pilot 
13. 15-11-2005 
Nagpur 
Jet Airways Boeing 
737 
Qatar Airways 
Airbus 330 
No standard separation 
existed between JAI826, 
VOHY-VIDP at F380 and 
QTR343 VGZR-OTBD at 
F380 over TAMID. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
1. The radar 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. Controllers were 
advised to use 
available tool on 
radar to assess 
separation 
between aircraft. 
14. 22-11-2005 
Kolkata 
 
 
Alliance Air  
Boeing 737 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
At 0728 UTC LLR 7891 
VIDP-VEGT ROUTE 
W105 FL 270 estimating 
KH 0728 reported getting 
TCAS. The traffic was 
JAI617 VECC-VEBD via 
route W69 FL 330 
estimating KH 0728, 
descended through the 
level of LLR 7891. 
Error by Indian Air 
Force ATC 
Indian Air-force 
advised to investigate 
the incident and take 
appropriate action 
against the 
concerned controller. 

76   
15. 30-11-2005 
Varanasi 
Air Sahara CRJ 
Eva Airlines 
Boeing 777 
SAH6235 CRJ VABB-
VEPT via W33 F310 was 
on direct routing from 
BHITI to IBUSU. EVA67 
B783 VTBD-EGLL via 
R460 F300 on direct 
routing from GGC to LLK. 
At time 0922 SAH6235 
was given descent to 
F100 through the level of 
EVA67. Both aircraft 
reported getting traffic 
advisory on TCAS. 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. The radar 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
 
2. Controllers were 
advised to use 
available tool on 
radar to assess 
separation 
between aircraft. 
16. 1-12-2005 
Kolkata 
Indian Airlines  
Air Bus 320 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
AT 0840 UTC IAC 230 
VEBD – VECC via W69 
was climbing to FL 240, 
CROSSED KH  at  0839, 
reported getting TCAS . 
The traffic was JAI 617 
VECC-VEBD  via route 
W69 FL 300, estimating 
KH 0845, which was 
given descend by 
Bagdogra ATC. 
Error by Air Force 
ATC 
Indian Air-force 
advised to investigate 
the incident and take 
appropriate action 
against the 
concerned controller. 
17. 4-12-2005 
Mumbai 
Emirate Boeing 777 
Lufthansa Cargo  
MD 11 
The controller descended 
UAE504 from FL350 to 
FL330 due to traffic 
GEC8443 maintaining 
FL320 but missed 
GEC8443, which was 
maintaining FL340. 
ATC personnel 
error 
1. The radar 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective 
training. 
2. Sectorization of 
Mumbai Area 
Control Centre 
was 
recommended to 
reduce Radio 
Telephony  
congestion. 
 
  
AIRPROX INCIDENT IN CIVIL AIRSPACE UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF AAI DURING THE 
YEAR 2006  
 
Sl 
No 
Date & 
Place 
Type of aircraft Brief Description of 
incident 
REASONS 
 
Action Taken 
01 21-01-06 
Kolkata 
Saudia airlines 
B744 
Rastriya Sahara 
B737 
At around 0820 UTC 
SVA860, B744, OEJN-
RPLL via route N895 
maintaining FL350 and 
RSH310, B737, VOHY-
VECC via route W41 
maintaining FL350 
converged over BBS. The 
two aircraft came within 
2-3 NM of each other. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
1. The Procedural 
controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. The radar 
controller was 
issued warning for 
his error. 
 
 

77   
02 06-02-06 
Mumbai 
Indian Airlines  
Air Bus 320 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
RA took place between 
IAC602, EA32, VIDP-
VABB FL340 and JAI364, 
B737, VAPO-VIDP  on 
direct routing to IDOLA 
from Pune via east of SG. 
 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
1. The RSR 
controller   was 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. RSR controllers 
were issued 
instructions to 
keep Global FPS 
with them to 
correlate SSR 
code and call sign 
while identifying 
any aircraft and to 
identify wrong 
association of data 
block in future. 
3. Instructions issued 
not to combine 
ACC sectors. 
 
03 08-02-06 
Kolkata 
Malaysian airlines 
B747 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
At around 0627 MAS1, 
B747, EGLL-WMKK via 
route L759 at FL390 and 
JAI217, B737, VABB-
VECC via route G450 at 
FL390 crossed each 
other near OTABA 
resulting in the RA 
manoeuvre by both the 
aircraft. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
1. Controller was 
warned to be more 
careful in future. 
2. ATS in-charge 
Varanasi was 
advised to issue a 
local instruction 
that estimate 
message should 
be passed first and 
co-ordination signs 
may be put up 
later on. All 
controllers were 
advised to be extra 
cautious on 
passing estimates 
on route L759.  
3. Action is being 
initiated to provide 
VHF 
04 18-03-06 
Mumbai 
Emirate Boeing 777 
OEG B752 
At 1130 UTC UAE 502 
B773 OMDB-L301-VABB 
FL350 and OGE 989 
B752 VTSP-L301A-
OMRK FL340 came in 
close proximity to each 
other, less than the 
prescribed minima 
resulting in an RA. 
Pilot as well as 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
Whenever unusual 
situations like power 
failure in ATC units 
take place which 
required special 
attention, training 
should be 
discontinued and if 
required WSO may 
be advised to 
provide additional 
assistance. 
 

78   
05 03-05-06 
Mumbai 
King fisher  
Air Bus 320 
Indian Airlines  
Air Bus 320 
 
The controller mistakenly 
descended KFR104 to 
FL130, which was 
actually intended for 
KFR304. This resulted in 
a breach of separation 
between  KFR104 and 
IAC167. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
1. The controller 
should pay 
undivided 
attention to 
transmission of 
aircraft having 
similar sounding 
call sign. 
2. The Cleared 
flight level CFL 
information in 
the SDD must 
be filled up 
immediately 
after issuing 
descent/climb 
clearance. 
3. The call sign of 
the aircraft may 
be changed 
temporarily after 
intimating the 
pilot to avoid 
confusion. 
06 09-08-06 
Kolkata 
Emirate Boeing 777 
Singapore  
Approximately 10nm from 
position URKOK on L301 
A TCAS target was 
observed by UAE335 
B777 REG A6EBP FROM 
Manila to Dubai. The 
conflicting traffic was 
SIA352 westbound on 
P628 AT 9O”clock and 
15nm to UAE335 and 
was converging at 
URKOK. UAE335 was 
asked by ATC to climb to 
FL350 (Non standard). 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
1. Concerned 
controllers were 
subjected to 
corrective training. 
2. Suitable action to 
augment the range 
of VHF. 
3. Suitable 
modification in the 
system to display 
ADS logged 
aircraft on SDD 
display. 
4. Necessary 
software 
modifications to 
highlight the 
conflict alert on the 
FDD Screen. 
 
07 21-09-06 
Rajkot 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
IAF Sukhoi 
JAI345 B737 Mumbai to 
Rajkot descending to 
FL75, under Rajkot 
control zone, while 
passing FL227 reported 
getting RA with respect to 
Sukhoi aircraft of IAF. An 
airforce exercise Gagan 
Shakti was in progress 
under Jamnagar ATC. 
Error by Indian Air 
Force ATC 
 
1. Better 
coordination 
between IAF and 
Civil ATC for air-
force exercise. 
2. DGCA carried out 
investigation of 
the incident. 

79   
08 26-09-06 
Nagpur 
IAF AN32 
IAF AN32 
VUBLA AN32 
VOYK/VANP 
On radial 189 NNP was 
instructed to descent to 
5000 feet, there was a 
departing aircraft VUBCK 
AN32 VANP/VOBG on 
radial 205 NNP which 
Was climbing 
unrestricted, this resulted 
in breach of separation 
within 5nm of Nagpur 
VOR with just 1 mile 
lateral separation. 
 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
1. Involved controller 
superannuated. 
2. It is recommended 
that jurisdiction of 
Nagpur tower may 
be reduced to 
FL75 and 25NM 
around Nagpur. 
09 02-10-06 
Delhi 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
Sri Lankan Airlines 
Airbus 320 
 
Simultaneous runway 
operations were in 
progress at Delhi. Due to 
coordination failure 
between tower (S) and 
tower (N) JAI354 (B737) 
and ALK196 (A320) were 
both given takeoff 
clearance simultaneously 
from runway27 and 
runway28 resulted in the 
airprox. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
Involved controllers 
were subjected to 
corrective training. 
10 16-10-06 
Mumbai 
Indian Airlines  
Air Bus 320 
North West  
IAC108 was descended 
to FL 130 instead of 
FL150 by TAR controller 
which resulted in the RA 
with the conflicting traffic 
NW034 which was also 
descending to FL130. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
The radar controller 
was subjected to 
intensive counseling. 
11 28-10-06 
Guwahati 
Indigo airlines  
Air Bus 320 
IAF MI18 
Indigo airlines IGO 202 
IMPHAL/GUWAHATI 
reported a helicopter just 
one mile ahead at the 
same level. Helicopter 
673 climbed to FL100 
without coordinating with 
Guwahati ASR resulting 
in the airprox. 
IAF personnel 
error 
 
 
Action was initiated 
by IAF against the 
Pilot of MI18. 
12 18-11-06 
Kolkata 
King fisher  
Air Bus 320 
Indigo airlines  
Air Bus 320 
 
At 1127 UTC KFR572 
A320 was asked to hold 
at approx. 20NM west of 
Kolkata AT FL85 due 
traffic congestion. 
IGO203 A320 
Delhi/Kolkata was also 
instructed to hold approx. 
at the same area at FL 
85. IGO203 had leveled 
of at FL90 as she got the 
TCAS alert and carried 
out RA manoeuvere. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
 
The radar controller 
was subjected to 
corrective training. 

80   
13 05-12-06 
Nagpur 
Rastriya Sahara 
B737 
C-550 
RA INCIDENT 
BETWEEN RSH6222 
AND VTCLC over BPL at 
FL280. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
The radar controller 
was subjected to 
corrective training 
14 05-12-06 
Kolkata 
Jet Airways Boeing 
737 
Emirate Boeing 747 
 
RSR controller (west) 
inadvertently gave JAI615 
EA332 Kolkata/Mumbai 
G450 descend to FL 340, 
resulting in RA with the 
reciprocal traffic UAE 
9863 B744 Hong Kong 
/Dubai Which was 
maintaining FL340 route 
A791. 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
The radar controller 
was subjected to 
intensive counseling. 
15 10-12-06 
Kolkata 
 
 
German Cargo 
MD-11 
 Cors Air B747 
GEC 8469 (MD-11) Hong 
Kong to Sarjah FL320 
EST OTABA 1506 and 
BLX932 corsair B744 
Phuket /Helsinki FL320 
EST OTABA 1507 
converged over OTABA, 
The planning controller 
could not detect the 
conflict as he did not 
update the strips of GEC 
8469 at  the crossing 
point OTABA . 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
1. The involved 
controller is 
subjected to 
corrective training 
for a period of 10 
days. 
2. 
Work on proposed   
RCAG at 
Jharsuguda to be 
expedited for 
better VHF 
coverage. 
16 26-12-06 
Hyderabad 
Jet Airways  
Boeing 737 
IAF AN32 
JAI452 after getting 
airborne from runway 09, 
while climbing 
unrestricted on R282 
HHY got RA while 
passing FL105. The 
conflicting traffic was 
VUBLE AN32 which was 
descending in the 
KAMAP hold to FL100 
ATC personnel 
error 
 
The controller was 
subjected to 
corrective training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81   
MINUTES OF THE 6 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 3 rd  AUGUST 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1345 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Francis K. George 
5. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Shri Kashiram Rana 
8. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
10. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
12. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
13. Shri Ajay Maroo 
14 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
15. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
3. Shri N.C. Gupta  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
List of Representatives  
Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Smt. Anita Choudhary,   Additional Secretary (CS ) 
2. Shri A.K.Srivastava,  Joint Secretary (PM)  

82   
Central Industrial Security Force  
 
1. Shri R.K.Das, Director General (CISF) 
2. Shri M.S.Bali Inspector General (Airport Sector)  
3. Shri Jishnu Mukherjee, AIG(Airport Sector) 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
 
 
1. Shri S.R.Mehra,  Commissioner of Security (Civil  Aviation) 
2. Shri M.N.Chaturvedi,  Deputy Commissioner of Sec urity (Civil Aviation) 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
 
 
1. Shri K.Gohain,  Director General  
2. Shri A.K.Chopra,  Joint Director General 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Ministry of 
Home Affairs, CISF, Bureau of Civil Aviation Securi ty and Directorate General of 
Civil Aviation in connection with examination of “A irports Authority of India – 
Safety and Security Aspects”.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of Ministry of 
Home Affairs, CISF, Bureau of Civil Aviation Securi ty and Directorate General of 
Civil Aviation and also drew their attention to dir ection 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamenta ry Committee.  Thereafter, 
the representatives made an audio-visual presentati on on Safety and Security 
Aspects.  After the audio-visual presentation, Memb ers raised queries on various 
aspects pertaining to safety and security in the ai rports.  Due to paucity of time, 
the reply to queries could not be ascertained from the witnesses.  It was, 
therefore, decided that written replies to all the queries might be furnished to the 
Committee within a fortnight. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives fo r providing all the 
material/information on the subject matter as desir ed by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

83   
MINUTES OF THE 14 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 20 th  DECEMBER, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1330 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
3. Shri Francis K. George 
4. Ch. Lal Singh 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
8. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
9. Shri Ajay Maroo 
10. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
4. Shri N.C. Gupta  Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
Representatives of Airports Authority of India 
 
 
1. Dr. K. Ramalingam Chairman 
2. Shri P. Seth Member (Operations) 
3. Shri V.P. Agrawal Member (Planning) 
4. Shri M.C. Kishore ED, (CA) & CS 
 

84   
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Airports 
Authority of India (AAI) in connection with examina tion of Safety and Security in 
its civil aviation sector.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of AAI and also 
drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directi ons by the Speaker relating to 
evidence before the Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives of 
AAI made an audio-visual presentation on Safety and  Security Aspects of their 
activities.  After the audio-visual presentation, M embers raised queries on 
various aspects pertaining to the subject and the e xplanations/clarifications on 
the same were made by the representatives of AAI.  Information on some of the 
points raised by the Committee was not readily avai lable with the representatives 
of AAI.  It was, however, promised by them that the  same would be furnished to 
the Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  AAI for providing all the 
material/information on the subject matter as desir ed by the Committee. 
 
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
6. XXXXXX 
 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
8. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

85   
MINUTES OF THE 17 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 27 th  FEBRUARY 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1700 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
   Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
1. Shri Ashok Chawla Secretary 
2. Shri K.N.Shrivastava Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Sandeep Prakash  Director  
4. Dr. K.Ramalingam Chairman(AAI) 
 
2.  The Committee took oral evidence of the represe ntatives of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation in connection with examination of  ‘Airports Authority of India – 
Safety and Security Aspects’. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and drew their attention to directio n 58 of the Directions by the 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Shri Francis K. George 
4 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5 Ch. Lal Singh 
6 Shri Kashiram Rana 
  
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
7 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
8 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
9 Shri Ajay Maroo 
10 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 

86   
Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamenta ry Committee.  Then, 
Members raised queries on various aspects pertainin g to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were made b y the representatives of 
Ministry.  Information on some of the points raised  by the Committee was not 
readily available with the representatives of Minis try.  It was, however, promised 
by them that the same would be furnished to the Com mittee Secretariat in due 
course. 
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for providing all the material/information on the subject matter as desired 
by the Committee. 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

87   
MINUTES OF THE 23 rd  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 28 th  APRIL, 2008 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1630 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N. S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, Committee on Public  Undertakings, delivered 
the valedictory address and thanked the members of the committee and the 
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat for their co operation and assistance 
rendered during the term of the committee. The Comm ittee thereafter considered 
two draft reports on the following subjects and ado pted the same without 
modifications: 
 
(i) Airports Authority of India-Safety and Security  Aspects 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2 
3 
Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5 Shri Francis K. George 
6 Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
8 
9 
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 

88   
(ii) XXXXXX XXXXX  XXXX XXXXXX 
  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finali ze these Reports for 
presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 