 
6 
 
C.P.U.No.892 
SIXTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MMTC LIMITED - TRADE IN GOLD (IMPORT OF GOLD 
BY MMTC) 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE) 
 
(Action Taken by the G overnment on the recommendations contained in the 6 th 
Report of  the Committee on  Public  Undertak ings (13 th Lok  Sabha)  on MMT C – 
Trade in Gold (Import of Gold by MMTC) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.08.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on      22.08.2005 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August 2005 /  Sarvana 1927 (S) 
 
 
 
 
 

 1
CONTENTS 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-2006)  
INTRODUCTION  
CHAPTER   l Report . 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government . 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in vi ew of the Government’s 
replies.  
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respec t of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited  
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of  sitting of COPU  
 II 
  
Analysis of the Action Take n by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 8 th Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
“ONGC – Avoidable expendit ure due to creation of 
excessive handling capacity” 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2
 
COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Sriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri Jibon Roy  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Smt. Ambika Soni  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph  Secretary 
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J. P. Sharma  Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Assistant Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Pu blic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Re port of the Committee on Public Undertakings (13 th Lok 
Sabha) on MMTC Ltd. – Trade in Gold (Import of Gold by MMTC). 
 
2. The Sixth Report of the Committee on  Public Undertak ings (2002-03) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 30 th July, 2001.  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations contai ned in the Report we re received on 
19.4.2005. The Committee on Public Undertakings cons idered and adopted this 
Report at their sittings held on 17 th August, 2005.  The Minut es of the sitting are 
given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations c ontained in the 6 th Report (2002-03) of   the Committee is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Rupchand Pal 
17   August,  2005 Chairman, 
 26  Sravana 1927(S)           Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 
 

 1
 
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Sixth Report (Thirteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public  Undertakings  (2002-2003) on “MMTC 
Limited – Trade in Gold (Import of Gold by MMTC)” which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 30th July, 2001 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Government in respect of all 
the recommendations containe d in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows : 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the  
Government : (Chapter II) 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, and 4,      (Total 3) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of Government’s replies :(Chapter III) 
 
Sl. Nos.  2 and 5       (Total 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:(Chapter IV) 
 
Sl. No. 6       (Total 1)  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the  Government are still awaited : (Chapter V) 
 
N I L         ( N I L )  
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some important aspects of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
I. RECOMMENDATIONS AT SL. NOS . 1 TO 5 
 
4. The Sixth Report (Thi rteenth Lok Sabha) on MMTC Limited – Trade in Gold 
was based on Audit Paragraph No. 6.3 in t he C&AG’s Report No. 3 (Commercial) 
of 1998.  The report dealt with various iss ues raised in the C&AG’s report relating 
to the Import of Gold.  The Committee in the Report had recommended for  

 2
investigation by the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) or the Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) on some of the i ssues like – turning down by MMTC the 
reasonable offer of the Bank of Nova Scotia to supply gold in 1984 and alleged 
suspicious involvement of one Shri Am arnath, a Senior Group General Manager 
of MMTC (Recommendation at S.No. 1); m ysterious involvement of unsolicited 
intermediary M/s Shattaff in Gold impor t by MMTC (Recommendation at S.No. 2); 
Special favours shown to the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) in the matter of 
selection of supplier of gold (Recommendation at Sl. No. 3); inclusion of restrictive 
clause in the Agreement with UBS that MMTC should not enter into agreement for 
supply of gold from any other party t hereby compromising the interests of MMTC 
(Recommendation at Sl. No. 4);  the r easons for continued import of gold from 
UBS at higher rate of intere st despite getting an erratic supply and that  too after 
signing contract with another  supplier of gold name ly, Credit Suisse bank 
(Recommendation at Sl. No. 5). 
5. From the final action taken repl y received from the Government on 19 th 
April, 2005, it may be seen that on all the five recommendations made at S.Nos. 1 
to 5 of the Sixth Report where the Committee had recommended for probe by 
CVC or CBI, the CBI had given their investigation report in which it has been 
concluded that there is no evidence to pr osecute the officers of MMTC in a court 
of law.  But there have been procedural irregularitie s and system deficiencies 
which have been brought to the notice of the Government.  For instance, in the 
case of action taken reply to recommendat ion at Sl. No. 2 regarding involvement 
of unsolicited intermediary in gold imports, the CBI in their inquiry report has inter-
alia pointed out that :-  

 3
“………..MMTC was in touch with M/s Shattaf Trading Co. and had been 
dealing with the Company in the matter of supply of gold on behalf of Credit 
Suisse.  Inquiry has shown that there were defects in the process followed 
for selection of supplier of gold.  For instance, Technical Examiner, CVC 
had also opined that the offers were  received through telex instead of 
sealed bid system and the whole process seems to be quite arbitrary, ad-
hoc and non transparent.   However, these were essentially procedural 
irregularities and were not sufficient to impute criminality to the conduct of 
the officials who dealt wit h the matter.  The procedur al irregularities were 
attributable partly to systematic inadequacies and partly to the concerned 
officials of MMTC viz. Mrs. Girija Bhan, then Divisional Manager and Mr. 
I.P. Hazarika, then Director (Finance) .  However, no action is possible 
against them at this stage since both of them have retired from the services 
of MMTC long back.” 
   
6. The Committee, while taking note of the findings of  the CBI, recommend 
that the Government must di rect MMTC to comply with the procedures laid down 
for carrying out their business activities in  future to avoid recurrence of procedural 
irregularities pointed out by the CBI which have been attributed to systemic 
inadequacies.  The Committee further re commend that complete transparency 
should be observed in fu ture in matters involving selection of a party from 
amongst many competitors  from whom offers are received for executing an 
agreement so as to reflect total fairness and transparency in the transactions. 
 
II. DELAY IN FURNISHING THE ACTION TAKEN REPLIES 
 
7. The action taken replies of the Government on the recommendations, 
contained in the Sixth Report (13 th Lok Sabha) which was presented to the 
Parliament  on 30 th July, 2001, were required to be furnished to this Secretariat 
within  six months of  presentation of the report i.e. by 29 th January, 2002.  
However, the Government has furnished th e final action taken replies only on 19 
April, 2005 i.e. after a lapse of more than 3 years. The Ministry have stated that in 
pursuance of Committee’s recommendations for a thorough probe by an 

 4
independent agency preferably by CBI a nd CVC, the Ministry of Commerce 
immediately referred the matter to CV C for probe on 29/10/2001.  The CVC, 
however, informed that it does not have an in-house investigating machinery and 
suggested that the matter may be referred to CBI.  Accordingly, the matter was 
referred to CBI on 8/2/2002. The CBI, in turn, suggested to the department that 
the matter may be entrusted to Economic Offences Wing of Delhi Police as CBI 
was saddled with invest igations of a large number of cases relating to import of 
gold by MMTC Limited. This was exam ined by the Ministry  and the CBI was 
advised on 23/7/2002 to comme nce investigations nevertheless, as this would 
rather facilitate the earlier investigations relating to import of gold already 
entrusted to it by CVC on the basis of recommendation of Task Force Report. 
8. The Ministry of Commerce had be en seeking extension of time for 
furnishing Action Taken Replies from time to time on the pretext that CBI has not 
furnished its report.  In September, 2003, the Ministry of Commerce had furnished 
the Action Taken Replies.  On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, it was noticed 
that 5 out of 6 Action Tak en Replies to the recommendations were only interim in 
nature, as the CBI Report was pending.  Thereafter, the Ministry while seeking 
extension of time up to 30 th March, 2005 for furnishing Action Taken Replies, 
intimated that preliminary inquiry registered by CBI on 20 th June, 2003 was at the 
initial stage and its finalisation was likely to take some more time as it involved 
scrutiny of voluminous files and examination of MMTC officials.  While considering 
the request of the Ministry for extensio n of time for furn ishing Action Taken 
Replies, the Committee decided to hear th e views of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Personnel and CBI with a view to ascertain the reasons for taking long 

 5
time in completion of the investigation and also  the pres ent status of the 
investigation. 
 
9. Accordingly, the representatives of the CBI appeared before the Committee 
for oral evidence on 22 November, 2004.  While giving the reasons for delay in 
completion of the investigation by the CBI and also the present status, the 
Director, CBI, in his deposition submitted that:- 
 
“……It is most humbly submitted that  a reference was made to CBI from 
the Ministry of Commerce on 14.2.2002 fo rwarding therewith a copy of the 
Sixth  Report of the PUC regarding MMTC in which a request for inquiry / 
investigation into recommendations No. 1 to 5 of Chapter III of the Report 
was made. 
 
 The matter was examined in CBI and it was considered necessary 
to obtain some additional information to  be able to take up the matter for a 
regular inquiry.  Accordingly, a request was sent to the Ministry of 
Commerce on 27.9.2002 to provide the ne cessary additional information.  
In fact, since the matter was old, the Commerce Ministry  set up a Task 
Force, the Report of which was receiv ed only on 12.5.2003.  Since it was 
an old matter, the Ministry of Commerc e also took substantial time to 
respond to our request and the final resp onse of the Ministry of Commerce 
was received only on 25.3.2003.  As a result of the inquiries into the matter, 
an inquiry by the CBI coul d be started by register ing a preliminary inquiry 
on 13
th June, 2003. 
 
 After the preliminary inquiry wa s registered, the Ministry of 
Commerce was requested to make availa ble the relevant files.  But MMTC 
took about two months to hand over the original documents to CBI, it being 
a very old matter.  
 
 During the course of inquiries, several other references were also 
made to MMTC.  But MMTC took 1 to 6 months time to respond to these 
references saying that the records pertaining to the matter not being readily 
traceable.  Further, during the course of inquiries, several key officials of 
MMTC, who had by now retired from the service, could not be located 
quickly as it took time to trace them out.  Two key officials who have dealt 
with the matter, Ms. Girija Bhan and Mr. I.P. Hazarika could be finally 
examined only in March, 2004. 
 
 Since the matter was highly te chnical in nature and involved 
financial implications, a reference was made to the Chief Technical 

 6
Examiner, Central Vigilance Commission in March, 2004 to evaluate the 
different offers received by MMTC  in November, 1986 for supply of gold.  
The Central Vigilance Commission took about three months to furnish its 
report in the matter. Field inquiries in  this matter were finally completed on 
16.6.2004.  Thereafter, the matter was examined at various levels in CBI 
including the examination from legal point of view.  The CBI finally took a 
decision in the matter on 13.9.2004 and a se lf-contained report in respect 
of the inquiry conducted by the CBI in the matter was sent to the Ministry of 
Commerce on 16.11.2004.  The inquiry in this matter is complete.  The CBI 
has come to the conclusion that t here is no evidence to prosecute the 
officers of MMTC in a court of law.  But there are procedural irregularities 
which have been pointed out in our self-c ontained report to the Ministry of 
Commerce of 16.11.2004 to take action as they deem appropriate. 
 
 So, so far the CBI is concerned, the matter is closed and the inquiry 
report has been submitted to the Ministry of Commerce.” 
 
 
10. The Committee note with concern that t he final action take n replies to the 
recommendations contained in the Sixt h Report have been furnished by the 
Government after a period of more than 3 years.  In this re gard, the Committee 
note that after the presentation of the Report the Government has taken 3 months 
time to initially refer the matter to the Central Vigila nce  Commission (CVC)  for 
probe and no reason for this delay has been furnished by the Government.  Even 
thereafter, when CVC had expressed their inability to conduct the probe on the 
ground of not having any in-house inve stigating machinery, the matter kept 
shuttling between the CBI and the Ministry.  The CBI co uld be finally convinced 
only on 23 July, 2002, i.e. after a period of one year fr om the presentation of the 
Report, to investigate the ma tter and CBI could start its inquiry by registering a 
preliminary inquiry only on 13 th June, 2003.  The Committee express its 
dissatisfaction on the slow pr ogress on such an important issue.  The Committee, 
therefore, believe that there has been slackness on the part of the Government in 
taking prompt actions on the recommendations of the Committee. The 

 7
Committee, therefore, strong ly feel that the Government should have taken all 
necessary steps in time an d could have furnished the Ac tion Taken Reply within 
the stipulated time.  The Committee recommend that in future Government should 
promptly take action on the recommendat ions contained in all Parliamentary 
Committee reports.  
 
III. RECOMMENDATION AT SL. NO. 6  REGARDING THE MISSING FILE 
 
11. The Committee in their Sixth Repo rt have recommended with regard to the 
missing file as follows:- 
 
 “The Committee have been informed that necessary papers regarding 
import of gold could  not be made avai lable to the Audit for examination 
due to the fact that the relevant file  was untraceable in the Ministry of 
Commerce. The Committee have been info rmed that the file still remained 
untraceable and  nobody co uld be held responsible for the missing of the 
file. The Ministry are also not sure whether the file had been weeded out at 
all as they had stated in their reply that it could have most probably been 
weeded out. The Committee have been fu rther informed by the Ministry 
that attempts were made to trace the file in the Section and the Record 
Room which did not produce any posit ive results. The Committee wonder 
as to how such sensitive files involv ing important decisions taken by the 
Government could have been classified as files that could be weeded out, 
especially, when such transactions are subjected to detailed scrutiny by the 
Audit. The Committee also wonder as to  how the Ministry could launch its 
search efforts when they felt that the file could have been weeded out.  It is 
an established practice of office managem ent that every file in the Section 
is properly entered in the f ile register and when action is complete, its fate 
about its retention is dec ided and proper entries are made in the file 
registers, if they are to  be weeded out. It is obvious  from this episode that 
the Ministry of Commerce does not  have a proper system of records 
management and there have been no regular system of checks through 
inspections by senior officers about  the status of record management, 
despite government orders existing on the subject and there was complete 
abdication of responsibility on the part of  officers in senior supervisory 
capacities in the Ministries which had been taken advantage of by 
unscrupulous elements to ensure their escape from many wrong doings.  
The Committee take a very serious note of the manner in which the 
Ministry of Commerce is being managed in respect of affairs of record 
management and in the observance of o ffice procedure and desire that 
appropriate action should be initiated to fix responsibility on the senior-most 
officer who dealt with the subject at a level not below the level of Joint 
Secretary and also to initiate remedial  measures in the Ministry at least 

 8
from now on so that such unfortunate incidences do not recur which could 
be taken advantage of by wrong doers. “ 
 
12. The Government (Ministry of Comme rce and Industry) in their action taken 
reply dated 23rd July, 2003 have stated as follfows: 
 
 “It has alredy been reported to COPU vide O.M. No.12/23/97-
EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 29/10/2001 that the file relating to the issue 
bearing No.10/22/86 EP(LSG)  was not traceable despite several efforts 
both in the section as well as in the Record Room.  The Vigilance Section 
of the Ministry of Commerce which pr obed this issue has stated that the 
enquiry could not make much headway due to the following: 
 
i) The section concerne d reported that file mo vement registers were 
only available from 1993 onwards and no movement records were 
available for the period 1987-88. 
 
ii) Though the file movement record s of Commerce Secretary’s office 
indicated the relevant dates on which the file had been submitted to CS, 
backward tracing of the file was not po ssible as the movement registers for 
the relevant period were not available with the offi ce of Joint Secretary 
(Surjit Mitra) and in the EP(Gem&Jewellery) Section. 
 
iii) As per Retention Sc hedule, the file register s are required to be 
maintained for 15 years while file movement registers are required to be 
maintained for one year.  The Manual of Office Procedure is silent about 
any other method to help in tracing the movement of a file  after a lapse of 
10 years or so. 
 
iv) Shri P.N. Gopalkrishna, PS and Shri H.R.Sharma, P.A. who were 
posted with the then Joint Secret ary(R.Dayal) have retired from 
Government service on 30.9.91 and 30.1.93. 
 
 Subsequently, theref ore, the vigilance f ile was closed with the 
approval of Commerce Secretary.  However, to prevent loss of files, 
detailed guidelines were issued by  O&M Section vide their O.M.No.1-
34(9)/98-O&M dated 25.3.1998. 
 
 The Gem & Jewellery Division of the Department of Commerce have 
since reconstructed  the missing f ile by getting the necessary papers 
available with MMTC, Mini stry of Finance and RBI.  Efforts are also being 
made to maintain the records hencef orth in a systematic manner and in 
accordance with Office Procedure guidelines.” 
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
 
 

 9
 The Remarks of C&AG on the reply of  the Government was as follows: 
 “As detailed guidelines have now been issued for proper maintenance of 
files, we have no further comments.” 
 
 The Comments of the Ministry on t he above mentioned remarks of C&AG 
is as follows : 
 
 “No comments.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government on the 
recommendation pertaining to missing documents on import of gold.  While taking 
a serious note of the manner in which th e records were being maintained in the 
Ministry of Commerce and th e observance of office procedure, the Committee 
had desired that the Government should  initiate appropria te action to fix 
responsibility on the senior-most officer concerned and  also to init iate remedial 
measures to avoid recurrence of such unf ortunate incidences in the future.  The 
Committee, however, note that  action taken reply of the Ministry does not reflect 
any serious efforts on their part in fixing the responsib ility.  Instead,  the Ministry 
have simply washed away their hands by stating that  movement registers for 
relevant periods were not available with the office of the Joint Secretary and in the 
EP (Gem & Jewellery ) sectio n and two P.As posted with  the concerned officers 
have since retired from serv ice.  According to the Mini stry, their Manual of Office 
Procedure is silent about an y method to help in tracin g the movement of a file 
after a lapse of 10 years or  so.  The Committee wonder as to whether the Manual 
on Office Procedure was serving any purpos e at all.  In th e opinion of the 
Committee, the justification that the missing file was reconstructed by getting 
necessary papers from MMTC, Ministry  of Finance and RBI, cannot absolve 

 10
Ministry of the serious lapses committed in  preserving impor tant documents and 
fixing the related  responsibility. 
14. The Committee, however, note that to prevent the loss of files and to keep 
track of the movement of files among the officers detailed guidelines have since 
been issued by the Ministry .  In this regard, the Comm ittee while reiterating their 
recommendation about fixing the responsibility for the missing file, feel that the 
matter should not remain unresolved but mu st be taken to a logical conclusion.  
The Committee further recommend that the detailed gu idelines issued by the 
Ministry should be scrupul ously followed so as to avoid recurrence of such 
unfortunate incidences in the future.” 

 11
CHAPTER –II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT . 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. N O. 1 OFFER FROM BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA FOR 
GOLD IMPORT: 
 
 The Committee note that under the su ccessive Exim policies beginning 
from the term 1985-88 onwards, MMTC has been tr ading in gold to help export of 
jewellery.  Under various schemes of the Exim Policies, MMTC was to import gold 
and supply it to approved gold jewellery manufacturing units which were mainly 
100% Export Oriented Units and also thos e situated in the Export Processing 
Zones apart from those in the Domestic Tariff Area.  MMTC could give gold to 
these units on loan basis or on outright sale basis subject to the condition that the 
export of jewellery made out of this imported gold was made within three months 
from the date of sale or  loan.  Under the various  schemes, 86096 Kgs. of gold 
was imported by MMTC during the period of 9 years beginning with 1988-89 and 
ending with the year 1996-97.  Out of th is, 83731 kgs of gold jewellery was stated 
to have been exported out of the count ry upto 1996-97.  The Committee find it 
that in order to import gold for supply under various schemes, advance action was 
started in 1984 itself so that the schemes under Exim  Policy of 1985-88 could be 
implemented without any delay.  The Co mmittee note that in February, 1985, 
MMTC proposed to the Ministry of Commerc e for approval, their decision to enter 
into an agreement with Bank of Nova Sc otia for supply of gold on consignment 
basis.  But the Ministry of Commerce di d not take any positive action on the 
proposal and in November 1986, fresh offers were invited from five foreign banks, 
although the Bank of Nova  Scotia extended its offe r upto December 1985.  The 
Ministry did not offer any explanation to  Audit as to what prevented it from 
processing the offer of Nova Scotia Bank to a logical end.  According to Audit, this 
offer was allowed to lapse, despite its extension upto December 1985.  However, 
the Ministry sought to explain to the Co mmittee stating that this could not have 
been processed earlier, as the Schemes for Import of Gold were  notified in June 
1988 only.  The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry and its 
attempt to portray this episode as a separate incident in isolation, in view of the 
developments later in the matter of impor t of gold which reveal special favours 
shown to another supplier of gold w ho came into the scheme through an 
unsolicited intermediary and the Commi ttee cannot but help come to the 
conclusion that there appears to be a de sign behind this move to deliberately 
scuttle a reasonable offer in order to accommodate another firm on some 
extraneous considerations.  The Commi ttee wish to point out here that the 
unsolicited intermediary firm, was one M/s Inter Gold (India) Ltd., which 
incidentally had one Shri Amarnath, a Senior Group General Manager of MMTC in 
it as a Director and this firm received a loan of Rupees One Crore from MMTC.  
Interestingly, Shri Amarnath who became a Director in the Board of Directors of 
M/s Inter Gold (India) Ltd. in June 198 7 shares his postal  address with one Ms. 

 12
Usha Khandwala who had been a Director of this Company since 23 August 1985 
and the date of incorporation of this firm was 20 May, 1985. 
 
 The Committee are of the vi ew that if the offer of the Bank of Nova Scotia 
was too early to merit any processing in  view of the fact that gold imports 
schemes came into being only in June, 1988, then on the same count, the offers 
invited in 1986 from five foreign banks were also too premature to merit any 
consideration, although a f limsy excuse has been cited that  the draft gold import 
schemes took some concrete shape by then.  The Committee cannot buy this 
argument further in view of the fact  that MMTC has been importing gold for 
various schemes from 1986 onwards under the Exim Policy of 1985-88 and there 
was no unreasonable haste in calling for offers in the year 1985 itself for the 
schemes meant for the year 1985-88.  The Committee, ther efore, feel that there 
was a pre-meditated deliber ate design behind this seem ingly innocuous isolated 
incident, which requires a thorough probe by an independent authority such as the 
Chief Vigilance Commissioner and the Centra l Bureau of Investig ation to get at 
the truth. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
1) The Ministry had already clarified that the offers received by several banks 
for supply of gold to MMTC on loan or co nsignment basis we re evaluated by 
MMTC on commercial considerations for fina l selection of the competitive bid.  
The basic function of the Ministry was to frame policies and procedures keeping in 
view the overall export policies of the Go vernment of India, while the commercial 
aspects of trade proposals are examined  by the agency concerned, in this 
instance, by MMTC.  The three member Task Force set up by the Ministry of 
Commerce to go into various aspects of  C&AG’s report, has examined the 
reconstructed file made available to t hem by the Ministry and come to the 
conclusion that right through the process of finalizing the scheme, the concerned 
authorities viz. Ministry of Commerce, Mi nistry of Finance and RBI were not only 
informed, but that necessary approvals we re taken in the final selection of the 
Union Bank of Switzerland as a supplier of gold. 
 
 2) As recommended by Committee on Public Undertakings for a thorough 
probe by an independent agen cy preferably by CBI and CVC, the Department 
immediately referred the matter to CV C for probe on 29/10/2001.  The CVC, 
however, informed that it does not have an in-house investigating machinery and 
suggested that the matter may be referred to CBI.  Accordingly the matter was 
referred to CBI on 8/2/2002. The CBI, in turn, suggested to the department that 
the matter may be entrusted to Economic Off ences Wing of Delhi Police as CBI 
was saddled with invest igations of a large number of cases relating to import of 
gold by MMTC Limited. This was exam ined in the Department  and the CBI was 
advised on 23/7/2002 to comme nce investigations nevert heless, as this would 
rather facilitate the earlier investigations relating to import of gold already 
entrusted to it by CVC on the basis of recommendation of Task Force Report.   
 

 13
3) In their inquiry report, CBI have in formed that the enquiries have revealed 
that Bank of Nova Scotia submitted proposals to SBI in August, 1984 on the basis 
of discussions held with SBI and Minist ry of Commerce to facilitate the current 
gold replenishment programme to begin on August 15, 1984 and for supply of 
gold on consignment/loan/sale on an on-going basis.  The same was sent by 
Ministry of Commerce to MMTC after whic h the latter sent formal proposal in 
October, 1984 expressing its intention to function as one of the outlets for the 
replenishment of gold to exporters.  The enquiry has revealed that various 
departments of the Government raised a number of queries on the proposed 
scheme of MMTC.  After a lot of deliber ations with MMTC officials, the scheme 
was ultimately approved by the Governm ent in December, 1987.  Finally the 
agreement as approved by the Government  was signed by MM TC with UBS on 
30th August, 1988. 
 
4) In view of the above, it may be seen that although the action was initiated 
by MMTC in 1984 at the instance of Mini stry of Commerce, the final agreement 
was signed only in August, 1988 after getting due clearance from GOI. 
 
5) As regards the observations of Committee regarding the role of Shri Amar 
Nath, a Senior Group Manager of MMTC in sanction of loan of Rs. 1 crores to M/s 
Inter Gold (India) Ltd., who became a Director in the Board of Directors in the said 
firm, CBI has concluded that Shri Amar Nath did not play any role in sanction of 
loan.  He also did not play any role in gr ant of licence to said firm for setting up its 
unit in SEEPZ, Bombay.  At that point of time there was no rule in MMTC 
prohibiting any senior MMTC official joinin g a private concern after retirement.  
Regarding the sharing of postal address with one Ms. Usha Khandwala, Shri 
Amarnath has informed during the course of inquiry t hat building comprising the 
flats in which he shifted on becoming the Director in the Company is owned by 
Ms. Usha Khandwala. 
  
6) In view of the above no action on t he part of this Department is required to 
be taken. 
  
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 14th March, 2005) 
 
Para-wise remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government: 
1) to 4)  Even though the offer from B ank of Nova Scotia lapsed on 31.12.85, 
it was ready to consider fresh offers for supply of gold beyond that period after 
GOI approval.  The approval of GOI could not materialise due  to bureaucratic 
delays as confirmed by the CBI report. 
 
5) In 1987, MMTC (ECDA) Rules did not fo rbid any retired MMTC official from 
joining private concerns with which MMTC had business dealings.  Soon after 
retirement of Shri Amarnath, the MMTC(ECDA) Rules, 1975, was amended in 
2000 providing for such prohibition.  Sinc e CBI have also termed the joining of 

 14
Shri Amarnath as Director in M/s Inter Gold  (India) Ltd., as unethical, we have no 
further comments. 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
 In view of the findings in the CBI report as summarised in para 4) & 5) 
above, no further comments of this Department are called for. 
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 19th April, 2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 3 SE LECTION OF UN ION BANK OF 
SWITZERLAND FOR SUPPLY OF GOLD: 
 
 The Committee note that the Union Bank of Switzerland was finally 
selected for supply of gold although they s ubmitted their offer four days after the 
other banks have sent their offers and no in vitation was sent to Union Bank of 
Switzerland to participate  in the bid by MMTC. The Committee have been 
informed that a team of t he representatives of MMTC  visited Switzerland in 
January 1987 to hold discu ssions with UBS and  thereafter MMTC informed the 
Ministry of Commerce in March 1987 that  the proposal of UBS was the most 
attractive one. Subsequently, the contract with UBS was finalised in August 1988 
with the approval of Ministry of Comerce and also the Mi nistry of Finance. When 
the Audit demanded the details of the analaysis of the various offers leading to the 
selection of the UBS as the successful bidder, the relevant papers were not 
available in the records produced to t he Audit. However, the Audit examined only 
some papers indicating the comparative position of t he offers received. On an 
examination of the comparative terms quoted by UBS and the Bank of Nova 
Scotia, the Audit found that the Bank of Nova Scotia had a clear edge over UBS in 
respect of the interest rate offered. The Audit found that the contract was awarded 
to UBS which had quoted an interest rate at  2.5 per cent per annum, although the 
Bank of Nova Scotia had offered a rate of  interest at 1.75 per cent per annum.  
According to the Audit, the contract awarded to UBS without any manifest effort to 
negotiate with the Bank of Nova  Scotia to get the best of  the terms of trade.  The 
offer of Bank of Nova Scot ia stipulated that a rate of 1.75 per cent per annum will 
be charged for a period of 90 days only an d interest on gold loaned beyond the 
period of 90 days would be charged at rates higher than 1.75 per cent per annum. 
The Audit found that the UBS had actually  charged rates of interest which 
exceeded 2.5 per cent on seve ral occassions, although they had quoted a flat 
interest rate of 2.5 per cent per annum.  MMTC had tried to explain to the 
Committee stating that the UBS was selected in view of the consideration that the 
consignment facility offered by Bank of Nova Scotia did not  compare favourably 
with that of Union Bank of Switzerland.  It was further explained that the 
consignment period was restricted to only 60 days by Bankof Nova Scotia, while 
the Union Bank of Switzerland had offe red consignment facility without any 
restriction on that period. 

 15
 
 The requirement of furnishing the guarantee was also dropped by Union 
Bank of Switzerland.  MMTC  tried to ju stify the agreement  stating that the 
exporters under the Exim Policy could keep the gold on loan for a period of 120 
days and beyond in respect of certain schemes which would have necessitated 
payment to Bank of Nova Scotia at rates higher than 1.75 per cent per annum 
beyond the period of 90 days.  MMTC also  stated that the Union Bank of 
Switzerland offered a flat rate of 2.5 per cent per annum irres pective of the loan 
period.  Therefore, MMTC st ated that the offer of Bank of Nova Scotia both in 
respect of consignment facility as well  as loan facility was found by them not 
better than the offer of UBS. 
 
 The Committee note that the acceptance of  the rate of interest at 2.5 per 
cent stipulated by UBS had made the company  pay interest at the higher rate of 
2.5 per cent for the first 90 days as most  of the jewellery units in the normal 
course would have to export the jewellery within a period of three  months from 
the date of issue of gold to them.  Since Bank of Nova Scotia stipulated only 1.75 
per cent rate of interest for the firs t 90 days, which is the normal period for 
exporting the gold back, t he Committee feel that the co nsideration shown to this 
clause was completely irrelevant fo r the purpose of making comparative 
evaluation of bids.  Again the Commi ttee feel that MMTC had accepted an 
unreasonable  condition from U BS that the rate of interest could be modified at 
any point of time, as this implies that t here was no upper/outer limit on the rate of 
interest that could be imposed,  whereas in the offer of Bank of Nova Scotia the 
maximum limit itself was a definite 2.5 per cent per  annum.  The Committee wish 
to point out that even this rate of interest could have been negotiated with the 
Bank of Nova Scotia as it had earlier offer ed in 1984 a rate of interest of only 1.5 
per cent in August 1984 which they sought to retain till the end of December, 1985 
through an extension.  Had t he earlier offer of Bank of Nova Scotia been kept 
alive or had MMTC negotiated with the Bank of Nova Sc otia citing their earlier 
offer, the Committee feel that MMTC could have obtained a better deal.The 
Committee also wish to point out that on 30 October, 1984, even Republic 
National Bank of New York, Hongkong quoted a rate  of interest of one per cent 
per annum, which could have been used to n egotiate favourably with the Bank of 
Nova Scotia. 
 
 The Committee, theref ore, do not approve of accepting any term of 
unlimited interest liability which had been incorporated in the agreement executed 
with UBS.  The Committee wish to point ou t that there has been no consistency 
about the approach in deciding the source of supply of gold, as they found that the 
Company visited London Bullion Market in the year 1984, while  in the year 1987 
they visited only Switzerland to negotiate with only one bank, and further, in 
August, 1994, they addressed only those banks which were the members of 
London Bullion Market Association. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, came to the conclusion that special favours 
have been shown to the Union Bank of Switzerland who was obviously 
recommended by Shattaff Trading Company, putting our interest to a great 

 16
disadvantage in the matter of payment of  interest in this deal.  The Committee 
recommend that the circumstances under which the UBS was selected should be 
thoroughly probed by an indepen dent authority, preferabl y by the CVC/CBI and 
they desire that a statement should be submitted to the Committee about the 
action taken in this matter within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
1) It has already been pointed out by the Mi nistry that the fi nal evaluation of 
offers from various banks was to be decided by MMTC on  commercial 
considerations and the Ministry had no role  to play.  Howeve r, as recommended 
by COPU for a thorough probe by an independent agency prefer ably by CBI and 
CVC, the Department immediately referre d the matter to CVC for probe on 
29/10/2001.  The CVC, however, informed that it does not have an in-house 
investigating machinery and suggested t hat the matter may be referred to CBI.  
Accordingly the matter was referred to CBI on 8/2/2002. The CBI, in turn, 
suggested on 12/6/2002 to the department that the matte r may be entrusted to 
Economic Offences Wing (EOW) of Delhi Police as CBI was saddled with 
investigations of a large number of cases relating to import of gold by MMTC 
Limited. This was examined in the D epartment and the CBI was advised on 
23/7/2002 to commence investigations nevertheless, as this would rather facilitate 
the earlier investigations re lating to import of gold alre ady entrusted to it by CVC 
on the basis of recommendation of Task Force Report.   
 
2) CBI has concluded that not onl y the delayed response of UBS was 
entertained but all other delayed offers were also considered. Thus from the 
consideration of the delayed offer of UBS the inference that it was shown favour 
cannot be drawn.  
 
3) CBI has also concluded that the offer of Bank of Nova Scotia and that of 
UBS were non-comparable in the sense t hat while the UBS had offered unlimited 
period during which the gold consigned to MMTC could be drawn, the Bank of 
Nova Scotia had stipulated a condition in its offer that the entire consignment shall 
have to be drawn by MMTC within 60 days and in case of failure to do so, an 
additional consignment fee of 0.625% of rate of gold per annum over the above 
the consignment fee will be charged.  Subsequently, when the UBS agreed to 
withdraw the guarantee clause, its offer beca me most attractive . This withdrawal 
of guarantee clause clinched th e issue in its favour as according to officials of 
MMTC no other prospective supp lier including the Bank of  Nova Scotia agreed to 
drop this clause. Hence, the decision of MMTC to enter into a contract with UBS 
was proper and no inference that favour  had been shown to the UBS can be 
drawn from the said decision. 
  
4) In view of the above, no action on the part of this Department is required to 
be taken. 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 14th March, 2005) 
 

 17
 
Para-wise remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government: 
1) Factual.  No further comments. 
 
2) & 3) In the absence of complete documents (as only compar ative statement of 
offers received was shown to audit), com parison of the offers was not possible as 
has been observed by the Technical exami ner/CVC also.  Hence the reply that 
offer of UBS was attractive is not acceptable and cannot suffice. 
 
Further reply of the Government  
 In view of the findings in the CBI report as summarised in para 2) & 3) 
above, no further comments of this Department are called for. 
  
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 19th April, 2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 4 RESTRI CTIVE CLAUSE IN THE AGREEMENT 
WITH UBS 
 
 The Committee note that MMTC a ccepted a peculiar condition of 
unspecified significance in their agreemen t with UBS according to which, the 
company was prevented from  executing any contract for obtaining gold further 
from any other party without making full disclosure to UBS and if it is to be done, it 
should be done only after taking prior permi ssion from UBS.  Besides this, there 
was no penal clause provided to take ca re of delays in effecting supplies with 
UBS, which later on became quite erratic. The Committee furt her note that the 
restrictive clause regarding not enterin g into loan agreement with any other 
banks/parties had been dropped by UBS in December 1997.  The Ministry of 
Commerce when asked to explain  as to why such a clause wa s included, stated 
that File No. 10/22/86-EP(LSG)  dealing with this matter, being an old file was not 
traceable and the Ministry of Commerce, however, had given their approval for 
the proposal of MMTC only in principle, leaving out all matters of commercial 
consideration purely to the discretion of MMTC. When asked about the action 
taken for fixing responsibility in the matter of  loss of file, the Ministry stated that 
the file being an old one could have most probably been weeded out and attempts 
were made to trace the file in the Section concerned and in the record room of the 
Ministry, which did not produce any posit ive results. The Committee have been 
further informed by MMTC that the clause in question did exit in the initial draft 
agreement itself and had been  accepted on the ground t hat a lender has to 
necessarily exercise control on the incr ease of liabilities on the borrower and the 
RBI and the Dept. of Economic Affairs had already examined the agreement  
clause-by-clause and only after their approval, it was signed by MMTC. 
 
 The Committee wish to point out that the very fact that this restrictive 
clause was dropped by the Bank in December, 1997 amply shows that there was 

 18
no compulsive reason in including this kind of restrictive clause in the agreement 
initially, as commercial consi derations do not drastically change in such deals.  
The Committee are of the opinion that t here was complete lack of transparency in 
the manner in which the ent ire agreement with UBS was executed, compromising 
the interests of the company for some possible u nexplained extraneous 
considerations and t herefore a thorough probe is recommended by an 
independent authority in this matter. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
1) As recommended by Committee on Public Undertakings for a thorough 
probe by an independent agen cy preferably by CBI and CVC, the Department 
immediately referred the matter to CV C for probe on 29/10/2001.  The CVC, 
however, informed that it does not have an in-house investigating machinery and 
suggested that the matter may be referred to CBI.  Accordingly the matter was 
referred to CBI on 8/2/2002. The CBI, in turn, suggested on 12/6/2002 to the 
department that the matter may be entru sted to Economic Offences Wing (EOW) 
of Delhi Police as CBI was saddled with inve stigations of a large number of cases 
relating to import of gold by MMTC Li mited.  This was examined in the 
Department and CBI was advised on 23/7/ 2002 to commence investigations 
nevertheless, as this would rather facilit ate the earlier investigations relating to 
import of gold already entrusted to it by  CVC on the basis of recommendation of 
Task Force Report.   
 
2) CBI has mentioned that  the original restrictive clause forwarded by UBS 
was examined by RBI and modi fied to make it less stringent and the clause so 
modified was ultimately included in the final agreement with the approval of RBI 
and Ministry of Commerce.  Inquiry also re vealed that the restrictive clause as 
available in the signed agr eement was further toned down in favour of MMTC as 
compared to the one suggested/ reworded  by MMTC in its communication to 
Ministry of Commerce and agreed upon by RBI.  Further, it has also been 
revealed that it is a common practice to demand such clause in these types of 
agreements by the suppliers to safeguard t heir interest since their exposure is 
quite high in such cases.  CBI has c oncluded that this alle gation had not been 
substantiated on the basis of the instant inquiry.  
 
3) In view of the above, no action on the part of this Department is required to 
be taken. 
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 14th March, 2005) 
 
 
 
 

 19
Para-wise remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government: 
1) Factual. No further comments. 
 
2) As already pointed out in para, a peculiar clause was accepted for which 
there was no compulsion for inclusion as also observed by COPU.  As such, reply 
of the Ministry (based on CBI enquiry) is not tenable as acceptance of the clause 
comprised the standard of transparency in awarding contracts.  
 
Further reply of the Government  
 In view of the findings in the CBI report as summarised in para 2) above, 
no further comments of this Department are called for. 
  
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 19th April, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 20
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE CO MMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES  
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 2 IN VOLVEMENT OF UNSOLICITED 
INTERMEDIARY IN GOLD IMPORTS: 
 
 The Committee find that in 1986, MMT C invited fresh offers for supply of 
gold from five foreign banks, namely, Bank of Nova Scotia, Credit Suisse, 
Republic Bank of New York  (Hong Kong), Mat Dist. Limi ted (London) and Mase 
Ag (London).  The Committee further fi nd that another bank, namely, M/s Union 
Bank of Switzerland (UBS) was not at all addressed by MMTC in the matter.  
Despite no communication sent to UBS, the Bank sent its offer uninvited four days 
after the receipt of other offers.  The Audit have obser ved that the offer of UBS 
was on the initiative of M/s. Shattaff Trading Company, Dubai (Shattaff) – who 
was initially involved in the bid, as the message calling for offers were 
communicated to one of the five banks mentioned above through Shattaff.  The 
circumstances in which the services of Sha ttaff were solicited were not on record.  
Since Shattaff had no formal business relationship with MMTC and was not 
working for any overt consideration, their involvement in the process leading to 
the finalisation of agreem ent with ‘UBS for the impo rt of gold was unusual’. 
Besides this, the firm Shattaff was also kept informed by MMTC of its plans to visit 
Switzerland in January 1987 to finalise t he arrangements for import of gold into 
India.  In July, 1997, MMTC informed Au dit that Shattaff was involved in the 
matter, as the firm was ‘perhaps’ buying gold from various banks.  The Ministry of 
Commerce informed the Audit that the offers were received by MMTC directly and 
not through Shattaff. 
 
 The Ministry further added that sinc e Shattaff was aware of the MMTC’s 
entry into gold import, they had voluntarily recommended the name of Union Bank 
of Switzerland to MMTC based on their own experience.  T he Committee fail to 
understand as to why the mess age calling for the offers to one of the five banks 
should be routed through M/s. Shattaff of  Dubai, as though the bank had never 
had any postal address of its own.  The Committee further note that on an earlier 
occasion when the offer from Bank of No va Scotia was proc essed, MMTC visited 
London, to discuss matters with the leading bullion firms in London whereas in the 
present case they sought to visit Switzerl and and had intimated this fact to M/s. 
Shattaff.  The Committee wonders as to why M/s. Shattaff should be involved in 
the matter when the management of MMTC wa s unsure of the status of M/s. 
Shattaff and have made a statement that Shattaff was ‘perhaps’ buying gold from 
the banks referred to above.  The Committee ar e also at a loss to know as to why 
similar firms who have the like standing of Shattaff in Dubai an d else where were 
not approached in the matter to facilitate the trade enquiries.  The most surprising 
thing in the whole episode is that M/s. Shattaff Trading Co. did not seem to have 
received any fee or payment for their se rvices and the services were obviously 
had been rendered ‘free of cost ’.  The Committee have every reason to believe 

 21
under these circumstances that M/s Shattaff Trading Company had some 
pecuniary interest in the matter and their link  with M/s. Inter Gold (India) Ltd. in 
which a senior officer of MMTC was also a Director definitely indicates that apart 
from M/s. Shattaff, there were many others whose interest have been looked after 
by this deal.  The involvement of M/s Shattaff trading company in Dubai in the 
whole matter excites suspicion in the mi nd of the Committee and to their utter 
surprise they find that the Ministry of  Commerce have never bothered to question 
the involvement of M/s. Shattaff in t he whole deal.  It is also a matter for 
consideration as to why initially UBS bank was not addressed at all in the matter, 
although later on the MMTC maintained during evidence that Union Bank of 
Switzerland was a renowned name.  The Committee are convinced that M/s 
Shattaff trading company, which wa s engaged by MMTC to communicate a 
message about gold import, did not maintain  any commercial confidentiality and 
had committed breach of trust by leaking out the details of the offer to UBS.  The 
Committee, therefore, find no substance in  the statement of MMTC that ‘Shattaff 
is nobody so far as we are concer ned’ made during evidence. The Committee 
condemn the way the company has sought  to explain the arrangement away 
stating that Shattaff had just made a reference to MMTC to help them tap another 
source with whom M/s. Shattaff had been having dealings.  In this connection, the 
Committee wish to point out that it is not an accepted practice in any 
trading/dealing by governmental organiza tions to accept uninvited offers, 
especially, where the mode of  transaction was not throug h a public tender. The 
Ministry of Commerce, when asked to expl ain their role in the matter, had sought 
to wriggle out of the situati on stating that the basic function of the Ministry was to 
frame policies and procedures, while th e commercial aspects of the trade 
proposals are examined by the agency concerned and acco rdingly the Ministry 
had nothing to say about the decision take n by MMTC at its own level.  Besides, 
the Ministry had stated that the file rela ting to this matter in the Ministry was 
untraceable, it being an old document.  Al though an enquiry was in stituted in the 
Ministry about the loss of the file it could not be still located. The Committee find 
that the involvement of M/s. Shattaff trading company in the matter of import of 
gold has remained an unexplained mystery and no positive action was taken to 
find out the real motive of their involvement by any auth ority in the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a thorough probe into the matter should be 
undertaken to find out the circumstances under which this firm came to be 
engaged and to find out if their involvement was a 
bona fide  business 
requirement. The Committee further reco mmend that responsibility should be 
fixed for the loss of file concerned in the Ministry and efforts should be made to 
reconstruct the file in order to get the total picture.   
 
Reply of the Government: 
1) The Ministry had already clarified that the offers received by several banks 
for supply of gold to MMTC on loan or co nsignment basis we re evaluated by 
MMTC on commercial considerations for fina l selection of the competitive bid.  
The basic function of the Ministry was to frame policies and procedures keeping in 
view the overall export policies of the Go vernment of India, while the commercial 
aspects of trade proposals are examined  by the agency concerned, in this 

 22
instance, by MMTC.  The three member Task Force set up by the Ministry of 
Commerce to go into various aspects of  C&AG’s report, has examined the 
reconstructed file when made available to  them by the Ministry and come to the 
conclusion that right through the process of finalizing the scheme, the concerned 
authorities viz. Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Finance and RBI were not only 
informed, but that necessary approvals we re taken in the final selection of the 
Union Bank of Switzerland as a supplier of gold. 
 
2) As recommended by Committee on Public Undertakings for a thorough 
probe by an independent agen cy preferably by CBI and CVC, the Department 
immediately referred the matter to CV C for probe on 29/10/2001.  The CVC, 
however, informed that it does not have an in-house investigating machinery and 
suggested that the matter may be referred to CBI.  Accordingly the matter was 
referred to CBI on 8/2/2002. The CBI, in turn, suggested to the department that 
the matter may be entrusted to Economic Offences Wing of Delhi Police as CBI 
was saddled with investigati ons of a large number of ca ses relating to import of 
gold by MMTC Limited. This was exam ined in the Department  and the CBI was 
advised on 23/7/2002 to comme nce investigations nevertheless, as this would 
rather facilitate the earlier investigations relating to import of gold already 
entrusted to it by CVC on the basis of recommendation of Task Force Report.   
 
3) In their report CBI have establ ished that MMTC was in touch with M/s 
Shattaf Trading Co. and ha d been dealing with the Company in the matter of 
supply of gold on behalf of Cr edit Suisse.  Inquiry ha s shown that there were 
defects in the process followed for select ion of supplier of gold.  For instance, 
Technical Examiner, CVC had al so opined that the offers were received through 
telex instead of sealed bid system and t he whole process seems to be quite 
arbitrary, ad-hoc and non transparent.   However, these were essentially 
procedural irregularities and were not su fficient to impute criminality to the 
conduct of the officials who dealt with the matter.  The proced ural irregularities 
were attributable partly to systematic i nadequacies and partly to the concerned 
officials of MMTC viz. Mrs. Girija Bhan, then Divisional Manager and Mr. I.P. 
Hazarika, then Director (Finance).  However, no action is possible against them at 
this stage since both of them have retired from the services of MMTC long back. 
 
4) In order to see that irregularitie s do not re-occur in future, the following 
system/procedure has since been put in place: 
 
a) The scheme of import of Gold by  the nominated agencies has been revised 
w.e.f 01.04.1998 where exporters are requi red to submit a separate Bank 
guarantee towards cost of  gold and concessional import duty to the 
nominated agency . Immediately on default , the bank guarantees are to be 
encashed  and customs duty element deposited with Customs.  
b) The Scheme for extending financia l assistance in the form of Packing 
Credit has been discontinued by MMTC since September, 1995. 
c) As directed by Ministry of Co mmerce, MMTC sources its  gold from 
suppliers accredited with London Bullion M anufacturers Association.  For 

 23
the past few years, MMTC has been invi ting tender  for supply of gold 
supplier  from LBMA members.  
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 14th March, 2005) 
 
Para-wise remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government: 
1) Factual.  No further comments. 
 
2) Factual.  No further comments. 
 
3) The contention of Audit in pa ra has been confirmed by the enquiry 
conducted by CBI.  Besides CVC’s Tec hnical examiner has also pointed out 
procedural irregularities and system deficiencies. 
 
4) No further comments as company has taken action so as that these 
irregularities/ system deficiencies do not occur. 
 
Further reply of the Government  
 In view of the findings in the CBI report as summarised in para 3) above, 
no further comments of this Department are called for. 
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 19th April, 2005) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please see para 6 of Chapter I 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 5  CONT INUED IMPORTS FROM UBS EVEN 
AFTER SIGNING CONTRACT WITH CREDIT SUISSE  BANK: 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the supply of gold by UBS 
became erratic  and many a times they coul d not supply the full quantity that was 
indented.  Therefore, in August 1994,  MMTC  felt that total dependence on UBS 
would not be in the interest of MMTC.  Since MMTC believed that better terms 
could be obtained from other banks, if they diversify the source of gold supplies 
for the same premium as was being paid to UBS, in October, 1994.  It invited 
offers from six banks which were members of London Bullion Market Association. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that out  of the six offers received, the 
offer from Credit Suisse Bank was found to be better than that of the others and it 
was broadly on the same lines as that of  the other existing arrangements with the 
UBS. The only difference was that the Credit Suisse Bank did not offer loan facility 

 24
and the gold was to be imported from them on outright purchase basis.  However, 
the Committee find that the premium charged by UBS was higher than the 
premium charged by Credit Suisse Bank, entailing payment of additional amounts 
to UBS, if MMTC were to continue their imports from them.  The Comitttee have 
been informed that MMTC cont inued to import gold fr om UBS at a higher 
premium, although they had entered into a fresh agreement with Credit Suisse 
Bank for supplies at a lower premium.  A test check conducted by Audit of the 
records of only one sub-regional office at Jhandewalan and that  too only for one 
year, (i.e. 1995-96) revealed that out of 4 348 Kgs of gold imported, only 2150 kgs 
were supplied by Credit Suisse Bank, leaving a balance of 2198 kgs of gold 
imported from UBS. 
 
 The Audit had observed that continued go ld import from UBS in this case 
resulted in payment of additional prem ium of Rs.10.04 lakhs under one scheme 
for one office for one year alone. Had t he entire gold been purchased from Credit 
Suisse Bank instead of UBS for all other sch emes for all other units  for the entire 
period after entering into contract from October 1984 onwards, MMTC could have 
avioded payment of a significa ntly very high sums by way of additional premium, 
which right now the Committee are unable to hazard a guess.  The Committee 
also note with concern the attempts by MM TC to evade the question of supply of 
details about the number of times the supply of gold was delayed by UBS and the 
extent to which the supply was short of the indented quantity.  The only way the 
MMTC sought to justify the continued purchase was by stating that ready 
availability from stock for longer consignment period was the deciding financial 
factor for obtaining gold from UBS. The Committee wish to point out that this 
argument of ready availability from sto ck contradicts the earlier  stand taken by 
MMTC that the supply from UBS became e rratic in October, 1994 to justify their 
steps to diversify the source of supply. 
 
 The Committee also note another ar gument of MMTC that the demand for 
gold was increasing year after year and it would not have been possible for any 
single bank to cater to the increasing demands for gold under various schemes.  
The Committee wonder as to why more  than one alternate sources of supply 
could not be identified, if the entire quantity of gold could not have been procured 
from a single source.  If MMTC could have arrangements with Credit Suisse Bank 
apart from UBS for supply of gold, nothing prevented t hem from negotiating with 
other banks as well to obtain, appropriate terms, as MMTC admittedly held a view 
that for the same premium as was bei ng paid to UBS better terms could be 
obtained from other sources.  The Committee wish to point out that further in the 
year 1996-97 and also in 1997-98, MM TC continued to import significant 
quantities (1115 kgs and 1782 kgs respective ly) from UBS which clearly reveals 
the continued patronage of the bank by MMTC for certain unexplained reasons.  
The Committee are unable to view this  continued purchase from UBS as an 
independent happening and they ar e inclined  to consider it only as an episode in 
a continuing plot, which was conceived ma inly with a view to favour a particular 
foreign bank continuously from the year  1988 onwards despite bad track records 
and, even after finding other sources of supply in October, 1994.  The Committee 
wonder that alternate sources of supp ly may have been found out only to 

 25
demonstrate to UBS that they shoul d feel obliged to MMTC management who 
kept alive their agreement, despite hav ing other sources an d the Committee here 
feel that there is something more than wh at meets the eye in the entire deal.  The 
Committee, therefore, are convinced that this is a fit case for a thorough inquiry by 
an independent authority and recommend to the Government that appropriate 
action should be initiated by them to sati sfy themselves that there was no ulterior 
motive in securing continued supplies of gold from UBS. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
1)  As recommended by Committee on P ublic Undertakings for a thorough 
probe by an independent agen cy preferably by CBI and CVC, the Department 
immediately referred the matter to CVC for probe on 29/10/2001. The CVC, 
however, informed that it does not have an in-house investigating machinery and 
suggested that the matter may be referred to CBI.  Accordingly the matter was 
referred to CBI on 8/2/2002. The CBI, in turn, suggested on 12/6/2002 to the 
department that the matter may be entru sted to Economic Offences Wing (EOW) 
of Delhi Police as CBI was saddled with inve stigations of a large number of cases 
relating to import of gold by MMTC Li mited.  This was examined in the 
Department and the CBI was advised on 23/7/2002 to commence investigations 
nevertheless, as this would rather facilit ate the earlier investigations relating to 
import of gold already entrusted to it by  CVC on the basis of recommendation of 
Task Force Report.   
 
2)  CBI have concluded that Credit Sui sse was selected by MMTC in 1994 as 
an alternative source of supply of gold due to increased requirement and erratic 
supply from UBS.  UBS was not replaced by Credit Suisse as a supplier of gold to 
MMTC.  The comparison of quantities of gold import ed from UBS and Credit 
Suisse during 1994-97 has reinforced the t hat fact that higher quantities of gold 
were imported from UBS because it had agreed to provide gold on loan basis as 
also on outright sale basis whereas Credi t Suisse was supplying only on outright 
sale basis.  Gold on loan scheme was far more popular with the exporters.   
 
3) Enquiry has also revealed that  no monetary loss had been caused to 
MMTC on account of payment of higher  premium to UBS since the premium 
charges were borne by the exporters/ domestic manufacturers.    
 
4) In view of the above, no action on the part of this Department is required to 
be taken. 
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 14th March, 2005) 
 
 
Para-wise remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government: 
1) Factual.  No further comments. 

 26
2) & 3) The fact remains that additional  premium was paid to  UBS even if there 
was no impact on MMTC.  Further the very rationale of calling for quotations to 
procure gold on best terms was forfeited.  
 
 
Further reply of the Government  
 In view of the findings in the CBI report as summarized in para 2) & 3) 
above, no further comments of this Department are called for. 
  
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 19th April, 2005) 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
Please see para 6 of Chapter I 

 27
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 6 THE MISSING FILE: 
 
 “The Committee have been informed that necessary papers regarding 
import of gold could  not be made available to the Audit for examination due to the 
fact that the relevant file was untrac eable in the Ministry of Commerce. The 
Committee have been informed that the f ile still remained untraceable and  
nobody could be held responsible for the missing of the file. The Ministry are also 
not sure whether the file had been weeded out at all as  they had stated in their 
reply that it could have most pr obably been weeded out. The Committee have 
been further informed by the Ministry that a ttempts were made to trace the file in 
the Section and the Record Room which did not produce any positive results. The 
Committee wonder as to how such sensitiv e files involving important decisions 
taken by the Government could have be en classified as files that could be 
weeded out, especially, when such transacti ons are subjected to detailed scrutiny 
by the Audit. The Committee also wonder as to how the Ministry could launch its 
search efforts when they felt that the file could have been weeded out.  It is an 
established practice of office management that every file in the Section is properly 
entered in the file register and when action is complete, its fate about its retention 
is decided and proper entries are made in the file regist ers, if they are to be 
weeded out. It is obvious from this epis ode that the Ministry of Commerce does 
not have a proper system of records management and there have been no regular 
system of checks through inspections by senior officers about the status of record 
management, despite government orders ex isting on the subject and there was 
complete abdication of responsibility on t he part of officers in senior supervisory 
capacities in the Ministries which had been taken advantage of by unscrupulous 
elements to ensure their escape from many wrong doings.  The Committee take a 
very serious note of the manner in wh ich the Ministry of Commerce is being 
managed in respect of affairs of reco rd management and in the observance of 
office procedure and desire that appropriate action should be initiated to fix 
responsibility on the senior-most officer wh o dealt with the subject at a level not 
below the level of Joint Secretary and also to initiate remedial measures in the 
Ministry at least from now on so that such unfortunate incidences do not recur 
which could be taken advantage of by wrong doers. “ 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 It has alredy been reported to COPU vide O.M. No.12/23/97-
EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 29/10 /2001 that the file relati ng to the issue bearing 
No.10/22/86 EP(LSG) was not traceable despite several efforts both in the section 
as well as in the Record Room.  The Vigilance Section of the Ministry of 

 28
Commerce which probed this issue has stated that the enquiry could not make 
much headway due to the following: 
 
i) The section concerned reported that file movem ent registers were only 
available from 1993 onwards and no mo vement records were available 
for the period 1987-88. 
 
ii) Though the file movement record s of Commerce Secretary’s office 
indicated the relevant dates on which the file had been submitted to CS, 
backward tracing of the file was not possible as the movement registers 
for the relevant period were not av ailable with the office of Joint 
Secretary (Surjit Mitra) and in the EP(Gem&Jewellery) Section. 
 
iii) As per Retention Schedule, the file registers are required to be 
maintained for 15 years while file movement registers are required to be 
maintained for one year.  The Manual  of Office Procedure is silent 
about any other method to he lp in tracing the movement of a file after a 
lapse of 10 years or so. 
 
iv) Shri P.N. Gopalkris hna, PS and Shri H.R.Sharma, P.A. who were 
posted with the then Joint Secretar y(R.Dayal) have retired from 
Government service on 30.9.91 and 30.1.93. 
 
 Subsequently, therefore, the vigilance file was cl osed with the approval of 
Commerce Secretary.  However, to prevent  loss of files, detailed guidelines were 
issued by O&M Section vide their O.M.No.1-34(9)/98-O&M dated 25.3.1998 (copy 
enclosed). 
 
 The Gem & Jewellery Division of t he Department of Commerce have since 
reconstructed  the missing file by ge tting the necessary papers available with 
MMTC, Ministry of Finance and RBI.  Effort s are also being made to maintain the 
records henceforth in a systematic manner and in accordance with Office 
Procedure guidelines. 
 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 14th March,  2005) 
 
Remarks of Audit   
 
 As detailed guidelines have now been  issued for proper maintenance of 
files, we have no further comments. 
 
Further reply of the Government  
 No comments. 
(Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) 
O.M. No. 12/23/97-EP(LSG)/FT(M&O) dated 19th April, 2005) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 13 and 14 of Chapter I 

 29
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi           RUPCHAND PAL  
17, August, 2005                              CHAIRMAN 
 26, Shravana, 1927(S) COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 

 30
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  6th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  17th  AUGUST,  2005 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1540 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Shri Kashiram Rana 
8. Shri Mohan Rawale 
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
10. Shri Ajay Maroo 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
3. Shri S. B. Aror a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
OFFICE  OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR  GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
 Shri Gulzari Lal, Director 
 
 
 
 

 31
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following Action Taken 
Reports without any modification :- 
(i) Action Taken Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (13 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertaki ngs on MMTC – Trade in Gold 
(Import of Gold by MMTC). 
 
(ii) XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX 
 
3. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation. 
4. XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX  XXXXXXXX 

 32
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in  the  Sixth Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “MMTC Limited – Trade in 
Gold (Import of Gold by MMTC)” 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  6 
 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government (vide recommendations at Sl. Nos 1,3 and 4) 
 
Percentage of total  
3 
 
 
 
50% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies (vide 
recommendations at Sl. Nos.  2 and 5) 
 
Percentage of total  
2 
 
 
 
33.33% 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…(vide recommendations at Sl. No IV) 
 
Percentage of total 
1 
 
 
 
16.67 % 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 