 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
C.P.U. NO. 897 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2005 -  2006) 
 
( FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA ) 
 
 
HEALTH  INSURANCE  –  A  HORIZONTAL  STUDY 
 
MINISTRY  OF  FINANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.03.2006 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.03.2006 
 
 
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW  DELHI 
 
 March 2006 / Phalguna 1926 (S) 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
               P a g e  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05) (i) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
PART – A 
Chapter-I 
 
CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK  
1.1 Introductory 
1.2 Development 
1.3 Concept 
1.4 Forms 
1 
1 
6 
12 
14 
Chapter-II 
 
INSTITUTIONS CONCERNED 
2.1 Government 
a) Ministry of Finance 
2.2 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
2.3 Insurance Companies 
2.4 NGOs 
2.5 Third Party Administrators 
17 
17 
 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Chapter-III 
 
PUBLIC SECTOR INSURANCE COMPANIES – AN EVALUATION OF HEALTH 
SCHEMES 
3.1 Backdrop 
3.2 Government Schemes 
3.3 Schemes by Public Insurance Companies 
3.4 Overall Performance 
 
22 
22 
23 
26 
34 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
CHALLENGES 
4.1 Lack of focus 
a) Tariff regime 
b) Stand-alone health insurance companies 
4.2 Lack of coordination 
4.3 Lack of data 
4.4 Lack of awareness 
4.5 Poverty & need for subsidy 
4.6 Lack of proper regulations in Health Sector 
4.7 Lack of health infrastructure 
4.8 Lack of product variety 
a) Scheme for poor 
b) Scheme for aged 
c) Scheme for Women & Children 
d) Scheme for maternity & out patient cover 
e) Major diseases cover 
f) Accessibility and affordability 
4.9 Lack of profitability 
a) Lack of Pool 
b) Re-insurance 
4.10 Rural penetration – Micro insurance & involvement of local institutions and 
NGOs 
4.11 Claims & TPA system 
 
40 
40 
41 
43 
49 
50 
53 
54 
56 
57 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
 
68 
81 
 
 PART – B 
Recommendations / Observations of the Committee 
 
 
89 
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee on Public Undertakings 111 
 ANNEXURES 
 
118 
I Functions of IRDA under Section 14 of IRDA Act, 1999  
II – X Details of various Health Schemes   
XI Features of the Micro-insurance Regulations, 2005  
 

COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2004 – 2005 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Kashiram Rana  
10. Shri Mohan Rawale  
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
13. Shri Rajesh Verma  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri Jibon Roy  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Smt. Ambika Soni  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Shriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan `Lalan’ Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri K.Chandran Pillai  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Vacant  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
* Smt. Ambika Soni Ceased to be member of t he Committee consequent upon her appointment as 
Union Minister w.e.f. 29.1.2006. 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri John Joseph  Secretary 
 2. Shri S. Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri N C Gupta  Under Secretary 
 4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Committee Officer 
 
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their beh alf, present this Eleventh Report on “ Health 
Insurance – a horizontal study.”  
2. The subject was selected for examinati on by the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2004-2005). 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2005-2006) took a briefing on the subject from 
the representatives of Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) on 6th June, 2005.  The Committee also 
took evidence of the representatives of the five public sector insurance companies namely, Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), National Insurance Company Limited (NICL), Oriental 
Insurance Company Limited (OICL), United Indi a Insurance Company Limited (UIICL) and New 
India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) on 20 July, 2005.  The Committee also called 
memoranda from various Non-governmental Organi zations involved in community based health 
insurance.  They further took evidence of representatives of Mi nistry of Finance, Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and the IRDA on 18th November, 2005. 
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2005-2006) considered and adopted the Report 
at their sitting held on 2 nd March, 2006. The Committee feel obliged to the Members of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2004-2005).  They would also like to place on record their 
deep  sense of appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to them by officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, various Non-
governmental Organizations, the public sector insurance companies and some private insurance 
companies for placing before them the material and information they required in connection with 
examination of the subject.  They also wish to thank in particular the representatives of the 
Ministries/Departments, Public Insurance Companies and the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority who gave evidence and  placed their valuable views before the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      RUPCHAND PAL 
2 March 2006       CHAIRMAN, 
11 Phalguna 1927(S)                       Committee ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(v) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
CONTEXTUAL FRAMEWORK 
 
1.1 Introductory  
 
1.1.1 In a welfare state like ours, public health is a res ponsibility of the State.  
The constitution underlines this fact by laying down that the state should regard 
“……..raising of the level of  nutrition and the standard of living of its people and 
the improvement of public  health as among its prim ary duties.” ( Article 47 – 
Directive Principles of State Policy). 
 
1.1.2 In a country like India having no social security system worth the name, 
appropriate Health Insurance Schemes fo r different sections of the society 
particularly the underprivileged and the poor is an urgent need of the hour.    
1.1.3 Insurance penetration being very lo w and health insurance’s share being 
minimal in the existing sit uation, the vast majority of  the population are outside 
the existing Health Insurance System. 
1.1.4 According to WHO figures (2002,),  total health expenditures represent 
6.1% of India’s GDP, but most of this amount, repres enting 4.8% of GDP is the 
share of private expenditures and only 1.3% of GDP is public expenditure. Of the 
4.8% private expenditure, 98.5% are out-of-pocket spending of users. In other 
words, 77.5% of total expenditure for health care costs are paid by individuals or  
 
 

 2
households (WHO, 2005) and this huge exp enditure does not pass through any 
pooling mechanism. 
1.1.5 Access to quality heal thcare is an important indicator in the human 
development index.  Access to health care in India is still low and with only less 
than 1% of GDP allotted to public healt h, there is lack of adequate health 
infrastructure.   Health insurance is  a complimentary financing mechanism for 
enhancing access to quality healthcare.  There are some health insurance 
schemes issued by Four public sector general insurance companies, namely, 
National Insurance Company Limited (N ICL), New India Assurance Company 
Limited (NIACL), Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OICL) and United India 
Insurance Company Limited (UIICL).  Besides these four companies, Life 
Insurance Corporation(LIC) of India also offers a few health covers in a limited 
manner. At present, 82.44% of the entir e commercial health insurance business 
in the country is shared between public companies, while private firms manage 
the rest 17.56%.  Thus, the public insurance companies are in the forefront of 
health insurance in the country. The Commi ttee, by selecting this subject, seeks 
to examine the achievements, failures, di fficulties and potentia ls of the public 
sector insurers with regard to health in surance and to suggest remedies so that 
the potential benefits of health insurance in the country are fully realized. 
1.1.6 In reply to a question about need for Health Insurance in the country the 
representatives of the Ministries of Finance and Health & Family Welfare, and the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) said :- 
 
 

 3
 Ministry of Finance: 
 “……In a welfare state it is the responsibility of the Government to meet 
the health needs of its Citizens.  Health Insurance as a financial 
instrument can work out for people who can afford the premium.  
However, the families with a limited s ource of income cannot afford to 
contribute towards the premium and any  amount of contribution by them 
will deplete their savings.  Therefore, Health Insurance as a measure to 
meet the Health expenditure for all community will not succeed.  In 
Europe, Africa & some Asian count ries Social Health Insurance 
Programmes are supported by the Go vernments.  Private Health 
Insurance as implemented through In surance Companies will succeed 
only for the affordable sections of the so ciety.  India is not an exception to 
this rule and the popularity of various  mediclaim insurance policies among 
the taxpayers is a clear example to this effect.” 
 
 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare: 
 
 “….Health indicators like life expe ctancy and decline in crude birth and 
death rates have recorded significant progress over the planning era.  
Alongside health infrastructure has also increased tremendously to cater 
to the increasing needs in the count ry.  Nevertheless, there are still 
differentials in the health status  between regions and States and among 
socio-economic groups.  Healthcare delivery is sti ll to be achieved 
effectively in terms of access, availa bility and affordability among different 
sections of the society.  In the context of a very large number of poor in 
the country spread across the remote areas, it would be difficult to 
conceive of an exclusive government  mechanism to provide health 
services.  All over the globe including the developing economies there is a 
continuing review of how health systems can be financed – either in terms 
of the way funds are collected or how they are pooled to spread risks. 
 
Despite the massive public health infras tructure, effective utilization of this 
infrastructure is beset with several difficulties like inadequate 
doctors/medical officers and para-medical staff, shortage of medicines and 
absence of supporting infrastructure.  Health Insurance is being conceived 
of as one of the mechanisms for financing healthcare.  As public 
expenditure on health is about 15% and the rest is out of pocket 
expenses, the possibility of public outlays catering to the entire health 
needs of the population seem s practically difficult.  Existing public health 
infrastructure is reported to be not highly accessible to BPL families…” 
 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority -(IRDA): 
 
 “Insurance is an alternative to self financing for risks in respect of life, 
health, property etc.  While it is true that in a welfare state, it is the 
Government’s responsibility to take care of the health of the nation, 

 4
particularly in respect of those below the poverty line and the senior 
citizens, considering the population profile India has, Health Insurance can 
definitely play a role in complementing the efforts of the Government.  The 
Government as the finance provider and custodian of health services has 
provided less than 1% of GDP for health care.  The existing public health 
infrastructure is able to cater to only around 20% of population and even 
for this segment health care is not complete, given the lack of proper 
amenities, shortage of suppl ies, shortage of doctors in rural areas, lack of 
critical care etc. 
 
In this scenario, health insurance as a financing model for health care can 
definitely help bridge the gaps in a ffordability and accessibility in health 
care to a considerable extent.” 
 
1.1.7 Regarding the need for an alternativ e mechanism to finance healthcare, 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfar e in a background note furnished to the 
Committee stated :- 
“Despite the impressive achievements,  noticeable are the differentials in 
the health status betw een regions and States and among socio-economic 
groups.  Effective healthcare deliver y i.e. accessible, available and 
affordable still is to be achieved.  Pub lic infrastructure created is still 
inadequate in terms of the requirements.  Also out of the aggregate health 
expenditure of 5.2%  of the GDP, public expenditure on health is a mere 
0.9%. Coverage or prepayment for health needs is poor.  Almost two-
thirds of spending is out of pocke t expenses making a drain on personal 
finances.  Studies have indicated t hat even consumers from the lowest 
income groups often pay considerable sums of money towards curative 
treatment, which shows t hat there is excessiv e financial burden on 
households despite the exis ting public healthcare  system.  As public 
health investments cannot  be enhanced beyond a point, exploration of 
alternative mechanisms of financing of  healthcare has become absolutely 
necessary.” 
 
1.1.8 Highlighting ce rtain crucial data on health ex penditure in the country and 
presenting a case for the prom otion of health insurance, Secretary, , Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) stated during evidence:  
“…..a well functioning health insurance system can come only if there is 
an overall efficient health care system . We are acutely conscious of this. 
Nevertheless, through you, I would like  to submit a fe w generic data on 

 5
the subject of health exp enditure in the country. Th is year the budget of 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare is slightly above Rs.10,000 
crore. It sounds a good sum of money but we have to realise that this 
Rs.10,000 crore is only about 20 per cent of t he expenditure that the 
States commit for health. So, that means, another Rs.40,000 crore is 
expended by the States. Totally, the public sector expenditure for health is 
about Rs.50,000 crore. 
 
The fact is that this Rs . 50,000 crore is only 25 per cent of the overall 
health expenditure in the country.   So, that means another Rs. 1,50,000 
crore or so is spent by people.   Of this, insurance premiums total upto 
about somewhere between Rs. 1500 crore to Rs. 1800 crore.   That 
means, rest of the money people are sp ending, what is known as out of 
pocket expenditure.  In some kind of medical distress, they are perforce 
spending the money……….  
 
It is not by emphasizing improvement  and investment in Government 
health care system only.   Health ca re costs money every time, but these 
days more because of the high-tech interventions in health.   Money has 
to be spent.   The Government c an double its Budget – the Central 
Government can double its Budget fr om Rs. 10,000 crore to Rs. 20,000 
crore.  They have also said  it in their manifesto.   They may even treble it.  
But even then you see in Rs. 2, 20,000 crore or so annual health 
expenditure, Rs. 30,000 cr ore cannot determine effectively all the issues.  
So, what is the answer?   The answer is stimulating a whole host of health 
insurance products.   Without risk poo ling, special and large episode of 
health care has led to across the board impoverishment, particularly 
among the poor.  Either they are not accessing health care and dying 
without health care or when they ar e accessing health care, they are 
getting impoverished and getting into rura l indebtedness.  It  is said that 
seeking major health care is perhaps the major cause of rural 
indebtedness these days.” 
 
1.1.9 Stressing the importanc e given to health insurance by the Government, 
Shri C.S.Rao, Chairman,  Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDA), stated in evidence; 
“……. As has been pointed out by the Se cretary (Health), this is one issue 
which has been engaging the a ttention of both the Ministry of Health and 
the IRDA from the time it has been created, as to how to provide adequate 
health cover to the people of this count ry.   In fact, y ou would remember 
that when the IRDA Act was passed and later also we said that we would 
give preference to a company which is prepared to provide health cover 
on a stand-alone basis also. 

 6
 
 If there are too many applications received, we will give preference 
to an insurance company which is prepar ed to provide health cover, but 
unfortunately we have not received so far in the last five years any 
application for a stand-alone health insurance company. 
 
 
1.2 Development of Health Insurance in India 
 
1.2.1 Insurance generally comprises of life and non-life (gene ral) insurance. 
Health Insurance in India comes under ge neral insurance.  The development of 
health insurance in India therefore, has to be seen  in the backdrop of the 
development of insurance in general. 
1.2.2 Whereas the primary focus of t he Committee is regarding the state of 
health insurance under the PSU general in surance companies, it is felt that 
highlighting the development of health insurance in it s various forms would set 
the context for a comprehensive understandi ng of the subject.  This necessitates 
taking into account certain developments that do not strictly come within the 
generally perceived notion of insurance,  but nevertheless constitute vital 
components in the chronology of development of health insurance in India.   
1.2.3 Taking into account various dev elopments in and outside the insurance 
sector, a chronological chart showcasi ng the developments in the field of 
insurance, including developments specif ic to health insurance, with brief 
summaries are given below. 
Chronology  
YEAR IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENTS 
1912 Insurance Act, 1912 passed, setting down rules and regulations specific to insurance 
industry. 
1923 Workman’s Compensation Act passed, aims to provide workmen and/or dependents 
some relief in case of accidents arising out of  or in the course of employment, causing 
death or disablement  

 7
1938 Insurance Act, 1938 passed, recognizing two categories, i.e. Life and non-life (general) 
insurance. Led to an insurance wing being set-up, attached to the Ministry of Finance. 
1948 Employee’s State Insurance (ESI) Act pass ed, providing protection to workers & 
dependents in the organized sector for sickness, maternity, death  
1954 The Central Government Health Scheme started in 1954, providing health cover to 
employees of Central Government, MPs, Judges, Freedom Fighters and their families.  
1956 Life Insurance industry nationalized and Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) set 
up subsequently. 
1959 Mudaliar Committee constituted, recommended provision of long-range health 
insurance policy for all and strengthening Primary Health Centers. 
1972 General Insurance industry nationalized; General Insurance Corporation of India came 
into being in 1973 with more than a hundred private companies merged into the four 
subsidiaries of GIC, namely; NICL, NIACL, OICL and UIICL. Before GIC came into 
existence, a number of private insurers offered group health cover to corporate bodies.  
GIC offered Limited hospitalization cover since 1981 
1986 GIC introduced mediclaim insurance; modified in 1996 to allow differentials in premium 
for six age groups. 
1999 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) Act passed; opening up the 
insurance sector to private players allowing 26% Foreign Direct Investment in the 
sector. 
2001 Indian Insurance Amendment Act, 2001 GIC became a re-insurer, its earlier role of co-
ordination between the four subsidiaries taken over by a new body, General Insurance 
(Public Sector Companies) Association (GIPSA). 
IRDA introduced several insurance regulations including provisions for Third Party 
Administrators (TPA) system in health insurance. 
 
1.2.4. As furnished by the five public insurance companies the development of 
health insurance is as follows:- 
Early Years 
1.2.5. The New India Assurance Company Limited, delving deep into the early 
developments of Health Insurance in their written reply, stated;  
“Health Insurance is not of recent or igin.  Concern for loss resulting from 
accident and illness can be  traced to ancient civilizations. In fact, one of 
the earliest forms of health insurance may have been based on the 
ancient custom of paying the doctor while in good health and discontinuing 
payment during periods of illness. Th is custom existed in South East 
Asian countries including I ndia.  The development of  health insurance in 
existing form in India is based on pattern followed in Europe and America.  
 
Health Insurance or medical insur ance schemes had developed in India 
due to industrial relations problems between the employer and the 
employees.  The Corporate Houses used to offer core and non-core 
benefits to the employees.  The insur ance policies were granted to large 

 8
Corporate Houses purely on an acco mmodation basis.  The cover usually 
offered to the employees was in the nature of hospitalization and 
domiciliary treatment for dental and non-surgical eye treatment.  The 
benefits used to be for very small amount.  There was no scheme for 
individuals and families. 
 
In 1981, the Apex Body of Public Se ctor Insurance Companies i.e. GIC 
designed a limited cover for individ uals and families for covering their 
hospitalization needs.  This was replaced by a mediclaim policy in the year 
1986 under a market agree ment to provide in surance benefits to 
individuals and groups under  a group mediclaim policy.     The scheme so 
introduced was modified in 1991 and 1996 in the light of experience and 
suggestions received from the insuring public and medical fraternity.  The 
benefit provided under the policy wa s on reimbursement basis on 
occurrence of a major calamity in the form of accident/sickness to an 
insured person.  Reimbursement of the expenses was allowed by 
insurance companies on production of  the required bills given by the 
hospitals where the treatment was tak en.  This resulted into demand from 
policyholders, for payment to Hospitals,  as it was difficult for an insured 
person to arrange for funds at the ti me of admission in the hospital.  
Requests were made to GIC for introducing a system w hereby, payment 
could be made directly by the insur ance company to the hospital where 
the treatment was taken.  Insurance Companies entered into tie up with 
hospitals to provide such benefit w hereby an insured person could collect 
a certificate of his eligibility from  an insurance company and produce the 
same to the hospital for taking the treatment.  The settlement of the claims 
was directly made with the hospitals.  This tie up with hospitals failed in 
course of time in view of some  reported cases wherein the hospital 
managed to get the reimbursement of claims of such insured persons who 
took treatment for pre-existing ailments.” 
 
1.2.6  Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) traced the early developments 
to a pre-independence legislation, t he Workman’s Compensation Act, 1923.  
Profiling the legislative and committee level efforts in the development of Health 
Insurance in India prior to liberalization,  LIC in their written reply furnished the 
following details. 
• “Workman’s Compensation Act was passed in 1923.  This Act aims to 
provide workmen and / or their dependa nts some relief in case of 
accidents arising out of or in the course of employment and causing 
either death or disablement of workmen. 

 9
 
• Employees’ State Insurance (ESI) Act   was passed in 1948.  The ESI 
scheme is an integrated social secu rity scheme tailored to provide 
social protection to workers and their dependents in the organized 
sector in contingencies such as  sickness, maternity, death or 
disablement due to an employment injury or occupational hazard.  The 
first SI hospital was established in 1952. 
 
• Mudaliar Committee (1959-1961) recommendations.  These included 
provision of long range health insurance policy for all and 
strengthening the Primary Health Centers (PHSCs).” 
 
1.2.7 The National Insurance Company  Limited (NICL), tracing the early 
developments of health insurance in the country since independe nce, stated in 
their written reply: - 
“The Employees State Insurance Act 1948 paved the way for introducing 
mandatory social insurance scheme in the formal sector. The ESIS 
introduced in 1952 benefits 33.4 million worker s with income less than 
Rs.6500/- a month along with their families.  
 
The Central Govt. Health Scheme (CGHS) started in 1954 for employees 
of Central Government, members of Parliament, Judges, Freedom fighters 
and their families. This contributory scheme has 4.5 million beneficiaries.  
 
The first Mediclaim Insurance Schem e was introduced by GIC in 1986 for 
people not covered under the above scheme. Prior to 1986, cover against 
sickness and diseases were provided by extension of Personal Accident 
Policy.  The Mediclaim Policy is a reimbursement policy i.e., the 
policyholder first pays the expenses for treatment and later gets 
reimbursement depending upon sum assured and the coverage. The 
Mediclaim Policies are issued to Individuals and Cor porate clients/ 
Groups. In addition, Tailor-made Group Me diclaim Policies are issued for 
Corporate clients.  The terms, condi tions and the rates of premium are 
governed by a market agreement, which was binding on all the four 
subsidiaries of GIC.  
 
The scheme was revised in 1996 w hen the following changes were made 
in the original scheme: 
 
a) In limits removed 
 
b) No category-wise benefits- in stead benefits provided under one 
sum insured  
 

 10
c) 7 days grace period was allowed for policy renewal  
 
d) No personal accident cover  
 
Simultaneously, other modified forms were also introduced keeping in 
view the requirements and affordability of different segments such as Jan 
Arogya Bima Policy, Critical Ill ness Policy, Sampoorna Arogya Bima 
Policy etc.” 
 
1.2.8 Under the sub-heading – ‘Early y ears’ in the development of health 
insurance in India, United India Insurance Company Ltd.(UIICL) in their reply 
stated:- 
“The health insurance for general pub lic was first started with the 
Mediclaim Policy that was introduced in 1986 under the guidance of the 
Ministry. This policy was introduced to  the individuals as well as Groups 
that wanted to cover its members. Init ially there were sub limits fixed for 
various heads. Later the sub limit s were removed and all relevant 
expenses were paid.  
 
Few Corporate Clients were enjoying Package Health & Hospitalization 
cover prior to nationalisation and they were allow ed to continue the cover. 
This scheme had also been taking care of not only in-patient treatment but 
also the cost of Outpatient treatment with certain limits.” 
 
 Post-Liberalization and current developments  
 
1.2.9 After the Insurance Industry was opened up in 2000 for competition from 
private players and setting up of Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) through an Act in 1999, the scenario substantially changed.   
1.2.10 Briefing the Committee on some of the developments in the health 
insurance sector after liberalization, the Chairman of IRDA stated: 
“What has happened in the last few y ears, after opening up of the sector, 
is that the number of policies t hat have been sold and the amount of 
premium that is collected under health insurance has increased 
substantially.  In 2001-02, we had about 75.33 lakh policies covering a 
premium amount of roughly Rs. 762 cror e.  By 2003-04, the number of 
policies has increased to 102.84 la kh and the amount of premium 
collected is Rs. 1,154.47 crore. So, there is more than 50 per cent 
increase in the premium and also the number of policies that are sold.  So, 

 11
health insurance is becoming a somewhat popular scheme among the 
public and the insurance companies are also willing to sell this.” 
 
1.2.11  Commenting on the progress of health insurance in the post liberalization  
period,  the National Insurance Company Limited in their written reply stated: -  
“In the Post liberalisation, the Heal th Insurance Portfolio in India is 
regulated by Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA). 
IRDA introduced one regulation provid ing for Third Party Administrator 
(TPA) to work independently to prov ide specialised services to support 
administration and management of health  insurance product offered by 
Insurance Companies. The twin objecti ves of introduction of TPA were to 
contain the rising claims cost and to  provide cashless treatment to the 
insuring public.  
 
The share of health insu rance premium as part of  overall portfolio of non-
life business of government owned companies is around 8%. Health 
Insurance as a portfolio has start ed showing an upward trend from the 
year 2000 (post IRDA). The share of  health insurance between Public 
Sector Companies and Private Sector Companies is 90: 10. It is 
interesting to note that even after near ly two decades of health insurance, 
the population covered by health insu rance is only 1% of the total 
population. The following table demons trates the progress of health 
insurance in India: 
 
Year People Covered (lacs) % 
increase 
Premiums (Rs. 
In Crs.) 
Per Capita 
Premium (Rs.) 
1997-98 27.87 216 773
1998-99 35.34 272 768
1999-00 48.94 380 777
2000-01 56.23 519 923
2001-02 77.84 742 953
2002-03 88.02 895 994
2003-04 109.95 1024 931
 
It will be observed that the real increase in health insurance portfolio has 
started only from the y ear 2000. Further, while there was a substantial 
increase in the per capita premium in the year 2000-01, it has remained range 
bound and nearly stagnant thereafter s uggesting that the premium has not 
kept pace with medical inflation or for that matter even the general inflation. 
This has adversely affected the underwritin g results of all the four companies 
underwriting health insurance.  
 
Notwithstanding above, there still rema ins a huge potential for growth of 
health insurance due to following reasons: 
 

 12
a) India is one amongst the fast est growing economies where the GDP 
growth in the short-term is expected to hover around 6-7% for the short to 
medium term, the projections are at a 10% mark 
 
b) People are spending more on health care. Today, a middle-level manager 
with a family of four, spends bet ween Rs.8000 and Rs.12000 a year on 
healthcare- compared to just Rs.2,000 in  the late – 1980s. Most users of 
healthcare have been paying from thei r own pocket and preferring private 
services to government ones. 
 
c) The rise in literacy rate 
 
d) The higher levels of income 
 
e) An increased awareness thr ough the deep penetration of electronic 
media. 
 
Health insurance is turning out to be the fastest growing segment in the non-
life insurance industry with an average growth  of close to 40% per year in the 
last three years. This is more than twice the growth rate for the non-life 
industry. If the current trend continues  for the next few years, health 
insurance will turn out to be the second biggest business segment after motor 
insurance. From bringing in less than 5% of the net  premium of the non-life 
companies in 1998-99, mediclaim premium has grown close to 10% of the net 
premium income in 2001-02. Mediclaim as a product brings in substantial 
premium income of 35-40% within the personal lines business of any insurer.  
Hence, there is no doubt that the time has come for taking a very close look 
at this important portfolio and our company is fully alive to this changing 
scenario and are making all out efforts to tap the untapped segment.” 
 
1.3 Concept 
 
1.3.1 Conceptual clarity being pertinent to any meaningful intervention, the 
Committee sought the comments of the c oncerned Ministries as well as the 
Public Insurance Companies on the concept of Health Insurance. 
1.3.2 Elaborating on the concept of Health Insurance, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (Department of Health), in their background note furnished to the 
Committee, stated as under ;- 
“Health insurance is a form of insurance whose payment is contingent on 
the insured incurring additional expens es or losing income because of 

 13
incapacity or loss of good health.  A Health Insurance Policy is a contract 
between an insurer and an individual or a group in which the insurer 
agrees to provide specified health insurance at a premium.  Depending on 
a policy, the premium may be payable eith er as a lump sum amount or in 
installments.  Health Insurance generally  provides direct payment or    
reimbursement of expenses incurred during an illness. What would be the 
nature of protection would depend on the kind of po licy purchased and the 
cost and range of protection under that policy.  Health insurance could be 
either a personal schem e or a group scheme spons ored by an employer. 
Unlike life insurance where there are only two parties i.e. the insured and 
the insurer, in the case of health in surance there are three parties namely 
the insured, the insurer and the provider.  
 
The generic features of insurance are equally applicable to the concept of 
health insurance.  Insuranc e primarily rests on the principle of pooling of 
risk associated with the same cause i.e. health to share losses on some 
equitable basis.”  
 
1.3.3. On the concept of Health Insu rance, the National Insurance Company 
Limited,  stated as under :-  
“’Insurance’ whether it is health or any other line of insurance, is a concept 
of sharing financial burden. Insurance fo llows a simple statistical principle 
of “diversity” or “pooling of resources and sharing of risk”. This means that 
from out of a given popul ation that is Insured, those needing the financial 
support by way of a claim for loss is very  small. Especially in the case of 
Health Insurance, it is less than 5% of the total populat ion covered in its 
current form. This in effect means t hat out of the amount contributed by 
100%, financial claims are paid to only 5% . This theory of diversity is an 
important factor in a country like India.” 
 
1.3.4 New India Assurance Company Limit ed, stressing on the social security 
aspect of health insurance, in their written note, stated; 
“Basically the philosophy behind the c oncept of Health Insurance is to 
provide protection against uncertainty of illness /accident by spreading the 
risk based on the principle that “what  is highly unpredictable for an 
individual is predictable for a group of  individuals. Thus, insurance is a 
system by which Healthcare expenditure of few unfortunate individuals, 
who suffer from illness/injury is shar ed by many fortunate ones who are  
insured and exposed to the same risk but remain healthy.” 
 

 14
1.3.5 Oriental Insurance Company, emphasizing the financial security aspects 
of health insurance, in their written note, stated;   
“Health insurance is a financial me chanism that exists to provide 
protection to individuals and househol ds from hospitalization expenses 
incurred as a result of unexpected illness or injury.  Under the mechanism, 
the insurer agrees to compensate or guarantees t he insured person 
against loss by specified contingent event and provide financial coverage 
for which the insured party pays a premium.  The case for health 
insurance rests on three grounds: 
 
a) Illness can not be predicted; 
 
b) Financial burden of hospitalizatio n is high and cannot be planned; 
 
c) The proportion of people requiring hospitalization due to illness or 
injury in any large population is  small thus enabling risk pooling.  
Pooling of risks, resources, and benefits is the hall mark of any 
insurance system 
 
Unlike in developed countries, in I ndia, the social security system is 
inadequate and therefore, healthcare is more dependent on insurance.” 
 
 
1.3.6 Reflecting a similar view point, United India Insurance Company Limited, 
in their written reply, stated; 
“Health Insurance as a concept deals with coverage of expenses relating 
to treatment on account of illne ss and also following an accident. 
However, the different schemes/policie s offer insurance for different risks 
under health insurance. 
 
Health insurance is basically a plan providing services or cash indemnities 
for medical care needed in times of illne ss or disability. It is effected by 
voluntary plans.” 
 
1.4 Forms of Health Insurance  
 
1.4.1 Health Insurance can take various forms.  It can be (i) Employer –
provided, (ii) mandatory/social, (iii) voluntary or (iv) community-based, depending 

 15
upon the relationship between the insurer and the insured, and also on the type 
of service provider.   
1.4.2 Asked to furnish in detail the vari ous forms of health insurance, the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India, in their written reply, stated; 
“Health Insurance mechanism in India can be sorted into four broad 
groups: 
 
i) Social / mandatory insurance:  the Employees’ State Insurance 
Scheme (ESIS) provides cover fo r low-income employees of the 
organized industrial sector.  T he Central Government Health 
Schemes (CGHS) provides cover for central government 
employees.   
 
ii) Voluntary health insu rance schemes include mediclaim, Universal 
Health Insurance (UHI) Scheme of private insurers.  These are 
available mainly through insurance companies.  
 
iii) Employer-based insurance (Public and private sector companies 
including Defence, Railway, Se curity Forces, etc.)  - The 
companies offer facilities by way of lump sum payments, 
reimbursement of employees’ heal th expenditure or coverage 
under one of the public / private insurance plans. 
 
iv) Community – based schemes.  These are provid ed either by 
Trusts, hospitals or NGOs.  The schemes are set up 
 
• To provide health security to people living around healthcare 
facilities. 
• To minimize default in payments 
• As a regulatory requirement of insurance in rural and social 
sector. 
 
1.4.3. Attempting to categorize health insu rance, the National Insurance Co. Ltd.  
stated in their written reply: 
“Thus in the scenario of health for all there can be three types of coverage 
using the premium/tax mix for promoting health coverage. 
 
1. Commercial Insurance – where the full  premium is paid by the insured, 
but tax benefits can be offered and service tax on health premium can 
be waived. 
 

 16
2. Community Insurance – where communities as may be sponsored by 
the state government, local govern ment, NGOs and other groups can 
be insured by means of limited c ontributions by the participating 
members and subsidy from the governm ent targeted to this end from 
tax earnings. 
 
 
 
 
3. Command or compulsory insur ance or social security schemes, 
whereby through employer contribution or taxes social security 
schemes can be offered to high risk groups such as the aged as also 
the poorest and unemployed sections of the population.” 
 
1.4.4 In reply to the question on the various forms of health insurance, the three 
other public insurance companies furnis hed the various schemes in vogue under 
the voluntary health insurance schemes that constitute the main form of 
insurance promoted by the insurance companies in India. 
1.4.5 Health insurance coverage under the various  Schemes of health 
insurance in India  is less than even 10%  of the population. Of this, only about 
10% coverage is through commercial heal th insurance meaning that only about 
1% of the country’s popul ation is availing health in surance through insurance 
companies.  The number of beneficiaries  under the various forms of health 
insurance in India is given in the table below. 
Form Scheme  Beneficiaries 
in lacs  
Social / Mandatory 
Schemes  
The Employees State Insurance Scheme (ESIS) 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) 
State Sponsored Schemes  
(This figure may be enhanced with the recent coverage extended by 
Assam Government to its undeserving population)  
253. 
43. 
5. 
Employer based 
Schemes 
Railways Health Scheme 
Defense employees  
Ex-Serviceman  
Mining & Plantations (Public Sector) 
Employer run facilities/reimbursement schemes of private sector 
Employers run facilities / reimbursement Schemes of public sector 
80. 
66. 
75. 
40. 
60. 
80. 
Commercial 
Schemes 
Pubic Sector Non-Life Companies 
Private Sector non-life Companies 
Health Segment of Life Insurance companies  
100. 
8. 
2.3 
Community 
Schemes  
Community health schemes by NGOs and others  30. 

 17
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
INSTITUTIONS CONCERNED 
2.1 GOVERNMENT 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
2.1.1 The public sector in surance companies are accountable to the Banking 
and Insurance Division of the Department of Economic Affa irs in the Ministry of 
Finance except for matters of day to day  administration and certain spheres of 
functional autonomy. The Ministry provi des the policy framework within which 
these companies operate. Administration of Insurance Act, 1938, Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956, Gener al Insurance Business (N ationalisation) Act, 1972, 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, Act, 1999, periodical review 
and monitoring of the performance of pub lic sector insurance companies and 
appointment of the Chief Executives of the public sector insurance companies 
and IRDA also come under the Ministry of Finance. 
2.2 INSURANCE REGULATORY & DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (IRDA) 
2.2.1 To look into the minutes of Insurance Regulation, the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) had been set up under an act of 
Parliament in 1999. IRDA monitors functioning of public a nd private sector 
insurers through regular reporting, undertaking inspections, conducting enquiries 
and investigations including audit of insurers, intermediaries, insurance 
intermediaries and other organi sations connected with the insurance business.   
IRDA also regulates overall functioning of the insurance companies in private 

 18
and public sectors includi ng investments through regul ations issued by the 
Authority. 
2.2.2 IRDA, an autonomous and statutory body, has been entrusted with duties, 
powers and functions as specified un der Section 14 of IRDA Act, 1999. 
(Annexure-I). 
2.3 INSURANCE  COMPANIES 
2.3.1 There are five public sectors insu rance companies in the country today 
offering health insurance schemes. These companies come under two 
categories, i.e. Life and General Insur ance. Health Insurance primarily comes 
under general insurance. In the life segm ent, Life Insurance Corporation of India 
(LIC) is the only public sector company. In the general insurance segment, four 
public companies namely National Insura nce Co. Ltd., Oriental Insurance Co. 
Ltd., United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and New India Assurance Co. Ltd. operate. 
 
2.3.2 Life Insurance industry was nat ionalized in 1956 and LIC was set up 
subsequently. The Committee are informed t hat though the core business of LIC 
was life insurance, it star ted offering health insurance as riders to its policies 
beginning from 1993.  
2.3.3 General insurance industry in India was nationalized in 1972. 
Consequently, General Insur ance Corporation of India was established in 1973 
with the merger of more than a hundred private companies  to constitute four 
subsidiaries of GIC, namely (i) National Insurance Co. Ltd., (ii) Oriental Insurance 
Co. Ltd., (iii) United India Insurance Co . Ltd. and (iv) New India Assurance Co. 
Ltd. GIC introduced Mediclaim Insurance Scheme in 1986 for the first time, and 

 19
since then, the four subsidiaries have been offering health insurance schemes on 
a voluntary basis besides other general insurance pro ducts. With the Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2001, GIC became a re-insur er and its four subsidiaries formed 
the General Insurance Public Sector Association (GIPSA) for coordination among 
them. These four companies, the Committ ee note, today have 82% of the total 
health insurance market amongst themselves. 
2.3.4 Apart from the four Public Sector Companies, t he following private sector 
General Insurance Companies also offe r Health Insurance products in the 
country today. 
1. Tata AIG General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
2. ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
3. Cholamandalam General  Insurance Co. Ltd. 
4. Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance. Co. Ltd. 
5. Iffco Tokyo General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
6. Reliance General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
7. Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
8. HDFC Chubb General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
 
2.4 NGOs and Self-help Groups  
2.4.1 Non-Governmental organizations and Self-help Groups or other 
Community-based organizations compliment  formal health insurance schemes 
offered by the insurance companies by way of various community-based health 
insurance schemes.  
2.4.2 These non-governmental organizations are facilitating the spread of health 
insurance to the rural and unprivileged segments either through arrangements 
with insurance companies or through effective community mobilization and aided 
projects. 

 20
2.4.3 The Committee have been informed that  64 such organizations (excluding 
two insurance companies and one TPA whic h was also included in the list) are 
either active or would like to be in volved in spreading health insurance. 
Prominent among them incl ude Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) of 
Gujarat, DHAN Foundation and ACCORD of Tamil Nadu and Yeshaswini Trust of 
Karnataka among others. 
2.5 THIRD PARTY ADMINISTRATORS (TPAs) 
2.5.1 The Committee are informed that  the institution of Third Party 
Administrators (TPAs) which facilitate a system of cash-less settlement of 
medical bills for the insured under health  insurance has been introduced in India 
as recently as 2001. TPAs basically ar e professional organizations servicing 
health insurance policies sold by insurance companies by way of facilitating cash 
less treatment to insured individuals through institutional arrangements with 
insurance companies and networked service providers i.e. hospitals and nursing 
homes, etc. The TPAs are register ed with and licensed by the IRDA and 
regulated by IRDA regulations, 2001 as amended from time to time. 
2.5.2 Asked to furnish a detailed note on TPAs, the IRDA in a written note 
stated the following: - 
“Third Party Administration in Health  Insurance was introduced in India in 
2001 with the notification of  IRDA (Third Party Ad ministrators – Health 
Services) Regulations, 2001. The fi rst set of companies was given 
licences in March, 2002. Today, there are 25 licensed Third Party 
Administrators (TPAs). The basic functions of TPAs are to provide cash-
less facility to the insurers and proce ss claims on behalf of the insurers. 
Covered medical expenses are paid by the TPAs directly to the hospital. 
The TPAs also serve as extended a rms of the insurers and give 
professional advice to the insured, whenever r equired and / or asked. A 
Third Party Administrator acts a link  between the insurer and the hospital. 

 21
By processing claims with due diligenc e, TPAs are expected to control 
claims costs for the insure rs. In the long run, TPAs  are expected to bring 
in greater professionalis m in the health insuranc e industry, which would 
augur well for the growth of this segment of insurance business. 
 
TPAs are licensed by the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority. The criteria for licensing are :- 
 
Only a company with a share capital and registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956 can function as a TPA. 
 
The primary object of the company shall be to carry on business in India 
as a TPA in the health services and on being licensed by IRDA, the 
Company shall not engage itself in any other business.  
 
The minimum paid up capital shall be Rupees One Crore in equity shares. 
 
The company should have at least one Director who is a Doctor. 
 
The aggregate holdings of equity shares by a foreign company shall not at 
any time exceed twenty-six per cent of the paid up equity capital of a Third 
Party Administrator. 
 
The IRDA calls for Annual Reports from the TPAs and these are 
scrutinized to ascertain the adequacy of capital and the financial strength 
of the company. TPAs have to mainta in a minimum of Rupees One Crore 
working capital at all times.” 
 

 22
CHAPTER – III 
 
PUBLIC SECTOR INSURANCE COMPANIES  
AN EVALUATION OF HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEMES  
 
3.1. Backdrop 
3.1.1 The Committee examined the existing health insurance schemes run by 
PSU insurers.  
3.1.2 Briefing the Committee on the broad contours of commercial health 
insurance in the country and the achiev ements so far as the public sector 
insurance companies were concerned, the Ministry of Finance, during evidence 
before the Committee stated: - 
“The Public Sector Insurance Co mpanies have so far launched 
`Mediclaim’ policy for general public; Overseas Mediclaim Insurance for 
those who are going abroad; Bhavis hya Arogya insurance scheme, which 
was launched some time back; the Jan Arogya Policy for the poorer 
sections; and the latest policy launched is the Universal Health Insurance 
for the families living Below the Poverty Line (BPL).   
 
‘Overseas Mediclaim’ and ‘Bhavishya Arogya’ schemes are also there.  
The ‘Bhavishya Arogya’ scheme was started in 1989.  It is not a very 
popular scheme.” 
 
3.1.3 All the health insurance schemes o ffered by the four public sector general 
insurance companies in India come under the voluntary form of health insurance. 
These can further be categorized into two groups namely, government floated 
health insurance schemes and health insurance schemes offered by the 
insurance companies. 
 
 

 23
3.2 Government Schemes 
a) Universal Health Insurance Scheme (UHIS) 
 
3.2.1 One of the health sch emes introduced by the Government is the Universal 
Health Insurance Scheme. While the Government announced the scheme, its 
launch was entrusted to the four public general insure rs. Details of the scheme 
as per note furnished by Ministry of Finance are given in Annexure II. 
 
3.2.2 The Universal Health Insurance Scheme has undergone a reformulation to 
make it an exclusive scheme for BPL segments of the popul ation with enhanced 
subsidy from the Government in 2004.  Explaining the broad features of this 
scheme, Ministry of Finance, during br iefing before the Committee stated as 
under ;-- 
“The Universal Health Insurance Sc heme was launched on 14 July 2003.  
It is meant for individuals, a family of  five and a family of seven.  The 
premium for individuals was Rs.365; for a family of five it was Rs.548; and 
for a family of seven -- including t he parents -- the premium was Rs.730.  
Initially, a subsidy of Rs.100 was given to each family belonging to the 
BPL group. This scheme, which was in operation for one year , that is, till 
31 March 2004, was modified a little.  In the modifi ed form, the subsidy is 
Rs.200 to an individual; Rs.300 to a fa mily of five; and Rs.400 to a family 
of seven.  Therefore, an individual has to pay only Rs.165 from his pocket; 
a family of five has to pay Rs.248; and a family of seven has to pay 
Rs.330.   
 
The hospitalisation coverage in it is  up to Rs. 30,000 for all members put 
together.  It is given on a floater basis, that is, Rs . 30,000 is admissible to 
a family of seven; family of five or an individual as the case may be.  It has 
a death cover due to accident for a su m of Rs. 25,000, and it has another 
component of reimbursement of wage-loss  at the rate of Rs.50 up to 15 
days. It is a flexible scheme, and add-ons could be built-in over and above 
all that the scheme prescribes.” 
 
 
 
 

 24
3.2.3 A comparative chart showing the performance of the four public sector 
general insurance companies under this scheme is given below: 
Chart I 
 
Business performance of the four public sect or insurance companies under Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme: 
 
Year Company Target Premium In  
Rs.Crore 
Claim 
Incurred 
Claim 
Ratio in % 
NICL  0.77 0.36 60.53 
OICL  3.31 1.16 35.14 
UIICL  5.64 5.34 95.00 
 
2004-05 
NIACL 1 0.22 0.03 13.63 
TOTAL   9.94 6.89 69.32 
NICL  1.34 0.05 12.54 
OICL     
UIICL  7.48 1.35 18.00 
 
2003-04 
NIACL 4 3.65 0.04 1.01 
TOTAL   12.47 1.44 11.55 
 
3.2.4 From the chart above, it is noted that the prem ium collected by the four 
companies in 2004-05 decreased to Rs.9 .94 from Rs.12.47 crore in 2003-04. 
The performance of individual  companies also deteriorated over the past year, 
i.e. New India Assurance Company Limite d collected Rs.3.65 crore in 2003-04 
and only Rs.0.22 crore in 2004-05. United India Insurance Company Limited, 
which collected Rs.7.48 cr ore in 2003-04 could manage only Rs.5.64 crore in 
2004-05. However, Oriental Insurance Co mpany Limited, which had nothing to 
show in 2003-04, reported a collection of Rs.3.31 crore in 2004-05. 
3.2.5 While briefing the Committee on the achievements under  the Universal 
Health Insurance Scheme,  a representative of Ministry of Finance, stated: - 
 “I would like to share some data about this scheme with the hon. 
Committee. Nearly 65,718 families were covered all over the country up to 
31 March 2005.  As this scheme caters to individuals, family of five, and 
family of seven, theref ore, the number of pers ons covered under this 
scheme was 1,82,641. Last year, the average was coming to three per 
family, and this year also it is rou ghly three per family. The total premium 
collected by the insuranc e companies is Rs.2.8 cr ore, and claims paid up 

 25
to 31 March 2005 are Rs.40.02 lakh.  In fact, those who had bought the 
insurance cover say in the month of February would have the cover till 
next February. Therefore, the claims would keep coming.  This scheme is 
still in operation. This Sc heme was started only in th e month of July 2004 
after modification. Therefore, this sc heme has not even been in operation 
for one full year. 
 
3.2.6 The Committee note that the figures furnished by the four public insurers 
on the amount of premium collected and claims disbursed are in great variance 
with the figures quoted by the representative of the Finance Ministry. 
 
3.2.7 Asked to explain the reason fo r making Universal Health Insurance 
Scheme exclusive to BPL segments, repr esentatives of Ministry of Finance 
during evidence stated as under : - 
 “Actually, the consideration really was that the scheme was not really 
taking off. Even earlier the subsidy wa s only for BPL families. What was 
found was that the coverage of non-BPL families was much larger than 
the coverage of BPL families and sinc e the Government wanted to focus 
on the poorer sections, this change was made.” 
 
3.2.8 In view of the non-BPL segment s’ good response to the UHIS, the 
Committee wanted to know as to why t he scheme was not made available to the 
poor above the BPL even as subsidy was made exclusive to the BPL segments 
at the enhanced rate. In reply, representative of Ministry Finance further stated: - 
 “…………if it had been allowed to conti nue and the focus shifted as far as 
the subsidy is concerned and enhanc ed subsidy was paid only for BPL 
families, may be the BPL coverage al so would have increased along with 
the coverage of non-BPL families. That point can definitely be argued.” 
 
3.2.9 Emphasizing the need for extendi ng Universal Health Insurance Scheme 
to non-BPL families also, Secretary Ministry of Health and Family Welfare during 
evidence stated as under:-  
 “………….The Universal Insurance Sc heme raised hopes but now it is 
restricted to BPL category.  The BPL category is a very narrow category.  I 

 26
think the lower middle class and the near-BPL band poor are equally 
distressed and we have to find some mechanism.  Then, the question of 
certifying that near-BPL is itself a gi gantic task.  In some urban areas, the 
BPL categorisation is also not complete , so, further difficulties come up.  
We would urge the Universal Insur ance Scheme to be opened up for any 
citizen who wants to come forward.  The subsidy could be restricted to 
BPL category but the insurance product should be available for a common 
man.  We feel that, the universal insurance scheme is being propagated in 
different States through different depar tments.  We would urge that in 
every State the Health Department should be given the task to propagate 
the Universal Insurance Scheme.  It is  because the Health Department is 
the biggest stakeholder in the Rural Health Insurance Scheme and the 
Universal Health Insurance Scheme is  such a product.  We also realise 
that we have a role to supplement t he effort of the R egulatory Authority 
and the Department of Insurance in shape of accreditation process, 
costing and such other complex activities which will help in more 
transparent and market driven yet equitable insurance products.  We will 
be in touch with them and under their guidance we will assist them.  These 
are all the new activities and we should be prepared for it.” 
 
b) Swasthya Bima Policy  
 
3.2.10 Swasthya Bima Policy was intr oduced in the year 2005. The scheme is 
meant for the poor and has been introduced  for members of Self-help Groups 
(SHGs) and other Credit Linked Groups (CLGs). The scheme was launched only 
in 2005 and  policy subscriptions for the same under all the four companies still 
remain a no-show. The premium is low but no subsidy is provided under the 
scheme.  The general features of Swasth ya Bima Policy are given in Annexure-
III. 
3.3 Schemes by Public Insurance Companies 
a) Mediclaim Insurance Policy 
 
3.3.1 The most popular and widely sold health scheme on offer from the four 
public sector general insurance companies  is the Mediclaim insurance policy. 
The detailed features of the policy  are given in Annexure – IV. 
 

 27
3.3.2 Briefing the Committee on the broad features of the scheme, a 
representative of Ministry of Finance during evidence stated as follows : - 
 “The ‘Mediclaim’ Insurance Policy -- as was pointed out by the hon. 
Chairman, IRDA -- was introduced in  1986 at the instance of the 
Government.  It provides reimburse ment of medical expenses for 
hospitalisation and domiciliary hospitali sation, but it does not cover OPD 
treatment. The sum that is assured under  this policy varies from Rs.15, 
000 to Rs.5 lakh.  It is available to the people from the age of 5 years to 
the age of 80 years. The children between the age of 3 months and 5 
years can also be covered with some additional premium.  I would also 
like to point out that the minimum premium is Rs. 213 per annum for the 
lowest sum assured, that is, Rs. 15,000 for people below 35 years of age. 
The highest premium is Rs. 17,156 per annum for people in the age group 
between 76 years and 80 y ears for the maximum sum assured, that is, up 
to Rs. 5 lakh.  There is a family discount of 10 per cent, and some 
cumulative bonus if the previous year had been claim-free.” 
 
3.3.3 A comparative chart showing the performance of each company under 
Mediclaim, compiled on the basis of their written replies is given below. 
 
CHART – II 
Past three years business performance of the four public sector insurance 
companies  - Mediclaim  (Individual  & Group) 
 
Year Company Target 
Rs. Crore 
Premium In 
Rs. Crore 
Claim Incurred Claim Ratio in 
% 
NICL  364.38 434.29 134.90 
OICL  249.62 294.05 117.80 
UIICL  252.08 313.59 124.40 
 
2004-05 
NIACL 440 455.39 527.59 115.85 
TOTAL   1321.17 1569.52 118.80 
NICL  298.03 304.71 102.24 
OICL  229.53 224.07   97.62 
UIICL  234.22 251.36 107.31 
 
2003-04 
NIACL 395 366.42 307.17   83.83 
TOTAL   1128.20 1087.31 96.37 
NICL  221.26 260.51 117.74 
OICL  204.08 157.54   77.19 
UIICL  211.07 219.63 104.05 
 
2002-03 
NIACL 350 354.41 270.12   76.21 
TOTAL   990.82 907.80 91.62 
 

 28
3.3.4 From the foregoi ng facts, it is clear that about 85% of the health insurance 
business of the PSU insurance companies  comes from Mediclaim alone, and 
with a claim ratio above 90% in 2003-04 and above 100% in 2004-05, the 
portfolio is loss-making for the public companies. 
 
3.3.5  On the performance of the public insurers under the scheme, 
representative of Ministry of Finance, stated as under : - 
“This scheme has expanded considerably  over a period of time.  In 2003-
2004, it had a coverage of 90 lakh persons. The insurance company had 
collected roughly Rs.1, 100 crore by way of premium, and had an incurred 
claim ratio of 94 per cent. I would like to point out that any incurred claim 
ratio beyond 70 per cent is a loss to the insurance company because they 
have to set aside some amount for their management expenses, and 
some amount for their agents in the form of commissions.  Under the 
‘Mediclaim’ scheme, the cl aim ratio is going up to  94 per cent.  It means 
that companies are losing roughly between 20 per cent and 24 per cent.” 
 

 29
 
b) Bhavishya Arogya 
 
3.3.6 Bhavishya Arogya is an other health policy marketed by all the four public 
sector general insurance companies. Introduced in the year 1990, the scheme is 
basically meant to take care of the healthcare needs of an insured person after 
retirement. The detailed features of the scheme are given in Annexure-V. 
 
3.3.7 The performances under the scheme fo r the past three years, of the four 
national general insurers based on their wr itten replies is given below in a 
comparative chart. 
 
CHART – III 
 
Past three years business performance of the four public sector insurance 
companies under the scheme Bhavishya Arogya Policy 
 
 
Year Company Target 
Rs. Crore Premium In
Rs. Crore 
Claim 
Incurred 
Claim 
Ratio in 
% 
NICL     
OICL  0.12 0.01 14 
UIICL     
 
2004-05 
NIACL     
TOTAL   0.12 0.01 14 
NICL     
OICL  0.08   
UIICL  0.021 0.018 87 
 
2003-04 
NIACL     
TOTAL   0.101 0.018 87 
NICL     
OICL  0.181 0.02  
UIICL  0.011 0.013 116 
 
2002-03 
NIACL     
TOTAL   0.191 0.033 116 
 

 30
3.3.8 The chart above clearly shows that the performance of the public 
insurance companies under the scheme is a disappointing o ne. NIC and NIAC 
have nothing to show, while the OIC and UIIC together collected only about 
Rs.19 lakhs in 2002-03 and a decreased amount of Rs.10 lakhs in 2003-04. 
 
c) Jan Arogya Bima Policy 
 
3.3.9 Jan Arogya Bima Policy designed to meet the needs of poorer sections of 
the society, was introduced in 1998. T he details of the scheme are given in 
Annexure-VI 
3.3.10 Based on the writt en replies of the companie s concerned, a comparative 
chart showing the performance of each of the four public  sector general 
insurance companies under the scheme is given below. 
CHART – IV 
Past  three  years  business  performance  of  the  four  public  sector  insurance  
companies  under  Jan  Arogya Bima Policy 
 
YEAR COMPANY TARGET 
Rs. Crore 
PREMIUM 
IN 
Rs. Crore 
CLAIM 
INCURRED 
CLAIM 
RATIO 
NICL  1.66 1.54 88.20 
OICL  0.98 0.70 70.70 
UIICL  0.54 0.86 159.00 
 
2004-05 
NIACL 1.00 0.75 1.03 137.33 
TOTAL     3.93 4.13 105.08 
NICL  0.23 0.33 102.03 
OICL  0.57 0.17 29.40 
UIICL  0.55 0.87 158.00 
 
2003-04 
NIACL 0.75 0.52 0.68 131.40 
TOTAL   1.87 2.05 58.74 
NICL  1.94 1.82 96.39 
OICL  0.69 0.24 35.38 
UIICL  0.38 0.83 218.71 
 
2002-03 
NIACL 0.50 0.48 0.91 190.24 
TOTAL   3.49 3.82 109.45 
 
 

 31
3.3.11 It is clear from the above chart t hat Jan Arogya, like most other health 
schemes under the public sector general insurance companies is also a loss-
making scheme. The Committee note that there is substantial variance between 
the claim ratio quoted by the Ministry and those furnished by the undertakings. 
3.3.12 Briefing the Committee on the general  features of the scheme and the 
performance of the public general insurers under this scheme, representatives  
of Ministry of Finance stated as under:- 
The ‘Jan Arogya’ scheme was started in 1996, and it is meant for the poor 
people.  It is again a hospitalisati on expense coverage scheme. It is 
available to the people from the age of 5 years to 80 years. The sum 
assured is Rs.5,000 per annum per per son, and the premium is between 
Rs.70 and Rs.140 per person depending upon the age.   An additional 
premium is charged for children. In  the year 2003-2004,  nearly 4.68 lakh 
persons were covered under this scheme. The premium that the insurance 
companies had got was only Rs.1.85 cr ore, and the claims settled were 
Rs.3.81 crore. Nearly 206 per cent wa s the incurred claim ratio. It means 
that they gave almost double of what they got  from the people as 
premium. 
 
 
d) Overseas Mediclaim Policy 
 
3.3.13 Overseas Mediclaim Policy is t he health insurance pr oduct available for 
three categories of travelers to forei gn countries such as Business & Holiday 
travelers, Employment and Study travelers and Cor porate Frequent travelers. 
The period of cover is as per the actual period of stay abroad and the premium is 
based on considerations like age of the insured, period of stay abroad and type 
of plan chosen. National Insurance and New India Assurance Company Limited 
are the two public insurance compani es offering scheme. A comparative 
business performance of the two companies under this scheme is given below. 
 
 
 

 32
 
Past three years business performance of National Insurance Co. Ltd. and New India 
Assurance Co. Ltd. under Overseas Mediclaim Policy 
 
Year Company Target 
Rs. Crore 
Premium In 
Rs. Crore 
Claim Incurred Claim 
Ratio in % 
NICL  15.68 7.32 46.68 2004-05 
NIACL 30.00 24.30 22.37 92.06 
TOTAL   39.98 29.69 74.26 
NICL  15.93 8.97 56.25 2003-04 
NIACL 35.00 27.25 20.51 75.26 
TOTAL   43.18 29.48 68.27 
NICL  16.07 5.53 34.41 2002-03 
NIACL 30.00 33.66 24.75 73.52 
TOTAL   49.73 30.28 60.88 
 
e) Company Specific Schemes 
3.3.14 Besides these, there are several other schemes of health insurance being 
offered by individual public insuranc e companies. These include Sampoorna 
Arogya Bima Policy and Critical Illness Insurance Policy by National Insurance 
Co. Ltd. (Annexure-VII), Health Plus Me dical Expenses Policy, Cancer Insurance 
and Tertiary Care Insurance by New In dia Assurance Co. Ltd. (Annexure-VIII), 
Good Health Policy and Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Policy by Oriental Insurance Co. 
Ltd.(Annexure-IX), and Uni-medicare Policy, Mediguard Policy and Trauma Care 
by United India Insurance Co. Ltd.(Annexure-X).  
3.3.15 In addition to the above schemes  offered by the public sector general 
insurance companies, Life Insurance Corpor ation of India offers Jeevan Bharati 
Plan, Critical Illness Rider and Accidental Disability Benefit. While Jeevan Bharati 
Plan is specifically made for women cove ring illnesses specific to women, the 
other two come as riders to life insuranc e policies of the corporation. Dwelling on 
this aspect, the Chairman, IRDA, during evidence stated: - 
“In addition to the general insur ance companies which have been 
traditionally in this line of business, the life insurance companies have also 
started an innovative practice of giving a critical illness rider on an existing 

 33
life insurance policy. Life insurance companies basically sell life insurance 
cover, but they also said that they would also like to sell a cover, which 
has got critical illness, and this cover will be triggered the moment a 
policyholder is afflicted by critical illness. It has nothing to do with 
hospitalisation and if it is established that this person had contacted a 
critical illness, then he would automatically be reimbursed by the life 
insurance companies. This has been star ted by the privat e life insurance 
companies and the LIC has also taken it in a big way. Now, we have two 
streams, which are oper ating. One is on the lif e insurance side where a 
critical illness rider is also available in addition to a normal life cover and 
there are also the general insur ance companies which are selling 
insurance policies for the purpose of providing reimbursement for 
hospitalisation.” 

 34
 
3.4 OVERALL PERFORMANCE 
3.4.1 The Committee note that the health insurance portfolio has shown 
considerable growth both in terms of premiums and numbers of policies during 
the last two years under t he public sector insurers. However, there has been 
greater growth in the pr ivate sector. The following table shows the percentage 
growth in gross premium collected by insurance companies during the years 
2003-04 and 2004-05 under various segments of business including health. 
Table 1: Percentage growth in gross premium in insurance companies in 2003-05. 
2003-04 2004-05 
 
 
 
Insurer 
Fire Marine Engg. Motor Health Total Fire Marine Engg. Motor Health Total 
 
Public 
Sector 
 
 
-3.33 
 
-13.32 
 
-4.44 
 
13.46 
 
28.89 
 
6.56 
 
-1.46 
 
2.85 
 
4.31 
 
9.30 
 
17.79 
 
5.43 
New 
India 
 
 
-10.97 
 
-21.90 
 
18.79 
 
8.06 
 
54.92 
 
3.17 
 
2.54 
 
-2.31 
 
-3.71 
 
8.23 
 
27.33 
 
4.38 
National 
 
 
-1.63 
 
-13.14 
 
-19.62 
 
29.73 
 
42.36 
 
18.27 
 
3.05 
 
34.93 
 
4.68 
 
19.02 
 
26.28 
 
11.94 
 
United 
India 
 
 
4.67 
 
-11.32 
 
-6.46 
 
3.87 
 
10.85 
 
3.33 
 
-6.69 
 
-18.57 
 
10.42 
 
-7.79 
 
5.24 
 
-3.77 
Oriental 
 
 
-1.62 
 
 
-4.01 
 
-7.03 
 
12.28 
 
7.87 
 
1.02 
 
-5.61 
 
10.00 
 
5.87 
 
14.80 
 
6.85 
 
7.31 
Private 
Sector 
 
 
63.58 
 
120.85 
 
43.51 
 
86.67 
 
130.32 
 
67.40 
 
28.70 
 
48.56 
 
60.48 
 
70.39 
 
114.21 
 
57.35 
 
Total 
 
 
6.57 
 
-3.92 
 
3.94 
 
18.66 
 
35.13 
 
12.30 
 
5.39 
 
10.22 
 
17.85 
 
16.13 
 
27.91 
 
12.73 
Source : Gupta & Trivedi,  IRDA Journal, Aug,’05 issue. 
 The figures in Table 1 above indica te that while the public sector 
companies in 2003-04 achieved a 28.89 % growth in their gross premium 
collection, the private companies achieved a whopping 130.32% growth. In 2004-
05, the performance of the public sect or companies further declined with a 
17.79% growth in gross premium under health segment while that of the private 
sector remained above the ce nt percent growth rate at  114.27%. Interesting to 

 35
note though, is that the health insurance segment has shown the most growth for 
both sectors. 
3.4.2 The Committee are informed that t he health portfolio in the non-life 
insurance business has emerged as the third most important segment after 
motor and fire insurance in 2005. T he following table shows the growing 
proportion of health segment in the general insurance business. 
Table 2 : Proportion of major business segments in non-life insurance sector. 
 Segment 
 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
Motor 39.0 41.5 43.1 
Fire 19.6 17.8 16.6 
Health 7.3 8.8 9.8 
Marine 
(Cargo+Hull) 
 
8.7 
 
7.0 
 
6.9 
Public Sector 
Engg. 4.3 3.9 3.9 
Motor 28.7 32.0 34.6 
Fire 32.7 32.0 26.1 
Health 4.6 6.3 8.6 
Marine 
(Cargo+Hull) 
 
6.3 
 
8.3 
 
7.8 
Private Sector 
Engg. 8.8 7.6 7.7 
Motor 38.0 40.2 41.4 
Fire 20.9 19.8 18.5 
Health 7.0 8.4 9.6 
Marine 
(Cargo+Hull) 
 
8.4 
 
7.2 
 
7.1 
Combined 
Engg. 4.8 4.4 4.6 
 
 The figures in Table 2 above also indicate that while the health segment 
got a momentum jump from 4.6 to 8.6 percent under the private sector, the public 
sector experienced lesser growth moment um where the health portfolio grew 
from 7.3 percent to about 10 per cent in the 2002-05 period. 
3.4.3 The Committee, while taking note of the vibrancy that health insurance 
business has experienced in the recent years, also note that in comparison to the 
private sector, the public sector com panies have achieved relatively slower 

 36
growth rate. The following table provides details of the growth of the Health 
Insurance business in both the public and private sector. 
Table 3 : Growth of health insurance across various insurers during 2003-04. 
 
 
 
Insurer 
Health premium 
(in Rs. Crore) 2004-05 
Health premium 
as a %age of 
total non-life 
business 2004-05 
Growth of health 
premium 
(2003/04-2004/05) 
(%) 
Growth of total 
premium (2003/04-
2004/05) (%) 
ICICI Lombard 118.78 13.4 257.0 74.7 
Bajaj Allianz 70.39 8.3 242.2 79.0 
Royal Sundaram 30.02 9.1 88.8 28.5 
IFFCO Tokio 28.37 5.6 73.3 56.0 
Tata AIG 26.64 5.7 35.3 32.7 
Cholamandalam 20.12 11.8  75.3 
Reliance 7.98 4.9 2.4 0.3 
HDFC Chubb 1.97 1.1  59.2 
Private Sector 304.27 8.6 148.0 55.3 
New India 504.28 11.9 43.9 4.5 
National 364.29 9.5 26.3 11.9 
United India 294.19 10.0 5.2 -3.8 
Oriental 265.14 8.7 13.9 5.9 
Public Sector 1427.9 9.8 24.0 5.2 
Total 1732.17 9.6 36.0 12.3 
 
 From the table above, it is clear that the bulk of health insurance business 
is with the public sector. However, it is  also clear that as far as percentage 
growth of health premium is concerned,  the public sector’s 24% compares 
unfavorably to the private sector’s 148.0%. 
3.4.4 Asked by the Committee as to why the growth percentage of Health 
Insurance under the Public Sector Insurance Companies lagged behind the 
exponential growth experienced by the private sector Insurance Companies, 
Oriental Insurance Company Limited in their post evidence reply stated: 
 “The growth of business appears to be more with the Private Sector 
Companies because of their small pr emium base.  The Private Sector 
Companies at the mom ent are grabbing the busin ess from corporate 
houses by indulging in unhealthy practi ces.  Moreover since only about 
1% of the population is currently taking insurance policies we are 
concentrating on personal lines of insurance where there is huge 
potential.” 

 37
3.4.5 In reply to the same question, New India Assurance Company wrote:- 
“The growth in terms of quantum of Health insurance business was 215 
Crores by Four public se ctor companies as compared to Rs. 162 Crores 
by 8 Private Companies.  However, in terms of percentage the growth was 
lower in public sector companies because of cautious approach in 
accepting business in view of rising claims ratio.” 
 
3.4.6 Assessing the spread of insurance cover by the four public insurers 
against the infrastructure at their dis posal, CMD, UIICL, during his evidence 
before the Committee stated as under : - 
 “So far as the spread of insurance is concerned, I would like to tell that our 
company is marketing, claim se rvicing through about 1100 offices 
functioning as one company. If all th e four companies are taken together, 
it must be 4000 in number. Even with that large infrastructure, our 
company has been able to insure only about 12 lakh people. If all 
companies are taken together, it may be around 50 lakh or so, So, this is 
very small as compared to the infrastructure itself.” 
 
3.4.7 Highlighting the effo rts made towards rural penetration in selling health 
policies, Shri M.K. Garg, CM D, United India Insurance Co . Ltd. further  stated as 
under : - 
 “Regarding expansion in rural areas  and un-represented areas where we 
do not have our direct branches, we have now engaged the new system of 
corporate agents and micro offices. Now, banks, post offices and other 
institutions are having t heir presence in villages and we want to take 
advantage of that. So we have tied up wi th them to provide this type of 
insurance. Rural insurance as well as  personal line of insurance is our 
area of thrust.” 
 
3.4.8 The spread of Health Insur ance and the performance of individual 
Insurance Companies can be best assessed through the total number of persons 
covered under the various health insurance schemes.  Based on the written 
replies of the four Public Sector General Insur ance Companies, a table showing 

 38
the total number of persons covered under the various health policies of each of 
these companies for the past three years is given below. 
Table showing number of persons covered under each of the  various health insurance schemes offered by 
the four public sector general insurance companies. 
 
YEAR Name of policy  NICL OICL UIICL NIACL  GRAND 
TOTAL 
Individual Mediclaim    423000 2203776 
Group Mediclaim   349000 882987 
Overseas Mediclaim    88117 
Mediclaim 2025610 2148247   
Jan Arogya 207701 68704 70000 55791 
Bhavishya Arogya   878  
2002-2003 
Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme 
  0 - 
 
Total   2233311 2216951 842878 3230671 85,23,811 
Individual Mediclaim    602000 2317090 
Group Mediclaim   589000 539585 
Overseas Mediclaim    57076 
Mediclaim 3122536 2223436   
Jan Arogya 260230 58398 73000 75966 
Bhavishya Arogya   955  
2003-2004 
Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme 
78140 298796 561264 236490 
 
Total  3460905 2580630 1826219 3226207 1,10,93,961 
Individual Mediclaim    626000 2705322 
Group Mediclaim   593000 994460 
Overseas Mediclaim    55890 
Mediclaim 7560666 2864532   
Jan Arogya 171603 101556 70000 67391 
Bhavishya Arogya   1108  
2004-2005 
Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme 
27709 107858 280644 15641 
 
Total  7759978 3073946 1570752 3838704 1,63,43,390 
 
 From the above table, the number  of persons who availed health 
insurance had notably increased from 85, 23, 811 in 2002-2003 to 1, 63, 43, 390 
in 2004-2005.  However, 1. 6 crore insured persons in a population of a billion 
plus people is still a very small number.  Considering the fact that PSU Insurers 

 39
account for 82 percent of the total Heal th Insurance business in the country 
today, and that a large chunk of the hea lth insured are from Corporate Groups 
and urban areas, much remains to be des ired as far as the spread health 
insurance is concerned, especially so in rural areas. 

 40
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
CHALLENGES / BOTTLENECKS 
 
 The Challenges and difficulties bef ore the insurance companies in 
spreading health insurance in the country range from a basic lack of focus to 
technical and infrastructure shortcomings and to certain regulatory deficiencies.  
Some of the important c hallenges brought to the notice of the Committee are 
dealt in detail as follows. 
4.1 LACK OF FOCUS  
4.1.1 The Committee were informed t hat health insurance started at the 
instance of the Government.  Briefing the Committee on the subject, Chairman, 
IRDA stated: 
“Basically we have today a cover which has been started sometimes in 
1986 by the public sector insurance co mpanies at the initiative of the 
Government of India. The Govern ment of India wanted the health 
insurance to be spread in a big way and they directed the general 
insurance companies to go ahead and sell health covers. This health 
cover is for the purpose of providing reimbursement for the hospitalization 
of the insured. So, it started only like that and it continues to be like that.” 
 
4.1.2 The Committee note that health in surance is managed as a part of the 
miscellaneous portfolio by public general insurance companies.  Asked to 
comment on the lack of focus on health insurance, Chairman, IRDA stated during 
evidence: 
“………….As has been pointed out by the hon. Chairman, the general 
insurance companies have been concentrating mostly on fire, engineering, 
and marine. The others are miscellaneous  portfolios.  The miscellaneous 
portfolios include health also in addition to shopkeeper’s liabilities, 
shopkeeper’s insurance, and small fire insurance for households, etc. The 
general approach of the general insurance companies has always been to 
look at these big portfolios because they are the ones t hat are going to 

 41
give them the volumes as far as t he premium is concerned. So, they are 
concentrating not on individuals but on corporate entities for purpose of 
obtaining business.  As a result, the health insurance has not taken off for 
a long time. For the first time, at the instance of the Government of India, 
the general insurance companies star ted the health portfolio in the 
Eighties as a Mediclaim Policy.  The same Mediclaim Policy is continuing 
in some form or the other, so far, with some minor modifications.” 
 
4.1.3 Asked whether there are separate officers looking after health insurance 
or whether it is the gener al staff looking after it, CMD, United India Insurance 
Company Limited stated: 
 “It is general staff.” 
4.1.4 The Committee noted that the lack of focus on health insurance was due 
to the tariff pricing of some general  insurance segments and the absence of 
stand-alone health insurance companies. 
 
a)  Tariff Regime  
4.1.5 The Committee were also informed that tariff pricing of insurance for 
property, fire, motor, Engineering, etc., which make these portfolios profitable 
result in insurance companies focusi ng primarily on these segments to the 
neglect of the less profitable, non-tariff portfolio of health insurance.  Further, 
health insurance ends up being treated as  an accommodation business to grab 
the profitable portfolios. 
4.1.6 The Committee also not ed that IRDA was taking in itiative to replace the 
tariff regime in general insurance.  Asked to enlighten the Committee on the need 
and benefits of de-tarriffing and its implications for the health insurance business, 
Chairman, IRDA during evidence before Committee stated as under:- 

 42
“We have in the general insurance both tariff and non-ta riff.  Health 
insurance comes under non-tariff where t he rates, as also the conditions, 
are prescribed by the insurance companies whereas in the case of fire, 
engineering and motor, the tariff is fi xed by the Tariff Advisory Committee 
which was created under the In surance Act.  That tariff has to be charged 
by all the general insur ance companies. So, when the private insurance 
companies came into existence, their anxiety was to get a major portion of 
this profitable portfolio of fire, engi neering and others.  They started 
concentrating on that particular elemen t.  When they started getting this 
element of portfolio, there were also requests from various entities saying 
now that you are getting a profitable portfo lio from us, what is it that is 
being given in return for the empl oyees of these organizations? They 
started giving health as a group policy more by way of an accommodation 
for purpose of getting a profitable por tfolio.  This is what has been 
expressed by the public sector co mpanies; that the private sector 
insurance companies are trying to obtain the fire policy or engineering 
policy by offering health at a very cheap rate to obtain the profitable 
portfolio.  This is what has been hap pening all along.  T hat is also the 
reason why the insurance companies have been saying that there should 
be de-tarrifing.  This request for de-ta rrifing has come not only from the 
general insurance companies of the Gove rnment of India but also from all 
the general insurance companies on the ground that in a free market, the 
rates will have to be fixed by the insurance companies keeping in view the 
risk profile of that particular company, and we should not have a 
straitjacket method of evaluating the risk for all companies at the same 
rate.  The point that is made is t hat if a company is taking certain 
precautions for preventing a fire from happening, then we should charge a 
lower premium than that of a factor y, which is not taking all those 
precautions.  That is not permitted in  the existing tariff regime.  It also 
leads to certain misuses like the one,  which has been mentioned, of trying 
to provide an accommodation portfolio for the sake of getting a profitable 
one. Keeping these factors in view, the insurance regulatory authority after 
consulting all the stakeholders has in dicated a road map for de-tariffing.  
What de-tariffing involves is that t he insurance companies should develop 
individual skills within their organi zation for assessing the risk and for 
providing a rate for that particular risk.  Today, the rate is determined by 
the Tariff Advisory Committee.  So, any Branch Manager can write a 
policy by looking at the book that is  available to him which has been 
published by the Tariff Advisory Committ ee. If that book is removed, then 
they will have to substitute that book  by their judgment with regard to the 
risk profile of that particu lar company and determine at what rate they will 
be able to underwrite a risk. What the I RDA has said is that we can think 
of a de-tariffing by 31 December 2006 and within this one-year period, the 
insurance companies should set up with in their own organizations a small 
group which is going to develop this expertise with regard to assessing the 
risk profile of these companies.  We hav e also said that this unit, which is 

 43
going to look at the rate part of it, should not be under the control of the 
Manager who is in charge of the business development because the 
business development man is going to look at the volumes and not at the 
risk profile, and it should be ind ependent and answerable to a separate 
entity which is going to directly report to the Managing Director.  This is a 
major exercise.  Whenever we move from tariff to non- tariff, what is likely 
to happen is that the rates are likely to come down in respect of the 
profitable portfolios.  In respect of  other portfolios where the rates are 
lower today, they are likely to go up.   The classic case would be where 
fire, engineering rates are likely to come down.  Their rates are likely to go 
up in the case of third party motor liability. 
 
Therefore, once de-tariffing takes place, what is likely to happen is that we 
are going to have a correct assessm ent with regard to  the amount of 
money that should be charged for various risks including health risks. 
Then, this accommodation for getting a profitable portfolio is likely to 
disappear. Then each risk is going to be evaluated based upon the risk 
profile of the particular company and proper under-writing will take place. 
So, to that extent, what the public sector companies have submitted 
before the august Committee is absolutel y right.  The tariff and non-tariff 
distinction that we have today is leading to distor tions with regard to the 
rating of the risk in respect of cert ain areas. So, when this de-tariffing 
takes place, perhaps some of these distortions will disappear.” 
 
b) Stand-alone Health Insurance Companies. 
4.1.7 Emphasizing the need fo r a stand-alone health insurance company so as 
to have more focus on health insurance, Chairman, LIC, during evidence stated:- 
“What we feel is that a separate stand-alone company for promoting the 
Health Insurance would certainly hel p in giving due focus and increasing 
the coverage, more particularly in t he rural areas.  But this stand-alone 
company, as I have submitted earlier, can be in a joint venture form where 
we may have a partner, a foreign par tner, who has got the expertise, 
experience and data.  They must have the technical expertise to help us to 
price the product properly and to have proper understanding of the whole 
business.” 
 
4.1.8 Asked to comment on the desirability of stand- alone health insurance 
companies to enhance the spread of health in surance in the country, the Ministry 
of Finance in a written note submitted: - 
 “Stand-alone Health Insurance Co mpany may be able to approach the 
issue in a better manner since the organizational structure of such a 

 44
company can be tailor made to suit the requirements of micro-health 
insurance needs of the low income population. The structure of the health 
insurance companies with low capital needs, suitable regulations by IRDA, 
appropriate subsidy, support from the Government, State Governments, 
and various implementing agencies in  creation of stand-alone Health 
Insurance Companies needs to be worked out to the satisfaction of all.” 
 
4.1.9 In reply to the same, the IRDA in  their note to the Committee commented:- 
 
“World over, 80% of health insurance is transacted by stand-alone health 
insurers and the rest by life insurers .  It is only in India that health 
insurance products are being sold by th e non-life insurers.  Life insurers 
only offer health covers by way of riders to a few life products.  In India, 
there is a dearth of experti se in the field of health insurance.  The current 
insurers do not look beyond administering a few standard policies which 
were initiated a while ago and have not bu ilt any expertise in this area.  In 
the existing scenario of a requirement of a minimum paid up capital of Rs. 
100 Crores, no company has come fo rward as a stand-alone health 
insurer.  Non-life and life companies  have other segments as their core 
business and given the profile of Health Insurance in India – absence of 
critical mass, high claims outgo, i nadequate pricing and lack of standards 
on the part of the service providers,  unless there is a reduction in the 
minimum capital requirement and an in crease in FDI, there might not be 
any takers.  It is important to attrac t foreign companies to this segment, as 
they will bring in the expertise, which is lacking in our country. 
 
On its part, the IRDA has taken several initiatives in Health Insurance.  
The National Working Group on Health  Insurance was formed under the 
chairmanship of the Chairman, I RDA.  Based on its recommendations, 
three sub-committees- for creation of  a data repository for health 
insurance, looking into regulatory aspects for regi stration of stand-alone 
health insurers and bringing about in novations in Health Insurance 
Products respectively were formed.  The reports of these committees are 
being finalized shortly for submissi on to the National  Working Group on 
Health Insurance, which will t hen make recommendations to the 
Government.  It is also crucial that health care providers are regulated to 
bring about standards in health care delivery. 
 
With Government and legislative support, we should be able to provide an 
enabling environment for stand-alone hea lth insurers and make health 
insurance as a financing model for health care viable.” 
 

 45
4.1.10 The Committee noted that Ministry  of Finance, IRDA and some of the 
public sector companies were in favour  of setting up of a stand-alone health 
insurance company to deal with health insurance business.   
 
4.1.11 Emphasizing that present regulations permit stand-alone health insurance 
companies and that the a rrangement is successful in foreign countries, the 
Oriental Insurance Company in their written note stated as under : - 
“IRDA Regulations permit registration of a company to deal exclusively 
with health insurance. Internationa lly, there have been companies dealing 
only with health insurance portfo lio and this has been successful. 
Traditionally, the four Public Sect or Insurers have been offering all 
varieties of general insurance covers  along with health insurance covers. 
Even as of now, the insurers have di fferential schemes to cater to the 
needs of various segments of the soci ety and also to suit their premium 
paying capacity. Unlike in international  practice, premium rates are same 
for men and women. T he policies have adequate co verage for the young 
and the old, the rich and the poor.  But stand-alone Health Insurance 
Company can have same focus to address the issue.” 
 
4.1.12 Commenting on the f easibility aspect of stand-alone health insurers, 
United India Insurance Company dwelt on the potential benefits while expressing 
their concerns on its possible impact on  the cost of health insurance. The 
Company in their written note stated : - 
“Stand-alone Health insurance co mpanies once permitted to operate 
would be concentrating only on Health insurance and they could find 
various ways and means with the various authorities both in Government 
and other major sectors (NGOs and Se lf-Help groups) to spread the 
health insurance scheme. This stand- alone Health insurance companies 
would definitely benefit the spread am ongst the public. We are not sure 
whether the cost of health insurance would be at the present level.” 
 
4.1.13 Commenting on the issue, the National Insur ance Company opined that 
such a company purely devoted to selling health covers would definitely give 

 46
more focus but expressed the need for r egulatory adjustments.  The Company in 
their note stated as under : - 
“Health insurance is turning out to be the fast growing s egment in non-life 
insurance industry with an average growth  of 40% per annum in last three 
years. There is a huge potential. However, the reason for non-proliferation 
of a pure health insurance company in India is du e to regulatory issues. 
The fact remains that a major portion of health insurance is underwritten 
by government owned insurers. Government owned companies have 
been interested all these years in traditional business like Fire, Motor,  
Marine etc. Health on a stand-alone business has never been tested out 
to be profitable. Clearly  the cross subsidy of non-health products is the 
one that is sustaining the interest of the insurer to even market the health 
insurance. Hence, the first regulator y change that should be attempted to 
usher in pure health insurance company  is to formulate guidelines for 
stand-alone health insurance companies.  
 
A pure health insurance can definitely devote more resources for selling of 
health products, which is now nearly non- existent. The current practice of 
health being “bought” and not “sold” is a trend that definitely needs to be 
reversed immediately.” 
 
4.1.14 Sharing similar views, and sug gesting a tie-up between the four public 
sector general insurers on the one h and and the proposed stand-alone health 
insurer on the other in view of the infras tructure limitations such a company will 
face, CMD, New India Assurance Company Ltd. during his evidence before the 
Committee stated as under: - 
“I am in agreement with Shri Shukla that we could examine the aspect of 
having a company for just health insur ance. However, the modalities have 
to be worked out so that we are able to cover the length and breadth of 
the country.  
 
Basically, most of the time, we are l ooking at the health policies to be sold 
to the weaker sections. We have to decide about what channel of 
distribution is to be used, how do we go about it if we go for a single unit 
company patronizing only health insu rance. We have to consider the 
aspect how to reach the nook and corner of the country. We, the four 
public sector insurance companies in the general insurance, have roughly 
4000 officers. But the stand-alone company will take time to have so many 
offices. But we can have a tie up where we can sell the product.” 

 47
 
4.1.15 Emphasizing the view that stand-alone health insurance companies would 
help the promotion of health insurance, especially in rural areas, CMD Oriental 
Insurance Company Ltd. stated before the Committee:- 
“World-over, health is being sold by individual companies which specialize 
in health insurance. I also support the view of my colleagues that the 
stand-alone health insuranc e company will definitel y help in reaching the 
insurance policies to the rural areas, which is a major concern. The policy 
is being sold in the cities.” 
 
4.1.16 Asked to explain as to why the publ ic insurance companies were favoring 
the idea of stand-alone health insurers , and whether that amounted to an 
abdication of responsibility on their part, CMD, United India Insurance Company 
Ltd. stated as under :- 
“When we said that stand-alone health insurance company will be opened 
and all that, we did not mean that we want to abdicate our  responsibility. 
We will be there in this business becaus e we see that there is a potential 
for us. It is not only a social responsibility. Apart from that, it is a good 
business proposition also. We only see growth in these areas now. We will 
expand the health insurance concept. When we were saying that stand-
alone health insurance company can be th ere, it has to be in competition 
or we can open our own stand-alone health insurance company also so as 
to reap the benefit of spec ialization, professionalism and also inter-branch 
move-ability of the staff, which in the pr esent system is very difficult to do. 
Then, we can move people from here to another area and all that. So, we 
will concentrate upon health insurance sector to further promote and to 
further bring professionalism, but certainl y it is our priority area. That is 
why, we were raising objection even to  LIC entering into  health insurance 
and saying why LIC should enter wh en we are there. We are not 
abdicating our responsibility.” 
 
4.1.17 On the viability of  a stand-alone health insurance company, United India 
Insurance Company in their written note stated as under:- 
 “Under a tariff regime for Fire and ot her profitable business, the fortunes of 
stand-alone health insurance Company may not be that bright.  However, 
if tariffs goes, then all classes of insurance will be priced rationally and 
may pave way for proper pr icing in health insur ance products also, which 

 48
may be good for viability of stand-al one health insurance company as well 
as existing insurance companies.          
 
The other advantage of stand-alone insurance company will be its focused 
approach from marketing to servicing.   Since they wi ll be dependent only 
on this business, they have to innovate fast to make the product 
successful and profitable.” 
 
4.1.18 Asked to furnish the status report  on the various sub- groups of IRDA’s 
Internal Working Group on health insuranc e, the IRDA in their a written note 
informed the Committee as under:- 
 “The Committee was formed with the objec tive of identifying the existing 
problems in the health insurance industry and to make recommendations 
to enable and encourage a large number of compani es to participate in 
the growth of insurance in health financing thereby increasing health 
penetration in the country and to create a conducive environment for 
these companies to operate on a l ong-term basis covering a larger 
number of beneficiaries with appropriate products and services. 
 
 The Committee finalized its repor t covering the areas of Minimum 
Capital Requirement, Risk Based C apital Model as an alternative, 
Foreign Direct Investment, Healthcare  provider related reforms, Health 
Insurance regulations and related issues. 
 
(1) The Committee recommended a Mi nimum Capital Requirement of 
Rs. 50 crores for a stand-alone health insurance company.  The 
Committee felt that this would not only render stand-alone health 
insurance viable, it will also pr ovide sufficient entry hurdle for non-
serious players to enter into the sector.  Of cour se, evaluation of 
financial soundness and ma rket reputation of the promoters would 
be equally important factors for consideration of a licence. 
 
(2) The Committee also reco mmended adoption of a Risk Based 
Capital Model for stand-alone Health Insurance companies.  
 
(3) There was also a recommendation that stand-alone health insurers 
be allowed to write Personal A ccident covers as combined and 
add-on covers.  Similarly, the Committee felt that stand-alone 
health insurance companies should also be permitted to sell 
overseas travel policies, sinc e these cover the eventuality of 
sickness and accident while on overseas travel. 
(4) The Committee recommended that  the level of foreign direct 
investment in stand-alone health insurance ventures be permitted 

 49
upto 51%.  This, the Committee fe lt was required in order to 
develop the domestic health insurance market and to provide it 
depth by introduction of newer products, contemporary underwriting 
practices, claims management techniques etc. 
 
(5) The Committee recommended continuat ion of the existing practice 
of health insurance being written both by life and non life insurance 
companies.  In addition to the cu rrent practice, it has suggested 
legislative changes to allow licensing of stand-alone health  
insurance companies. 
 
(6) The Committee also recomm ended that agents of both life and 
general insurance companies should be allowed to take agency of 
stand-alone Health Insurance Companies. 
 
 The Working Group has also decided to  set up a separate ‘Rural Health’ 
subgroup.  The purpose of t he subgroup is to increase the 
understanding of the barrier s to providing health insurance to the rural 
poor and create a roadmap for over coming the barriers and promoting 
and expanding private health insuranc e in the rural areas with public 
efforts.” 
 
4.2 LACK OF CO-ORDINATION 
 
4.2.1 From the note furnished by  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare .  
Committee note that the subject of H ealth Insurance is handled by many 
Ministries / Departments/ Public Sect or Corporations and Private Sector 
companies.  The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MOHFW) looks after the 
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS), which was started in 1954.  The 
Ministry of Labour looks after the Employ ees State Insurance Scheme started in 
1948.  The Ministry of Finance looks af ter the Universal Health Insurance 
Scheme, which was launched in 2003. 
4.2.2 Asked whether the public sect or companies co-ordinate amongst 
themselves, CMD of NIC, stated: 

 50
“………yes; we coordinate among ourselves in all matters of interest, in all 
other matters. We definitely coordinate among ourselves. There is a body. 
 
We have a body called GIPSA – Gener al Insurance Public Sector 
Association where we discuss this matter.” 
 
4.2.3 However, on coordination,  Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
stated as under:- 
“………we are operating in a very com partmentalized manner.  Instead of 
collaborating and c ooperating with each other quickly to deliver products, 
we seem to be in our cocoon.” 
 
 
4.3 LACK OF DATA  
 
4.3.1 The Committee noted that the la ck of vital data on morbidity across-
demographic groups is coming in the way of insurers in formulating health 
schemes and in determining premium as per industry specific requirements.  
4.3.2. Explaining the reas ons as to why the company ’s various health covers 
could not be successfully promoted, Chairm an of Life Insurance Corporation of 
India, stated: - 
“The real reason was that we did not  have sufficient data to design the 
product, and price the same.” 
 
4.3.3 Reinforcing the above statement, CM D of National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
during evidence stated as under:- 
“Regarding premium calculat ion, I echo the views of  Shri Shukla that we 
have not been able to eval uate, either from our sources or from outside 
agencies, the morbidity or other ratios or the actual premium.” 
 
4.3.4 Asked to comment on the availability of essential data on morbidity, 
diseases and demographic groups, the Unit ed India Insurance Co. Ltd. in their 
written reply stated: 

 51
“It is a fact that there is not enou gh data on mortality and morbidity in our 
country. However, this does not affe ct the popularity of  health insurance 
as the insurers arrive at the premium and the coverage on the basis of the 
past loss experience and the average co sts of treatment for various 
illnesses. The insurers would certainl y be more equipped if data is made 
available for more scientific and actuarial basis of premium and sum 
insured and the diseases covered.  
 
The presence of data would enable the insurers to bring out new products 
on health insurance for major diseases/commonly affecting diseases for 
the common public including the rural poor.” 
 
4.3.5 While briefing the Committee on the need and steps taken for collection  
of data, Chairman, IRDA stated as under  - 
“But the basic requirement is the collection of data on which we have 
already started the work.  We have started collecting data with regard to 
not only the claims and premium but also the kind of diseases for which 
the payments have been made, and the age group at which people are 
getting affected, and then the claim amount for different hospitals.  So, this 
information is being collected.  Unless this information flows, no insurance 
company will be willing to take up th is work because insurance business, 
like any other business, is to be a profitable busines s if it is to be run on 
commercial lines.  Otherwise, the Government should subsidize.  So, 
these are the two alternatives that are available.” 
 
4.3.6 In a subsequent note furnished by t he Ministry of Finance the  Committee 
were informed as under: - 
“With a view to promoting and dev eloping Health Insurance in the 
country, the IRDA constituted a Wo rking Group on Health Insurance in 
September, 2003. The group comprises of representatives drawn from 
the IRDA, the Government and vari ous stakeholders of the health 
insurance industry. Chairman, IRDA is Chairman of the working group.  
 
Recognizing that a data bank on H ealth Insurance is the need of the 
hour, the Working Group first formed a Sub-group to examine issues 
related to data collection and pooling of information available with the 
Third Party Administrators and Insurers. The data sub-group’s task was 
to decide on how the ex isting data would be co llected, finalize data 
elements for collection of futu re data that would enable product 
development supported by actuarial rating and decide on who would be 
the custodian of the data repository as well as carry out its analysis. 
 

 52
The Data Sub Group proposed a plan fo r collection of existing data and 
recommended the data elements and st ructure for future data. It 
recommended that the Tariff Advisory Committee be the custodian of 
the data repository. The Data Sub Group also recommended the setting 
up of three committees to examine the following issues:  
 
(1) Implementation of the re commendations of the Health 
Insurance Data Sub Group on Health Insurance data. 
 
(2) Product innovations in health insurance and definition of 
‘pre-existing disease’. 
 
(3) Regulatory issues pertaini ng to registration of Stand-alone 
Health Insurance Companies. 
 
Accordingly, IRDA constituted three committees, to look into and make 
specific recommendations on the three areas.  
 
I. Sub-committee for Health Insurance data: 
 
The committee was formed with the objective of drawing up a road map 
for establishing a data repository under  the custodianship of the Tariff 
Advisory Committee and evaluating the adequacy of data elements 
already finalized and recommend standar d data elements in respect of 
health insurance proposals and claims. They included 
 
(a) Sharing of currently available data in specific formats 
(b) Introduction of standard data el ements for insurance proposals and 
claims from a future date. 
 
Briefly, the following recommendations were made by the committee:  
 
1. Formats for collecting existing data as recommended by the 
sub-committee to be adopted fo r the years 2003/04, 2004/05 
and 2005/06. 
2. The existing data would be coll ected from the TPAs first within a 
specified time schedule. 
3. Training of personnel from the TPAs, Insurers and TAC for 
using ICD classification with th e help of the Government of 
India. 
4. The committee recommended that the Tariff Advisory 
Committee publish aggregate information regarding claims.  
 
Data for the years 2003/04 and 2004/05 has been received from the 
Third Party Administrators and are under verification. 
 

 53
The IRDA, with the help of the Central Bureau of Health under the 
Ministry of Health has already  commenced the training of TPA 
personnel on ICD 10 coding.” 
 
4.4 LACK OF AWARENESS  
4.4.1 The Committee noted that one main hindrance to the successful 
promotion of various health covers by t he insurers, was the lack of awareness 
about the need, availability  and benefits of health insurance amongst a large 
majority of our population. Outlining t he major problems being faced in the 
implementation of health insurance schemes, the Oriental Insurance Company 
Ltd., in their written reply stated:- 
“The concept of Health Insurance is st ill not very clear to the prospective 
clients.  Some of them believe that  once the premium is paid, all their 
health care is taken care of. Others believe that health insurance cover 
can be availed once they are diag nosed for some serious medical 
treatment. Most of them  are unable to comprehend pre-existing diseases 
and feel that the once the policy is bought it should be ‘all risk’ cover.  This 
misunderstanding often creates problems at the time of settlement of 
claims. Hence wrong messages are spr ead that health insurances do not 
really help those in need and therefore discour ages people from buying 
the policy. 
 
Many times people who are already su ffering from some ailments take the 
policy without disclosing material fact s to derive benefit from the policy 
which at times is prevented by vigi lant action of the claim processing 
authorities.” 
 
4.4.2 Echoing the above view, the CMD of United India Insurance Co. Ltd. 
stated in evidence before the Committee as under :- 
“As I said earlier, firstly, there is  no awareness.  Even if awareness is 
there, there is no paying capacity or the people feel t hat they are still 
healthy and nothing is going to happen to them.  So, with that type of 
attitude in mind, they are not coming forward.”   
 

 54
4.4.3 Responding to the issue of lack  of awareness about h ealth insurance and 
steps being taken by Government in this regard a representativ e of the Ministry 
of Finance stated: 
“Sir, as regards awareness creation through Government agencies, the 
hon. Finance Minister himself had written to all the Chief Ministers and the 
Secretary (Financial sector) had written to all the Chief Secretaries of the 
States to solicit their cooperation because medical, at the State level is 
under their control.  But somehow, we could not get the kind of response, 
which we had anticipated.” 
 
4.5 POVERTY AND NEED FOR SUBSIDY   
 
4.5.1  Lack of premium paying capacity amongst a sizable number of our 
population was cited as another  reason coming in the way of implementation of 
health insurance schemes in the country.  In this regard CMD of United India 
Insurance Co. Ltd. during the oral evidence before the Committee stated:- 
“However, paying capacity problem also exists.  When people living below 
the poverty line are getting Rs. 1200 or Rs. 1500 only, how can they 
contribute even Rs. 15 or Rs. 20?  They cannot spare money for health 
insurance.  They also have alte rnative channels for treatment like 
Government hospitals or primary heal th centres.  For major diseases, 
generally, they do not go anywhere.  They leave it to the God, or to some 
quacks who are in the villages, as they cannot afford this.” 
 
4.5.2 The Committee noted that all t he public insurers emphasized on  the 
necessity of subsidizing premium for the poor and those living below the poverty 
line in order to extend health insurance cove r to those segments.  In this regard, 
Chairman, Life Insurance Corporation of India stated during the oral evidence; 
“As far as giving cover to the people,  especially the poor and those who 
are living Below Poverty Line, is  concerned, a subsidy from the 
Government would be a must.” 
 
4.5.3 On the above issue,  CMD, New India Assuranc e Company Ltd. stated 
during evidence: - 

 55
 “We do have policies where the prem ium range starts from 50 paise per 
day to Rs.20/- per day. For the urban population of the tax-paying 
employees, there is deducti on in the income tax under Section 80D. We 
have, from time to time, even intr oduced policies with the help of the 
Government where there is a subsidy paid by the Government of India for 
the weaker sections.” 
 
4.5.4 In reply to a question  on the extent of subsidy provided under the various 
health insurance schemes, the National, In surance Company in their note stated 
thus: 
“Subsidy is provided by Govt. of Indi a only for Universal Health Insurance 
Scheme which is meant for BPL families only. Under this scheme the 
subsidy of Rs.200/- is provided for I ndividual, Rs.300/- is provided for a 
family of 2-5 members and Rs.400/- is provided for a family containing up 
to 7 members including parents of the insured. There is no other subsidy 
received from the government.” 
 
4.5.5 Replying to a question on the su stainability of subsidy for the poor, 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. in their written reply stated: 
“Considering the economic situation of  the majority of  rural and poorer 
sections of the society, subsidization of premium is  inevitable as of now. 
However, progressively subsidization has to be reduced and later 
eliminated. In the place of subsidizing the premium, Government can work 
for enhancing the income levels of the rural poor to such level where 
premium payment is not felt as a burden by them .  At present, the BPL 
families are unable to bear the burden of  this expense and hence, subsidy 
is essential.” 
 
4.5.6 Submitting that subsidy of prem ium, though vital to spread health 
insurance amongst the poor, needed to be supported by micro-insurance and 
Self-help Group involvement, United India Insurance Company, in their written 
reply contended: 
‘Subsidizing premium for the poor to  a large extent is one way of 
encouraging the poor to ta ke up insurance as well  as contribute towards 
their health care. However, paying up insurance premium may not be a 
priority for the poor. Even where the public have the capacity to pay the 
premium, the collection of premium by the Insurance companies would be 

 56
a difficult task with the available infr astructure. Further unless the people 
are given a cashless facility, the confidence of the public cannot be gained 
and hence, the insurance penetration could be improved only through self-
help groups, micro-insurance concept. 
 
However, the subsidy would be high if it  covers all the Below Poverty Line 
people. The fund can be created by  way of contribution from 
Government/Hospital and other Instit utions so that the premium and 
liability can be matched.” 
 
4.5.7 Echoing similar views and suggest ing corporate involvement, New India 
Assurance Co. Ltd. in their written reply stated: 
“The poor section of the society neither has awareness nor the capacity to 
pay the premium even if the Govern ment subsidizes some portion of 
premium. Thus, there is a need to have schemes for these sections with 
participation of NGOs, SHGs, voluntar y organizations & the Government. 
They can collaborate for creating aw areness & implementing schemes for 
rural areas depending on specific need of each area. To begin with some 
corporate houses & charitable institutions may also adopt the areas.” 
 
4.6 LACK OF PROPER REGULATIONS IN HEALTH SECTOR 
 
4.6.1 Regulatory shortcomings relating to  the health sector in India is another 
major hindrance to a healthy growth of health insurance in the country as is 
reflected in the views expressed by t he IRDA and the public insurers.  The 
Committee noted that there ar e basically three aspects for regulation of health 
sector.  One, there is a need to make  it mandatory for all health service 
providers, hospitals, nursing homes, etc., to obtain registration.  Secondly, a 
standard treatment protocol nee ds to be evolved for various illnesses.   Third, a 
uniform pricing needs to be established fo r various treatments.  Delving into 
these aspects, CMD, of United India Insurance Co. Ltd. during his evidence 
stated:
 
“…………., a regulator in the health serv ices sector is required.  At 
present, there is no standardization or gradation of the hospitals for the 

 57
fees, which they are charging, or the treatment, which they are giving.  All 
types of nursing homes are opening ev erywhere.  There is nothing, which 
can be called ‘standardized’.  We have witnessed that in cities they charge 
exorbitant prices as compared to towns and small Government hospitals.  
If an operation for appendix can be per formed in a private or a trust 
hospital in Rs. 15,000, generally Private hospitals will charge Rs. 1 lakh or 
even more.  So, that tendency will have to be curbed.   Some regulator 
has to be there to take care of the health sector.  Then, I think, there will 
be a healthy growth of the health insurance.”  
 
4.6.2  Giving their views on  lack of proper regulations in the health sector and 
how far it was hindering the promotion of  health insurance in India, Oriental 
Insurance Co. Ltd. in their written reply stated: 
 “ Yes, stringent norms should be  prescribed for opening and operating 
hospital and some uniformity should be maintained in the fee structure for 
standard treatments. Registration, accreditation and rating of the hospitals 
should be made mandatory. Hospitals should be encouraged to come out 
with published charges for various services that they offer. Improvement in 
healthcare facilities goes hand in  hand with improvements in health 
insurance sector.” 
 
4.6.3 Asked to comment on the need for stringent regulations in the health 
sector, Secretary, Department  of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
stated during evidence: 
“We also realise that we have a role  to supplement the effort of the 
regulatory authority and the Departm ent of Insurance in shape of 
accreditation process, costing and such  other complex activities which will 
help in a more transparent and mark et driven yet equitable insurance 
product.  We will be in touch with them  and under their gu idance we will 
assist them.  These are all the new activities and we should be prepared 
for it.” 
 
4.7 LACK OF HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE 
4.7.1 Lack of adequate hospit als and other health care fa cilities is yet another 
commonly cited difficulty being faced by the insurance companies in spreading 

 58
health insurance covers. Analysing the problem the CMD of Oriental Insurance 
Co. Ltd. stated in his evidence as under : 
“I feel that the major area of conc ern seems to be the lack of health 
infrastructure in the rural and semi -urban areas. That problem has to be 
addressed so that people have facilities to go to the hospitals for 
treatment. Once the facilities are t here, then, perhaps, sales can pick up. 
Otherwise, a person in a village has to go a long distance to have 
treatment for major illness. That is the key area, according to me.” 
 
4.7.2 To a question as to whether inadequate availability of health care 
infrastructure in the country, as al so health personnel, was hindering the 
promotion of health insurance in the coun try, New India Assurance Co. Ltd. in 
their written reply stated: 
“Yes, While more than 75% population resides in rural areas the 
expenditure in rural areas is only 25%  of total healthcare expenditure. 
Thus there is gross inadequacy of healthcare  infrastructure in rural areas.   
Although there is gro wing awareness about health insurance in urban 
areas, which is evident from, the growth of business in the last 3 years but 
the lack of healthcare infrastructure in rural areas is bound to hinder 
promotion of Health insurance.  Moreover poor quality & inadequate 
healthcare services of Government facilities compel the masses to go to 
private healthcare providers, which is a costly affair.” 
 
4.7.3 While briefing the Committee on wh y numerous initiatives taken by the 
Government have failed to bring about ade quate health insurance cover to the 
poor, Chairman, IRDA, stated: 
“One of the primary reasons, according to me, is the lack of service 
providers.  If we go to the village and try to sell a health insurance policy 
even at Rs. 100 or Rs. 150 to the poor person, the question that he is 
going to ask is: “When I fall ill, where do I go?  And, who is going to look 
after me?” What is happening is that we are taking away this premium, 
and when the claim comes, the claim is settled but the money does not go 
to the hospitals that has provided this  facility.  If it is a Government 
hospital, it goes to the Government.  On the other hand, if this money is 
given back to the primary health cent re or the Taluk hospital where a 
person is treated, this money goes into a pool. The advantage is, that pool 
of money would be available for the doc tors there to provide treatment to 

 59
those people who come wit h the health policies. Ot herwise today, what is 
happening is that even if I have a health  policy, if I am a poor man and I 
go to the hospital, the doctor may be wi lling to treat me, but he does not 
have the wherewithal; he does not  have medicines; he does not have 
disposable if he wants to do an operation. So, he wo uld simply say: “ I am 
available to provide the service, go and get the following from the nearest 
medical shop……….”. 
 
4.7.4 Giving suggestions to address to this problem, Chairman, IRDA further 
stated :- 
“…….My suggestion is that that amount  that is paid by the insurance 
company should go to a pool in that  particular hospital, and they can 
create a pool of this money.  That  pool should be used for treating people 
who are coming like this.  Then people will be encouraged to purchase 
even at Rs. 165.  Other wise, how would he pay Rs. 165? He would still 
have to pay for medicines and disposable.   So, that is my suggestion.” 
 
 
4.8 LACK OF PRODUCT VARIETY  
4.8.1 One of the concerns of the Committee have been on the lack of variety of 
health covers to meet specific requirement s of various strata of population such 
as the aged, youth, people with pre-exis ting diseases and for conditions which 
need no hospitalization, et c.  Commenting on the lack of variety of health 
insurance products, Secretary, Ministry of Health & Fam ily Welfare stated during 
evidence: 
“Sir, to be honest, the Health Ministry feels the need for variety of health 
insurance products, …………………It is because out of the total health 
expenditure in the count ry, only 5 per cent is through Central Budget and 
15 per cent is through St ate Budgets.  So, 80 per  cent being through out-
of-pocket expenditure including insu rance premium, which is only about 
1.5 per cent of the total out-of-pocket expenditure, we feel that instead of 
making people spend money under dure ss and in time of distress, people 
should be encouraged to have insuranc e products for saving for health 
needs.  Now, it is all easy to say but we  also note that there is growth but 
the growth is uneven.  We are more interested initially for such products 
as community insurance.  In other words, such products, which are not for 
the high-end clients, ar e meant for super-specialty hospitals only.  The 
universal insurance raised  hopes but now it is rest ricted to BPL category.  

 60
The BPL category is a very narrow category.  I think the lower middle 
class and the near-BPL band poor ar e equally distressed and we have to 
find some mechanism.  Then, the questi on of certifying that near-BPL is 
itself a gigantic task.  In some ur ban areas, the BPL categorization is also 
not complete so those difficulties come up.  We would urge the universal 
insurance scheme to be opened up for any citize n who wants to come 
forward.  The subsidy could be re stricted to BPL category but the 
insurance product should be available fo r a common man.  We feel that, 
the universal insurance scheme is being propagated in different States 
through different departments.  We w ould urge that in every State the 
Health Department should be given t he task to propagate the universal 
insurance scheme.  It is because t he Health Department is the biggest 
stakeholder in the Rural Health Insurance Scheme and the Universal 
Health Insurance Scheme is such a product.” 
 
4.8.2 Commenting on hindrances to promotion of health insurance in India, 
ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd.  in a note furnished to the Committee 
stated as under:- 
“As present the market does not offer much choice.  Going ahead, greater 
customization would be required to ca ter to the various age / economic 
segments of the society to ensure greater demand.” 
 
a). Schemes for the poor 
 
4.8.3 To a question on whether each public sector insu rance company has 
health insurance schemes for the poor and  the marginalized, the four national 
general insurers stated as follows: - 
National Insurance 
Company  Ltd. 
Our Company is presently marketing three health insurance 
schemes where the target groups are the poor and marginalized.  
They are Jan Arogya Bima, Universal Health Insurance Scheme 
and Swathya Bima Policy. 
New India Assurance 
Co. Ltd. 
Yes, we have two schemes namely Swasthya Bima Policy and 
Jan Arogya Bima Policy. 
United India Insurance 
Co. Ltd. 
There is a scheme for the poor and the marginalized viz. 
Swasthya Bima Policy and Jan Arogya 
Oriental Insurance Co. 
Ltd. 
We have the Jan Arogya Bima, Universal Health and Swasthya 
Bima Yojna schemes where the premium is sizably lower 
 
 
 
 

 61
b). Schemes for the aged 
 
4.8.4 Asked to brief the Committee on w hether an appropriate health insurance 
model for senior citizens in the c ountry had been identified, the Chairman of 
IRDA stated: 
 “Sir, today, under the Mediclaim product, we have covered up to the age 
of 80. So, the senior citizens, in a wa y, are covered up to the age of 80, 
depending upon whether they are having any pre-existing illness. If a 
person is continuously having an insu rance cover, then he is in no way 
affected by any disease that he may contract during the course of the 
insurance period, when he is covered by insurance. Courts have also said 
that insurance companies cannot re fuse cover for next year for any 
disease.” 
 
4.8.5 On being prodded furt her to state whether efforts had been made to 
identify or formulate a compulsory health coverage scheme for the senior citizens 
in the fifty years since independence, the Chairman, IRDA stated: - 
“This issue came up for discussion in one of our sub-groups. It is an issue, 
which has been discussed in one of  the sub-committees that we 
constituted under the Working Group. The suggestion made by the 
Working Group, at that time, was t hat we should try to have a common 
pool for senior citizens and then th is pool should be supported by the 
Government because the insurance companies, which are also motivated 
substantially by commercial consider ations, will not be able to sustain a 
policy for senior citizens on their own strength. What was suggested was 
to explore the possibility of having so me kind of an understanding with the 
Government and create a separate pool for senior citizens, and whatever 
is the premium that is collected from t he senior citizens will go into this 
pool. If the expenses are in excess of t he amount that is already there in 
the pool, there should be a system of getting the reimbursement from the 
Government. This is what one of our sub-committees has already 
recommended. We are examining this aspect with regard to the senior 
citizens.” 
 
4.8.6 On whether the practice of bringing senior citizens under compulsory 
health insurance coverage, as prevalent in some developed and developing 

 62
countries, is an agreeable and feasible model for India, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Health stated: - 
“I have a very respectful submission. I am on the threshold of old age. So, 
my submission may not be taken as an impertinence of a young person. I 
am aware old age is al ready there and waiting r ound the corner for me. 
With utmost respect, I am speak ing from my heart and not as a 
bureaucrat; I wish to say that the mother and child of this country, we are 
not yet able to give the assurance of a safe institutional delivery. In States 
like Uttar Pradesh, 700 mothers per one- lakh childbirths are dying. In 
Japan, it is somewhere around 4. In this context, I should not be taken out 
of context, this promise of modern al lopathic system of an endless perfect 
life notwithstanding age is leading to  disproportionat e channeling of 
resources for geriatric care, that t oo for a high end hospitalization care, 
without any proportionate benefit to the quality of life.  Even in USA, etc., a 
citizen writes that, when he is still in  command of his faculties, sometimes, 
no hospital can take up heroic care and cause him impoverishment. There 
are a lot of complicated issues, and if I go on narrating them, I would 
sound unsympathetic to the senior citizens. I would submit very 
respectfully that there are unreserv ed equity issues in many lower age 
groups and metropolitan hospitals have created a myth that………..” 
 
4.8.7 Explaining the difficulty in brin ging about a health insurance scheme for 
senior citizens and highl ighting the alternative a rrangements in place, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Health further stated: - 
“I was only saying that most of the insurers are still market-driven and they 
will not come forward for such a spec ial scheme. The only insurance still 
available is public health infrastruc ture. My Minister has asked me to 
create special packages and facilities for senior citizens. That is also a 
way of insurance. If you are thinki ng of a private insurance package for 
senior citizens - my saying yes or no has no meaning but I am only saying 
this out of utmost respect - factually it will not happen now.” 
 
4.8.8 Taking note of the fact that most health covers offered by the public sector 
insurers provide standard coverage for the age group of 5 years to 80 years, and 
renewal of policies after 80 years are subjected to certain conditionalities, the 
Committee sought clarifications in this r egard from the public insurers. In their 
written replies, they stated as follows: - 

 63
NICL For persons above 80 years of age premium is loaded as under. Up to 85 years-15% 
and Over 85 years-25% 
NIACL In case of continuous renewal the premium is not loaded & policy is renewed beyond 
80 years at the same rate, terms & conditions. 
UIICL There is generally loading on the pr emium solely on account of the age of the 
person. The claims experience also is ta ken into consideration when premium is 
loaded. The loading ranges from 10% to 100% depending on the claims experience. 
However, as mentioned earlier there is likely to be a restriction of Sum insured. 
OICL None as there is a slab system and per sons from the age of 76 years onwards pay 
the same premium. However, in case of  adverse claims history, premiums are 
loaded appropriately. 
 
c). Health cover for women and children 
4.8.9 Asked to state what policies exis t for women and children under health 
insurance, United India Insurance Co. Ltd. in their written reply stated :- 
“There are two schemes/package polic ies that cover the women and 
children. They are: 
 
¾ Uni Micro-health insurance scheme- This scheme is offered 
as a package policy to the Women in self-help groups operating 
mainly in rural areas. The covers offered are Personal Accident 
for Rs 15,000/- and Hospitalization cover for RS 5,000/-. The 
insured woman has the option of choosing to cover her spouse 
and two children under the hospitalization scheme. The amount 
of RS 5000/- is floated among t he family members on payment 
of additional premium. 
 
¾ Mother Teresa Women and Children policy-  T h i s  i s  a l s o  a  
package policy offered to Women and children either of self-
help groups or individuals. Th e policy offers three covers- 
Personal Accident, Personal Acci dent Cover for the children 
and also Hospitalization cover (Rs 5000/-) for the woman. The 
amount of RS 5000/- is floated among the family members on 
payment of additional premium. 
 
In the above category, few policies have been sold through 
Self-Help Groups.” 
 
 The three other insurance companies stated to the effect that 
women and children are covered under all existing schemes. 
 
d). Maternity and Out-patient cover 
4.8.10 To a question as to whether exis ting health policies offer covers for 
maternity and out-patient care and the reasons if such covers were not available, 

 64
the replies of the four public insurance companies were largely similar and are 
substantially reflected in the written r eply furnished by the New India Assurance 
Company Ltd. which stated:- 
“Maternity benefit is covered only under group policies on payment of 10% 
premium loading for the gr oup. Out patient care is not covered under any 
of our existing health policies. The main reasons for not covering these 
benefits are lack of data for calculati ng actuarial premium & difficulty in 
checking fictitious & inflated bills. The total expenditure on outpatient 
treatment is too high & c hances of mal-practices are also more. Moreover 
inclusion of these benefits would make the covers expensive & 
unaffordable for public at large. Pres ently there is no plan to introduce 
such scheme with above benefits.” 
 
e). Major diseases covers 
4.8.11 In order to assess the availability of insurance schemes covering major 
diseases, all the four public sector gener al insurance companies were asked to 
furnish details. Except for Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., which so far does not float 
any specific schemes for major diseas es, the other three companies have one 
such scheme each. National Insurance Co. Ltd. has a Critical  Illness Insurance 
Policy, New India Assurance Co. Ltd. has  Tertiary Care Insurance Policy while 
United India Insurance Co. Lt d. has Trauma Care Policy. (as per details given in 
Annexures  VII,  VIII  &  X  respectively). 
4.8.12 On the question of making such schemes affordable to the poor and 
whether there was any proposal to intr oduce such schemes for the poor, the 
National Insurance Company in its written reply stated: - 
 “This policy is designed for people having minimum income of Rs.1 Lac 
from gainful occupation. This policy is given in  addition to Mediclaim 
policy. Since this is a benefit poli cy with a high Sum Insured and at a 
comparatively higher premium, poor people can hardly afford the 
premium. Should the Government come forward to bear the entire 
premium or subsidize, a suitable separate health insurance policy 
covering major diseases may be considered for the poor.” 

 65
 
 
4.9 LACK OF PROFITABILITY  
 
4.9.1 One of the challenge s to the spread of health  insurance is the loss 
proneness of this business.  To make it profitable and to give some sustainability 
to the segment, the Committee were informed, inter –alia, that an adequate pool 
of insured and a system of re-insurance needed to be ensured. 
a) Lack of adequate pool 
4.9.2 Asked to comment on health insur ance being a loss–making proposition, 
IRDA in a written note stated :- 
“………….there is absence of a critic al mass instrumental in health 
insurance note taking off as one would have liked it to.” 
 
4.9.3 Reflecting on one of the causes of  inadequate pool of insureds, Shri 
S.B.Chakraborti, CMD of National Insur ance Co. Ltd., in evidence before the 
Committee, stated :- 
“Usually, we find that we are not in a position, for various reasons, to catch 
the people at young stage.   The average age of the insured persons is 
above 45 years or 50 years or whatever  it is.  So, the very ‘insurance’ 
concept of pooling various resource s from many people and serving the 
few is not done in this case becaus e the ‘probability’ factor of people 
suffering is much more in the higher age group.” 
 
4.9.4 Stressing the need for an adequate pooling of resources and risks, Shri 
C.S.Rao, Chairman of IRDA, during the briefing stated as under:- 
“As far as insurance for the poor is concerned, basically, insurance, as 
was pointed out by my colleague Shri Hota, is a pooling of resources. A 
large number of people should pay the premium for meeting the claims of 
a few. We presume that out of one lakh people, who take insurance policy, 
may be 2000 people will claim it. If we  have a large pool of resources, 
then the premium will come  down and we will be able to do better. If a 
larger number of young people w ho are entering the job take the 
insurance policy, it could cover the m edical expenses of others that are in 

 66
the age group of 50 to 60 years. We have to encourage the younger 
sections of population to take up m edical insurance scheme because it is 
a group, which is generally free from diseases.So, even if he acquires a 
disease during the course of the policy,  either he is in his 40s or 50s, he 
will not come under the definition of pre-existing disease.  So, he can 
continue to get the benefit of the medical insurance over a period of time.  
So, the challenge is to s ee how best we can popular ize this mediclaim so 
that a large number of people get in.” 
 
b) Re-insurance 
4.9.5 Re-insurance is a system of insu ring the insurance companies against the 
risks they underwrite in relation to their c lients, i.e. the insu red.  The Committee 
learnt that health insuranc e is prone to adverse claim ratios and that all the PSU 
general insurers were experiencing losses in their health insurance portfolios.   
4.9.6 Explaining the concep t of re-insurance and dwel ling on its practice and 
prospects in India, Oriental Insurance company in their written reply stated: 
“Re-insurance means insurance of in surance.  Re-insurance is arranged 
by the insurance company to protec t themselves against catastrophic 
loses, which are beyond their capacity to  bear.  It is either taken for very 
big risks or for those small risks wh ich are numerous and where the total 
accumulations are likely to be high.  Health Insurance proposals will fall 
under the second category i.e. small ri sks, which are numerous in nature.  
So far the companies are sharing this business by way of re-insurance 
with General Insurance Corporation of India by way of compulsory 
cessions but there is hardly any other re -insurance on this portfolio.  This 
possibility can be examined once the health insurance business 
increases. Internationally, not much re -insurance support is available for 
Health insurances”. 
 
4.9.7 Highlighting t he present arrangement for re-i nsurance of health policies 
and the efforts being made to strengthen re -insurance arrangements for health 
insurance, National Insurance Co. Ltd., in their written reply stated; 
“At present, Indian Re-insurer (GIC) is to take 20.% of all the policies 
under Health Insurance. Health Insurance can be split into Jan Arogya, 
Universal Health and Mediclaim Insurance (Domestic and Overseas). 
 

 67
80.% of the above Health Insurance is retained within the company 
without any re-insurance protection for Net Retained Account.  
 
Discussions are on with intermediaries (domestic and foreign) and 
overseas re-insurers for a re-insur ance protection for the net retained 
account under Domestic Health Insur ance. Since individual claims are not 
much, re-insurers preferred to go on annual aggregate claims basis, but 
loss Retention suggested by re-ins urers, appears to be high which was 
considered not cost-effective.  
 
However, efforts are on to have re-i nsurance protection for the domestic 
health insurance. It is worth mentioning  that IRDA is in the process of 
collecting actuarial dat a from our TPAs using TAC as a Central 
Repository. The analysis coming out of their data can provide support to  
seek re-insurance for  health.” 
 
4.9.8 Detailing the various benefits of re-insurance that in surance companies 
can avail from a reinsurer in addition to  risk coverage, and outlining re-insurance 
prospects for health insurance in India, the Life Insurance Corporation of India in 
their written reply stated:  
“In case of re-insurance, the insu rance company, by paying premium to 
the reinsurer, transfers a part of the risk to the re-insurance company.  In 
addition to the transfer of risk, other  services provided by re-insurance 
companies include technical support in various areas like pricing, 
underwriting, administration, claims underwriting, etc. 
Re-insurance is critical in case of products which carry substantial risk as 
the claims experience can be volatile or where the company does not 
have sufficient experience or data to be able to write such business on its 
own. 
  
Availability of re-insurance at a re asonable cost can encourage insurance 
companies to offer health insurance pr oducts in India. Re-insurers can 
also help in designing innovative products. Health insurance is considered 
risky and the presence of re-insurers can give a lot of relief to the insurers. 
There are, therefore, good prospects for re-insurance in health insurance 
sector in India.” 
 

 68
 
4.10 RURAL PENETRATION – MICRO -INSURANCE & INVOLVEMENT OF 
NGOS AND OTHER LOCAL INSTITUTIONS. 
 
Rural Penetration 
4.10.1 The Committee noted that lack of rural penetration was one of the biggest 
challenges coming in the way of spread of Health Insurance in the country.  
Based on the written replies of the four  public general insurers, a comparative 
chart showing their infrastructure pres ence and health insurance sales in rural 
areas is given below:- 
Company Rural Infrastructure % Of Health Policy Holders 
From Rural Areas 
NICL Branches in almost all districts in India No ready statistics 
NIACL Majority Agents force in urban areas 2% 
UIICL No specific data provided 10% 
OICL One Branch in every district of most States No statistics 
 
4.10.2  In response to the Committee’s comment that all the four public 
sector companies were concentrating only in urban and metro cities in selling 
health products, CMD, NICL, during evidence stated as under : - 
 “One point was raised regarding our concentration. All four of us are 
having about 1100 to 1200 offices in  each company. So, when we talk 
about these four companies , we are almost having 5000 offices and the 
concentration is not necessarily in metro centres. We are having our 
presence in almost, at least district headquarters if not down the level.” 
 
4.10.3  In reply to a question on why,  despite having branches in every 
district in the country, the public general  insurance companies were not doing 
enough business in rural areas , CMD, National Insuranc e Company Ltd. during 
evidence admitted to availability of potential market saying: - 
 “………….There is, of course, tremendous  potential available for personal 
line insurance by which we mean per sonal accident, medical insurance 
and so on………….” 

 69
 
4.10.4  Admitting the poor penetration of health insurance covers in rural 
areas the CMD of Oriental  Insurance Company Ltd. during evidence stated as 
under :- 
 “Today, the problem could be in sell ing these policies in the rural areas 
and semi-urban areas.  Even though we have made up a tie-up with the 
banks, we could not achieve the levels . They are distributing the policies. 
We have recruited special agents to sell these policies in the rural areas.  
Due to cost of distribution and the commission despite being paid, this 
policy is not selling well. We have devised policies especially for the BPL 
families with Government subsidy. We have tried selling that for the last 
two years. Even that has not been sold, tw o-thirds of it is being subsidized 
by the Government.  
 
4.10.5  On the efforts to penetrate rural areas in the sale of health 
insurance, CMD, UIICL stated during evidence: - 
 “Regarding expansion in rural areas  and un-represented areas where we 
do not have our direct branches, we have now engaged the new system of 
corporate agents and micro offices. Now, banks, post offices and other 
institutions are having t heir presence in villages and we want to take 
advantage of that. So, we have tied up with them to provide this type of 
insurance. Rural insurance as well as  personal line of insurance is our 
area of thrust.” 
 
Micro - Insurance 
4.10.6 The Committee noted that the existing schemes, institutional mechanisms 
and regulating framework of heath insu rance and the degree of governmental 
involvement in the sector were inadequat e to facilitate the spread of health 
insurance to the poor and rural segment s, and wanted to know the various 
enabling mechanisms which could facilitat e the spread of health insurance to 
cover rural and poor segments of the population,  
4.10.7 The Committee were informed that  Micro-insurance basically is a poor 
man’s insurance.  Adapting the principles and practice s of micro-insurance in 

 70
health covers is micro-Health insuranc e.  The Committee were informed that 
micro-health Insurance sector had developed in the last few years at a fast pace 
and that the initial drive for this deve lopment came from NGOs.  The Committee 
also noted that even the little interest show n by commercial insurers in the sector 
were largely spurred by IRDA regulations which required them to fulfill a quota of 
“rural” and ‘social’ clients. 
4.10.8 On the concept of Micro-Health insurance, United India Insurance Co. 
Ltd., in their reply, informed the Committee as follows:- 
“Micro-health insurance is a form of heal th insurance, which offers limited 
protection at a low cont ribution (hence “micro”).  It is aimed at poor 
sections of the population and design ed to help them cover themselves 
collectively against risks.” 
 
4.10.9  In a similar vein, New India Assu rance Co. Ltd.  in their written reply 
stated: 
“Micro-health insurance refers to devel opment & implementation of health 
insurance schemes for micro entr epreneurs, small farmers, landless 
laborers, women & low-income people through formal, semiformal & 
informal institutions. The role of semi formal institutions including credit 
societies, NGOs & Self-help groups is  significant as they have immense 
potential in carrying the message of insurance by soliciting Health 
insurance & increasing the insurance penetration levels.” 
 
4.10.10 The Committee were informed that Micro-Health insurance 
schemes are normally routed through NGOs , Self-help Groups and associations 
like trade Unions, religious congregati ons and hospitals whose main area of 
activities put them in direct contact with the target groups.   
 
 
 

 71
4.10.11 In this regard, the National Insurance Co. Ltd., in their written reply 
stated: 
“Micro-health insurance is a very im portant mechanism in a country as 
large as India with a large population that cannot afford to pay for the 
healthcare costs. The only known initiative of the Gove rnment of India 
through the medium of insurance, in the recent years is the “Universal 
Health Insurance Policy”. This initiative, while it is subsidized by the 
government, has not really measured upt o the expectations in terms of 
number of lives covered. From an insu rer’s perspective, it is a nightmare- 
as originally conceived, this pro duct had bundled three different benefits 
into one with near certainty of a claim on each policy. While the 
Government of India has reiterated its commitment to this product by 
upward revising the subsidy and tri mming the benefits under  this policy in 
the year two of this initiative, it  is still not very popular and more 
importantly, there exists no mechanism amongst the insurers to sell it to 
the target population i.e., the rural poor. Hence, while the intentions of this 
micro-insurance initiative is laudable, the systemic  issues have not been 
addressed, prior to it’s seeding.“ 
 
4.10.12 On the issue of routing Micr o-health insurance schemes through 
grass root organizations, the Committee sought to be informed of any tie-up 
between the PSU general insurers and any NGO, Self-help Group or 
Community-based Organization to promote health insurance.  In this regard, New 
India Assurance Co. Ltd. in their written reply stated: 
“We have tied up with Indore Municipa l Corporation providing health 
insurance cover to entire population of Senior Citizens residing within 
Municipal limits.    Each member is covered for sum insured of Rs. 
20,000/- under hospitalization benefit.  Th e Cash less services has been 
provided through TPA.  Other muni cipal corporations and similar 
organizations willing to grant cover may also implement this scheme.” 
 
4.10.13  In reply to the same ques tion, the three other PSU general 
insurance companies, namely, National In surance Co. Ltd., Oriental Insurance 
Co. Ltd. and United India Insurance Co. Lt d.  submitted that no such tie-up has 
so far been put in place.  Their submissions are reproduced below: 

 72
NICL No. However, for marketing of Universal Health Insurance Policy and Swathya 
Bima Policy, Underwriting Offices have been advised to liaise NGOs, Self-help 
Groups and Cooperatives.   
OICL Although, there is no such tie-up arrangement as on date, we are exploring 
the possibility of developing such tie-up with CBO/ NGO, Self-help groups and 
cooperatives. 
UIICL We have no formal tie-ups with NGOs and Self-Help Groups. However, few 
one or two NGOs have taken Group Mediclaim cover from us. We have also 
entered into arrangement with major bankers like Syndicate Bank, Canara 
Bank, Andhra Bank, State Bank of Hyderabad, State Bank of Travancore 
covering their Savings Bank accountholders. 
 
4.10.14 On the issue of regulating t he mechanism for promotion of Micro-
health Insurance in India,  Chairman, Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA), during the briefing before the Committee stated as under :- 
“The third thing that we are trying fr om the IRDA side is to take the 
initiative, and we have taken that init iative. We have now passed, in the 
IRDA, a regulation called the Micro-insurance Regulations. There are a 
large number of micro finance institutions, which are operating in the 
country already. They would also lik e to enter the ar ea of the micro-
insurance. Today, if somebody wants to sell insurance, he should have 
certain qualifications to sell in surance.  In the Micro-insurance 
Regulations, we have said, ‘any NGO, any self-help Group can sell 
insurance provided they have an understanding with the insurance 
company.  It is a facility that is ava ilable to the insurance company to sell 
its policy through these micro-insu rance agents who do not require any 
qualification except their service reco rds.  If they have got good service 
records and the insurance company is comfortable with them, then they 
can use these micro-insurance agents for purpose of selling policies to the 
poorest of the poor. We went even a step further and said if a company is 
comfortable with them, they can also use the same agency for settling the 
claims.  What normally happens is that if a premium is collected and taken 
to the insurance company, and when the amount has to be paid, he will 
have to wait for a long time.  In t he meanwhile, that m an will go and incur 
some debt. So, what we have suggested in the Micro-insurance 
Regulations is that if the insurance company is comfortable with that NGO, 
they can allow them to settle the bills and claim the reimbursement from 
the insurance company.” 
 
4.10.15 Outlining potential significance of Micro-health insurance, to be 
operationalized through SHGs and NGOs etc. in India, the United India 
Insurance Co. Ltd. in their written reply submitted as under:- 

 73
“As it would not be possible for t he Govt. Machinery/Insurer to have 
access to the nook and corner of the country, it would be easier if the Self-
help Groups /NGOS are more involved in the activities of Micro-health 
insurance. Hence Self-help groups  and NGOs can be encouraged by the 
State and the Central Government.” 
 
4.10.16 Expressing similar views in th eir written reply Oriental Insurance 
Co. Ltd. submitted:  
“It will improve the health care of all t he citizens of the country. This also 
spreads the message of insurance among those who were hitherto 
unaware of the same. This also tries to bring the unorganized sector under 
one umbrella.” 
 
4.10.17 The Committee were informed, through a position paper submitted 
by Federation of Indian Chambers of Co mmerce and Industry (FICCI) that there 
were many barriers in operat ing sustainable micro-health  insurance in India.  
These include a prohibitive level of su rplus requirement, inability of micro 
schemes to transfer risks to re-insurance, lack of information, almost no support 
in raising technical and administrative sk ills at micro-insurance level (and funds 
to finance training), and complications in  ensuring ample supply of medical 
services of good quality at affordable co st.  Also, that there were some 
(regulatory) pressure to lim it micro insurers to the role of simple agents of 
commercial insurers which could severely restrict the growth of micro-health 
insurance.  
4.10.18 Asked to state the major hurdl es facing the operationalisation of 
Micro – health insurance in India, the United India Insurance Co. Ltd. in their 
written reply informed: 
“In India the number of the Non-Go vernmental Organizations/ Welfare 
Organizations is very few in number compared to the population of the 
country. The rural populace is not linked by any organiza tion that would 

 74
aid/assist in collection of premiu m or in arranging for any assistance-
medical or otherwise. Their network  is not very strong nor wide and 
neither do these organizations have the authority required.  
 
In the recent-past, the Self-help Groups have started evincing interest in 
this regard and here again the question of collection and payment of 
premium to the Insurance Companies is an impediment.” 
 
4.10.19 In addition, the Committee were informed that the growth in the 
micro sector in health insurance was inhi bited by factors like lack of health care 
infrastructure, particularly in   rural ar eas, lack of premium paying capacity, lack 
of awareness due to illiteracy, inadequate efforts to popularize the schemes by 
implementing agencies, and inadequate transport system among others. 
4.10.20 Asked to furnish possible remedi es to make Micro-health insurance 
a success in India, New India Assurance Co mpany Ltd.   in their written reply 
suggested the following. 
¾ Government should define the goal of implementing agencies 
¾ Creation of Healthcare Infrastructure in Rural areas  
¾ Cashless facilities through providers  
¾ Outpatient treatment with some minimum Co-payment 
¾ Encouraging community-based Health insurance schemes 
¾ Devising products according to local needs.      
 
4.10.21 In response to the same question, the National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
in their written reply submitted: 
“In order to make such micro- health insurance a success the following 
important factors need attention: 
 
a. Coverage in respect of surgical treatment only – studies have 
shown that borrowing for meeting medical cost is the second 
important cost of ru ral indebtedness. Hence, any such scheme 
should aptly address this important need. 
b. The scheme should address organi zed and identified groups – to 
eliminate impersonation 
c. Active participation from the Govt. – for collection of premium or 
contribution per member 

 75
d. Treatment at door-step – availability of fully equipped health service 
providers.“  
 
4.10.22 Over and above these possibl e remedies, the Committee were 
informed that certain pre-requisites neede d to be fulfilled to operationalize the 
concept of Micro-health insurance in the country. These include. 
• Adopting formal insurance arrangements to the needs of target groups 
• Upgrade non-formal insurance arrangements with companies. 
• Linking formal & Non formal insuranc e institutions with banks & Self-
help Groups  
• Establishing Local Institutions   to provide micro –insurance services, 
 
4.10.23 Towards enabling micro-health insurance units to achieve the 
objectives of enhancing healt h insurance of undeserved populations, FICCI, in a 
position paper submitted to the Committ ee proposed the following  four-pronged 
strategy:- 
1) Flexible benefit package design, reflecting local priorities and ability 
to pay; 
2) Re-insurance of micro-health insurance units; 
3) Subsidies to cover part of the co st of the insurance premium and/or 
the re-insurance premium; and  
4) Capacity building at micro-insurance level. 
 
4.10.24 Briefing the Committee on the latest developments regarding the 
Micro-insurance Regulations, Chairman, IRDA stated during evidence as under:- 
“………..we have been working on this regulation for almost one-and-a-
half years.  It is because there are a number of suggestions that have 
come from NGOs, especially from  ‘Seva’ and others.  We have 
incorporated some of the suggestions and then finalised it.  This has been 
notified only on the tenth of November.  This has now come into force, and 
we are sending it to the insuranc e companies saying them to take 
advantage of this particular regulatio n, and to identify the appropriate 

 76
agencies for delivering products in the rural areas.  It covers not only 
health but also life or cattle or any sma ll assets or even huts.  They are all 
covered under this regulation.” 
 
4.10.25 The salient features of the Micr o-insurance Regulations, 2005 are given 
in annexure-XI. 
NGOs and Self-help Groups in Health Insurance 
4.10.26 The Committee desired to know the views of the PSU insurance 
companies on the possible role they per ceive for NGOs and Self-help Groups or 
other community-based organisations in t he promotion of health insurance in 
India, and the initiatives on the part of Public insurance companies to harness the 
potential of these organizations. On t he issue of harnessing the relative 
advantage the NGOs and Se lf-help Groups have in terms of reach and mass 
contact in rural areas, the Committee note that little or no effort had been made 
by the PSU general insurers.  In repl y to a question on whether any company 
had a tie-up with any NGO/SHG or Comm unity-based Organization to promote 
health insurance in rural areas, all the PSU general insurers admitted to the 
absence of any formal tie-up. 
4.10.27 Responding to the issue of involving self-help groups in micro-
health insurance raised by the Committee,  CMD, National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
stated during evidence as under :- 
“One issue was raised about the involvement of self-help groups for micro-
insurances. There were some discu ssions amongst ourselves and I am 
not too sure but I have been told that  for micro-insurance matters, there 
are some schemes of banks to provide marginal farmers some kind of 
money for various activities. If the se lf-help groups can also co-ordinate 
with them and if that particular group pays the premium on behalf of those 
members and deduct in instal lments from the members for a little bit of 
their personal line insurances, it is a reasonably good idea which has been 

 77
discussed amongst us, but honestly, we have not crystallized our thought 
process. We are working on it.” 
 
4.10.28 In response to the Committee’s observation on rural penetration 
and the potential of involv ing NGOs and Self-Help Grou ps in spreading health 
insurance, CMD, United India Insurance Co. Ltd. stated during evidence; 
“Sir, it is our thrust area. I think, al ternative of self-help groups is a very 
viable alternative and it has to be harnessed if we have to bring in the 
spread. We have been talking to many self-help groups and NGOs. 
Earlier, they were not showing much in terest and saying that 'Our area of 
concern is not that. We are into spec ific areas.' But now they have also 
woken up to that it is a community service, which they have to provide. I 
think, awareness is coming amongst them.” 
 
4.10.29 The Committee also sought  the views of selected Non-
governmental organizations/experts regardi ng the promotion of health insurance 
in the country.  In all 14 organizations/experts responded, detailing the nature of 
their involvement and their views on what steps we re needed to enhance health 
cover especially amongst the rural poor and the marginalized sections of society.  
From the exercise, the Committee lear nt that the major thrust of these 
organizations’ involvement is in the micro-health insurance sector, commonly 
known in India as Community-Based Heal th Insurance (CBHI).  The Committee 
also noted that several NGOs were engaged as a vital link between insured 
communities and the insurance compan ies through various facilitative 
arrangements. These included pr e-payment of premium in bulk and recovery of 
the same from the insured in easy mont hly installments, provision of extra 
benefits like out-patient care and maternity care facilities and, in some cases, 
subsidization of premium or negotiating benefit packages to su it local needs in 
relation to insurance companies.  These submissions of NGOs reflected their 

 78
commitment and enthusiasm, as also the propriety of harnessing those 
organisations in penetrating rural India with health covers.  However, there were 
several handicaps faced by the NGO sector, of which mention may be made 
here of the lack of initiative and indi fferent attitude of insurance companies, 
including Public Companies, in prom oting health insura nce through the NGO 
sector. 
4.10.30 The comments of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Health 
and Family welfare on these submissions of NGOs/experts were obtained.  One 
of the major observation of the Ministries  was that all NGOs may be enrolled as 
TPAs for implementation of Micro–Health  Insurance schemes. Second, Social 
Health Insurance as against Private Health insurance needed to be given a 
serious consideration for effective implem entation of Health insurance.  Third, 
that the NGO approach to health insurance entailed considerable 
investment/start up costs by NGOs wh ich required support from Government, 
insurance Companies and cor porate sector, and also subsidies to make health 
insurance affordable to the poor. 
4.10.31 Asked to furnish their comment s on the role of NGOs and SHGs in 
health insurance, the future prospects of their involvement and the steps taken to 
enhance their role in promoting health insu rance, the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. 
in their written reply submitted: 
“The Self-help groups and NGOs can he lp in marketing health insurance 
both in the rural sector and far flung areas. These groups have the unique 
advantage of having remote access for several reasons and they can 
conveniently handle insurance marketing as well.  
 

 79
The presence of these Self-help Groups/ NGOs participation would help in 
spreading the message among the masse s but would not have any direct 
impact on the subsidy. We are c ontacting such organizations for 
marketing Health Insurance Schemes like Universal Health, Swasthya 
Bima i.e. policies designed for BPLs.  A referral fee of about 10% is paid 
to the self-help groups/ NGOs for the services rendered by them.” 
 
4.10.32 New India Assurance Co. Ltd. in  their written reply on the issue 
highlighted the Company’s efforts at involving Self -help Groups and the future 
prospects of utilizing this sector thus: 
“In order to involve self-help groups  the company has recently launched 
Swasthya Bima policy as per Governm ent directives. The SHGs can play 
an important role in creating awareness about health insurance & 
marketing this policy. In future thes e SHGs can be appointed as Agents 
for marketing & distribution of micro-insurance products.” 
 
4.10.33 Enlightening the Committee on th e initiatives to facilitate the 
penetration of health insurance among the poor through micro-insurance, 
Chairman, IRDA, during the briefing stated:  
“In the Micro-insurance Regulations, we have said, ‘any NGO, any self-
help Group can sell insurance provi ded they have an understanding with 
the insurance company.  It is a facility that is available to the insurance 
company to sell its policy through t hese micro-insurance agents who do 
not require any qualification except their service records.  If they have got 
good service records and the insuranc e company is comfortable with 
them, then they can use these micr o-insurance agents for purpose of 
selling policies to the poorest of the poor. We went even a step further and 
said if a company is comfortable wit h them, they can also use the same 
agency for settling the claims.  What normally happens is that if a premium 
is collected and taken to the insurance company, an d when the amount 
has to be paid, he will have to wait for a long time.  In the meanwhile, that 
man will go and incur some debt. So, what we have suggested in the 
Micro-insurance Regulations is t hat if the insurance company is 
comfortable with that NGO, they can allow them to settle the bills and 
claim the reimbursement from the insurance company.” 
 
 
 
 
 

 80
Panchayats  
 
4.10.34 The Committee desired to be ap prised of as to whether the public 
sector general insurance companies had ex plored the feasibility of promoting 
Health Insurance schemes through Panchay ati Raj institutions or other such 
existing grass-root platforms. In reply, the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. in their 
written note submitted: 
“Although there is no existing tie-up wit h Panchayati Raj or such other 
democratic institutions, we will explor e the possibilities of developing such 
contacts for spreading the message of health cover among rural masses. 
 
However, we are selling insur ance through NGOs, Micro Finance 
Institutions, Rural Banks and Rural Co-operative Societies.” 
 
4.10.35 Responding to the same query, United India Insurance Co. Ltd., in 
their written reply stated: 
“We have not so far used the institutions like the Panchayati Raj. 
However, we would be educating the Panchayat Raj.  
 
The impediment in using the services  of the Panchayati Raj and other 
NGOs is that there is no incentive for them to tie up with the insurer. There 
is difficulty in providing for agency commission for these agencies as of 
now. In case services of these agencies have to be utilized, it would be 
possible only with the active involvem ent of the Govt. and directions from 
the Govt. regarding release of any incentives.” 
 
4.10.36 Expressing the limit ations for such an arrangement to materialize, 
New India Insurance Co. Ltd. in their reply argued: 
“Such an arrangement can be successful for covering selected surgical 
procedures or major diseases in  network hospitals as has been 
experimented in self funded plan, fo r example “Yashaswini” Scheme in 
Karnataka. However for a comprehensive cover there is need to develop 
healthcare infrastructure in rural areas for successf ul marketing of these 
covers through Panchayati Raj institutions.” 
 

 81
4.10.37 Stressing the need to first se t in order the Panchayati Raj 
Institutions through close monitoring befor e such arrangements are put in place, 
National Insurance Co. Ltd. in their written  reply submitted: 
“Till date our company has not made su ch arrangement for the promotion 
of health insurance schemes. We feel  this type of arrangement might be 
useful in promoting health insurance if  their activities are kept under close 
vigil.” 
 
4.11 CLAIMS MANAGEMENT & THIRD PARTY ADMINISTRATORS 
SYSTEM. 
 
4.11.1 Efficient claims management and speedy disposal of  claims is one critical 
factor that can lure or keep away potent ial customers of health insurance.  The 
public grievances against insurance companies over claims rebuttals were 
brought to the notice of the Committee. 
4.11.2 Asked to furnish the claims proc edure and mechanism to monitor claims 
management, the National Insurance Company in their written reply stated: 
“After introduction of TPA, health insurance claims are settled by TPAS. In 
each Regional Office a TPA Monitoring Team has been constituted to 
oversee the functioning of TPAs in cluding settlement of claims. The 
Service Level Agreement executed with the TPA is comprehensive and 
require the TPA to furnish periodic information to respective underwriting 
office with regard to settlement of claims. Details of settled claims are also 
provided at the time of requisition for replenishment of claim float fund. 
Generally TPAs seek opinion from under writing offices for repudiation of 
claim.  
  
If any disputes arise in the TPA level, the claim is reviewed by our 
Underwriting offices then by regional Offices. The Company is also having 
one in-house grievance redressal de partment who also intervene when 
such disputes are referred.  If the clients are not satisfied with the decision 
of our company, they approach the Insurance Ombudsman to resolve the 
dispute. The disputes are settled by the Insurance Ombudsman after 
hearing the two parties i.e. the client and the insurance company. 
However, it may be mentioned that  at times reference are made to 
Ombudsman by the Insured even in case of rightful rejection.”  

 82
  
4.11.3. The Committee note that the TPA system had been introduced in 
response to demands in the market for ca sh-less settlement of insurance claims. 
In this light, the Committee desired to be apprised of the impact of TPA system 
on health coverage. Hig hlighting one positive outcome  from the introduction of 
TPAs,  CMD Oriental Insurance Company stated during evidence: - 
 “Today, we have got the TPAs who gi ve customers a cash free service. 
The customers are enjoying the service.  Therefore, sales are also more, 
but mainly in urban areas.” 
 
4.11.4 The Committee were informed that nearly cent percent of health policies 
sold by the four public general insurance companies are serviced by TPAs. In 
this context, the four public sector gener al insurance companies were asked to 
furnish a note on their experience and also the experience world over about 
TPAs. In reply, the New India Assurance Company submitted the following: - 
“Third party Administrators world over are skilled outfits where insurance 
companies outsource health insuranc e portfolio administration.  The 
definition of Health insurance has changed to healthcare management.  
World over the definition is now called health cover plans where outpatient 
treatment, diagnostics, pharmacy benefit s, curative services like 
hospitalization and old age rehabilitative care are part of coverage. 
 
The biggest market for health insuranc e/cover is USA where 1.8 million $ 
US are spent and insurance companies either use a TPA or have their 
health care service organizations.  The goal for these companies is to 
provide the policyholders the best care at reasonable price.  In other 
words they act as a watchdog to the unnecessary inflation of the medical 
treatment charges by healthcare service providers.  This is needed to 
control the rising premium for the health cover. 
 
TPAs world over graduat e to managed care service organizations.  The 
TPAs have very close interaction wit h health service pr oviders to check 
whether international standard protocols are being fo llowed or not to treat 
the patients.  They also graduate to the evidence based medicines and 
payment to providers for quality of  care & outcome of treatment.  
Traditional insurance companies do not have such medical skills and 

 83
hence outsourcing to TPAs/MCOs.  These help in monitoring accreditation 
of providers, standardized costing, data collection and quality of care. 
 
In India the Third Party adm inistrators were introduced w.e.f. 1st October-
2002.  This was done mainly with the objective of providing cashless 
service to the policyholders.  The pr emium was enhanced by 6% to meet 
the additional cost of service rendered by TPAs/ With the help of TPAs the 
insurers can now develop standardi zed data patterns depending on type 
of Hospital or provider facility, educate clients about the international 
trends of treatment for various ailm ents, evaluate the economic impacts.  
The claims cost has gone up after in troduction of TPAs & the comparison 
of claims cost per claim for the last five years are as below: 
 
YEAR No. of Claims Amount settled Amount per Claim 
2000-01 305406 2034996000 6663 
2001-02 116819 1885300000 16138 
2002-03 196300 3105300000 15819 
2003-04 161959 3006812000 18565 
2004-05 245169 5018133622 20468 
 
The comparison of claims cost in te rms of percentage for the last 5 years 
is as below: 
 
YEAR No. of policies Premium Incurred Claims Claims 
2000-01 609255 239.16 161.77 67.64
2001-02 822534 269.96 238.28 88.26
2002-03 937012 354.43 270.12 76.21
2003-04 949648 366.42 307.17 83.83
2004-05 1075386 455.39 527.59 115.85
 
 It is evident from the above figures that the cost per claim as well 
as the claims ratio has increased considerably after introduction of TPAs.  
The reasons for rise in claims cost are as under: - 
 
• TPA concept being new in India, the TPAs have so far not 
been able to address the i ssue of price control & 
overcharging by Health care providers. The issues are being 
debated by group of TPAs with Indian Medical Council. 
• There has been increase in cost of treatment including cost 
of medicines, diagnostic materials & medical appliances, 
Doctors fee etc. 
• Policyholders prefer to go to best available healthcare 
providers, in view of availa bility of cash less service 
irrespective of sum insured. 
• There is no regulator for price control of services provided by 
Hospitals and there is no cat egorization of Hospitals and 

 84
standardized charges for them . Thus overcharging by 
providers is inevitable. 
• With limited number of Healthca re providers there is no 
competition as far as charges are concerned.” 
 
4.11.5  Asked to explain as to what  extent the TPA system had improved 
service delivery and customer  satisfaction, the National Insurance Company in 
their written reply submitted: - 
“At the initial stage we received lot of complaints from customers and 
service providers against the TPAs which have been reduced to some 
extent at present. 
 
A dispassionate review of the perform ance of all the TPAs show, that not 
all TPAs have passed the test. T he purpose of inducting TPA was to 
provide quality service to Insured by TPA so that the Insurer can 
concentrate on area of competence of  underwriting the risk and marketing 
the same. The performance of TPAs  is monitored regularly and any 
deficiency in the service is brought to their notice for rectification. We need 
performing TPAs and so non-performer will be gradually wiped out.  
 
In addition, we are in the final stage of implementation of the system with 
regard to electronically exchange (ex port &import) of data with the TPAs. 
By implementing this system we feel , the services of TPAs could be 
improved considerably.” 
 
4.11.6  With the involvement of T PAs, the Committee were informed, the 
insurance companies are saved from t he trouble of processing and settling the 
claims and the client is not required to settle his hospital bills which are settled by 
the TPA directly with the concerned medical institutio n. On being asked as to 
whether involving of TPAs  benefited the companies in  terms of expenditure on 
health insurance, CMD, National Insurance Company, stated during evidence: - 
 “The benefit has been made to the cust omer for cash-less settlement. But 
the cost has gone up.” 
 
4.11.7  Admitting that the cost of health  insurance as sustained by the PSU 
companies had gone up with the involvement of the TPAs, and narrating the 

 85
efforts to check rising costs, CMD, United India Insurance Company stated 
during evidence: - 
“……….cost has gone up, as everybody says.   But TPA concept, which 
has been in India today, is at a very  nascent stage.  It has been brought 
only two or three years before as an exper iment or as a facilitator to give 
in a better service for cashless.  You can say that it has driven up the cost.   
But whether this cost wil l go up or it can be brought  down, we are in that 
process because whatever TPAs we re there, we are continuously 
monitoring their performance vis-à-vis claim ratios as well as analyzing the 
patterns and some of the TPAs have been churned also.  They have 
stopped working.  We have brought in new TPAs and we have just to see 
whether this concept works in Indi a. Stand-alone, we cannot manage this 
type of facility.   So, that is why, th inking that it will take some time to 
stabilize the things, we had introduced another alternative to the insured 
also that they can go in for without TPA facility also.   Now, as steps have 
been taken that for all hospitals t he gradation has been made by TPAs 
and even the cost has been brought down up to a level of 50 per cent.  
This type of monitoring is also be ing made where they charge differential 
rating and all that.   I think, this should stabilize after some time.” 
 
4.11.8  While furnishing a detailed note on TPAs, the National Insurance 
Company touched upon the reason for a rise  in premium costs affected by the 
involvement of TPAs stating: - 
“Service charges paid to TPAs are 5. 5% of the net premium of insured 
persons serviced by them in North and Southern Zones and 5.4% in East 
and Western Zones. In addition to the service charges, the TPA shall be 
offered incentives based on the claims incurred on the insured persons. 
Accordingly, rate of premium under medi claims policy was also enhanced 
by 6%”. 
 
4.11.9 Contending that the increasing costs incurred by the companies in health 
insurance claims cannot be attributed to  involvement of TP As alone, Oriental 
Insurance Company in their subsequent note stated as under: - 
 “The increasing trends in claims in health insurance cannot be exclusively 
attributed to the involvement of T PAs. Firstly, there has been a strong 
growth in the area of health insurance as compar ed to any other sector. 
More and more urbanites are becoming c onscious of the fact that health 
care is quite expensive and are opting for health covers. Second is the 

 86
fact that the population, mainly urban population is becoming health 
conscious. Most of the illnesses, which were ignored in the past, are 
attracting greater attention of the people who are ready to undergo 
corrective treatment. Third is the fa ct that health care by medical 
institutions are no longer  a service. Medical profession has now become 
more a profession. This is evident from the reports we often see about 
hospitals overcharging patients or di recting them to undergo unnecessary 
tests and treatments. Fourthly, the co sts of these treatments are on the 
rise. To the extent there was an increase in the cost of medical treatments 
and also to the extent there was an in crease in general price index, the 
premiums have not gone up in health insurance. Fifthly, there could 
undeniably, be some lapses on the part of TPAs as well. These are 
attracting our rigorous attention. We have already called our region 
incharges to hold periodi cal meetings with TPAs on service levels and 
also directed them to undertake rigorous audit of the claims settled by 
them. Lapses on the part of these outsourced agencies will not be 
tolerated at all. 
  
The concept of TPAs has been borrowed from advanced countries where 
this has worked well. The TPAs, with their expertise in handling medical 
industry, have concentrated on developin g tie-ups with various hospitals 
and have also negotiated with them for a lower charges than the normal 
ones.” 
 
4.11.10 Asked as to whether compla ints had been received against TPAs 
and what steps taken had been taken to a ddress the same, IRDA in their note 
stated as under:- 
“When TPAs first started functioning, t here were some complaints relating 
to non-receipt of identity cards.  In itially, these were being issued on a 
yearly basis.  The IRDA then advised TPAs to consider issuing cards for 
three years at a time.  This step has helped solve the problem of 
policyholders constantly worrying about non-receipt of cards etc. as 
without them they will not be in a posit ion to obtain cashless facility.  
Today, we hardly have any complaints relating to non-receipt of ID cards. 
Secondly, there are some complaints where TPAs have either delayed or 
failed to issue authorization letters  to hospitals.  Such cases are 
immediately followed up with not only the TPAs but also the insurers, as in 
most cases, it is the insurers who fail to provide the TPA with necessary 
information/clarification they are looking for. 
 
In respect of reimbursement case s (TPAs also process claims for 
reimbursement of medical expenses on behalf of insurers), the complaints 
relate to disputes with regard to liabi lity (almost all of them relating to 

 87
whether or not a disease was pre-ex isting) or quantum (when certain 
expenses may have been disallowed).  These have to do with policy 
condition and not with the functioning of the TPA per se.” 
 
4.11.11 Asked further as to whether  claims related complaints had 
increased after the introduction of TPAs, C hairman, IRDA during evidence stated 
as under:- 
“Complaints are increasing and the third party administrators have been in 
existence for about two years now.  We hope that once the company has 
standardized the manner in which the bill is to be processed, the 
complaints will come down.  The real  problem is this.  The third party 
administrator is an extension of insurers.  The liability is on the insurer and 
not on the third party admin istrator.  If the third party administrator gets a 
clear mandate from the insurance company as to how to process these 
claims then part of these difficultie s which we are facing today will get 
over.  In fact we have told the in surance companies to give a clear 
mandate on how to process these bills  and not leave it entirely to the 
judgment of the third party  administrators.  These complaints are coming 
and then the complaints are also  going before the ombudsman for 
adjudication.  Complaints are definitely there.” 
 
 
4.11.12 The Committee are informed that  the sub-Committee to examine 
Product Innovations in Health Insurance and definition of ‘Pre-existing disease’ of 
the IRDA’s Internal Working Group on He alth Insurance have also commented 
on the TPA system and made recommendation as under:- 
 “On Third Party Administ ration, the Committee felt that it is important 
that Insurance Companies take concrete steps to provide clear 
guidelines to enable TPAs to effectively manage and settle claims.”  
 
4.11.13 The Committee were informed that a private general insurance 
company, Bajaj Allianz, had introduced their own in-house Health Administration 
Team (HAT) in preference over the TPA system.  Asked to comment on the TPA 
System, Bajaj Alianz General Insurance Company Limited in a note furnished to 
the Committee inter-alia stated as under:- 

 88
“In the present Indian setup how th is can succeed is a matter of debate 
and concern.  The TPA’s should be able to reduce the cost to such a level 
that the cost of TPA to the insurer is  met from that reduced cost otherwise 
the health care costs will shoot up.  This should be along with better 
service say cash less service to the insured.  Ot herwise the basic purpose 
of introducing TPA services is defeated and it may result in just cost 
shifting with the TPA making business at  the cost of the insured in the 
name of service.  You don’t need TPA for cash less service, service 
contracts are sufficient.  The regulator should insist on the insurers to 
disclose to the public the actual pr emium for the insurance plan and the 
fees collected for the services to be offered by the TPA separately.  This 
will help analyze and review the role of the TPA in the Indian health 
insurance sector vis-à-vis their cost to the society. 
 
4.11.14 Asked to comment on the future relevance of TPA system in the 
light of this development, the IRDA in a note to the Committee stated as under:- 
“Insurers may choose to engage or not engage TPAs for some or all 
health insurance products.  Health Administration within the company may 
be preferred by some insurers for some  or all products as they may prefer 
to do the claims servicing themselves.  However, it is the cash-less facility 
which is the most important service offered by a TPA which benefits the 
insureds and this is nearly 50% of the total business handled by a TPA. 
 
As regards stand-alone health insurers, some TPAs might, infact, want to 
merge with them and this would be g ood for these insurers as they will 
have the required expertise to serve the policyholders.  For those stand-
alone insurers who would still want to outsource administration of their 
policies, TPAs would continue to play the role they do now.” 

 89
OBSERVATIONS  /  RECOMMENDATIONS 
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 1 
STAND-ALONE HEALTH INSURANCE COMPANY 
 In a welfare state like India,  it is the responsibility of 
the State to take care of the health of the nation. But the 
existing public health infrastruc ture is able to cater to only a 
very small section of the population. Supplementing the 
existing health system which needs rapid and large scale 
improvement and modernization, an effective Health 
Insurance System appropriate to the country needs to be 
built up as early  as possible.  
 More and more people with some kind of health 
insurance should be the goal  to be achieved. While 
Government employees and organized sector employees 
are covered under Central Government Health Scheme 
(CGHS), Employee’s State Insu rance Scheme (ESIS), as 
well as employer provided schemes like in the army, 
railways and several public sector undertakings efforts have 
been made to cover the rest of the populace with 
commercial health schemes. The Committee, however, note 
that only about 10% of the country’s one billion plus 
population comes under all these forms of health cover and 

 90
of this, only about 10%, meani ng about 1% of the population 
are covered under commercial health insurance. 
 The Committee feel that one  of the primary reasons 
for limited spread of health insurance in the country is the 
lack of focus on this segment by insurance companies, 
especially the public sector general insurance companies 
who enjoyed a monopoly till recently and still continue to 
enjoy 82% of the market among st themselves.  Besides the 
above, tariff pricing of certain general insurance segments 
like fire, motor, engineering etc. has also adversely affected 
the growth of health insur ance into an independent and 
sustainable business, forcing insurance companies to treat it 
as a miscellaneous portfolio and as an accommodation 
business for more profitable tariffed portfolios like fire and 
other property insurances. The Committee have been 
informed that a separate stand-alone company for promoting 
the health insurance would certai nly help in giving the due 
focus and in increasing the coverage, more particularly in the 
rural areas. The Committee,  however, find that the 
emergence of stand-alone health  insurance companies is 
hindered by a number of hurdles. 
 The Committee note that the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority has made certain 

 91
recommendations regarding st and-alone health insurance 
companies. The same may be scrutinized keeping in view 
that the public sector has been and can play a very 
important role in this regard.  Stand-al one health insurance 
companies in the Public Sect or with model performance can 
encourage the Private Sector to perform accordingly keeping 
in view the issue of affordabili ty of large sections of the 
needy population and thus help create a conducive 
environment for spread of health insurance business. 

 92
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Universal Health insurance scheme 
 
 The Committee note that Universal Health Insurance 
Scheme was introduced by the Government in 2003 with a 
subsidy component for people living below poverty line.  The 
subsidy was subsequently enhanced in 2004 and the 
scheme was confined to the BPL segment of the population 
only,  and in spite of it, the scheme failed to make much 
head way. In view of the fact that the coverage of non BPL 
families was much larger than that  of the BPL families in the 
original version of the scheme,  the Committee feel that the 
scheme ought to have been c ontinued for the non-BPL 
families as well, so as to ac hieve the twin objective of 
making this scheme more attractive to the BPL segment and 
to cover a larger segment of  the poor populat ion under the 
health insurance.  Besides the above, Committee note that 
another cause of limited succe ss of Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme has been incomplete identification of BPL 
families. The Committee highly deplore the slipshod manner 
in which a laudable scheme like U.H.I.S has been 
implemented. The Committee des ire that an exercise to 
identify BPL families should be initiated immediately and  the 
entire exercise be completed within a specific time-frame 

 93
and the scheme should also be made applicable to lower 
middle class and  the people who are just above the Poverty 
Line. 
 The Committee also note that in the absence of any 
targets set for the PSU insurers  in terms of the number of 
covers sold, the insurance companies did not make 
concerted efforts to cover la rger chunks of the population 
under health insurance schemes.  The Committee desire 
that Government should set ambitious targets for the 
insurance companies and closely monitor their performance 
so that they strictly comply with the targets laid.  

 94
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 3 
LACK  OF  COORDINATION 
 The Committee note that various insurance schemes 
viz. the Employee’s State Insurance Schemes, the Central 
Government Health Scheme and other Commercial Health 
Insurance schemes are being o perated by three different 
Ministries viz. the Ministry of  Labour, Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare and Ministry of Finance respectively and 
there is no coordination amongst t he three Ministries as also 
the IRDA in policy planning,  programme implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation with regard to commercial health 
insurance thereby depriving the business of the much 
needed synergy which can ev olve only through 
synchronization of individual efforts. 
 The Committee further note that the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers has  proposed, through the draft 
National Pharmaceutical Poli cy, to set up a new health 
insurance scheme – Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana – for 
the poor which will be funded through a 2% health cess.  
While lauding the proposal, th e Committee feel that an 
integrated approach involvi ng all the above agencies needs 
to be evolved by the Government for the successful 
implementation of Health Insurance Schemes. 

 95
 The Committee desire that a mechanism for regular 
cross-consultation and coor dination among these agencies 
should be put in place to enhance the synchronization of 
efforts to promote health insurance in the country.  The 
Committee further desire that  a pilot health insurance 
scheme involving the Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Finance, IRDA an d Public Sector Insurance 
Companies may be evolved and launched within a specific 
time-frame. 

 96
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 4 
LACK  OF  DATA 
 The Committee note that lack of adequate data on 
morbidity, demographic groups and diseases etc., is a major 
hindrance in formulating and designing new products in 
health insurance and thus affect the development and 
progress of health insurance in the country.  The Committee 
are pleased to note that a sub-committee constituted under 
the IRDA’s Internal Working Group on health insurance with 
the objective, inter-alia, `of drawing up a road map for 
establishing a data repositor y and evaluating the adequacy 
of data elements already finaliz ed’ has already submitted its 
recommendations. 
 The Committee desire t hat the recommendations 
made by this Committee be ex amined in its entirety and 
steps taken for their expeditious implementation. 

 97
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 5 
LACK  OF  AWARENESS 
 The Committee are constrai ned to observe that the 
level of public awareness about  the need, availability and 
benefits of health insurance in the country is still very low 
despite the fact that public  sector general insurance 
companies have been operating in the field of health 
insurance for nearly two dec ades, beginning from 1986. 
Though efforts have been made at  the Finance Minister and 
Finance Secretary level to solic it the cooperation of State 
Governments in creating aw areness amongst masses and 
about the need and impor tance of health insurance, they 
have not yielded the desired result. 
The Committee desire that c oncerted efforts be made 
to create awareness about the need, availability and benefits 
of health insurance schemes especially in rural areas 
through a multi-pronged strategy  involving the public 
insurance companies, the cent ral Government, the state 
Governments and the Panchayati Raj Institutions as well as 
non-governmental organizations so that more and more 
people come forward to adopt Health Insurance schemes. 

 98
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 6 
LACK  OF  ADEQUATE  HEALTH  INFRASTRUCTURE 
 The Committee note that two factors that discourage 
a majority of potential cust omers from buying health 
insurance cover are (i) lack of adequate health care 
infrastructure, especially in rural areas where 75% of the 
country’s population lives,  and (ii) the consequent 
inaccessibility to health care fo r a majority of the population. 
Viewed in this context, the Committee feel that strengthening 
of the existing infrastructure fo r providing health care to the 
rural masses is of paramount im portance. As efforts of the 
Government  alone are not bringing the desired impact, the 
Committee feel that there is a need to involve the private and 
corporate sector in health in frastructure development and 
they should be prov ided with suitable in centives for this 
purpose. Further, the Committee desire that the possibility of 
channelising investments by public insurance companies to 
rural as well as urban health infrastructure be seriously 
examined, and necessary poli cy level initiatives and 
regulatory changes be effected to facilitate such 
investments. 
 The Committee are also aware of the severe shortage 
of manpower resources in th e public health care system 

 99
especially in the rural areas. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should take necessary 
steps to meet the huge shortfa ll of medical personnel and 
introduce stringent measures to enhance efficiency in health 
care delivery. 
 The Committee further desire that Governments of all 
States and Union Territories may be requested to allot land 
for development of health infrastructure in rural areas at 
concessional rates to private bodies/Self-help 
Groups/cooperatives etc. Soft loans from Life Insurance 
Corporation of India, Banks an d other financial institutions 
should be made available to t hese bodies for creation of 
rural health infrastructure.  The Committee further desire that 
enhanced budgetary support for health infrastructure should 
also be made available. 
 Chairman, IRDA, had suggested before the 
Committee, a system where by the amount that is paid by 
the insurance companies for tr eatment of the insured should 
go to a pool in that particular hospital  and the creation of a 
pool of this money for treating the insured persons.  The 
Committee desired that the sugges tion should be studied in-
depth and implemented to improve t he availability of health 
service providers. 

 100
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 7 
LACK  OF  PROPER  REGULATIONS  IN THE HEALTH 
SECTOR 
 
 The Committee note that the unregulated 
mushrooming of health service providers across the country 
has resulted in escalation  of health care prices, 
undependable and deteriorating qual ity of health care and 
rampant instances of under-treatment and over-treatment by 
doctors and hospitals / nursing homes. All these 
phenomena, besides being detrim ental to the medical and 
financial welfare of the patient s, also inhibit the healthy 
growth of health insurance sector. The Committee would like 
to emphasise the imperativ e need for fixation of 
standardized and properly graded pricing, evolution of 
uniform treatment protocols a nd health service provider 
should be made accountable for the successful functioning 
and healthy growth of health insurance sector in the country. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that adequate steps 
be taken for evolving a comprehensive and stringent 
regulatory framework to ensure – (i) mandatory registration 
and credible accreditation of health care service providers 
like hospitals, nursing homes  and clinics; (ii) the 
establishment of a standard c linical protocol for all 
treatments; and (iii) a syst ematized, standardized and 

 101
graded pricing for medical procedures. The regulatory 
framework should also ensure that  violations of such norms 
be made punishable as criminal offences. Further, the 
feasibility of estab lishing a regulatory body to oversee all 
these aspects be explored and  progress thereof reported 
back to this Committee within a period of not more than 6 
months from the date of pres entation of this report to 
Parliament. 

 102
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 8 
LACK  OF  PRODUCT  VARIETY 
 The Committee have been informed that while there 
are a variety of products in terms of the sum insured and 
premium costs, there is a seri ous lack of variety of health 
insurance products in terms of flexibility to cater to the 
specific needs of different s egments of the population. They 
are constrained to note that al l the health schemes currently 
offered by the public sector general insurance companies 
are standard policies covering hospitalization only.  The 
Committee are of the view that there is an imperative  need 
to introduce long term health insurance products, covering 
out-patient care, maternity care, pre-existing diseases, 
suitable products for the aged,  abandoned women, widows, 
physically and mentally challe nged, children and the rural 
poor.   The Committee, therefore,  desire that in addition to 
the existing range of standar d health insurance schemes, 
the Government and the public insurance companies should 
introduce a host of flexible  and client-oriented health 
insurance schemes including long term health insurance 
products, maternity and out-patient covers, specific schemes 
for the abandoned women, widows, physically and mentally 
challenged and children. The Committee also desire that 

 103
feasibility of formulating a compulsory health insurance 
scheme for senior citizens as recommended by a sub-
Committee of IRDA be exam ined and steps be taken with 
due promptitude to evolve such  a scheme. Steps may also 
be initiated to include pre-exis ting diseases in all health 
schemes within a reasonable per iod after scheme initiation, 
incorporating in all such schem es some measure of subsidy 
as deemed appropriate and requi red to enable the less 
privileged sections of society to afford the schemes. 
 The Committee also note that covers for most major 
diseases are beyond the economi c means of the poor. The 
Committee desire that the Go vernment and public sector 
companies should evolve a mechanism to make such 
schemes affordable to the poor.  The Committee 
recommend that one or two hospita ls in each district should 
be earmarked for the treatment  of major diseases like 
cancer, AIDS, organ transplants,  Bypass surgery etc.  and 
Central / State Governments should lend adequate 
budgetary support   to these hospitals so as to enable the 
poor to get themselves treated. 

 104
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 9 
CLAIMS  MANAGEMENT  &  THIRD PARTY 
ADMINISTRATOR  SYSTEM 
 The Committee note t hat the Third Party 
Administrators system had been introduced by all public 
sector insurance companies to smoothen claims 
management and to facilitate cash-less settlement of 
medical bills for the insured.  The Committee, however, are 
dismayed that a large number  of complaints have been 
emanating from the insuring public on the procedure of 
claims management and claims di sposal and that there are 
serious malpractices involved in claims disbursement by 
public sector insurance com panies. The Committee are also 
constrained to observe that an additional burden has been 
thrust upon the insured by incr easing the premium costs by 
6% to meet the cost of service rendered by TPAs. 
 The Committee regret to note that the Third Party 
Administrators in the Country have been following unethical 
practices in collusion with health service providers and 
insurance companies in settlement of claims. They also  lack 
the competence and necessary infrastructure to fulfill the 
role and functions expected of them.  They also note that 

 105
complaints relating to claim settlements have increased 
considerably after the introduction of the TPA System. 
 In view of a plethora of complaints against TPAs and 
the increase in cost of prem ium as also claim costs, the 
Committee feel that a comprehensive review of TPA system 
is imperative. The Committee no te that a sub-committee of 
IRDA’s Internal Working Group on Health Insurance has, 
inter-alia, recommended that the insurance companies 
should take certain concrete steps to provide clear 
guidelines to enable TPAs to effectively manage and settle 
claims. The Committee des ire that the above 
recommendation made by the sub-committee be examined 
in all its ramifications and im plemented so as to smoothen 
the system of claims management and facilitate cashless 
settlement of medical bills of the insured within a set time-
frame. 

 106
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 10 
RURAL  PENETRATION 
 As more than 68 % of India’s population still live in 
rural area, there is no denying th e fact that rural penetration 
of health insurance need to be accorded utmost priority. The 
Committee, however, note with displeasure that despite  
having a huge network of branches in all district 
headquarters and huge strength of  agents, the public sector 
insurance companies have not been able to sell health 
insurance into the rural and se mi-urban areas in a big way. 
The Committee are further constrained to observe that there 
is no regulation requiring the insurance companies to have a 
certain minimum percentage of their total business to be 
carried out in the rural health insurance portfolio. The 
Committee are of the consi dered view that specific 
regulations should be introduced to make it mandatory for 
the insurance companies, both in the public and private 
sector, to have a fixed percent age of their entire business 
done in the rural health insu rance segment with stringent 
penalties prescribed for failure to meet such obligations.  
The Committee also recommend that appropriate 
incentives should be given to the Indian operators, 
preferably the Public Sector Insurance Undertakings, to 

 107
cater to the urgent needs of t he Health Insurance Sector, 
particularly, in favour of the weaker sections and the Rural 
areas and also of the co mmon man through innovative, 
attractive and purposeful schemes. 
The Committee also note with concern, the lack of 
involvement of NGOs and other local institutions in the 
promotion of health insuranc e among the poor and in the 
rural segments. The Committee appr eciate the initiative of 
the IRDA in introducing and no tifying the Micro-insurance 
Regulations, 2005 whic h will facilitate the involvement of 
NGOs, self-help groups and micr o-finance institutions in 
selling health cover to the rural areas. The Committee desire 
that the Government should take adequate steps to create 
awareness about the advantages under the new regulations 
and come up with a comprehensive action plan for capacity- 
building and promotion of such institutions in rural areas. 
The Committee also commend the decision of the 
IRDA’s Internal Working Group on Health Insurance to set 
up a separate – ‘Rural Health’ subgroup aimed at increased 
understanding of the barriers to providing health insurance to 
the rural poor and to create a roadmap for overcoming such 
barriers.  The Committee desire that expeditious steps may 

 108
be taken for setting up of a separate ‘Rural Health’ 
subgroup. 
They also desire to see the development of a host of 
micro-health insurance products suited to local needs by the 
insurance companies in a time-bound manner. 

 109
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 11 
LACK  OF  PROFITABILITY 
 The Committee note that most health insurance 
schemes offered by public sector insurance companies are 
loss-making primarily due to their inability to insure the 
younger people who are relatively free from major diseases. 
Besides this, the absence of proper re-insurance facility for 
health insurance is also adversely affecting the confidence of 
insurance companies to underwr ite health covers on a large 
scale. The Committee, therefore,  feel that public sector 
insurance companies need to take concerted steps to 
motivate and educate the young people to take health 
insurance policies in their own interest. The Committee 
desire that the Government and the regulator, after due 
consultation, prescribe viable targets of health coverage to 
the insurance companies, both in the public and private 
sector, and introduce incentives linked to their performance 
in fulfilling those targets. 
 The Committee also desire that the Government may 
give special attention and take  time-bound action to set up a 
viable re-insurance mechanism for health insurance. 

 110
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 12 
POVERTY  AND  NEED  FOR  SUBSIDY 
 The Committee note that affording the premium of 
health insurance schemes is beyond the economic capacity 
of people living below the poverty line as well as for a large 
section of the popula tion living just above the poverty line. 
The Committee also note that the only way to ensure health 
insurance cover for the poor is through subsidy to be 
provided by the Government  to make the premium 
affordable for the poor. The only subsidized scheme at 
present is the Universal Heal th Insurance Scheme launched 
in 2003 and  it has been confin ed exclusively  to the BPL 
segments in 2004 with enhanced subsidy. 
 The Committee desire that subsidy for the poor and 
BPL segments be made available to all existing health 
insurance schemes and not re stricted only to Universal 
Health Insurance Scheme. Further, the Committee desire 
that a system of differential subsidy for the poor and the BPL 
segments may be introduced across the board for health 
insurance schemes and service tax for providing health 
insurance may be abolished to increase its affordability. 
 
 
 
New Delhi:      RUPCHAND PAL 
2 March 2006       CHAIRMAN, 
11 Phalguna 1927(S)                       COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 

 111
MINUTES  OF  THE  3rd  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  6  JUNE,  2005 
 
 The Committee met from 1500 hrs to 1700 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
4 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
7. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8 Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
10. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
11. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
12. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
13. Shri Ajay Maroo 
14. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
15. Shri Jibon Roy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
1. Shri Prasanna Hota, Secretary 
2. Smt. S. Jalaja,  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sujatha Rao,  Me mber Secy, NCH & Macro-   
     economics 
4. Shri K. Ramamoorthy, Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Shubhra Singh, Director 

 112
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
1. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, JS (B&I) representing Deptt. of Eco. Affairs 
2. Shri C.S. Rao,  Chairman, IRDA 
3. Shri Mathew Verghese, Member, IRDA 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings, 
welcomed the representatives  of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
the Ministry of Finance and Insurance Regulatory Development Authority 
(IRDA). Thereafter, the representati ves gave a briefing to the Committee 
on the concept of `Health Insuranc e’ and various related aspects. The 
queries raised by the Members were also replied to by the 
representatives. 
3. Concluding the meeting of the Committee, Hon’ble Chairman 
directed the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the Ministry of 
Finance to furnish written notes on cert ain additional points relating to the 
Health Insurance. 
( The witnesses then withdrew ) 
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee decided to hold their next sitting on 20 th June, 
2005. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 / MINUTES / 2005-06 / M-3 

 113
MINUTES  OF  THE  5th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  20  JULY,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1415 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
5. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
7. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale 
10. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
11. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
12. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
14. Shri Ajay Maroo 
15. Shri Jibon Roy 
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
3. Shri S. B. Aror a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INSURANCE COMPANIES 
1. Shri A. K. Shukla, Chairman,  Life Insurance Corp of India 
2. Shri R. Beri, CMD, Ne w India Assurance Co. Ltd. 
3. Shri M. Ramadoss, CMD, Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. 
4. Shri M. K. Garg, CMD, United India Insurance Co. Ltd. 
5. Shri B. Chakrabarti, CMD,  National Insurance Co. Ltd. 

 114
 
3. The Committee took oral evidence  of the representatives of Life 
Insurance Corporation of India, New India Assurance Company Ltd., 
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd., Un ited India Insurance Company Ltd. 
and National Insurance Com pany Ltd. on the subject of Health Insurance. 
The representatives of above mentioned Insurance Companies clarified 
some of the queries raised by the Members and were asked to furnish 
written replies to queries which c ould not be readily answered then and 
there. 
 
3. Verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept on record 
separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 / MINUTES / 2005-06 / M-5 
 

 115
MINUTES  OF  THE  11th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  18th  NOVEMBER,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1650 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
8. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
9. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J. P. Sharma, Director 
3. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPTT. OF ECONOMIC AFFA IRS – BANKING & INSURANCE 
DIVISION) 
 
1. Shri A. K. Jha, Secretary 
2. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary (B&I) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH) 
 
1. Shri P. K. Hota, Secretary 
2. Shri Deepak Gupta, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Amarjeet Sinha, Director (Policy) 
4. Ms. Ganga Murthy, Addl. Economic Advisor 

 116
REPRESENTATIVES OF INSURANCE REGULATORY & 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
1. Shri C. S. Rao, Chairman 
2. Shri K. K. Srinivasan, Member 
 
4. The Committee took oral evidenc e of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs – Banking and 
Insurance Division) Ministry of Heal th & Family Welfar e (Department of 
Health) and Insurance Regulatory & Development Authority in connection 
with examination of `Health Insurance – A Horizontal Study’. 
3. Verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept on record 
separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 / MINUTES / 2005-06 / M-11 

 117
MINUTES  OF  THE  14th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  2nd MARCH,  2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1705 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
3. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
7. Shri Ajay Maroo 
8. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
9. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee considered the Dr aft Report on `Health Insurance – 
A horizontal study’ and adopted the same with some modifications. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Report for 
presentation.  XXXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXX 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 

 118
ANNEXURE-I 
 
Powers and Functions of IRDA Under Section 14 of IRDA Act, 1999 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the 
time being in force, the Authority shall have the duty to 
regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the 
insurance business and re-insurance business. 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions 
contained in sub-section (1), the powers and functions of the 
Authority shall include,  
 
(a) issue to the applicant a certif icate of registration, renew, 
modify, withdraw, suspend or cancel such registration; 
 
(b) protection of the interests of  the policy holders in matters 
concerning assigning of po licy, nomination by policy 
holders, insurable interest, settlement of insurance claim, 
surrender value of policy and other terms and conditions 
of contracts of insurance; 
 
(c) specifying requisite qualif ications, code of conduct and 
practical training for intermediary or insurance 
intermediaries and agents; 
 
(d) specifying the code of conduct for surveyors and loss 
assessors; 
 
(e) promoting efficiency in the conduct of insurance 
business;  
 
(f) promoting and regulating  professional organisations 
connected with the insurance and re-insurance business;  
 
(g) levying fees and other c harges for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act;  
 
(h) calling for information from, undertaking inspection of, 
conducting enquiries and investigations including audit of 
the insurers, intermediaries, insurance intermediaries 
and other organisations connected with the insurance 
business;  
 
(i) control and regulation of the rates, advantages, terms 
and conditions that may be offered by insurers in respect 

 119
of general insurance business not so controlled and 
regulated by the Tariff Advisory Committee under section 
64U of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938);  
 
(j) specifying the form and manner in which books of 
account shall be maintained and statement of accounts 
shall be rendered by insurers and other insurance 
intermediaries;  
 
(k) regulating investment of f unds by insurance companies;  
 
(l) regulating maintenance of  margin of solvency;  
 
(m) adjudication of dis putes between insurers and 
intermediaries or insurance intermediaries;  
 
(n) supervising the functioning of the Tariff Advisory 
Committee;  
 
(o) specifying the percentage of  premium income of the 
insurer to finance schemes for promoting and regulating 
professional organizations referred to in clause (f);  
 
(p) specifying the percentage of  life insurance business and 
general insurance business to be undertaken by the 
insurer in the rural or social sector; and  
 
(q) exercising such other pow ers as may be prescribed. 
 

 120
ANNEXURE – II 
 
Features of  Universal Health Insurance Scheme as furnished by Ministry of Finance. 
 
The scheme was launched on 14.7.2003 by public sector general insurance companies.  
The salient features of the scheme are given below: 
 
Eligibility 
 
• Persons between the age of three months and  65 years are covered under the scheme. 
• Individuals, head of the family and upto a maximum of three dependent children can be 
covered. 
• Dependent parents can also be covered. 
 
Benefit: 
 
• Reimbursement of hospitalization expenses upto  Rs. 30,000 can be availed individually or 
collectively by the members of the family. 
 
• Personal accident cover of Rs. 25,000 for death of earning head of family. 
 
• Compensation due to loss of earnings of earning member @ Rs . 50 per day, upto a 
maximum of 15 days. 
 
Premium: 
 
• For an individual, Re.1.00 per day, i.e., Rs. 365/- per annum. 
 
• For a family of 5 (including the first 3 children), Re.1.50 per day, i.e. Rs. 548/-- per annum. 
 
• For a family of 7 (including the first 3 children and dependent parents ), Rs. 2.00 per day, i.e., 
Rs. 730/- per annum. 
 
Subsidy: 
•  
• Premium subsidy @  Rs. 100/- per family for BPL families. 
 
Exclusions: 
 
• All pre-existing diseases. 
 
Progress: 
 
 
 
Upto 31.3.2004 1.4.2004 to 31.5.2004 
Total Coverage 
Premium collected (Rs. Lakhs) 
Rural coverage 
 
BPL families 
 
No. of claims 
Mount of claim (Rs. Lakhs) 
416688 
1932.24 
198359 
(47.60%) 
9252 
569 
27.46 
36000 
183.30 
13762 (38.23%) 
2156 
314 
15.00 
 
Redesigned Universal Health Insurance Scheme as announced in the Budget 2004-05: 

 121
 
The Redesigned UHIS was formally launched by the Hon’ble Finance Ministry at Mendhasal near 
Bhubansewar, Orissa on 20th September, 2004. 
 
Eligibility : 
 
Only BPL families  
 
Premium: 
 
• For an individual Rs. 165/- per annum (subsidy Rs. 200). 
• For a family of 5 (including the first 3 children), Rs. 248/- (Subsidy Rs. 300). 
• For a family up to seven, Rs. 330/- (Subsidy Rs. 400). 
 
Benefits: 
•  
• Reimbursement of  hospitalization expenses upto Rs. 30,000 can be availed individually or 
collectively by the members of the family. 
• Personal accident cover of Rs. 25, 000 for death of earning head of family. 
• Compensation due to loss of earnings of earning member @ Rs. 50 per day upto a maximum 
of 15 days. 
 
Strategy for marketing the Redesigned UHIS: 
 
The strategy for marketing  the Redesigned UHIS include the following  
 
• Implementation by the public sector general in surance companies on flagship basis in the 
country, i.e., by Oriental Insurance in Northe rn Region,  United India in southern Region, 
National Insurance in the Eastern Region and New India in the Western Region. 
 
 
• Publicity through print and electronic media in local languages. 
• Coverage of BPL families with the active supp ort of state governments, NGOs and Voluntary 
Organisations. 
• Mobilization of additional subsidy through state governments to make the scheme affordable 
• Tie-up with Third Party Admi nistrators (TPAs) and Health service providers for cashless 
service. 
 
Progress under the Redesigned UHIS (As on 31.10.2004): 
 
The progress under the Redesigned UHIS is as follows: 
 
Name of 
Company  
No. of Policies  No. of Families  No. of Persons  Premium (Rs. In 
Lacs) 
National  166 166 255 0.65
New India  2232 3000 4771 9.56
Oriental  39 1115 4595 5.35
United India  7522 9964 27106 30.19
Total  9959 14245 36727 45.75
 
 

 122
 
ANNEXURE –III 
 
Features of Swasthya Bima Policy as furnished by New India Assurance Company Limited . 
SWASTHYA BIMA POLICY 
 
Swasthya Bima Policy was introduced in the year-2005. It has been introduced for members of 
Self-help Groups and other Credit Linked Groups who avail loans from Banks or co-operative 
institutions.  
 
Eligibility 
 
The policy is issued in the name of groups, as sociations, institutions/ for the benefit of 
individuals in the group and persons in their family.  A proposal form has to be duly 
completed. 
 
Benefit: 
The policy covers re-imbursement of hospitalization  expenses for illness / di seases contracted or 
injuries sustained by the insured person, during the policy period. 
 
The claim settlement is made through TPA to the hospitals / nursing home or the insured person.  
The total hospitalisation benefit is limited to Rs. 10,000/- per insured person. 
 
The treatment should be taken in hospital / nursing home run by the government. 
 
Pre and post hospitalisation expenses are not covered under the policy 
 
The policy also provides for add on Benefits: 
 
Transportation: 
 
Cost of transportation of insured person to hospital is payable in upto Rs. 200/- during 
policy period provided the claim is admissible under the policy. 
 
Meals: 
Cost of meal for the patient not exceeding Rs. 30/- per day of hospitalisation and not 
exceeding Rs. 150/- during the policy period are payable. This benefit will be payable 
only if the claim is admissible under the policy. 
 
Exclusions:  
 
The exclusions are also similar to mediclaim policy. 
 
 
Age Limit: 
This insurance is available between the age of 15-65 years.  
 
Premium: 
 
The premium per individual is Rs. 120/- per annum.  Service Tax is to be collected in 
addition. 
 

 123
 
ANNEXURE –IV 
 
Features of Mediclaim as furnished by  National Insurance Company Limited . 
 
MEDICLAIM INSURANCE POLICY: 
 
The policy covers reimbursement of Hospitalisat ion / Domiciliary Hospit alisation expenses for 
illness / diseases or injury sustained. 
 
In the event of any claim becoming admissible u nder this scheme, the Company will pay to the 
Insured Person the amount of such expenses as would fall under different heads mentioned 
hereunder and as are reasonable and necessarily incurred by or on behalf of such Insured 
Person, but not exceeding the Sum Insured in aggregate in any one period of insurance stated in 
the policy schedule. 
 
Reimbursement of hospitalisation expenses are allowed for : 
 
(a) Room, Boarding Expenses as provided by the Hospital / Nursing Home.  
(b) Nursing Expenses. 
(c) Surgeon, Anaesthetist, Medical Practi tioner, Consultant, Specialist Fees.  
(d) Anaesthesia, Blood, Oxygen, Operation Theatre Charges, Surgical Appliances, 
Medicines and Drugs, Diagnostic Materials and X-Ray, Dialysis, Chemotherapy, 
Radiotherapy, Cost of Pacemakers, Artificial limbs and cost of organs and similar 
expenses.  
 
Pre-hospitalisation expenses incurred during the period upto 30 days prior to hospitalization and 
post hospitalization expenses Incurred during the period upto 60 days after discharge from the 
hospital are also covered under the policy. 
 
This Insurance is available to persons bet ween the age of 5 years and 80 years. Children 
between the age of 03 months and 05 years of age can be covered provided one or both parents 
are covered concurrently.  
 
The Sum Insured under the Mediclaim Policy vari es from Rs. 15,000/- to Rs. 5 Lakh wherein 
liability of the Company for domiciliary ho spitalization are Rs. 3000/- and Rs. 65,000/- 
respectively. 
 
Premium under Mediclaim policy varies according to the age of the Insured Persons as well as 
the Sum Insured opted by them. Thus the premium for Sum Insured of Rs. 15000/- upto 35 years 
age category comes to Rs. 213/- and that for Rs. 5 lakh comes to Rs. 5,151/-.  Similarly premium 
for Rs. 15000/- for 76-80 years age category is Rs. 551/- and that for Rs. 5 lakh comes to Rs. 
17,156/- 
 
Family Discount @ 10% of the total premium is allowed under the Individual Mediclaim Policy for 
covering the family members comprising of Spouse, Dependant Children, and Dependant 
Parents. In case of Group Mediclaim Policy a maximum limit of 30% depending upon the size of 
the group is allowed as Group Discount. 
 
Cumulative Bonus @ 5% of the Sum Insured for each claim free year subject to a maximum of 
50% of the Sum Insured is admissible under the Individual Policy. 
 
Cost of Health Check-up is also admissible to the Insured Persons once at the end of block of 
every 4 (four) Underwriting years provided there ar e no claim reported during the block. The cost 
so reimbursable shall not exceed the amount equal to 1% of the average Sum Insured during the 
block of four claim free underwriting years.  

 124
 
Income Tax Benefit is also available under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act. 
 
In addition to the “ Individual” and “ Group Mediclaim” Policy our Company also issue “ Tailor 
made Group Mediclaim” policy according to  the need of the Clients. 
 
Tailor made Group Mediclaim Policy  
 
This is issued when modifications sought by groups based on their individual requirements and is 
very popular. Tailor-made policies are sold to Corporate groups as also to non corporate groups. 
A large chunk of mediclaim premium comes from tailor made group policies.  
 
 

 125
ANNEXURE –V 
 
Features of  Bhavishya Arogya Bima Policy as furnished by  New India Assurance Company 
Limited . 
 
BHAVISHYA AROGYA 
 
The policy was introduced in the year 1990.It is a sort of deferr ed mediclaim policy.  The policy 
provides cover similar to mediclaim policy. 
 
Proposer can join the scheme any time between the age of 25 & 55 .  He could choose retirement 
age between 55 and 60 years with a condition that there should be a clear gap of 4 years 
between the date of joining and the retirement age chosen. The policy retirement age means the 
age selected by the insured at the time of sign ing the proposal and specified in the schedule for 
the purpose of commencement of benefit in the po licy.  This age cannot be advanced.  The pre 
retirement period means the period commencing from the date of acceptance of the proposal and 
ending with the policy retirement age specified in the schedule during which period the insured 
shall be paying instalment/single premium amount as applicable. 
 
The basic sum insured has been fixed as Rs. 50,000/-, which can be enhanced by payment of 
additional premium subject to per illness limit of 40% of the sum insured. The policy also allows 
5% cumulative bonus at the beginning of each  claim free year after the selected date of 
retirement subject to maximum accumulation for 10 such claim free years in all during the entire 
life span of the insured person.  Health check up is not required for obtaining this policy 
In case, the insured dies or wishes to withdraw  from the scheme either before the retirement age 
or after retirement age chosen, then appropriate refund of premium would be allowed subject to 
no claim having occurred under the policy.  There is a provision of grace period of 7 days for 
payment of premium in the event of satisfactory reason for delay in renewal. 
 
The scheme provides for assignment. 
 
The policy does not have exclusion of pre-existing  diseases, 30 days waiting period & first year 
exclusion of specified diseases as in mediclaim.   
 
Policy can also be availed of on group basis in which case, facility of group discount is available.   

 126
ANNEXURE –VI 
 
Features of Jan Arogya Bima Policy as furnished by  New India Assurance Company Limited . 
 
JAN AROGYA BIMA POLICY 
 
This policy was introduced in the year-1998. It is  designed to provide Hospitalization insurance to 
poorer sections of the society. 
 
The coverage is along the lines of the individual mediclaim policy except that cumulative bonus 
and medical check up benefits are not included.The policy is available to individuals and family 
members by duly completing the proposal form.   
 
The age limit is 5 to 70 years.  Children between the age of 3 months and 5 years can be covered 
provided one or both parents are covered concurrently. 
 
The sum insured per insured person is restricted to Rs. 5000/-.   
 
The premium payable as per the following table 
 
Age of the person 
insured 
Up to 46 years 46-55 56-65 66-70 
Head of the family 70 100 120 140 
Spouse  70 100 120 140 
Dependent child up to 25 
years 
50 50 50 50 
For family of 2 + 1 
dependent child 
190 250 290 330 
For family of 2 + 2 
dependent children 
240 300 340 380 
 
 
Premium up to Rs. 10000/- qualifies for tax benefit under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act.  
Service tax is not applicable to the policy. 

 127
ANNEXURE –VII 
 
Features of Sampoorna Arogya Bima Policy and Critical Illness insurance Policy as furnished by  
National Insurance Company Limited . 
 
SAMPOORNA AROGYA BIMA POLICY : 
 
As per desire of the Ministry this policy has been designed with the introduction of sub-limits on 
different heads of expenses incurred by the Insured. 
 
This policy also covers reimbursement of hospi talization expenses only for illness / diseases 
contracted or injury sustained by the Insured Person in line with our standard Mediclaim Policy.  
 
The scope of cover as well as other important pa rameters are identical to that of our standard 
Mediclaim Policy with some  special features as stated hereunder : 
 
1. This product is 20 to 25% cheaper than that of  our standard Mediclaim Policy. 
2. Sub limits have been introduced under different heads of hospitalization expenses. 
3. Waiting period for pre-existing diseases  coverage has been reduced from open ended 
period of 3 years in case of all diseases other than diseases of Heart and Circulatory 
Systems for which the waiting period is 5 years. 
4. Hospital expenses of a few named diseas es have been kept out of the policy coverage 
for first two years instead of first one year as existing in our Mediclaim Policy. 
5. Scope of cover towards expenses incurred under day care surgeries have been widened 
in this new scheme. 
6. Hospitalisation expenses of person donating an organ du ring the course of organ 
transplant will also be payable subject to the sub limits applicable to the Insured Person 
within the overall sum insured of that person. 
7. Emergency ambulance charges are payable subject to a limit of Rs.1000/- in total or the 
actual amount whichever is less. 
8. Hospitalisation treatment ta ken in Nepal, Bhutan will be considered under this scheme if 
prior approval is taken from the Company.  
9. Proposal form has been simplified as details of all insured members are available in one 
document. 
10. No tailor made policy is allowed under this health insurance policy. 
11. Cumulative bonus @ 10% of the Sum Insured is allowed for each claim free year subject 
to a maximum of 60% of the sum insured of the current policy year. 
12. Sum Insured under this policy varies from Rs . 25000/- to Rs. 5 lakh in multiples of Rs. 
25000/-. 
13. Domiciliary hospitalization is not covered under this policy. 
 
Critical Illness insurance Policy 
 
Our company is having a Critical Illness insurance Policy, which covers major diseases.  
This is an exclusive benefit policy for individual in the age group of 18-60 years covering a) 
coronary artery disease b) cancer  c) Renal failure d) Stroke e) Multiple sclerosis f) Major organ 
transplants g) Paralysis and blindness at extra premium. 
Policy can be issued for a S.I. of Rs.3 to 25 lacs in multiples of Rs.1 lac. Rate of premium varies 
with the age of the insured. There is a waiting pe riod of 90 days from the inception of the policy. 
The insured person needs to survive for 30 succe ssive days after the diagnosis of critical illness 
in order to make his claim. 

 128
ANNEXURE –VIII 
 
Features of Health Plus Medical Expense, cancer Insurance and Tertiary  care Insurance 
Schemes  as furnished by New India Assurance Company Limited . 
 
(A)   HEALTH PLUS MEDICAL EXPENSES POLICY – (INDIVIDUAL) 
 
This policy was introduced in the year 2004. It co vers reimbursement of only the hospitalisation 
expenses for illness / diseases contracted or injury  sustained by the insured person.  Cash less 
facility is not available. 
In the event of any claim becoming admissible  under the policy the company will pay to the 
insured person the amount of such expenses as are reasonably and necessarily incurred in 
respect thereof anywhere in India by or on behalf of such insured person but not exceeding in any 
one period of insurance the amounts mentioned in the Table of Benefits. 
 
SECTION 1 – Table of Benefits: 
HOSPITALIZATION BENEFITS  LIMITS 
1.   i.  Room, Board & Nursing Expenses as  
provided by the hospital/nursing home 
including registration and service charges. 
     ii   If admitted into IC Unit  
All admissible claims under (i) & (ii)  during the 
policy period 
Up to 1% of SI per day 
 
 
 
Up to 2% of SI per day 
Up to 30% of SI per illness/injury 
2.       Surgeon, Anaesthetist,Medical  
          Practitioners,Consultant,                
          Specialists Fees 
Up to 30% of SI per illness / injury 
3. Emergency Ambulance charges  
 
4. Anaesthesia, Blood Oxygen, Operation 
Theatre Charges, surgical Appliances, 
Medicines & Drugs, diagnostic Materials 
and X-ray, dialysis, chemotherapy, 
radiotherapy, Cost of Pacemaker, 
artificial Limbs and any medical 
expenses incurred which is integral part 
of the operation 
Up to Rs. 1000/- 
 
Up to 40% of SI per illness / injury 
Note: 
1) The Hospitalisation expense s incurred for treatment of any one illness under agreed 
package charges will be restricted to 80-% of the unutilised sum insured or actuals 
whichever is less, for any one illness. 
2) Hospitalisation expenses of person donating an organ du ring the course of organ 
transplant will also be payable subject to the above sub limits applicable to the insured 
person and within the overall sum insured of the insured person 
3) Hospitalisation treatment ta ken in Nepal & Bhutan will be  considered under the policy 
provided prior approval has been taken from the Company 
4) Expenses for Ayurvedic Medical Treatment for illness shall be restricted to 20% of Sum 
insured or Rs. 25000/- whichever is less 
 
SECTION II – EXTENSION OF THE GEOGRAPHICAL LIMIT OF  THE POLICY TO COVER 
TREATMENT ABROAD BY PAYMENT OF ADDITIONAL PREMIUM ( OPTIONAL – TO BE 
OPTED AT THE INCEPTION OF THE POLICY) 
 
This policy can be extended, to cover the expens es incurred for treatment of an insured person 
for one additional sum insured (excluding cumulative bonus) abroad in case the attending doctor 
or the hospital in India where the insured perso n is taking treatment has recommended that such 
types of treatment is not available in India and the insured person required specialized treatment, 

 129
surgery or post operative treatment abroad. The benefit can be availed of provided the insured 
person’s claim has been admitted under section I of the policy. Non-payment of a claim under 
section I merely because S.I. is already utilized in ea rlier claim, will not prejudice a claim under 
Section II.  The Company on written certification by the attendi ng doctor will examine such 
request of the insured person in case Company’s consulting doctor feels that such of treatment is 
not available in India, the Company shall allow the medical expenses of insured person incurred 
abroad.  The reimbursement of such medical expenses incurred abroad shall be paid in Indian 
Rupees only, limited to one additional sum insur ed of the insured person mentioned in the policy 
schedule.  The extension of Medical benefit will be allowed to an insured person from the date of 
admission in the hospital until discharge there from.  No pre and post hospitalization expenses 
will be covered under this extension.  No cumulative bonus will accrue under this extension. 
 
EXCLUSIONS: Are similar to Mediclaim Policy except that preexisting diseases are covered after 
4 claim free renewals 
 
AGE LIMIT: 
The cover is available between the age of 3 mont hs to 70 years. Children are covered only when 
one or both parents are covered simultaneous ly. Person above the age of 45 years has to 
undergo medical tests as required by the company at their own expenses.    
  
Above age of 70 years renewal will only be cons idered subject to insured enjoying at least 15% 
Cumulative Bonus and by payment of additional premium. 
 
AGE LOADING 
71 TO 75 10% 
76 TO 80 20% 
81 AND ABOVE 30%                
 
PREMIUM CHART  (SECTION 1) 
 
Sum Insured 
hospitalisation 
expenses (Rs.) 
Up to  
25 years 
26 to  
35 years  
36 to  
45 years 
 46 to 55 
years 
56 to 65 
years 
66 to 70 
years 
50,000/- 600 650 900 1000 1200 1300 
100000/- 1000 1200 1400 1900 2250 2700 
150000/- 1550 1800 2100 2800 3300 3600 
200000/- 2000 2300 2600 3650 4300 5000 
300000/- 2900 3200 3500 5200 6100 6800 
400000/- 3280 4000 4400 6600 7700 8750 
500000/- 4000 4800 5600 8550 10200 10700 
800000/- 6500 8380 10450 13500 16500 17500 
1000000/- 7500 10500 13000 17000 21000 22000 
SECTION II – Extension of the geographical limit of the policy to cover treatment Abroad   
  PREMIUM 
AGE Up to  
25 years 
26 to  
35 years  
36 to  
45 years 
 46 to 55 
years 
56 to 65 
years 
66 to 70 
years 
Additional 
sum insured 
equal to that 
under Sec I 
1%  of SI 1%  of SI 1%  of SI 1.5% of SI 1.5% of SI 2% of SI 
All the insured persons covered in the Policy have to opt for this Section.  The decision to avail of 
Section II benefit has to be taken at the inception.  No variation would be allowed at renewals. 
 

 130
 
(B)   CANCER MEDICAL EXPENSES INSURANCE POLICY 
 
Two types of policies are devised for covering cancer Medical Expenses.  One policy is available 
to members of Indian Cancer Society and anot her one for members of Cancer Patients Aids 
Association.  The features of policy are given hereunder: 
 
The insurance scheme offered to members of Indian  Cancer Society came into effect from July 
1985 and was modified from 1 st May, 1987 as per the market requirement. The Indian Cancer 
Society offers different types of membership to their members such as life members, well-wisher 
ordinary members, corporate members etc.  The memberships of the society are available only to 
those individuals below 70 years of the age and are not cancer patients. The membership fees of 
the society includes insurance premium also. 
 
For availing the benefit of this insurance, a propo ser has to fill membership form of the society 
and has to complete a proposal of the insurance company by giving the details asked therein.  
The proposal form also contains a certification by a doctor that th e proposer is not suffering from 
cancer. 
 
The policy covers the insured member and his/her spouse on floater basis.  During the operation 
of this insurance, if the insured member or spouse contracts cancer, then the insurance Company 
will pay to the insured, cost of diagnosis, biopsy, surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, 
hospitalisation and rehabilitation to the extent of the sum insured.  The sum insured is available in 
multiple of Rs. 50,000/- subject to a maximum of Rs. 2 lacs.  The policy allows cumulative bonus 
of 5% for each claim free year up to a maximum of 50%.  The policy comes into operation only 
after a period of one month after the date of enrol ment of the member, which date is taken as 
date of commencement of insurance.  The policy is valid for 12 months and each insured member 
has to pay the annual membership of the society which includes premium before its expiry.  The 
renewal insurance will have no waiting period and the policy will operate as usual from its renewal 
date. 
 
Special features of the policy: 
 
Policy stipulates that the insured member and his/her spouse, are covered under the policy 
however, once either of them contracts cancer, the spouse w ill not be entitled to any benefit 
under the policy.  The other member is free to take fresh membership of Indian Cancer Society by 
completing the required formalities. 
 
The Indian Cancer Society initially as an add on  benefit provide to the insured member and 
his/her spouse check up for cancer only once, free of cost and subsequent check up at 50% 
discount.  In case, entire sum insured is exhausted and insured person requires further treatment 
then the society allows chemotherapy treatment at discounted rates. 
 
The policy can be extended to cover two dependent children of the insured person on payment of 
additional premium.  Separate indemnities are granted to each child.   
Policy covers only allopathic treatment. 
 
GROUP CANCER MEDICAL EXPENSES POLICY 
 
It is possible to grant a policy on group basis.  The employer has to arrange for a well-wisher 
corporate membership.  A group discount is also available on membership fee as well as 
premium amount based on mediclaim scale. 
 
CLAIMS SETTLEMENT 
 
Reimbursement of claims is made on quarterly basis on production of medical/hospital bills duly 
certified by Indian Cancer Society. 

 131
 
(C)  Tertiary Care Insurance Policy 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE POLICY 
The Policy covers reimbursement of Hospitalisation/Domiciliary Hospitalisation expenses for nine major 
ailments suffered by the insured person as defined hereinbelow :- 
1. Nephritis of any Aetiology plus Bacterial renal failure requiring Kidney Transplantation & Dialysis  
2. Cerebral or Vascular Strokes 
3. Open and Close Heart Surgery (inclusive of C.A.B.G) 
4. Malignancy disease which are c onfirmed on Histopathological report 
5. Encephalitis (Viral) 
6. Neuro Surgery 
7. Total Replacement of joints 
8. Liver disorder (Hepatitis B & C) associat ed with complications like Cirrhosis of liver. 
 
9. Grievous injury including multiple fracture of  long bones, head-injury leading to unconsciousness, 
burns of more than 40%, injury requiring artificial ventilatory support plus Vertebral Column Injury. 
 
In the event of any claim becoming  admissible under this scheme, the company will pay to the Insured 
Person the amount of such expenses as would fall  under different heads mentioned below, and as are 
reasonably and necessarily incurred thereof by or on behalf of such Insured Person but not exceeding 
the Sum Insured in aggregate in any one period of Insurance stated in the schedule hereto. 
 
A) Room, Boarding Expenses as provided by the hos pital/nursing home  which includes Registration & 
Admission Fees. 
 
B) Nursing Expenses. 
 
C) Surgeon, Anaesthetist, Medical Practitioner, Consultants, Specialists Fees 
 
D) Anaesthesia, Blood, Oxygen, Operation Theater C harges, Surgical Appliances, Medicines & Drugs, 
Diagnostic Materials and X-ray, Dialysis, Chemother apy, Radiotherapy, Cost of Pacemaker, Artificial 
Limbs & Cost of Organs and similar expenses. 
 
E) Reasonable expenses incurred for ambulance with in city limits at the time of admission and 
discharge only. 
 
(N.B. Company’s Liability in respect of all claims admitted during the period of insurance shall not 
exceed the Sum Insured per person per annum to be reckoned from the date of inception of the risk as 
mentioned in the schedule.) 
 
ADDITIONAL OPTIONAL COVER :  
In the event of an admissible claim under Hospitalisation section of this policy, expenses not exceeding 
Rs. 500/- per week shall be reimbursed towards the boarding and lodging  expenses in the hospital for 
one of the family members or next of kin who ac companies the Insured Person during the period of 
hospitalisation. The weekly compensation shall not be payable for more than 52 weeks in respect of 
any one covered major ailment/ policy period. This optional cover is subject to payment of additional 
premium as mentioned in the premium chart. 
 
Hospitalisation and Operation Ex penses reasonably and necessarrily  incurred on person donating the 
organ to the insured person during the course of Organ transplant operation subject to limits available 
during the policy period. 

 132
 
PRE-EXISTING MAJOR AILMENTS (CONDITIONS) :  
The pre-existing conditions in respect of major ailments are those conditions of sickness or its 
symptoms which existed prior to or at the time of  inception of the first policy period and may lead to 
precipitation of a major ailment as defined in the polic y. In case the renewal is effected with any break, 
the pre-existing condition will apply afresh as though the risk is assumed for the first time. 
 
AGE LIMIT : 
This insurance is available to persons between the age of 5 years and 75 years.  Children between the 
age of 3 months and 5 years of age can be cove red provided one or both parents are covered 
concurrently. 
 
Family Discount 
A discount of 10% in the total premium will be allowed comprising the insured and any one or more of 
the following : 
i) Spouse 
ii) Dependent Children (i.e. legitimate or legally adopted children) 
iii) Dependent parents 
PRE-MEDICAL HEALTH CHECK-UP : 
Insured has to submit blood, urine test reports, ECG, Chest X-ray and such other reports alongwith the 
Certificate from Post-Graduate Medi cal practitioners stating that the Insured is free from all the nine 
major ailments proposed for insurance under this policy. The cost of pre-medical check-up at the time 
of first inception of the policy and when required because of break in renewal for more than seven days 
will be borne by the Insured. The family physician’s certificate stating the health status of the Insured in 
a prescribed proforma should also accompany the proposal form. 
 
Mediclaim policyholders of New India having Sum Insu red equivalent to or higher than this policy will 
get 5 % Discount on Major ailments Insurance policy premium. 
SUM INSURED : 
Minimum Rs. 50,000 with multiples of Rs. 50,000 thereafter, with maximum Sum Insured of Rs. 
5,00,000. 
 
     
  
 

 133
ANNEXURE –IX 
 
Features of Good Health (Individual and Group) as furnished by Oriental Insurance Company 
Limited . 
 
Good Health (Individual and Group) 
 
Age – 1 month to 75 years.  Child can be covered fr om 1 months to 21 years if parents are also 
covered.   
   
Premium : on age based basis.  
 
Sum Insured – Rs 50,000/- to 5,00,000/- in multiples of Rs 50,000/- & in multiples of Rs 1 lac 
upto Rs 10,00,000/-. 
 

 134
ANNEXURE –X 
 
Features of Uni-Medicare, Mediguard and Trauma Care Policies as furnished by United India 
Company Limited . 
 
(A) Uni-Medicare policy - Reimbursement of hospitalisation expenses following an 
unforeseen illness/accident or Cashless treatm ent at empanelled hospitals by the Third 
Party Administrators (TPAs). Sum Insured ch osen from Rs 15,000/- to Rs 5,00,000/- at 
the Insured’s choice and paying capacity. Limit per illness 30% of the Sum Insured. Lower 
premium and limits fixed for different head of account. 
 
(B) Mediguard Policy- This policy is similar to that of the mediclaim policy but is not serviced 
by the Third Party Administrators. Reimbur sement of expenses only and no cash less 
treatment offered. Premium fixed on the basis  of the age and the sum insured opted for. 
This policy has been introduced recently. 
 
(C) Trauma Care – There are two schemes – Scheme A and B – Scheme A covers 11 major 
diseases and Scheme B covers 5 major diseases viz. Major Heart diseases, Renal failure, 
Cancer, Renal disorders, Multiple Sclerosis, etc.  

 135
ANNEXURE –XI 
 
Some of the salient features of the Micro-insurance Regulations, 2005  as  furnished by IRDA  
 
1.Micro-insurance Products: 
 
Under the aforesaid regulations, the products wh ich can be termed as Micro-insurance products 
are clearly defined as under: 
 
 “General micro-insurance product” means any health insurance contract, any 
contract covering the belongings, such as, hut, livestock,  tools or instruments or any 
personal accident contact, either on individual or  groups basis, as per terms stated in 
Schedule-I which is furnished below: 
 
Item  Type of Cover Min. 
Amount of 
Cover 
Max. 
Amount of 
Cover 
Term of 
Cover 
Min. 
Term of 
Cover Max. 
Min. Age 
at entry  
Max. age 
at entry 
1 Dwelling & contents, or 
livestock or Tools or 
implements or other 
named assets / or Crop 
insurance against all 
perils 
Rs.5000 per 
asset/cover 
Rs. 30000 
Per 
asset/cover 
1 year  1 year NA NA 
2 Health Insurance 
Contract (Ind.) 
Rs.5000 Rs.30000 1 year 1 year Insurers’ discretion 
3 Health Insurance 
Contract (family) 
(Option to avail limit for 
Individual/Float on 
family) 
Rs.10000 Rs.30000 1 year 1 year Insurers’ discretion 
4 Personal Accident (per 
life/ earning member of 
family) 
Rs.10000 Rs.50000 1 year 1 year 5 70 
 
 “Life micro-insurance product” means any term insurance contract with or without return 
of premium, any endowment insurance contract or  health insurance contract, with or without 
an accident benefit rider, either on individual or group basis, as per terms stated in Schedule-
II which is furnished below : 
 
 
Item  Type of Cover Min. 
Amount of 
Cover 
Max. 
Amount of 
Cover 
Term of 
Cover 
Min. 
Term of 
Cover Max. 
Min. Age 
at entry  
Max. age 
at entry 
1 Term Insurance with or 
without return of 
premium. 
Rs.5000  Rs. 50000  5 year  15 year 18 60 
 Endowment  Rs.5000 Rs.30000 5 years 15 years 18 60 
2 Health Insurance 
Contract (Individual) 
Rs.5000 Rs.30000 1 year 7 year Insurers’ discretion 
3 Health Insurance 
Contract (family)  
Rs.10000 Rs.30000 1 year 7 year Insurers’ discretion 
4 Accident Benefit as 
rider 
Rs.10000 Rs.50000 5 year 15 year 18 60 
 
All micro-insurance products are required to be filed with the Authority under File & Use 
procedures and every micro-insurance product which is cleared by the Authority for the 
purpose of micro-insurance shall prominently carry the caption “Micro-insurance Product.  
The Regulations also encourage issuing of policies in the vernacular language which is 
simple and easily understood by the policyholders. 
 
 
 

 136
2. Micro-insurance Agents:  
 
Micro-insurance carry enormous potential for tran sforming the lives of the rural poor as it 
can be an effective tool to provide health insurance, accidental insurance and as a 
means of social security. Recognizing the importance of Self-help Groups/NGOs/Micro 
Finance Institutions in empowering the rura l poor, the Micro-insurance Regulations have 
allowed them to carry out the micro-insura nce activities by becoming Micro-insurance 
Agents.  These will be working in addition to existing network of agents, corporate agents 
and brokers.  In terms of the Regulations, 
 
(a) “ micro-insurance agent” means – (i) a Non-Government Organisation 
(NGO); or (ii) a Self-help Groups  (SHG); or (iii) a Micro-Finance Institution (MFI), who is 
appointed by an insurer to act as a mocro-insurance agent for distribution of micro-
insurance products. 
 
Explanation: For the purpos e of these regulations:- 
 
(I) Non-Government Organisation (NGO)  means a non-profit organisation 
registered as a society under any law, and has been working at least for three 
years with marginalized groups, with proven track record, clearly stated aims and 
objectives, transparency, and accountabilit y as outlined in  its memorandum, 
rules, by-laws or regulations, as the case may be, and demonstrates involvement 
of committed people. 
 
(II) Self-help Group (SHG)  means any informal group consisting of ten to twenty or 
more persons and has been working at least for three years with marginalized 
groups, with proven track record, clearly stated aims and objectives, 
transparency, and accountability as outli ned in its memorandum, rules, by-laws 
or regulations, as the case may be, and demonstrates involvement of committed 
people. 
 
While they abide by code of conduct, relaxations were given with regard to 
training for micro-insurance agents. 
 
(III) Micro-Fina nce Institution means any institution of entity or association 
registered under any law for the registration of societies or co-operative societies, 
as the case may be, inter alia, for sanctioning loan/finance to its members. 
 
 
3. Tie-up between life insurer and non-life insurer:- 
 
To enable micro-insurance to be an integral part of a country’s wider insurance system and with a 
view to provide flexibility for distribution of the micro-insurance produc ts, the Regulations are 
designed in such a way that (1) An insurer carrying on life insurance business may offer life 
micro-insurance products as also general micro- insurance products, and (2) An insurer carrying 
on general insurance business may offer general micro-insurance products as also life micro-
insurance products, as provided herein. 
 
Provided that where an insurer carrying on life insurance business offers any general micro-
insurance product, he shall have a tie-up with an insurer carrying on general insurance business 
for this purpose, and subject to the provis ions of section 64VB of the Act, the premium 
attributable to the general micro-insurance product may be collected from the prospect (proposer) 
by the insurer carrying on life insurance business, either directly or through any of the distributing 
entities of micro-insurance products as specified in regulation 4, and made over to the insurer 
carrying on general insurance business. 
 

 137
Provided further that in the event of any claim in  regard to general micro-insurance products, the 
insurer carrying on life insurance business or the distributing entities of micro-insurance products, 
as the case may be, as may be specified in the tie-up referred to in the first proviso, shall forward 
the claim to the insurer carrying on general insurance business and offer all assistance for the 
expeditious disposal of the claim. 
 
These provisions are equally applicable where an insurer carrying on non-life insurance business 
offers any life micro-insurance product as mentioned in 3(2) of the aforesaid Regulations. 
 
 
4. Incentive to insurance companies: 
 
(1) All micro-insurance policie s may be reckoned for the purp ose of fulfillment of social 
obligations by an insurer pursuant to the provisions of the Act and the regulations made 
there under. 
 
(2) Where a micro-insurance policy is issued in a rural area and falls under the definition of 
social sector, such policy may be reckoned for both under rural and social obligations 
separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1/C:\WINDOWS\Desktop\report-HI-final-13-2-06.doc 
 