C.P.U. No. 913 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“GAIL (INDIA) LIMITED – A COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION" 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 17th Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14th Lok 
Sabha) on GAIL (India) Ltd. – A Comprehensive Examination.) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.12.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.12.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2007 / Agrahayan 1929 (S) 
23

  
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted 
by Government. 
 
8 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies.  
 
41 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee. 
 
42 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
44 
 APPENDICES
 
 
I Minutes of sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
 
49 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report of Committee on Public 
Undertakings (14
th Lok Sabha) on “GAIL (India) 
Limited - A Comprehensive Examination”  
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha
 
 
16 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
Secretariat
 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma               Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
4. Shri N.C. Gupta  Deputy Secretary  
5. Shri Bala Guru G.  Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Se venteenth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Gail (India) Limited – A 
comprehensive examination”. 
2. The Seventeenth Report of the Co mmittee on Public Undertakings (2006-
2007) was presented to Lok Sabha on 15 December 2006.  Action Taken Replies 
of the Government to the recommendat ions contained in the Report were 
received on 31
st August, 2007. The Committee on Public Undertakings 
considered and adopted this Report at their sittings held on 26 th November, 
2007.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
3. An analysis of the action tak en by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 17
th Report (2006-07) of  the Committee is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         RUPCHAND PAL 
26 November, 2007             Chairman 
5 Agrahayan, 1929 (S)      Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings (2006-07) on 
“GAIL (India) Limited-A comprehensive examination” which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 15th December, 2006. 
  
2. Action Taken notes have been received fr om Government in respect of all 
the recommendations contained in the R eport.  These have been categorized as 
follows : 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3(i), 3(ii), 3(iii), 4, 5(ii), 6(i), 6(ii), 6(iii), 7, 8, 10, 11,12. 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
Sl. No. 9 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accept ed by the Committee (Chapter 
IV) 
Sl. No. 2 
 
(iv) Recommendations / observations to which the Government have 
furnished interim replies.(Chapter V)  
Sl. Nos.  5(i) and 5(iii). 
 
 The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation No. 2
 
 ORGANISATIONAL SET-UP  
3. The Committee in their Sev enteenth Report have recommended with 
regard to ‘Organizational Set-up” as follows: - 
“The Committee note that GAIL’s activi ties have increased manifold since 
its setting up in 1984.  The Committee have been informed that the 
diverse business profile of Company, such as exploration & production, 
city gas marketing etc., has warrant ed a realignment of portfolio among 
various Directors which include cr eation of new directorates and 
accordingly a proposal for creation of the position of Director (Operations) 
has been put up before the HR Committee,  a sub-committee of Board of 
Directors. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons due to 
which no decision has yet been taken by the HR Committee on the said 

  
proposal. The Committee desire that t he proposal for creation of Director 
(Operations) be cleared expeditiously  and steps be taken to appoint 
Director (Operations) with due promptitude. 
 
The Committee are also constraine d to note that Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas have not  communicated any decision on 
GAIL’s proposal for requirement of  additional independent Directors on its 
Board despite the fact that GAIL  has taken up the matter with them 
number of times.  The Committ ee need not emphasise the imperative 
need of full complement of Directors on the Board of GAIL for the effective 
and efficient functioning of its vari ous activities. They therefore 
recommend that Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural Gas should take 
immediate decision on GAIL’s propos al for appointment of additional 
Directors. The Committee also recomm end that a comprehensive review 
of organizational setup of GAIL may be undertaken in view of its fast 
expanding role and responsibility in m eeting the energy requirements of 
the country.” 
 
4. The Government have in their reply stated as follows: - 
 
“The proposal for creation of posit ion of Director (Operations) was 
submitted to HR sub-committee of B oard of Directors of GAIL. It was 
proposed that in view of the diverse business profile of GAIL, realignment 
of portfolios among various directorat es(s), including creation of the 
position of Director (Operations), is  needed. The proposal is under active 
consideration of the HR sub-committee. 
 
Regarding appointment of Independent Directors on the Board of 
GAIL, the Search Committee of the DPE has recently recommended some 
names for the post of Independent Direc tors on the Board of the GAIL 
(India) Limited. The recommendations of the Search Committee are being 
examined in the Ministry.” 
 
5. Comments of the Committee 
 
 In their original report the Committee had observed that diverse 
business profile of the Company such  as exploration and production, city 
gas marketing, etc. had warranted a realignment of portfolio among various 
directors and a proposal for creation of  position of Director (Operations) 
was put up before the HR Sub-committ ee.  The Committee had therefore 
recommended that the above proposal should be cleared expeditiously and 
steps be taken to appoint Director (Operations) with due promptitude.   
 
 From the reply of the Government,  the Committee regret to note that 
despite their specific recommendati on for appointment of Director 
(Operations), GAIL has not taken an y action and the matter still continues 
to be under consideration of HR Sub-committee.  The Committee take 

  
strong exception to the inaction on the part of GAIL in this regard.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons due to which even after 
a lapse of six months since their recommendation in this regard, HR Sub-
committee has not been able to t ake any decision.  The Committee can 
safely conclude that the Government have virtually not taken any action on 
the recommendation.   
 
 The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would 
like Director (Operations) to be appoi nted within a specific time frame 
under intimation to them.   
 
Regarding appointment of indepe ndent Directors on the Board of 
GAIL, the Committee note that Search Committee of DPE has 
recommended some names which are unde r examination in the Ministry.  
The Committee desire that Ministry s hould take an early decision in this 
matter so that independent Director s could be appointed without any 
further delay. 
 
Recommendation No. 5(i)
 
The Role of GAIL in India’s Gas Security 
6. The Committee in their Sev enteenth Report have recommended with 
regard to “The Role of GAIL in India’s Gas Security” as follows: - 
“In view of steep hike in prices of crude oil in international market and 
resultant strain on foreign exchange reserves of the country, it is 
imperative that concerted efforts ar e made to augment t he supply of gas 
which is relatively cheaper and cl eaner fuel to meet the energy 
requirements of the country.  The Co mmittee note that t hat at present 
natural gas meets only 8% of the ener gy requirement of our country and 
its share is projected to grow up to 20% in the next twenty years i.e. by the 
year 2026. To reduce the wide gap of 40% between demand and supply 
of natural gas and to augment the shar e of natural gas up to 20% in the 
energy sector in the next twenty year s, the Committee note that a multi-
pronged strategy has been adopted by GAIL  which include participation in 
NELP blocks; setting up of LNG terminal s to import LNG; bringing of gas 
by transnational pipelines; extracti on of gas by use of clean coal 
technology etc. The above-menti oned multi-pronged strategy adopted to 
ensure the gas security of India has been dealt with as under:  
 
The Committee note that Government has taken steps for importing 
gas through transnational pipelines from  gas rich countries, namely, Iran, 
Myanmar and Turkmenistan and the th ree pipeline proposals are Iran-
Pakistan-India pipeline, Turkmenist an-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline 

  
and Myanmar-India pipeline.  As regar ds Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline, 
Committee note the matter has been under discussion with Iran for the 
last 2 ½ years and the only issue wh ich is pending resolution pertains to 
price at which gas is to be sold by Iran to Pakistan and India.  The 
Committee were informed by Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas during evidence on 26 th September, 2006 that he was confident that 
pricing issue would be resolved over the next two months. The Committee 
hope that the stalemate wit h regard to gas price issue would be resolved 
soon. 
 
As regards Turkmenistan - Af ghanistan – Pakistan India (TAPI) 
Pipeline project, the Committee note t hat Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
which is the technical sponsor of the TAPI pipeline project has been 
requested to go to Turkmenistan and make survey about the adequacy of 
reserves to supply gas to India, and to  give the necessary certification. 
The Committee have been further inform ed that discussion will start only 
after the certification is given by AD B to India. The Committee desire that 
the matter may be vigorously pur sued with ADB and based on their 
certification steps may be taken to negotiate with Turkmenistan for supply 
of gas.    
 
With regard to gas from Myanm ar, the Committee were informed 
that Myanmar has floated an international bid for the two blocks, and India 
has also put in the bid, and if that bid is accept able to Myanmar, then the 
negotiations would reach the final shape. The Committee desire that 
GAIL/Ministry should play more proacti ve role and make all out efforts to 
bring in natural gas into India thr ough transnational pipelines from Iran, 
Myanmar and Turkmenistan.” 
 
7. The Government have in their reply stated as follows: - 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI)
 
 
“With regard to Iran-Pakistan-India (I PI) pipeline project, six trilateral 
meetings between Iran, Pakistan and India have been held. The issue of 
price of natural gas has not been resolved so far. During the 4 th tripartite 
meeting held in Tehran on January 24 & 25, 2007, a gas pricing formula 
regarding pricing of gas at   Iran-Pakistan border was agreed between Iran 
and Pakistan sides, subject to approval from the respective Governments. 
The Indian side agreed to res pond to the pricing formula.   India conveyed 
to the Iranian side, vide letter dated 28. 2.2007, that total price payable at 
India-Pakistan border would also depend on  transportation cost and 
transit fees payable by India to Pa kistan for passage of  gas through 
Pakistan; as there was no clarity on thes e, it was not possible for India to 
decide regarding the total price implication.  Subsequently, Iran demanded 
price escalation in the 5 th Tripartite JWG meeti ng held at Tehran during 
May 27-30, 2007, which both India and Pakistan disagreed with. The 6 th 
Tripartite meeting was held in New Delhi on June 28-29, 2007, in which 
the issues relating to gas price review clause were discussed.  
Discussions are also being held amongs t the participating countries on 
issues relating to gas availability fr om dedicated fields and development 

  
plan, delivery point for gas supply to  India, governing law, GSPA related 
issues, etc. It was decided to carry forward the discussions to the next 
round of meetings for resolution of some of the contentious issues. 
 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan (TAP) 
 
With regard to Turkmenistan-Af ghanistan-Pakistan (TAP) project, 
first Technical Working Group meeti ng was held at Ashgabat on April 17-
18, 2007, which India att ended. For India to join the project, inter – 
Governmental Framework Agreem ent signed between Turkmenistan, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan has to be am ended.  Draft of the revised 
Framework Agreement has been rece ived.  The draft Framework 
Agreement is under examination in  consultation with the concerned 
Ministries. 
 
Myanmar-India Pipeline 
 
With regard to Myanmar-India pipeli ne, India has made consistent 
efforts to source gas from A1 and A3 blocks in Myanmar. The then 
Minister (P&NG) participated in a trila teral Ministerial meeting between the 
Oil Ministers of Bangladesh, My anmar and India in January 2005 at 
Yangon, Myanmar. In pursuance of the trilateral Joint Press Statement 
released after that meeting, a Techno-Commercial Working Committee 
(TCWC) of representatives of the three countries was constituted. The first 
meeting of the TCWC was held in  Yangon on February 24 and 25, 2005. 
The TCWC prepared a draft MoU to be signed by the three Oil Ministers 
after the approval of their respecti ve Governments. However, the MoU 
could not be approved on account of  differences between India and 
Bangladesh, as Bangladesh sought to rais e certain bilateral issues in the 
trilateral MoU.  
 
In view of the above, India pur sued the alternative option of a 
pipeline from Myanmar through North-Ea stern States of India.  GAIL 
completed a Detailed Feasibility Report for this pipeline, for evacuating 
Myanmar gas to India through the north -eastern states.  The pipeline was 
projected to be routed through Mizora m, Assam, West Bengal and Bihar, 
with a pipeline length of 1575 km within the Indian territory till Gaya in 
Bihar.  
  
Subsequently, Myanmar invited bids for selling natural gas from A1 
and A3 offshore blocks by the pipeline r oute. In response, GAIL submitted 
its bid in September 2006. Myanmar authorities later informed that the 
price quoted by all the bidders did not meet their expectation.  
Subsequently, Myanmar invited bids fo r sale of gas from these blocks 
through LNG route.  This bid was s ubmitted by GAIL on December 4, 
2006.  The bids received were also not acceptable to Myanmar.  However, 
in a meeting held in February 2007 between Myanmar Government and 
PetroChina, Myanmar Government deci ded that the gas from A1 and A3 
blocks would be sold to China th rough the pipeline route. This 
development was conveyed to the consortium partners by Myanmar 
Government during a meeting held at  Nay Pyi Taw (NPT) on March 16, 
2007.  During this meeting, GAIL impressed upon the other partners and 

  
Myanmar Government that GAIL’s pipeline offer was still the most 
competitive and offered optimum value for them due to proximity of India 
to these fields. However, Myanmar Go vernment stuck to their decision to 
sell the gas to China.” 
 
8. Comments of the Committee  
 
For augmenting the share of natu ral gas upto 20 per cent in the 
energy sector and for strengthening the role of GAIL in India’s gas security, 
the Committee had felt the imperative need of bringing natural gas by 
transnational pipelines.  As regards, the Iran-Pakistan India pipeline, the 
Committee had recommended for early reso lving of the issue of gas price 
with Iran.   
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has in their reply stated that 
discussions are being held among the participating countries.  The Ministry 
has also further stated that th e discussions for resolution of the 
contentious issues would be carried fo rward to the next round of meetings 
with Iran.   
The Committee note that the repl y in respect of the above 
recommendation is only interim in nature as Iran-Pak-India pipeline 
discussions are still going on.  The Committee would like to apprised of the 
final outcome of the discussion.  
 
Recommendation No. 5 (iii)  
Underground Coal Gasification 
9. The Committee in their Sev enteenth Report have recommended with 
regard to “Underground Coal Gasification” as follows: - 
 
“The Committee note that underground coal  gasification is a potential 
economic means for extracting gas  from deep seated and /or isolated 
coal/lignite deposit resources which may not be amenable to conventional 
physical extraction economically. As  per estimates of ONGC, the 
recoverable energy from Mehsana-Ahmedabad block with coal reserves of 
63 billion tonnes in the form of gas is estimated to be equivalent to 15,000 
billion cubic meters (BCM) of natural  gas. Considering vast unexplored 
deposits of coal where conventional mini ng methods are not feasible, it is 
imperative that under ground coal gasification process is used to extract 
gas, which would go a long way in meet ing our energy requirements.  The 
committee note that GAIL has enter ed into an agreement with agencies, 
which are competent in coal gasific ation, and is in the process of 
identifying 4-5 blocks in different parts of the country. The Committee 
desire that this exercise should be completed within a time frame and 

  
work pertaining to extraction of gas through UCG be started 
expeditiously.” 
 
10. The Government have in their reply stated as follows: - 
“The technology is for production of synt hesis gas from the In situ Lignite 
gasification project. GAIL has signed an MoU with Government of 
Rajasthan to set up a pilot project at Barmer. It is planned to be an 
Integrated Gasification Combined Cycl e (IGCC) plant of 5 MW power 
capacity. 
 
GAIL has signed an MoU with M/s Er go Exergy Technologies Inc., 
Canada, who are technology providers and leaders in the field. GAIL is in 
the process of signing a General License Agreement with M/s Ergo 
Exergy Technologies Inc. for the proj ect. Under this, Site Selection study 
and Pre-feasibility study would be carri ed out for establishing the lignite 
potential at site before taking up the pilot gasification project.” 
 
11. Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee in their original report had recommended that the 
process of identifying coal blocks should be completed within a time frame 
and work pertaining to the extract ion of gas through Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) be started expeditiously.  
 The Ministry has in their reply st ated that GAIL has signed an MoU 
with Government of Rajasthan to set up a pilot project at Barmer.  The 
Ministry has further stated that GAIL  is in the process of signing a General 
License Agreement with M/s Ergo E xergy Technologies Inc. and site 
selection study and pre-feasibility study would be carried out for 
establishing the lignite potential at  site before taking up the pilot 
gasification project.   
 The Committee note that the re ply in respect of the above 
recommendation is interim in nature  as the Ministry/GAIL has just 
embarked on a pilot project for Underg round Coal Gasificat ion.  The site 
selection study and pre-feasibility study ar e yet to be carried out.  In view 
of the fact that UCG technology is  environment friendly and has a huge 
potential to meet India’s energy  security requirement, the Committee 
emphasise the imperative need of exp editious implementation of above 
projects. The Committee therefore r ecommend that this exercise should be 
completed within a specific time frame and work pertaining to extraction of 
gas through UCG be started expeditiously.   

  
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Historical background and present activities 
GAIL (India) Limited which was initia lly known as Gas Authority of India 
Limited, was established on 16 th August, 1984 with the objective of creating 
necessary infrastructure for transportation,  processing and dist ribution of natural 
gas; planning, designing and construction of  pipelines, distribution systems and 
facilities for extraction of LPG and C2/C3; to operate and maintain the systems to 
be taken over from ONGC/ OIL as well as facilities to be set up by it and to liaise 
and coordinate with gas pr oduction organizations, Government and the gas 
users to ensure proper utilization of gas.   
The Committee are happy to note that over the last 22 years, GAIL has 
diversified its portfolio into a number of  new areas such as gas processing, 
production of LPG, production of liqui d carbons, gas cracking, polymer 
production etc.; and today this company is the owner and operator of India’s 
largest gas transmission network of about  5600 km length of pipelines, world’s 
longest exclusive Jamnagar – Loni LPG pipeline, India’s largest gas based petro-
chemical complex, seven gas processing fa cilities with a capacity of more than 1 
million metric tonnes per annum (MMTPA) of  LPG etc. GAIL has also been 
receiving “Excellent rating” as regards  the MoUs signed with the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas and has been perfo rming extremely well so far as its 
financial performance is concerned which is  evident from the fact that the 
Company has added 3.7 US billion dollars to its market capitalization.   
While appreciating the above achievem ents of GAIL, the Committee find 
that in many other aspects, viz., capacity utilization of pipelines, share in natural 
gas transmission business, gas storage c apacity, city gas distribution, gas 
exploration activities, bringing gas by transnational pipelines, setting up of LNG 
terminals, underground coal gas ification, completion of various limbs of the 
proposed gas grid, etc, their performance needs further improvement.  
After going into the working of GAIL (India) Limited, the Committee are of 
the view that a lot more  is required to be done in many areas. These and other 
aspects have been dealt with by the Committee in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.  

  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 No comments.  
 
Recommendation No. 3(i) 
PERFORMANCE OF THE COMPANY 
Project Appraisal 
 
While the Committee appreciate the successful execution of Dahej-
Vijaipur gas pipeline, which had the distin ction of both cost reduction as well as 
completion of the project by 5-1/2 m onths ahead of schedule, in the case of 
Dahej-Uran pipeline, the Committee are c onstrained to note that only 55% of the 
project had been completed by July 2006 and the date of commissioning has 
also been rescheduled to March 2007.  The reasons for delay in commissioning 
of the project have been attributed mainly  due to non-tieing-up of the gas source 
and delay in supply of gas.  The Jagoti- Pitampur pipeline whose completion date 
has been revised from July, 2006 to December 2006 is further expected to be 
delayed by 2 months due to delay in award of order for procurement of pipeline.  
The Committee are constrained to note that despite revision in the completion 
schedule in case of Dahej-Uran pipeline and Jagoti-Pitampur pipeline, they are 
not expected to be completed even on thei r revised dates of completion. The 
Committee would like to emphasize the imperative need of completion of pipeline 
projects on time not only for augmenting GA IL’s share in transmission of natural 
gas which has declined from 90% in 2003-04 to 86.07% in 2005-06, but also to 
facilitate uninterrupted supply of gas to power, fertilizer, petrochemical industries 
located in various States.  The Committ ee desire that the progress of work of 
these pipeline projects be m onitored continuously so as to ensure that they are 
completed as per their revised schedule.   
As regards, Dadri-Panipat pipeline project, which has been put under hold 
for want of Gas Sales Agreement /T erms–Sheet Agreement with Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd., the Committee desire that negotiations be held with IOC for 
signing of TSA/GSA and steps may be tak en for early construction of Dadri-
Panipat pipeline.  
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that second part of the HDPE plant at 

  
Pata which was scheduled to be completed by 30 April 06 has been now delayed 
due to non availability of process pack age in time and the project is now 
expected to be completed by 24 March 07. The Committee are not convinced 
with the reasons cited for delay  in av ailability of process package viz, SIA 
(Secretariat of Industrial Assistance) approval for technology transfer taking 
nearly five months as against normal time  of 15 days as they  feel that advance 
action ought to have been initiated for eval uation of different technologies. The 
Committee recommend that in future all these steps should be initiated well in 
advance so as to obviate any delay in completion of projects in time.    
In view of undue delay that has been taki ng place in execution of projects 
by GAIL, the Committee feel that the set up in GAIL meant for project formulation 
and implementation needs to be improved. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
a stricter mechanism for monitoring and cont rol of projects at the formulation and 
implementation stage should be evolved.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The actions which have been taken in re spect of each of these projects 
and the overall steps being taken for faster implementation of GAIL’s projects are 
as under: 
Dahej-Uran Pipeline (DUPL) 
 
 The DUPL project was approved by the Board of GAIL on 21.6.2005, 
wherein the Board noted that the project should be completed by February 2007.  
Thereafter, the project receiv ed attention of the Governme nt at the highest level, 
since the gas from DUPL was to flow to  Dabhol power project, revival of which 
was high on the Government’s priority.  The project has been monitored by the 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) and the Cabinet Secretary.   
 All out efforts have been made to complete the project within the 
schedule.  The contracts for procurement of line pipes and the EPC contracts for 
construction were awarded by May 2006.  Howe ver, the project ran into difficulty, 
because of stiff resistance from villagers and local leaders in the states of Gujarat 
and Maharashtra.  The farmers demanded exor bitant rates for compensation of 
crops and were not allowing the work to  proceed even after disbursement of 
compensation as declared by  the Competent Authority.    Several rounds of 
meetings were held with Ch ief Secretaries and Princi pal Secretaries (Revenue) 

  
of Maharashtra and Gujarat.  In fact, t he Government of Maharashtra had to set 
up a Special Task Force under the chair personship of Chief Secretary to 
expedite the process of approvals. At a number of locations, work could be done 
only under police protection and after enfor cement of notific ation under Section 
144 of CrPC. The pipeline has since been commissioned on July 11, 2007. 
 
Jagoti – Pitampur Pipeline 
 The Jagoti-Pitampur Pipeline has  been completed on March 24, 2007.  
Although the project has been delayed from it s original schedule, the gas supply 
to the customers has commenced in a ccordance with the contractual schedule 
without any ‘sale or pay’ liability on GAIL. 
 
Dadri-Panipat Pipeline
 
The Dadri-Panipat Pipeline is being implemented by IOC and work is in 
progress. The 30” pipeline was designed for captive use by the Panipat refinery. 
The pipeline has a capacity of 8 MMSCMD at pipeline pressure of 54 kg/cm 2. 
However, later it was decided to jointly implement the projec t with GAIL and it 
was decided that the pipeline pressu re be augmented by GAIL by way of 
compressors, so that the pipeline could carry 20 MMSCMD gas at a pressure of 
92 kg/cm2. So the additional capacity availabl e to GAIL on IOC’s Dadri-Panipat 
pipeline would have been only 12 MMSCMD.   
GAIL has represented to the Ministry t hat their projections  indicated that 
the gas requirement of their custom ers in Haryana and Punjab would be 30 
MMSCMD. This included 6 MMSCMD for Pragati Power Corporation Limited 
(PPCL) at Bawana, which had to be supp lied by the year 2009 on account of the 
Commonwealth Games.  PPCL’s plant at  Bawana was also not on the IOC’s 
pipeline segment.  Accordingly, the Minist ry decided that GAIL be allowed to lay 
a separate 28 MMSCMD Dadri-Bawana S angrur-Ludhiana-Nangal pipeline (with 
tap off from Sangrur to Bhatinda) for which authorization has been issued on July 
11, 2007.  GAIL’s pipeline would supply gas to PPCL power plant at Bawana, 
NFL fertilizer plants at Bhatinda and Nangal and other customers on the route. 
 
Pata Expansion Project 
Recommendations of the Committee hav e been noted and action is being 
initiated for compliance of the same for future projects. 

  
 
General Steps taken for ensuring timely completion of Projects 
 A number of steps have been initiat ed to have a stringent control on 
project implementation, including submitting status report to the GAIL Board on a 
monthly basis and explaining to the Boar d the reasons for slippages.  Besides 
the above, review meetings are being ta ken for each project at the level of 
Director and CMD on fortnightly basis to m onitor the progress of projects and to 
initiate appropriate remedial actions, wherever there are slippages. 
 
Recommendation No. 3(ii) 
Financial performance of GAIL 
The Committee note that while GAIL has been earning profits continuously 
year after year, their profitability has been affected adversely due to sharing of 
subsidy burden of downstream oil ma rketing PSUs on LPG and kerosene. 
Besides adversely affecting the profit ability of the Company , the Committee note 
that due to uncertainty regarding the quant um of subsidy burden to be shared, 
GAIL is not in a position to make any r ealistic estimate of its profits. In the 
absence of realistic estimates of its profits, Committee have every reason to 
believe that GAIL would not be in a positi on to prepare its future plans in a fair 
and objective manner. The Committee not e that Dr. Rangarajan Committee on 
pricing and taxation of pet roleum products has recommended for discontinuing 
the practice of asking ONGC/OIL/GAIL to  provide upstream assistance. They 
have observed that “to the extent the Go vernment decides to extend subsidies, 
the burden should be borne ent irely and transparently in the Union Budget and 
the oil marketing companies should be fr eed from the burden of  subsidy.” This 
Committee has also expressed the view  that if no action is taken and 
Government is unable to provide the requi red subsidies, the financial position of 
the public sector oil companies will det eriorate rapidly and jeopardize the 
country’s energy security. The Committ ee on Public Undertakings therefore 
recommend that the present arrangement w herein GAIL is required to share the 
subsidy burden on account of LPG and keros ene may be reviewed in the light of 
recommendations made by Dr. S. Rangarajan Committee so as to enable it to 
make realistic assessment of its profits,  and to protect its financial as well as 
functional autonomy, while the Govern ment may find other revenues like 

  
reduction of duties and setting up of oil pr ice stabilisation fund to protect the 
interests of the common man, ‘aam admi’.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Downstream Companies marketing s ensitive retail products have not 
increased the prices of consumer products in line with international prices. It has 
been decided that a part of the under-recove ries of the downstream marketing 
PSUs be borne by the upstr eam Companies, viz., ONGC, OIL and GAIL, which 
have actually benefited from the high international prices. 
 
However, the recommendations of the Committee would be considered by 
the Government.  
Recommendation No. 3(iii) 
Capacity utilization 
The Committee are constrained to note t hat the capacity ut ilization of the 
existing gas transmission infrastructure for transportation of natural gas and LPG 
is merely 60-63%.  In case of natural gas pipelines while it is appreciable that the 
main inter-state gas pipelines are being used to 100% capacity, the Committee 
regret to note that the utilization of smaller network of natural gas pipelines in the 
states of Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Ta mil Nadu, Maharash tra and Tripura is 
merely 60% mainly due to shortage of gas  from the main producer ONGC. In 
view of depleting gas reserves of ON GC, Committee desire that GAIL should 
explore new avenues to meet the deficit by  sourcing additional gas/LNG so as to 
ensure the optimum ut ilization of natural gas pipelines.  The Committee have 
been informed that to impr ove capacity utilization, GAIL has a proposal to 
connect Dabhol and Hazira LNG terminals to GAIL’s grid.  The Committee desire 
that this should be done with due prompt itude. The Committee also recommend 
that discussions which are in progress wit h major potential producers of gas viz., 
SHELL, RIL, GSPL, PMT, ONGC etc. fo r sourcing / transportation of gas from 
their new finds in future should be held to their logical conclusion so as to ensure 
utilization of natural gas pipelines capacity to optimum level.   
As regards capacity utilisation of LP G pipelines, the Committee note that 
Vizag-Secunderabad LPG pipeline (VSPL) is being utilized to the level of 30 to 
40 percent only due to non-usage of pipeline to the fullest extent by Oil Marketing 

  
Companies (OMCs) who are bringing in  LPG by road and rail. The Committee 
have also been informed that due to limited availability of LPG at Vizag through 
indigenous refinery production/ imports, OM Cs are sourcing part requirement of 
their bottling plants located at Sec underabad through alternate supply source.  
The Committee need not emphasise that  under-utilization of pipelines, 
construction of which involves huge expendi ture is a gross wastage of public 
funds and loss to the country.  It is therefore imperative that all efforts are made 
to augment capacity utilizat ion of these pipelines. The Committee find that 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s has undertaken certain measures like 
setting up of LPG cavern storage at Vi zag, VSPL connectivity to Parwada 
Bottling Plant of IOC and Rajmundry plant  of HPCL etc., to increase VSPL 
utilization.  The Committee desire that all these measures  be implemented with 
due promptitude so that VSPL is utilized to its maximum capacity.   
 
Reply of the Government 
As suggested by the Committee in it s recommendations, GAIL has taken 
up a number of initiatives to improve the capacity utilization of its pipelines. This 
involves GAIL’s activities as a transporter. In many of these cases, GAIL would 
be transporting gas marketed by some other entity. The initiatives in this direction 
are detailed herein:- 
1. Pursuant to the signi ng of GSA between GAIL and ONGC on 7.7.06, GAIL 
is making attempts to source gas fr om ONGC’s new fields and additional gas 
from the existing fields of ONGC.  The Companies are in discussions for 
exploring areas of cooperat ion, that include supply of  additional gas/new gas 
(including CBM), utilization of pipelines, settlement of outstanding issues, joint 
participation in upstream fields, etc. 
2. GAIL has signed an MoU with Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) to source 
natural gas from K.G. Basin for transpor tation using GAIL’s pipeline network, 
apart from GAIL’s marketing rights for a s pecified quantity. Supply of this gas to 
GAIL’s network at Kakinada in Andhra Pradesh and at Uran in Maharashtra is 
expected to increase the ut ilization of local pipeline networks in Andhra Pradesh 
and Maharashtra from the year 2008. Reli ance Gas Transportation Infrastructure 
Limited (RGTIL) has been granted author ization for Vijaywada-Nellore-Chennai 
and Chennai-Tuticorin pipelines. RIL’s nat ural gas from KG basin would be 
transported on these pipelines to feed cu stomers on GAIL’s network in Tamil 

  
Nadu, which would increase the utilization of GAIL’s network in Tamil Nadu.   
3. PLL has planned expansion of Dahej  terminal from 5 MMTPA to 7.5 
MMTPA, which is expected to be commissioned in 2008-09. This R-LNG, 
including the share of off takers other than GAIL, would be transported on GAIL’s 
network. 
4. Additional gas of about 6 MMSCMD is expected from Tapt i fileds of PMT 
JV.  JV is currently marketing about 4. 8 MMSCMD gas from PMT fields directly 
to the customers under thr ee-year contracts valid till March 2008.  GAIL has 
taken up with PMT JV for marketing for tie up of the additional gas, as well as the 
above 4.8 MMSCMD gas.  The additional gas  would, any way, increase the 
capacity utilization of GAIL’s pipeline network.  
5. GAIL has concluded negotiations for price revision for Ravva Satellite gas 
with Ravva JV partners in December 20,  2006.  The side letter signed between 
the parties envisages upply of additi onal gas of about 1100 MMSCM to be 
supplied till the year 2011.   During the negotiation meetings, Ravva JV also 
shared details of additional gas availabilit y from Ravva III fields in KG basin; 
GAIL has conveyed its interest for sour cing this gas and discussion for this is 
likely to commence in the near future.  
6. Pipeline has been laid to connect Ha zira LNG Private Limited (HLPL) 
terminal at Hazira with GAIL’s network, so that R-LNG from the HLPL terminal 
can be transported through GAIL’s network  to supply to customers in the 
Northern and Western market. 
7. DUPL and DPPL pipelines have been commissioned. Indigenously 
produced gas from Gujarat and R-LN G from the LNG terminals can be 
transported to Maharashtra market  through DUPL. DPPL will be used to 
transport R-LNG to Ratnagiri Power Pl ant. This will enhance the prospect for 
higher utilization of local network in Maharashtra. 
8. Spot cargoes of R-LNG from  PLL and HLPL have also helped in 
increasing the capacity utilization of GAIL’s pipelines. 
9. GAIL is in discussion with Great  Eastern Energy Company Limited 
(GEECL) for tie-up of CBM Gas.  Dr aft-term sheet is to be discussed and 
finalized between GAIL and GEECL for CBM Gas.  
 
 

  
Vizag Secunderabad Pipe Line (VSPL)  
Capacity Utilization 
  VSPL is a 600 km long cross country LPG pipeline having LPG 
transportation capacity of about 1.33 MMTPA.  It was commissioned in July 2004 
for transporting LPG from HPCL refinery/ EIPL import facility at Vizag to  
Secundrabad (Cherlapally) via Vijayawada to feed the en-route LPG bottling 
plants of PSU Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs). 
At the time of planning of VSPL, it  was envisaged that transportation 
capacity of 0.8 MMTPA will be achieved by 2014-15 through utilization by Public 
Sector OMCs and balance by the Private Marketeers marketing LPG under 
Parallel Marketing Scheme (PMS). Public  Sector OMCs are transporting LPG 
through this pipeline to their six bott ling plants located at Vijayawada and 
Secunderabad en-route VSPL, while private marketeers are not coming forward 
for LPG marketing because of the subsidy by the Government. 
The quantity of LPG transported during 2004-05 and 2005-06 was 0.137 
MMTPA and 0.316 MMTPA respectively. The utilization expected in the current 
year 2006-07 will be around 0.459 MMPTA.  
 
Reasons for lower capacity utilization:
 
1. LPG availability at Vizag through indigenous refinery production/imports is 
limited, as OMCs are not able to receive full LPG import parcel due to inadequate 
LPG storage available at Vi zag. Therefore, OMCs are partly sourcing the 
requirement of their bottling plants lo cated at Secundrabad through alternate 
supply sources, such as Mangalore, Ratnagiri, Mumbai and Hazira through 
road/rail. Moreover, sourcing of pr oducts for Secundrabad through rail is 
sometimes cheaper.  
 
2. OMCs are presently meeting 75-80% of the total LPG r equirement of all 
the bottling plants en-route VSPL thr ough pipeline, which is about 0.46 MMTPA 
as against VSPL capacity of 1.33 MMTPA.  
Measures undertaken to increase the VSPL utilization:
 
1. Discussions are progressing wit h IOC and HPCL to provide VSPL 
connectivity to Parwada bottling plant and Rajamundhry plant respectively within 
the next 1-2 years, which will enhance VSPL utilization.  

  
2. Setting up of LPG Cavern storage of 60,000 MT capacity at Vizag by 
HPCL in joint venture with TOTAL, France by September  2007 will augment the 
LPG availability at Vizag through rece ipt of large impor t parcel, which will 
improve VSPL utilization.  
3. GAIL is exploring the possibility of  transportation of POL products through 
VSPL, thus proposing to make VSPL a multi-product pipeline.  
 
Recommendation No. 4
 
Gas exploration by GAIL 
GAIL was setup by Government of India primarily to undertake the 
activities pertaining to transmission and marketing of natural gas and to establish 
long distance gas pipelines for transportation to locations where gas was to be 
used as a feedstock and fuel. To ensure long term gas supply security from 
multiple natural gas sources, the Com pany has also ventured into exploration 
and production activities through joint vent ures/equity participation routes. The 
Committee however note that GAIL’s perfo rmance in exploratory activities are 
not at all impressive which is evident from  the fact that out of 16 blocks awarded 
to GAIL’s consortium so far, its cont ribution is confined to equity participation 
varying from 10-80% and in none of the blocks GAIL has any bid as a main 
operator. The Committee are of the view that  if GAIL is not an operator in any of 
the blocks, wherein it has equity partici pation, it has limit ed control over the 
actual cost of developing the reserves.  
The Committee feel that if GAIL has to  actively participate in exploration 
activities, it should strive to become an operator. In view of qualification criteria of 
bidding document under NELP-VI, Committee note that GAIL cannot bid as an 
operator on its own as operatorship ex perience has now been made mandatory.  
It can however participate as a joint oper ating partner along with other operators. 
Committee desire that accordingly GAIL should strive to become joint operating 
partner along with other oper ators and also assume oper atorship on a rotational 
basis under the production sharing contracts with other partners.  The Committee 
further recommend that GAIL should ma ke every endeavour to become operator 
in overseas blocks.  
 

  
Reply of the Government 
GAIL has recognized the importance of operatorship of bl ocks in order to 
intensify its role in the E&P sector. So, while bidding for blocks in the NELP-VI 
round, since the qualifying cr iteria did not permit sole operatorship, bids have 
been submitted on Joint operatorship basis in  two of the blocks. The details of 
these bids are as under:- 
 
Sl. No. 
 
Description Details 
 
1 Block RJ-ONN-2004/1 (Block – 19) 
 Location Rajasthan Onland 
 Operator GAIL (20%) & GSPC (20%) as Joint-Operators 
 Other Partners HPCL (20% ), BPCL-10%, Hallworthy-10%, 
Silverwave (10%), Nitin Fire (10%) 
2 Block KG-ONN-2004/1 (Block-28) 
 Location Krishna-Godhavari Basin Onland 
 Operator GAIL (11%)-Petrogas (44%) as Joint-Operators 
 Other Partners HPCL ( 30%), Silverwave (15%) 
 
The award of blocks in NE LP-VI has been announced and GAIL 
consortium has been successful in bl ock RJ-ONN-2004/1 on joint operatorship 
basis. 
Further, in an existing block, vi z., CB-ONN-2000/1 in Cambay onland, 
where discovery of oil has already been made, GAIL has staked its claim for 
operatorship, in accordance with the provisions of Jo int Operating Agreement 
(JOA) between the partners, which provi ded that the operatorship will change on 
rotational basis. The matter is being purs ued with the existing Operator of the 
block, viz., Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation Ltd (GSPC). 
 
Further, in the existing blocks, where GAIL has equity participation but is 
not an operating partner, GAIL has assum ed an active role in close monitoring 
and control of operations being performed by other operators. 
GAIL is constantly looking for opport unities both within and outside India 
for acquisition of E&P blocks and Oil / Gas Assets, including those where GAIL 
could be an operator. GAIL is gearing up it s work force, infrastructure and 
expertise, so that it is ready to f unction effectively as a sound E&P company. 
GAIL has developed a work station with r equisite software for G&G studies, fully 
complemented by trained Geologists and Geophysicists, including senior 
advisory professionals, besides a team of project engineers for the E&P area. 

  
 
Recommendation No. 5 (ii) 
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
The Committee note that country is im porting close to 30-35 million cubic 
meters of gas per day equivalent of LN G which is regasified at LNG terminals. 
The advantage of LNG is that gas can reac h through cryogenic tankers by sea to 
various locations on the coastlines. Thus  there is a need to give added thrust to 
LNG imports. The Committee have been informed that GAIL has signed an MoU 
with NIGEC, an Iranian Company in June, 2005 to bring five million tones of LNG 
from Iran to Kochi.  T he Committee desire that GAIL /Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas should vigorously pursue the matter with Iranian Government so as 
to clinch the deal at t he earliest possible time. The Committee also note that 
Petronet LNG is holding discussions with EXON MOBIL for supply of LNG from 
Australia. However, the project is getting delayed due to environmental problems. 
The Committee desire that the bottlenecks t hat are coming in the way of supply 
of LNG from Australia should be sort ed out through negotiations. To further 
augment the import of LNG, the Committee recommend that GAIL should explore 
the feasibility of import of LNG from all other LNG producing countries.    
Besides import of LNG, construction of  LNG terminals is equally important 
because LNG, which comes in liquid form from exporting countries through ships, 
is converted into gaseous form at LNG terminals. The Committee regret to note 
that as against the target of commissi oning four LNG terminals by the end of 
tenth Plan Period, only Petronet’s Dahej  terminal and HLPL’s Hajira terminal 
were commissioned in April, 2004 and 2005 respectively and the construction of 
LNG terminals at Dabhol, Ennore, Mangal ore, Kochi and expansion of LNG 
terminal at Dahej etc., are at initial stages only. There are reports that the Dabhol 
LNG terminal is proposed to be handed over to some private party which may not 
be in the overall interests of the dev elopment in the par ticular area. The 
Committee understand the implications of construction of LNG terminals without 
finalizing the deal for LNG imports, whic h would be an idle investment. They 
would however like to emphasise the poi nt that there s hould be no unnecessary 
delay in construction of LNG terminals in case the deal is finalised.  
 

  
Reply of the Government 
1. Regarding   Sale & Purchase Agr eement (SPA) for import of 5 MMTPA of 
LNG, the matter is being pursued with the Gove rnment of Iran.  Minister (P&NG) 
discussed the issue with President of  Iran at Shanghai in June 2006 and again 
during his recent visit to Tehran on Apr il 25-26, 2007.  Presi dent of Iran assured 
Minister (P&NG) that Iran is committed to  both IPI pipeline project and export of 
LNG on equal terms.   
2. PLL is at advanced stage of discussi on with Gorgon, Australia for import 
of 2.5 MMTPA LNG for Kochi LNG Terminal. 
3. GAIL and PLL are exploring possib ility of import of LNG from various 
potential suppliers.  
4.1 Dabhol LNG terminal is expected to be completed by end of March 
2008. The terminal will, however, bec ome fully operational only after 
completion of breakwater facilities in May 2010.  
4.2 Dahej LNG terminal is being ex panded from current 5 MMTPA capacity 
to 10 MMTPA capacity.  The expanded facility is expected to be commissioned 
by last quarter of 2008. 
4.3  PLL is setting up an LNG terminal at Kochi.  Various pre-project 
activities have been completed and vari ous statutory approvals have been 
obtained.  Site leveling work has been completed and construction of 
boundary walls has commenced.  Proc ess for selection of Project 
Management Consultant is underway.  Final Techo-Commercial bids for 
selection of EPC contractors are under ev aluation and the contract is likely to 
be awarded by September 2007.   Project-related construction activities are 
likely to start by June 30, 2008. The terminal is expected to be commissioned 
by 2010-11. 
4.4 With regard to setting up of LNG terminal at Mangalore by ONGC, the 
Company has initiated some pre-project activities.  Construction of the terminal 
depends upon long-term LNG tie up, which is yet to be accomplished. 
4.5 IOC proposes to set up an LNG termi nal at Ennore.  Some pre-project 
activities were initiated by IOC for the same. Techno-commercial feasibility 
study has been completed. Heads of  agreement have been signed with 
potential customers. Draft MoU regarding fiscal incentiv es for the project and 
gas transmission pipelines has been di scussed with Government of Tamil 

  
Nadu. Draft MoU for allotment of l and and other facilities has been discussed 
with Ennore Port Limited and TIDCO.  A suitable land adjacent to Ennore Port 
has also been identified.  IOC has been pursuing with various suppliers for 
sourcing of LNG for the project.  However, the same is yet to be tied-up. 
5. Various options for achieving l ong-term viability of Dabhol project are 
being considered by the Government. The opt ion of hiving off of LNG terminal is 
one of the options being considered by the Government. 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (i)
 
Gas transmission by GAIL 
6 (i)  Decline in percentage share of GAIL in natural gas transmission 
business:  
The Committee note that GAIL’s share in transmission business which 
was 100% at the time of setting up of company has plummeted to 86% mainly 
due to entry of multiple players as a re sult of opening up of the gas market. The 
Committee have been informed that subject to firming up of supply sources GAIL 
proposes to strengthen its natural gas transmission business by building key 
inter-state trunk pipelines to increase t he total network from 5,600 km to 12,000 
km over the next eight years at a cost of Rs.15,000 – 20,000 crores.  
 
The Committee have been apprised that GAIL is holding negotiations with 
gas rich countries for import of LNG and import through transnational pipelines 
etc. Committee hope that with the fi rming up of these gas sources and 
augmentation of GAIL’s pipeline infrastr ucture, GAIL would be able to enhance 
its share in gas transmission. Besides these steps, Committee desire that GAIL 
should negotiate with private gas producer s and persuade them to utilise GAIL’s 
pipelines for transmission of gas produced by them.  
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 Recently, authorizations have been gr anted to GAIL for the following 
pipelines:-   
 

  
 
 
 
Attempts being made to secure import of LNG are mentioned in the reply 
to Recommendation 5 (ii). The status of  negotiations regarding import of natural 
gas through transnational pipelines is mentioned in the reply to Recommendation 
5. Initiatives undertaken by GAIL to  increase gas transmission through its 
pipeline network are mentioned in reply to Recommendation 3 (iii). 
 
Recommendation No. 6 (ii) 
National Gas Grid Project 
The Committee note that GAIL has plans  to develop inter-state gas grid 
(ISGG) under which gas available from  different sources is planned to be 
connected to 16 limbs of ISGG to cate r to the needs of customers along the 
network.  In view of availability of  gas from various sources and need for 
distribution to various parts of the country to meet requirements of the customers, 
it is imperative that a national gas grid is developed at the earliest. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the work of devel opment of all the limbs 
should be closely monitored and completed within a specific time frame.  
 
Reply of the Government  
GAIL is operating more than 5600 km of pipelines with a capacity of 
around 130 MMSCMD for transportation of natur al gas to various customers in 
the country. Gas pipelines are laid accord ing to gas availability and location of 
production centres and customers. In light of the limited availability of natural gas 
in the country, gas pipelines have been la id connecting the limited production 
centres to the customers situated in relative proximity.  
Sl. No. Name of the pipeline Length of pipeline 
1. Dabhol-Bangalore 
Pipeline 
730 km long pipeline from Dabhol to 
Bangalore  
2. Kochi-Kangjirkkod-
Mangalore Pipeline 
100 km long pipeline from Kochi to 
Kanjirkkod, 440 km from Kanjirkkod to 
Bangalore and 322 km  from 
Kanjirkkod to Mangalore 
3. Jagdishpur Haldia 
Pipeline 
876 km long pipeline from Jagdishpur 
to Haldia 
4. Dadri-Bawana-Nangal 
Pipeline 
590 km long pipeline from Dadri to 
Nangal 
5. Chhainsa-Gurgaon-
Jhajjar-Hissar Pipeline 
310 km long pipeline from Chhainsa to 
Hissar and spurline to Bhiwadi, 
Manesar and Neemrana Industrial 
areas 

  
 A number of Companies are at present  laying pipeline infrastructure for 
transportation of gas in various parts of the country, linking production centres to 
demand centres. To regulate the same  and to encourage investment in the 
sector, the Government of India has  enacted ‘The Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board Act, 2006’ and notified the ‘Policy for Development of Natural 
Gas Pipelines and City or Local Natural Gas Distribution Networks’. 
GAIL completed the Dahej – Vijaipur  pipeline in 2004 for evacuation of 
RLNG from PLL Dahej LNG terminal. GAIL commissioned Kelaras – Malanpur 
pipeline in July 2006 to supply gas near  Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh. Dahej - 
Uran pipeline (DUPL) for supply of RLNG from Dahej PLL terminal to customers 
in Uran, Trombay, Thane- Belapur and Ambevili regions in Maharashtra has 
been commissioned on July 11, 2007. Dabhol - Panvel pipeline (DPPL) has also 
been commissioned; it would be an extensi on of DUPL to transport RLNG to 
Ratnagiri Gas & Power Project Limited, and later for evacuation of R-LNG from 
Dabhol LNG terminal. 
Authorizations have been recently granted to GAIL for the following 
pipelines:- 
 
 
 
Authorizations have been granted to other entities for the following pipelines:- 
 
Sl. No. Name of the pipeline Length of the pipeline 
1. Kakinada-Basudebpur-Howrah 
Pipeline 
1100 km  
2. Vijayawada-Nellore-Chennai 445 km  
3. Chennai-Tuticorin 670 km  
4. Chennai-Mangalore-Bangalore 660 km 
 
A network of trunk gas pipelines is being laid by GAIL, as also other 
entities, connecting customers across the c ountry to various sources of natural 
gas. A map depicting this is being enclosed.  Thus a grid covering a large part of 
the country is evolving, which would c onnect customers in various parts of the 
country to the sources of gas. 
Sl. No. Name of the pipeline Approximate proposed length 
of pipeline 
1. Dabhol-Bangalore Pipeline 730 km  
2. Kochi-Kangjirkkod-Mangalore 
Pipeline 
862 km 
3. Jagdishpur Haldia Pipeline 876 km 
 
4. Dadri-Bawana-Nangal Pipeline 590 km 
5. Chhainsa-Gurgaon-Jhajjar-
Hissar Pipeline 
310 km 

  
 
Recommendation No. 6 (iii)  
Gas Pipeline Policy 
The Committee note that Government has a proposal to announce Natural 
Gas Pipeline Policy which will inter-alia  lay down the broad frame work for laying 
of transmission pipelines, gas trunk pipeli nes and inter-city pipelines.  While the 
draft Pipeline policy has been prepared, t he Committee are constrained the note 
that final policy has yet not been announced even though Secretary, Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas during hi s deposition before the Committee in 
September, 2006 had stated that the policy was expected to be issued within two 
weeks.  As the proposed policy is aimed at facilitating open access for all players 
to the pipeline network on non–discriminat ory basis, encourage more investment 
in this sector which in turn would help in speedy completion of current and future 
pipeline projects, Committee desire that Natural Gas Pipeline Policy should be 
announced without any further delay.  
Reply of the Government  
Government has notified the ‘Poli cy for Development of Natural Gas 
Pipelines and City or Local Natural Gas Dis tribution Networks’ on December 20, 
2006.  The policy has come into effect from December 22, 2006, the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette. 
 
Recommendation No. 7
 
Gas storage capacity 
   The Committee note that there is zero storage of natural gas in the 
country.  In the event of any disrupti on in the supply of gas, Committee have 
been informed by GAIL that they supply gas which is there in the compressed 
form within the pipeline, called line pack or other option is use of liquid fuels both 
of which are not at all a satisfactory state of affairs.  
As natural gas is stored underground in sa lt caverns/ depleted fields or in 
aquifers, Committee note that GAIL has started a feasibility study.  Committee 
desire that GAIL should expedite comple tion of feasibility study and take steps 
for creation of storage capacit y for natural gas for 2-3 weeks so that in the event 
of any energy deficit arisi ng out of oil/ gas supply di sruption, supply of gas to 
various consumers viz fertilizer/ power plants etc., is not disrupted.  

  
Reply of the Government 
GAIL has envisaged setting up of commercial Natural Gas storage facilities 
along HVJ-DVPL pipeline and on the east c oast near gas consumption centers. 
Discussions have been held with various parties having experience in the area of gas 
storage and necessary inputs have been taken for the project. GAIL has initiated 
activities for preparation of the F easibility Report. The study will involve 
assessment of required stor age capacity, selection of the best sites suitable for 
gas storage and optimal solution for construction of the same.  
Further, MoP&NG constituted a Committee in October 2005 for preparation 
of Pre-feasibility Report/Det ailed Feasibility Report for setting up of Strategic 
Natural gas storage facilities. The Commi ttee comprised of members from OIDB, 
GAIL, DGH and EIL. The pr eparation of Pre-Feasibility Report has been taken up 
by OIDB for setting up of strategic Natura l gas storage through EIL. The report is 
expected to be ready by September 2007.    
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Gas distribution by GAIL 
Committee note that at present Piped Natural Gas is being made available 
in certain localities in Delhi, Mumbai , Assam and Gujrat and GAIL intends to 
provide natural gas to another  10-11 cities through city gas distribution network in 
the next eight years. As a long-term measure, Committee have been informed that 
GAIL has identified 28 cities for implementation of city gas distribution project on the 
basis of most polluted cities identif ied by honorable Supreme Court and other 
cities close to GAIL pipeline network on the basis of busi ness need and project 
viability.  The Committee des ire that GAIL should take all possible steps to 
achieve the objective of providing gas to  10-11 cities in the next eight years. 
Further, they should explore the feasibility of covering all the 28 cities identified by 
them in the next phase.  
Regarding the compressed natural gas (CNG), the Committee note that the 
entire public transport system of Delhi t oday runs on CNG. The Committee however note 
that CNG distribution is not made available to other major cities such as Pune despite a 
Supreme court order requiring the start of CNG by 2006. The Committee recommend 
that GAIL should make efforts to see t hat CNG is made available to other major 
cities as well, as such a step will not only help in reducing the consumption of 
petrol which is a costlier fuel but also help in controlling the pollution of cities.    

  
The Committee would like the GAIL authorities to expedite the setting up 
of interstate pipeline network in close vicinity of metropolitan cities and other 
industrially important centres of the st ates, and in suitable phases GAIL should 
prioritise the issue of making available CNG  in the overall interests of rapid and 
inclusive growth of the economy.  
Reply of the Government 
Piped Natural Gas (PNG) is being presently supplied in the following cities 
and towns:- 
Delhi, Mumbai, Agartala, Surat, Ha zira, Junagam, Vasva, Mora, Damka, 
Bhatlai, Kawas, Rajgiri,  Suwali, Icchapore, Ankles hwar, Bharauch, Vadodara, 
Ahmedabad, Vidyanagar, Anand, Morbi,  Gandhinagar, Duliajan, Digboi, 
Dibrugarh, Moran, Naharkatiya, Sivasagar, Nazira, Simaluguri and Tinsukia. 
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) is being presently supplied to vehicles in 
the following cities:- 
Mumbai, Thane, Mira-Bhayandar, Delhi,  NOIDA, Vijayawada, Hyderabad, 
Kanpur, Lucknow, Agra, Agartala, Ahm edabad, Ankleshwar, Bharuch, Surat, 
Vadodara, Gandhinagar and Hazira. 
GAIL and other entities have recently  applied for authorizations for City 
Gas Distribution (CGD) projects in a large number of cities. 
The Committee was earlier informed that GAIL has identified 28 cities for 
implementation of CGD Projects. These citi es were identified on the basis of the 
most polluted cities, wher e CGD projects have to be implemented in view of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court’s directions, and ot her cities, which are close to GAIL’s 
pipeline network and are seen as busine ss fit cases. As desired by the 
Committee, GAIL is taking all possible steps to achieve the objective of 
providing PNG and CNG to all the identif ied cities. The current status and 
expected target date for s upply of CNG and PNG to the identified cities is 
enclosed. 
Further, the detailed status of activities for CNG distribution in Pune is as 
follows:- 

  
1. The JV Partner:    
GAIL and BPCL have formed Join t Venture Company, namely, 
Maharashtra Natural Gas Limited for im plementation of City Gas Distribution 
project in Pune. 
2. Signing of JVA:  
JVA has been signed on 26.07.2004. 
3. Incorporation of the Company:  
Joint Venture Company was incorporated on 13.01.2006. 
4. Market Survey:  
Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) st udy, including Market survey and 
demand assessment, has already been completed. 
5. Land / RoU acquisition:  
Identification of land fo r CNG stations and acquisition of RoU is under 
process. 
6. Contribution towards equity:  
Rs.10 crores (Rs. 5 crores each by GAIL and BPCL) has already been 
contributed. 
7. Engagement of Project Execution Agency:  
Engineering and Project Management C onsultant (EPMC) has been 
appointed and the job is being executed. 
8. Pipeline connectivity from gas supply line:  
Supply of natural gas to Pune City Gate Station has been planned by 
GAIL as part of Dhabol Panvel Pi peline (DPPL) Project. The work is 
expected to be completed by the end of 2007. 
9. Expected Commissioning of Project:  
It is expected that 1 st CNG station would be commissioned and CNG 
supply would commence by 31.01. 2008. 
The Committee has suggested that GAIL should expedite the setting up of 
inter-state pipeline network in close vicinity of metropolitan cities and other 
industrially important centers of states . Detailed information in this regard is 
submitted in the reply to Recommendati on No. 6(ii). The developing network of 
trunk pipelines would facilitate availabilit y of CNG in a much greater number of 
cities. 

  
 
 
 
 
Project Status Sl. 
No
. 
Name of 
City 
N a m e  o f  J V  /  
Status of JV 
Formation 
Gas 
Allocatio
n 
(MMSCM
D) 
Market 
Survey 
& 
Demand 
Study 
DFR Pipeline 
Connectivity 
project 
Implementati
on Status 
Target 
Date for 
supply of 
CNG 
1. Agra Green Gas 
Limited 
NIL Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Available 1 CNG station  Already 
commission
ed 
2. Lucknow Green Gas 
Limited 
0.1 Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Available 4 CNG station  Already 
commission
ed 
3. Kanpur Central U.P. 
Gas Limited 
0.1 Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Available 3 CNG 
stations 
Already 
commission
ed 
4. Varanasi Central U.P. 
Gas Limited 
Nil Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Proposed 
Jagdishpur – 
Haldia 
To be taken 
up with 
implementatio
n of 
Jagdishpur – 
Haldia 
 
2010 
5. Pune Maharashtra 
Natural Gas 
Limited 
0.4 Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Feeder 
Pipeline is 
being laid as 
part of  
Dhabol Panvel 
Project. 
Target date of 
commissionin
g -  
Downstream 
project 
implementatio
n activities 
being taken 
up by MNGL 
 
   2008 
6. Faridabad Indraprastha 
Gas Limited 
0.7 
(includin
g 
NOIDA, 
Gurgaon 
& 
Faridaba
d) 
Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Feeder P/L 
available 
IGL can 
supply after 
clearance 
from State 
Govt. 
 
- 
7. Patna JV Partner to 
be finalized 
NIL Carried 
out in 
2002 
Prepar
ed in 
2002 
Proposed 
Jagdishpur – 
Haldia 
To be taken 
up with 
implementatio
n of 
Jagdishpur – 
Haldia 
pipeline 
2010 8. Ahmedabad MoU signed 
with HPCL on 
16.11.2005; 
JVA under 
finalization 
NIL Carried 
out by 
HPCL 
Carrie
d out 
by 
HPCL 
Pipeline 
available 
HPCL is 
supplying 
CNG 
Already 
available 
9. Sholapur Maharashtra 
Natural Gas 
Limited 
NIL To be 
taken up 
To be 
taken 
up 
To be taken 
up  
Implementatio
n to be taken 
by MNGL after 
commissionin
g in Pune 
 
        2008 
10. Hyderabad Bhagyanagar 
Gas Limited 
0.1  Carried 
out in 
2003 
Prepar
ed in 
2003 
Proposed 
Kakinada- 
Uran Pipeline 
Auto LPG is 
already being 
supplied. 
Already 
available 

  
 
 
11 
Bangalore MoU has 
been signed 
with BPCL on 
22.12.2005 
NIL To be 
taken up 
To be taken up Proposed Kochi – 
Kanjirkkod-
Mangalore-
Bangalore  
Pipeline.  
 
Implementation 
to be taken up 
after formation 
JVC and tie up 
of Gas. 
 
 
2010 
 
 
12 
Kolkata Signing of 
MoU under 
progress 
Nil To be 
taken up 
To be taken up Proposed 
Jagdishpur- Haldia 
Pipeline  
To be taken up 
after 
commissioning 
of Jagdishpur-
Hadia P/L  
 
 2009 
 
13 
Chennai JV partner to 
be identified 
Nil To be 
taken up 
To be taken up Proposed 
Kakinada- Chennai 
Pipeline 
To be taken up 
with 
commissioning 
of Kakinada-
Chennai P/L by 
Reliance Energy 
Limited. 
  
 2010 
14 
Allahabad Central UP 
Gas Limited 
(CUGL) 
Nil Carried 
out 
To be taken up Thulendi Phoolpur 
pipeline is already 
laid. 
CUGL to take up 
the 
implementation. 
 
 2009 
15 
Bareilly Central UP 
Gas Limited 
(CUGL) 
0.05 Carried 
out  
Carried out Feeder Pipeline is 
available 
CUGL to take up 
the 
implementation. 
  
 2007 
16 
Jhansi Central UP 
Gas Limited 
(CUGL) 
Nil Carried 
out  
To be taken up Feeder pipeline is 
available 
CUGL to take up 
the 
implementation. 
 
2009 
17 
Mathura Green Gas 
Limited 
(GGL) 
Nil Carried 
out 
To be taken up Pipeline available 
to up to IOCL 
Mathura Refinery 
GGL to take up 
the 
implementation 
  
2009 
 
18 
NOIDA State Govt. of 
Uttar Pradesh 
issued NOC 
to Adani 
Energy 
Limited. 
0.7 (including 
NOIDA, 
Gurgaon & 
Faridabad) 
To be 
taken up 
To be taken up Pipeline available  
- 
 
- 
19 
Navi Mumbai Mahanagar 
Gas Limited 
(MGL) 
0.5 (Thane & 
Navi Mumbai) 
To be 
taken up  
To be taken up To be taken up MGL to take up 
the 
implementation  
 
  2007 
20 
 
Gwalior Aavantika 
Gas Limited 
(AGL) 
Nil Carried 
out 
To be taken up Feeder pipeline 
available 
AGL to take up 
the 
implementation 
 
2007 
21 
Indore Aavantika 
Gas Limited 
(AGL) 
Nil Carried 
out 
Carried out Jagoti-Pitampur 
Feeder Pipeline 
under execution  
AGL to take up 
the 
implementation 
 
2007 
22 
Ujjain Aavantika 
Gas Limited 
(AGL) 
Nil Carried 
out 
 Feeder pipeline 
being laid 
AGL to take up 
the 
implementation 
2007 
23 
Rajamundry Bhagyanagar 
Gas Lmited 
(BGL) 
Nil To be 
taken up 
To be taken up Feeder Pipeline 
available 
BGL to take up 
the 
implementation 
 
2008 
24 
Vijayawada Bhagyanagar 
Gas Lmited 
(BGL) 
Nil Carried 
out 
Carried out Pipeline available  
4 CNG Stations 
 
Already 
Commossion
ed 
25 
Rajkot MoU has 
been signed 
with HPCL on 
16.11.2005 
Nil Carried 
out 
To be taken up To be taken up To be taken up 
by JVC 
 
2007 
26 
 
Surendranag
ar 
MoU has 
been signed 
with HPCL on 
16.11.2005 
NIl Carried 
out 
To be taken up To be taken up To be taken up 
by JVC 
 
2007 
27 
 
Kota MoU has 
been signed 
with HPCL on 
16.11.2005 
Nil Carried 
out 
Carried out Pipeline available To be taken up 
by JVC 
 
2007 

  
Recommendation No. 10 
Gas Pricing Policy 
The Committee have been informed that in view of different sources from 
where gas is made available, i.e., through domestic production and imports in the 
form of LNG and pipeline gas, it is difficult  to arrive at a uniform price of gas, 
sector-wise as well as source-wise. Thus, as on date, there is no direct regulation 
of prices for all gases other than adm inistrative price mechanism regulated 
domestic gas produced by ONGC/OIL, which involves a limited volume of 55 
MMSCMD. The Committee feel that for or derly growth of gas market in the 
country, it is imperative that clear-cut guidelines are issued for determination of 
gas price from different sources. The Committee note that a Committee has been 
set-up in the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, to come out with a 
transparent policy framewor k which will provide the basis and the guidelines for 
determination of gas price. The Committ ee desire that gas pricing policy be 
evolved on the basis of recommendation of this Committee so as to ensure that 
gas prices are fixed on a transparent basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 At present, there are br oadly two pricing regimes for gas in the country - 
gas priced under APM and non-APM or free market gas. The price of APM gas is 
set by the Government. As regards non- APM/free market gas, this could also be 
broadly divided into two categories, nam ely, imported LNG and domestically 
produced gas from JV fields. While the price of LNG imported under term 
contracts is governed by the SPA betw een the LNG seller and the buyer, the 
spot cargoes are purchased on mut ually agreeable commercial terms. As 
regards JV gas, its pricing is governed in terms of the PSC provisions. At 
present, out of the total gas availab ility of around 96 MMSCMD in the country, 
around 53 MMSCMD is APM gas and 43 MMSCMD in non-APM gas (20 
MMSCMD JV gas and 23 MMSCMD RLNG). APM gas, which comes from the 
existing fields of ONGC and OIL given to them on nomination basis by the 
Government, is on the decline; while it forms about 60% of the total gas available 
at present, its share is likely to co me down to around 15-20% by 2011-12; while 
the quantities under RLNG and JV production will go up. 
 

  
1.1 APM Pricing 
1.1.1   The Cabinet decided that the consumer price be revised to 
Rs.3,200/MSCM w.e.f. 1.7.2005 for the follo wing categories of consumers. It was 
also decided that all t he APM gas (estimated at around 55 MMSCMD then) will 
be supplied to only these categories.  
a. Power sector consumers 
b. Fertilizers sector consumers  
c. Consumers covered under court orders 
d. Consumers having allocati ons of less than 0.05 MMSCMD. 
 
This increase was on an ad hoc basis and it was decided that the Tariff 
Commission would examine the issue of Producer price of natural gas.  
 
1.1.2  It was decided that the price of  gas supplied to small consumers and 
transport sector (CNG) would be increased over the next 3 to 5 years to the level 
of the market price. With effect fr om 06.06.2006, the APM gas price to small 
consumers and CNG sector has been increas ed by 20%, to bring it to Rs.3840 / 
MSCM.  
1.1.3  It was decided that the gas price to the consumers, other than those stated 
in para 1.1.1 above, would be market determined.  
1.1.4 The Tariff Commission (TC) has  submitted its report and has 
recommended Producer price of Rs.3710/MSCM and Rs.4150/MSCM for ONGC 
and OIL respectively. TC has also reco mmended that the consumer price should 
be somewhat higher than the Producer price, looking at the substantial difference 
between the recommended Producer pr ice and the price of market 
gas/alternative fuels. MoP&NG is exam ining the recommendation of TC and 
would be revising the prices of natural gas shortly. 
1.2 Pricing of gas under Pre-NELP Pr oduction Sharing Contracts – PMT 
and Ravva JV gas  
1.2.1 Production Sharing Contracts (PSC s) were executed by GOI with Ravva 
consortium and PMT consortium on Oc tober 28, 1994 and Dece mber 12, 1994 
respectively. 
1.2.2  In terms of PSC for PMT, the ce iling prices are to be revised to 150% of 
90% F.O. basket (average of the preceding 18 months), after 7 years from the 
date of first supply. Thus, the revisi on was due w.e.f. June 2004 for Tapti and 
February 2005 for Panna Mukta.  The PMT gas prices have since been revised. 

  
While PMT sells 4.8 MMSCMD of gas dire ctly, the balance quantity of about 6 
MMSCMD is brought by GAIL, and GAIL paid @ $3.86/MMBTU during 2005-06 
and is paying @ $4.75/MMBTU w.e.f 1.4.06 based on counter-matching the price 
offered by prospective consumers in  response to the bid floated by the 
consortium. However, this gas is being supplied by GAIL to power and fertilizers 
sector consumers along HBJ pipeline at  APM price and adjustments are being 
made through the gas pool account mechanism  in terms of the pricing order of 
20.6.2005. 
1.2.3  In case of Ravva, the revision of ceiling price is due after 5 years from the 
date of supply and the revised ceiling price is to be negotiated between the Buyer 
and the Seller in good faith. The price re vision for Ravva was due w.e.f. April 
2002. The price revision has been effect ed w.e.f. July 1, 2005 and GAIL has 
been paying @ $3.50/MMBTU since then. The share of this gas going to APM 
consumers is being charged by GAIL at APM price, with adjustment through gas 
pool account mechanism. The total quantity of this gas is around 1 MMSCMD. 
1.2.4 As regards 0.9 MMSCMD Ravva  Satellite gas, it was priced at 
$3.3/MMBTU till September 18, 2006.  The price has been revised to 
$4.3/MMBTU in terms of the provisions of  PSC. Since this gas  is not under APM 
allocation, GAIL recovers the full price from the consumers.  
 
1.3 Pricing of gas with reference to NELP Provisions:
 
 As regards the gas from NELP fields, the price of natural gas for sale to 
consumers shall be in accordance with the PSC provisions. It is to be fixed at 
arm’s length price as per the provisions of PSC under NELP.  Prior approval of 
MoP&NG has to be obtained for the formula or the basis on which the price is 
fixed. 
   The role of Government is to appr ove the valuation of gas for the purpose 
of determining Government take.  In or der to provide transparency in approving 
valuations, the Government had formed a Committee to formulate transparent 
guidelines for approving natural gas price formula / basis for giving Government 
approval under the Production Sharing Contracts.   
The Committee, which was constituted by the Ministry in August 2006, 
was headed by Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor, Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas and had DG, DGH and concer ned Joint Secretaries as other 
members. 

  
The Committee has recommended that in  all situations where a price 
discovery through competitive bidding is  possible, there should be no need to 
apply any other principle for valuation of  gas.  Once a market-determined price 
has been discovered between the suppliers and customers through a transparent 
competitive bidding process, there s hould be no need for the Government to 
interfere with the same. 
Further, the Committee has said t hat in the absence of a market 
determined price discovered through a transparent bidding process, where 
valuation of gas has to be necessarily  done by Govt., it may be done, based on 
the price in the most rec ent competitively determined c ontract in the region duly 
indexed to the present.  Index ation is to be done as per provisions of the market 
determined reference contract, as each market determined contract sets out 
various terms and conditions of supply, including the price review mechanism.   
The Committee has noted that each cont ract, normally, has a price review 
clause every 5 years. If the price stands reviewed as per the reference contract 
that may become the new reference pric e. For interim periods, the Committee 
has recommended that indexation may be lin ked to percentage increase in price 
of cheapest liquid fuel, i.e., Furnace O il (FO), which is not only the cheapest 
liquid fuel but has also shown least price volatility in recent years. 
The Committee was of the view that  the above valuation may be applied 
only when actual supply has commenced and the price has not been discovered 
through the market mechanism.  However, if the actual price, at which any 
producer supplies to any consumer, is higher than the one arrived at by the 
above methodology, then the higher price is  to be reckoned for Govt. take.  It 
would be ideal if the Committee’s approac h had never to be applied, but if the 
eventuality does arise, DG DGH and Dir ector, PPAC will do the calculations 
based on Committee’s recommendations. It would be DGH’s responsibility to 
ensure that the Producer remits the Government’s take accordingly. 
 
1.4 Pricing of R-LNG: 
1.4.1  A contract was signed with RasGas, Qatar for supply of 5 MMTPA LNG 
(equivalent to about 18 MMSCMD) by Pe tronet LNG Limited and supplies were 
commenced from April 2004.  The price for LNG has been linked to JCC crude oil 
under an agreed formula. However, the FOB pr ice for the period up to December 

  
2008 has been agreed at a constant price of $2.53/MMBTU. This price translates 
to RLNG price of $3.86/MMBTU ex-Dahej terminal. 
1.4.2  In order to make the price of RLNG affordable, it has been decided to pool 
the prices of 5 MMTPA RLNG presently being imported from Qatar with the price 
of new RLNG being imported on term contract basis. This would ensure supply of 
RLNG to both existing and new custom ers at a non-discriminatory uniform 
pooled price. 
Recommendation No.11
 
Regulator 
The Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulat ory Board Act, 2006, which, inter-
alia, stipulates for setting up of a r egulatory Board Authority for downstream 
operations like transportation, distribution, marketing, processing, storage etc. of 
natural gas was notified by Governm ent in April, 2006. The Committee are 
constrained to note that though more t han seven months have elapsed since the 
notification was issued, t he Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board has not 
yet been established. The Committee have been informed that a Search 
Committee for selecting Chairperson and Members of the Board has been 
notified on 31.08.06.  The Committee desire t hat Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas should urge the Search Committee to submit their recommendations 
expeditiously and based on their recommendation Ministry should take steps to 
constitute the PNGRB and appoint regulator without any further delay.  
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 The Petroleum & Natural Gas Regul atory Board has been constituted 
w.e.f. 25-6-2007 with the following composition:- 
Chairman -  Shri L. Mansingh. 
Members - 1) Shri B.S. Negi 
  2) Shri L.K. Singhvi 
  3) Smt. Sudha Mahalingam  
  4) Shri M.B. Lal (Technical Appellate Tribunal) 
  5) Dr. Dange (Legal)  
 

  
Recommendation No. 12 
Safety Measures 
 
The Committee have been informed that GAIL has always accorded 
highest priority to maintenance of highes t standards of safety and continue to 
strive for zero accident, in  all its industrial installations. In recognition of its 
efforts, GAIL has earned several safety awards and laurels from various national 
and international bodies.  
 
Despite all the laudable steps that  have been taken by GAIL, Committee 
note that during the last three years number of a ccidents have increased year 
after year.  While in 2003 only one incident  of fire due to gas leakage in Gandhar 
occurred, in the year 2004, three incidents of fire and electrocution took place.  In 
2005 number of such incidents increased to f our.  Even in the current year, i.e., 
2006 already three accidents have occurred.   Although GAIL (India) Limited has 
made tall claims about their safety, yet t hey have not been able to achieve zero 
accident rate. The Committee would like to emphasise that accidents are not only 
harmful to the workers and the people near by but also cause damage to the 
assets of the company. The Committee therefore recommend that GAIL should 
further strengthen its safety measures and ensure their strict compliance so that 
the intended objective of achieving zero accident rate in all its units is achieved.  
 
Reply of the Government
 
GAIL continues to strive for Zero a ccidents in all its units. Its emphasis on 
safety starts right from the pl anning stage and continues through design, 
construction, operation & maintenance. GAIL has established a structured Safety 
Management System which is being follow ed at all installations. GAIL is 
committed to achieve Zero accidents through continuous improvement and 
strengthening of it existing safety system and measures. In this  regard, notable 
initiatives of the Company taken recently are as follows: 
1. Implementation of Enterprise Re source Planning (ERP) all across GAIL 
installations. 
(a)   wherein the work permit system, electrical lockout and job cards have 
been made on line. 
(b)  the environment, health & safety  module of SAP has been implemented in 

  
major work centers, wherein the in cident/accident reporting/investigation, 
internal safety audits and compliance and occupational health examination 
have been made on line. 
2. The near miss awareness and reporti ng from the work centers have 
increased manifold due to rigorous follow up & reporting of near miss 
incidents by work centers on regular basis. 
3. Six monthly workshops on safety and related topics are being organized at 
the work centers. 
4.  CMD's rolling trophy for the best HSE performer during the year, amongst 
all GAIL units/process plants,  has been introduced to generate 
competitiveness and further enhance the safety performance. 
These safety measures shall help in bringing down the accident rate and 
finally achieve/attain the Zero accident  target. As per Table -1, the no of 
accidents/incidents have already come down from 4 in 2005 to3 in 2006.  
 Apart from this, existing and in place Safety measures, mentioned below, 
are being adhered and followed strictly:- 
1. Review of safety measures at the design stage. 
2. Safe construction practices during execution of the project. 
3. Pre-commissioning audit by OISD. 
4. Hazop and risk analysis of plants & pipelines. 
5. Emergency Response Plan established for all major installations. 
6. Mutual aid during emergency. 
7. Certification of OHSAS 18001. 
8. Operation & maintenance manuals with proper safety instructions. 
9. Availability of properly maintained safety data sheet. 
10. Conducting quarterly internal safety audits. 
11. External Safety audit by Oil Industries Safety Directorate. 
12. External Safety audit through r eputed national/ international agency. 
13. Effective telecommunication system th rough optical fibre, microwave, HF, 
VHF, paging and cellular telephones. 
14. Supervisory control and data acquisi tion (SCADA) of various parameters 
of the pipeline and transmitting data to Master Control Centre (MCC) for 
effective monitoring on real time basis.  
15. Remote operation of Sectionalizing Valves (SV) provided in the pipeline 
from MCC in cases of emergency. 
16. Emergency shutdown of the plants (automatic/ manual). 
17. Availability of round-the-clock fire  tenders and fire fight ing crew at all 
installations. 
18. Work Permit System. 
19. Training of employees on safety i ssues including personnel safety on 
regular basis. 
20. Conducting Safety Workshops. 
21. Review by the top management on safety matters during meetings. 
22. Incident investigation to identify t he root cause and implement corrective 

  
measures to prevent recurrence. 
23. Adherence to established Managem ent of Change procedure for any 
modifications in the plants.  
24. Established system for Control of def eat and reliability of  critical systems 
and devices.  
25. Effective monitoring of Third Party Services. 
 
TABLE -1 
 
Year  No. of accidents/ 
causalities 
Death Injury  Compensati
on 
Cause  Preventive 
Measure Taken 
2003 Fire due to gas 
leak in Gandhar 
Dhuwaran P/L on 
26.4.03 
Nil Nil NA Gas leak from 
one of the 
flanges near pig 
receiving barrel 
caused fire 
 
Maintenance of Pig 
barrels valves 
strengthened.  
History cards 
maintained. 
2004 Electrocution at 
LPG Plant 
Vaghodia on 
12.3.04 
1 
contract 
worker 
Nil Refer Note 
1 
Electrocution 
while checking 
bus bar of 
isolated panel 
1. Contractor 
to ensure safety 
briefing given to all 
workers 
 
2. Supervision
 done by GAl
L
executives 
 
3. Electrical 
lockout permit 
system reviewed. 
 
 Electrocution at 
construction site 
on Agartala on 
06.07.04 
1 
contract 
worker 
Nil Refer Note 1 Electrocution 1. Temporary 
switch  boards/ 
panels protected 
from rain water  
 
2. PPE use 
ensured 
 
 
3.  Safety 
briefing given to 
workers at site 
 
 Fire incident in 
LPG Phase I 
Vijaipur on 
06.07.04 
Nil Minor 
burn 
injury of 1 
GAIL 
Employee 
Rs.37,143 Malfunctioning 
of the igniter of 
pilot burner 
leading to flash 
fire 
1. Job to be 
covered under hot 
work permit. 
 
2.  Jobs 
performed at odd 
hours should be 
approved by 
General Manager 
 
Job to be carried in 
presence of GAlL 
executive 
2005 Fire incident at 
Pata 
Nil  Burn 
injury to 
Rs.92,800 Leakage of 
Cyclohexane 
1. Proper risk 
assessment done 

  
Petrochemical 
complex on 
29.04.06 
01 GAIL 
employee 
before any 
hazardous job 
 
2. Open 
hydrocarbon loops 
avoided as far as 
possible. If at all 
unavoidable job to 
be carried out as 
per SOP and with 
due approval of 
General Manager. 
 
 
3. Jobs 
involving fire 
hazards, if done at 
odd hours should be 
with the approval of 
GM/OIC. 
 
4. Procedures 
established for all 
non routine jobs 
 
 Minor fire due to 
gas leak in 
DESU-Maruti P/l 
on 10.08.2005 
Nil Nil NA Gas leak from 
pipeline 
puncture 
caused by 
localized 
heating by 
passing 
overhead 30 
KV surge 
diverter cable. 
A study carried out 
and after initial 
study 11 KV cable 
was taken away by 
about 2 feet form 
pipeline and 6 
inches thick PCC 
slabs were 
positioned in 
between the 
pipeline and cable 
at the affected 
location  
 
 Non fatal accident 
of fall of 
employee from 
monkey ladder of 
furnace in GCU 
Pata on 
11.9.2005 
 
 
Nil 1  
GAIL 
employee 
Rs. 1,25,000 Fall from height All access/ ladders 
in the plant area 
audited for safety.  
System of periodic 
checking initiated 
for entire plant. 
 Non fatal 
accident of fall 
of contract 
worker from 
rooftop 
of C&P Cement 
Godown Pata 
on 
30.09.2005 
 
Nil 
1 
contract 
employee 
 
Refer 
Note 1 
Fall from 
height 
Stringent use of 
safety belt for 
work at 
height 
2006 Minor fire/gas 
leak in 8" 
diameter 
Natural 
Nil Nil Nil 
Passing of fault 
current through 
pipeline 
originated 
1. A survey 
was done to locate 
erected electrical 
poles in close 

  
Gas Pipeline at 
Ferozabad on 
19.08.06 
from 11 KV 
overhead 
conductor 
puncturing 
pipeline and 
leading to fire 
proximity to gas 
pipelines. 
 
2. Electrical 
poles shifted to 
distance from 
pipeline. Where 
ever, not feasible 
insulation provided 
between pipelines 
and poles. 
 
 
 Flash fire in HT 
panel injury to 
one 
employee at 
IPS, 
Mansarampura 
on 
24.08.2006 
Nil 
Burn 
injury to 
one 
GAIL 
employee 
 (no 
disable 
ment) 
Claim 
lodged 
with 
insurance 
company 
(approx. 
Rs30,00 
00) 
Exposure to 
Flash fire in HT 
panel while 
isolation / 
maintenance 
1.Strict 
implementation of 
electrical isolation 
procedure 
 
2.Provision of 
rubber mats on floor 
while working on 
such panels 
 
 Minor Fire /gas 
leakage in 2' 
diameter NG 
Firozabad 
onl1.09.2006 Nil Nil Nil  
Passing of fault 
current 
through pipeline 
originated 
from 11 KV 
overhead 
conductor 
puncturing 
pipeline and 
leading to fire 
1. Close 
proximity electrical 
poles shifted away 
 
2. Insulation 
provided between 
pipeline and 
electrical poles, 
wherever shifting 
was not feasible 
 

  
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
Shortage of rich gas to HVJ based plants. 
 
The Committee have been informed that in order to ensure rich gas 
supplies to GAIL’s processing plants al ong HVJ pipelines, rich LNG was sourced 
from Qatar and currently rich LNG from  Dahej is entering into HVJ system. 
However, in view of Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural Gas’s decision permitting 
ONGC for setting up of C2-C3 extraction plant at Dahej which is expected to 
commence from 2009 onwards, GAIL have informed that extraction of rich gas by 
ONGC at Dahej would lead to shortage of rich gas to their HVJ based plants and 
their investment of Rs. 4000 crores on the gas processing facilities along the HVJ 
system would stand exposed to the threat of turning into non-performing assets.  
 
The Committee desire that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas should 
hold consultation with repres entatives of ONGC and GAIL and take remedial 
steps so as to ensure that GAIL’s processing plants along HVJ pipeline don’t 
face shortage of rich gas.  
    
Reply of the Government
 
 
New gas finds are expected to be m ade in the blocks awarded under the 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NEL P). The Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
infrastructure in the country is being expanded, which would make it possible to 
import large quantity of LNG in the c ountry. Depending upon the availability of 
C2+ fractions in the gas thus available, GAIL would be able to optimally utilize its 
processing plants. GAIL has been advised to  take expeditious action to tie-up 
gas sources for this purpose.  

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
ORGANISATIONAL SET-UP 
The Committee note that GAIL’s activi ties have increased manifold since 
its setting up in 1984.  The Committee have been informed that the diverse 
business profile of Company, such as exploration & production, city gas 
marketing etc., has warranted a realignment  of portfolio among various Directors 
which include creation of new director ates and accordingly a proposal for 
creation of the position of Director (Operations) has been put up before the HR 
Committee, a sub-committee of Board of  Directors. The Committee are unable to 
understand the reasons due to which no dec ision has yet been taken by the HR 
Committee on the said proposal. The Commi ttee desire that the proposal for 
creation of Director (Operations) be clear ed expeditiously and steps be taken to 
appoint Director (Operations) with due promptitude.   
The Committee are also constrained to note that Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas have not communicated any decision on GAIL’s proposal for 
requirement of additional independent Directors on its Board despite the fact that 
GAIL has taken up the matter with them number of times.  The Committee need 
not emphasise the imperative need of full complement of  Directors on the Board 
of GAIL for the effective and efficient f unctioning of its various activities. They 
therefore recommend that Mi nistry of Petroleum & Natural Gas should take 
immediate decision on GAIL’s proposal fo r appointment of additional Directors. 
The Committee also recommend that a co mprehensive review of organizational 
setup of GAIL may be undertaken in vi ew of its fast expanding role and 
responsibility in meeting the energy requirements of the country.  
 
Reply of the Government
 
 The proposal for creation of posit ion of Director (Operations) was 
submitted to HR sub-committee of Board of  Directors of GAIL. It was proposed 
that in view of the diverse business pr ofile of GAIL, realignment of portfolios 
among various directorates(s), including creation of the pos ition of Director 

  
(Operations), is needed. The proposal is under active consideration of the HR 
sub-committee. 
Regarding appointment of Independent Dir ectors on the Board of GAIL, 
the Search Committee of the DPE has recently recommended some names for 
the post of Independent Directors on the Boar d of the GAIL (Indi a) Limited. The 
recommendations of the Search Committee are being examined in the Ministry. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
 Please refer paragraph no. 5 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Role of GAIL in India’s Gas Security 
In view of steep hike in  prices of crude oil in international market and 
resultant strain on foreign exchange reserves  of the country, it is imperative that 
concerted efforts are made to augment t he supply of gas which is relatively 
cheaper and cleaner fuel to meet the energy  requirements of the country.  The 
Committee note that that at  present natural gas meet s only 8% of the energy 
requirement of our country and its share is projected to  grow up to 20% in the 
next twenty years i.e. by the year 2026.  To reduce the wide gap of 40% between 
demand and supply of natural gas and to augm ent the share of natural gas up to 
20% in the energy sector in the next twenty years, the Co mmittee note that a 
multi-pronged strategy has been adopted by GA IL which include participation in 
NELP blocks; setting up of LNG terminal s to import LNG; bringing of gas by 
transnational pipelines; extraction of gas by use of clean coal technology etc. The 
above-mentioned multi-pronged st rategy adopted to ensure the gas security of 
India has been dealt with as under:  
The Committee note that Government has taken steps for importing gas 
through transnational pipelines from gas rich countries, namely, Iran, Myanmar 
and Turkmenistan and the three pipeli ne proposals are Iran-Pakistan-India 
pipeline, Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Paki stan-India pipeline and Myanmar-India 
pipeline.  As regards Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline, Committee note the matter has 
been under discussion with Iran for the last 2 ½ years and the only issue which is 
pending resolution pertains to price at which gas is to be sold by Iran to Pakistan 
and India.  The Committee were informed by  Secretary, Minist ry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas during evidence on 26 th September, 2006 that he was confident 
that pricing issue would be resolved ov er the next two months. The Committee 
hope that the stalemate with regard to gas price issue would be resolved soon.  
As regards Turkmenistan - Afghanist an – Pakistan India (TAPI) Pipeline 
project, the Committee note that Asian De velopment Bank (ADB) which is the 
technical sponsor of the TAPI pipeli ne project has been requested to go to 

  
Turkmenistan and make survey about the adequa cy of reserves to supply gas to 
India, and to give the necessary certif ication. The Committee have been further 
informed that discussion will start only after the certification is  given by ADB to 
India. The Committee desire that the matter may be vigorously pursued with ADB 
and based on their certification steps  may be taken to negotiate with 
Turkmenistan for supply of gas.    
With regard to gas from Myanmar, the Committee were informed that 
Myanmar has floated an international bid fo r the two blocks, and India has also 
put in the bid, and if that  bid is acceptable to Myanmar, then the negotiations 
would reach the final shape. The Commi ttee desire that GAIL/Ministry should 
play more proactive role and make all out e fforts to bring in natural gas into India 
through transnational pipelines from Iran, Myanmar and Turkmenistan.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) 
 With regard to Iran-Pakistan-India (IPI) pipeline project, six trilateral 
meetings between Iran, Pakistan and India have been held. The issue of price of 
natural gas has not been reso lved so far. During the 4 th tripartite meeting held in 
Tehran on January 24 & 25, 2007, a gas pric ing formula regarding pricing of gas 
at   Iran-Pakistan border was agreed between Iran and Pakistan sides, subject to 
approval from the respective Governments. The Indian side agreed to respond to 
the pricing formula.   India conveyed to the Iranian side, vide letter dated 
28.2.2007, that total price payable at I ndia-Pakistan border would also depend 
on  transportation cost and transit fees pay able by India to Pakistan for passage 
of  gas through Pakistan; as there was no clarity on these, it was not possible for 
India to decide regarding the total pr ice implication.  Subsequently, Iran 
demanded price escalation in the 5 th Tripartite JWG meet ing held at Tehran 
during May 27-30, 2007, which both Indi a and Pakistan disagreed with. The 6 th 
Tripartite meeting was held in New Delhi on June 28-29, 2007, in which the 
issues relating to gas price review claus e were discussed.  Discussions are also 
being held amongst the participating count ries on issues relating to gas 
availability from dedicated fields and dev elopment plan, delivery point for gas 
supply to India, governing law, GSPA rela ted issues, etc. It was decided to carry 
forward the discussions to the next round of meetings for resolution of some of 
the contentious issues.  

  
 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan (TAP) 
 With regard to Turkmenistan-Afghani stan-Pakistan (TAP) project, first 
Technical Working Group meeting was held at Ashgabat on April 17-18, 2007, 
which India attended. For India to join  the project, inter – Governmental 
Framework Agreement signed between Turkmenistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan 
has to be amended.  Draft of the re vised Framework Agreement has been 
received.  The draft Framework Agreement  is under examination in consultation 
with the concerned Ministries. 
 
Myanmar-India Pipeline 
 With regard to Myanmar-India pipeline,  India has made consistent efforts 
to source gas from A1 and A3 blocks in Myanmar. The then Minister (P&NG) 
participated in a trilateral Ministerial meeting between the Oil Ministers of 
Bangladesh, Myanmar and India in January 2005 at Yangon, Myanmar. In 
pursuance of the trilateral Joint Press St atement released after that meeting, a 
Techno-Commercial Working Committee (TCWC) of representatives of the three 
countries was constituted. The first meeting of the TCWC was held in Yangon on 
February 24 and 25, 2005. The TCWC prepar ed a draft MoU to be signed by the 
three Oil Ministers after the approval of their respective Governments. However, 
the MoU could not be approved on account of differences between India and 
Bangladesh, as Bangladesh sought to raise certain bilateral issues in the 
trilateral MoU.  
 In view of the above, I ndia pursued the alternative option of a pipeline from 
Myanmar through North-Eastern States of  India.  GAIL completed a Detailed 
Feasibility Report for this pipeline, for evacuating Myanmar gas to India through 
the north-eastern states.  The pipeli ne was projected to  be routed through 
Mizoram, Assam, West Bengal and Bi har, with a pipeline length of 1575 km 
within the Indian territory till Gaya in Bihar. 
 Subsequently, Myanmar invited bids fo r selling natural gas from A1 and 
A3 offshore blocks by the pipeline route. In response, GAIL submitted its bid in 
September 2006. Myanmar authorities later informed that the price quoted by all 
the bidders did not meet t heir expectation.  Subsequently, Myanmar invited bids 
for sale of gas from these blocks through LNG route.  This bid was submitted by 

  
GAIL on December 4, 2006.  The bids received were also not acceptable to 
Myanmar.  However, in a meeting held in February 2007 between Myanmar 
Government and PetroChina, Myanmar Go vernment decided that the gas from 
A1 and A3 blocks would be sold to Ch ina through the pipeline route. This 
development was conveyed to the consortium partners by Myanmar Government 
during a meeting held at Nay Pyi Taw (NPT) on March 16, 2007.  During this 
meeting, GAIL impress ed upon the other partners and Myanmar Government 
that GAIL’s pipeline offer was still t he most competitive and offered optimum 
value for them due to prox imity of India to these fields. However, Myanmar 
Government stuck to their decision to sell the gas to China. 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 Please see paragraph no. 8 of  Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (iii)  
Underground Coal Gasification 
The Committee note that underground coal  gasification is a potential 
economic means for extracting gas from deep seated and /or isolated coal/lignite 
deposit resources which may not be amenable to conventional physical 
extraction economically. As per estimates of ONGC, the recoverable energy from 
Mehsana-Ahmedabad block with coal reserves  of 63 billion tonnes in the form of 
gas is estimated to be equivalent to 15, 000 billion cubic meters (BCM) of natural 
gas. Considering vast unexplored deposits of coal where conventional mining 
methods are not feasible, it is imperative that underground coal gasification 
process is used to extract gas, which w ould go a long way in meeting our energy 
requirements.  The committee note that GAIL has entered into an agreement with 
agencies, which are competent in coal gas ification, and is in  the process of 
identifying 4-5 blocks in different parts of the country. The Committee desire that 
this exercise should be completed within a time frame and work pertaining to 
extraction of gas through UCG be started expeditiously.   
 
Reply of the Government
 
The technology is for production of synthesis gas from the In situ Lignite 
gasification project. GAIL has signed an MoU with Government of Rajasthan to 

  
set up a pilot project at Barmer. It is planned to be an Integrated Gasification 
Combined Cycle (IGCC) plant of 5 MW power capacity. 
GAIL has signed an MoU with M/s Er go Exergy Technologies Inc., 
Canada, who are technology providers and l eaders in the field. GAIL is in the 
process of signing a General Licens e Agreement with M/s Ergo Exergy 
Technologies Inc. for the project. Under  this, Site Selection study and Pre-
feasibility study would be carried out for es tablishing the lignite potential at site 
before taking up the pilot gasification project. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 Please see paragraph no. 11 of  Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         RUPCHAND PAL 
26 November, 2007             Chairman 
5 Agrahayan, 1929 (S)      Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 26th NOVEMBER, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1620 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
7 Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8 Shri Kashiram Rana 
  
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Ajay Maroo 
10 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
11 Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
 
Secretariat 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N.C. Gupta Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
 
2.   XXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX 
3. Then, the Committee took up for c onsideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the 17
th Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings pertaining to GAIL(India) Limited. The Committee 
adopted the Report without any changes. 
4.  XXXXX  XXXXX  XXXXX XXXXX 
5.  The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Seventeent h Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  on “GAIL (India) Limited – A 
Comprehensive Examination”. 
 
I Total number of recommendations  18 
lI  Recommendations that  have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendati ons at Sl. Nos. 1,3(i), 
3(ii), 3(iii), 4, 5(ii), 6(i), 6(ii), 6(iii), 7,8,10,11 and 12. 
  
Percentage of total  
14 
 
77.8% 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Gove rnment’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. No. 9 
Percentage of total  
1 
 
5.6% 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been a ccepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendations at Sl. No. 2 
 
Percentage of total 
1 
 
5.6% 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited Sl.No. 5(i) and 5(iii) 
 
Percentage of total 
2 
 
11% 
 