 
7 
C.P.U.No.893 
SEVENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
ONGC – AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE DUE TO CREATION OF 
EXCESSIVE HANDLING CAPACITY 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on t he recommendations contai ned in the 
8th Report of the Committee on  Public Undertakings (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
ONGC – Avoidabl e expenditure due to creat ion of excessive handling 
capacity) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.08.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on         22.08.2005 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August 2005 / Sravana 1927 (S) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-2006)  
INTRODUCTION  
CHAPTER   l Report . 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government . 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Co mmittee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies.  
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of sitting of COPU  
 II 
  
Analysis of the Action Tak en by Government on the 
recommendations c ontained in the 8 th Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (13 th Lok Sabha) on 
“ONGC – Avoidable expenditu re due to creation of 
excessive handling capacity” 
  
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Sriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
   
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri Jibon Roy  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Smt. Ambika Soni  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri John Joseph  Secretary  
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J.P.Sharma  Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Assistant Director  
5. Shri Girdhari Lal  S enior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on ONGC- Avoidable expenditure due 
to creation of excessive handling capacity. 
 
2. The Eighth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2002-
2003) was presented to Lok Sabha on  28
th April, 2003.  Action Taken Replies 
of the Government to the recommendat ions contained in the Report were 
received on 12.4.2005.  The Committ ee on Public undertakings considered 
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 17 th August, 2005.  The 
Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 8 th Report (2002-03) of  the Committee  is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
  
New Delhi:                          Rupchand Pal 
17 August, 2005                             Chairman, 
 26 Sravana 1927(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 

CHAPTER   1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committ ee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contai ned in the Eighth Report  (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings  (2002-2003) on “Oil & Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited” –Avo idable expenditure due to creat ion of excessive handling 
capacity which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2003. 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 10 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows : 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Sl.Nos. 1,3,4,6,8  and 9     (Total 6) 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Sl. Nos. 2,7 and 10      (Total 3) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl.No. 5       (Total 1) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
 
N I L       
3. The Committee will now dea l with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendation of the Committee relating to Inflexible Procedures.  
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL NO. 5 – INFLEXIBLE PROCEDURES 
 
4. Regarding the inflexible procedures of the Company, the Committee in their 
8th Report recommended as follows:- 
Apart from the inflexibility in th e conceptual design of the GGS Plant, 
the Committee note that the amount expended or committed towards project 
related work as early as in 1992-93 wa s yet another significant reason for 
ONGC to continue with the constr uction work, despite the apparent low 
production at the field. The Committee observe that by mid June, 1993, apart 
from spending an amount of Rs.4.33 crore, the commitments made by the 
Company to various contractors and vendors amounted to Rs.11.18 crore. 
Considering the fact that a total amount of Rs.15. 51 crore, which amounts to 
near about 86%  of the total project co st of Rs.18.05 crore, was either 
already expended or committed by mid 1993 and major civil, electrical and  
related works of the project were also  reportedly completed by this period, 
the committee are left to wonder as to what actually the progress of project 
execution was from 1993-94 to June, 2001, when the GGS plant finally 
became operational. The Committee desire that on this aspect ONGC should 
review their existing practices and procedures.  
 
The Committee are also inclined to note that on account of the reasons   
discussed in the preceding paragraphs, t hat is, rigidity of design and project 
costs expended or committed,  by 1993-94, ONGC was faced with a situation 
where it could not turn back from going ahead with implem enting the project 
despite the big question mark on its ut ility. And, mainly as a consequential 
action the company sought to justify t he utility of the project by inter-alia 
proposing usage of the GGS facility for hand ling ‘well fluid’ from the other oil 
fields located in the near vicinity. 
 
5. In their action taken reply to t he recommendation of the Committee, the 
Government have stated as follows:- 
ONGC has clarified that Rs.4.33 cr ores was spent around June, 1993 
and including this amount the overall to tal commitment was Rs.11.18 crores 
which is 61.94% of the total Project cost.  
 
The advance action that result ed in committed amount was taken 
keeping in view the initial project  completion schedule of Dec. 1993 which 
subsequently  slipped due  to various  extraneous exigencies, beyond the 
control of ONGC. Also, committed ex penses imply only firmed order 
placement and/or equipment being at va rious stages of deliveries. After 
material receipt, erection and commissioning works are taken up which 
requires lots of effort and time. 
 
 

-  
-  
The efforts of project Group were to  complete the project within time 
and therefore, the initiatives. However,  time slipped mainly on account of 
extraneous  circumstances like ki lling, kidnapping, bandh, barricades, 
disturbed environment, interrupted power  supply, lack of competitions, 
monsoon weather etc. and del ays from repair/re-work in the works done by  
contractors with in-adequate tools and   /or inexperienced manpower. 
 
However, ONGC management has be en advised to place the matter 
before its Board to review the existi ng practices and procedures so that 
avoidable commitments are not made in  future and the project schedule are 
maintained in future.  
 
6. Remarks of the office of the C&AG on the reply of the Government are as 
follows:- 
In the Action Taken Note it has been inter-alia stated that  ONGC’s 
management has been advised to place the matter before its Board to review 
the existing practices and procedures  so that avoidable commitments are not 
made in future and the project schedule are maintained in future”. The 
relevant agenda , if any, placed befo re the Board and its outcome need to be 
intimated. 
 
 
7. Comments of the Ministry on the remar ks of the office of the C&AG are as 
follows:- 
 
  Due care will be taken to go for flex ible type  of design as and when 
need arises i.e whenever projects of similar nature are implemented. 
 
As per existing practices and procedur e, all the project schedules are 
closely monitored by ONGC through vari ous control mechanisms at different 
levels and also by the Board and its Sub-Committee. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
8. The Group Gathering Station (GGS) pr oject with 1314 TPD capacity was 
planned to be constructed by ONGC at De mulgaon at a modest investment of Rs. 
2.54 crore with the completion schedule of December, 1992.  But, as against the 
original estimated cost and timeframe, the project was comp leted in December, 
1999 and finally commissioned in June, 2001 with the actual cost  

  
of Rs. 18.05 crore.  The project was cons tructed keeping in vi ew the production 
assessments made during the period 1987- 1989 when the Company witnessed 
good production from the initially drilled wells.  However, subsequently, the actual 
production at Demulgaon filed was noticed below 300 TPD and as such the very 
utility of the projec t became questionable.   In this regard , the Committee had 
observed that ONGC, by way of advan ce action procured machinery and 
equipments as well as acquir ed land for the project even pr ior to formal approval of 
the proposal by the competent  authority.  As a result, by  mid June, 1993, apart from 
spending amount of Rs. 4.33 crore, the Company had made commit ments towards 
project related works amounting to Rs. 11.18 crore.  Since ONGC by way of 
advance action had already sp ent or committed the major por tion of the total cost of 
Group Gathering Station project at Demulgaon, it becam e very difficult for ONGC to 
turn back from the project.  The Committee,  therefore, observed in their original 
report that such a situation had aris en because of the existing practices and 
procedures that permitted ONGC  to take such an advance action on the project in 
question and there was no scope for mid-cour se correction.  In view of this, the 
Committee had recommended ON GC to review their existing practices and 
procedures.   
 The Government in their acti on taken reply have inter-alia submitted that 
ONGC management has been advised to place the matter before its Board to review 
the existing practices and pr ocedures so that avoidabl e commitments are not made 
in future and the project schedules are maintained.  However, about the actual 
review of the relevant practi ces and procedures by the Boar d, ONGC is totally silent 
in its reply to an Audit query  

 
or this aspect.  This shows that the Committee’s recommendation has not been 
seriously addressed to by  the management of ONGC despite the advice of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.   The Committee whil e reiterating their 
recommendation, strongly deprecate the vague reply of the management and desire 
that a proper review of the existing practi ces and procedures should be immediately 
undertaken so that such instances do not recur in future. 

  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  (SL. NO. 1)  –  ABANDONMENT OF INITIAL 
PROPOSAL  
 
 The Committee feel constrained to note that ONGC could not give any 
substantive or viable reasons for shelvi ng the initially formulated proposal of 
January, 1988, whereby the GGS was planned to be constructed at Demulgaon at a 
modest investment of Rs.2.54 crore by ensuring utilization of materials available with 
the company to the optimum extent. The project, as planned, involved a modular 
designing of the production facility wher eby additional production modules could be 
added on as per requirement and would have id eally suited the ‘developing oil field’ 
of Demulgaon. But this was shelved ostensibly owing to non-availability of land. 
Despite the pointed questioning by the Commi ttee on the details of the GGS project 
planning as carried out at first and the reasons for shelving the proposal, ONGC 
could only add that apart from ‘non-availability of land’, certain operating constraints 
envisaged too resulted in giving up this pr oposal. Given the submissions made, the 
Committee are inclined to believe that no serious follow up action or ‘working’ was 
carried out on the initially conceived prop osal of January, 1988 to construct a 
‘modular based’ GGS at a minimal cost and time-frame. This also becomes apparent 
from the fact that ONGC did not face any  problems or constraints in acquiring a 
much larger quantum of l and required for constructing the more modern and full-
fledged GGS that the company subsequently opted for in the same year, that is 
1988, in lieu of the initially conceived project plan. The Committee desire that ONGC 
in future should exercise due care in formulat ion of projects of this nature so that 
wasteful expenditure is avoided.
   
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 The Study Team constituted by Minist ry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had, 
inter-alia recommended  that a modular approach should be cons idered that should 
have the provisions for mid-course correcti ons, if needed, especially when level of 
confidence of production profile  is not very high. ONGC  has decided to implement 
the recommendation of the Study  Team. This will ensure that due care is exercised 
in future in the formulation of projects of this nature where le vel of confidence of 
production profile is not very high. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
 
 

 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government 
 
 Steps taken to implement the recommendat ions of the study team need  to be 
communicated to the audit to watch compliance in future. 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office of the C&AG 
 
 Lessons learnt from the case of  construction of Demulgaon GGS and 
subsequent recommendations of the COPU and the Study  Team constituted by 
MOP&NG have been duly taken care  in the case of projects like CMG-EPS, Safrai 
EPS, Laiplinggaon, Banmali etc. These projects, which have gone on stream in last 
2-3 years, were handled with a balanced approach as suggested by the Study 
Team. As indicated in the reports by COPU and the Study Team, the dynamics of 
E&P, which has been beset with a large number of imponderables and uncertainties, 
future prediction for field performance has been duly taken care of  with reliable test 
data from subsurface and surface teams at  Assam Asset. Though these fields are 
quite promising one, however due care was taken and  it was decided to use in 
house resources till the potent ial of the fields is well established. ONGC is 
continuously monitoring these fields and taking judicious decisions at the right 
juncture
. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO: 3 - PR ACTICE OF DIVIDING JOBS FOR 
PROJECT EXECUTIOIN 
 
 The Committee note that there are ce rtain inherent contradictions or 
inconsistencies in the reasons attributed by ONGC for the cost escalations and 
delays in executing the GGS project as  formulated by EIL in 1989. While the 
Company has informed that it was after giving sufficient thought to the conditions 
prevailing in the area that it was decided to break up the scope of work of the 
project into ‘small independent packages’ to enable the construction of the plant in 
an effective manner, this very factor of packaging the work into separate bits has 
also been shown to have c ontributed significantly to the subsequently witnessed 
effect of cost escalations and delays in  implementing the project. The Committee 
feel that ONGC should hav e been more forthright and clear in giving their 
explanations in this regard. 
 
 
 The Committee also observe that as  per the comprehens ive project plan 
formulated by EIL, implementation of the GGS project was envisaged to be 
completed by December, 1993 on Lump sum Turnkey (LSTK) basis. Yet, ONGC 
chose not to issue a tender for implem enting the project on turnkey basis and 
instead decided to adopt, what has been termed by the Petroleum Secretary as an 
‘unusual route’ of breaking up the wo rk involved into 80 small independent 
packages due to doubts about a single  contractor being able to do the turnkey job  

  
in the Eastern Region in view of the disturbed conditions prevailing at that time’. The 
Committee feel  that had ONGC attemp ted and succeeded in executing the GGS 
project by adopting the accept ed and convenient method of ‘turnkey basis’ followed 
for such comprehensive projects, the effect of cost escalations, delays and technical 
snags witnessed in implementing the project could have possibly been minimized or 
avoided. The Committee, therefore, recommend that ONGC should revise their 
strategy for project implementation in th e light of the experience gained in this 
specific project. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 ONGC has submitted that the decision to split LSTK project had to be taken 
in view of the then prevailing env ironment in Assam and has noted the 
Committee’s recommendations for strategy for future works  that ONGC should 
revise their strategy for project implementation in the light of the experience gained 
in  this specific project for compliance. ONGC has decided to keep in full focus the 
lessons learnt in this project while implementing other projects in future. 
  
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government 
 
 Specific steps taken to implement recommendations need to be intimated to 
audit to watch the compliance. 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office of the C&AG 
 
 
 ONGC is firmly of the same view as expressed by COPU in its 8 th report and 
by the Study Team that we should follow  “turn key” model while implementing the 
projects of this nature. LSTK is a world wide accepted, convenient and cost effective 
model. Prudent technical and economical norms suggest that we should go for LSTK 
model to the maximum extent possible. He nce every effort is being made to follow 
the same in the case of installation of new LP compressors at various GGS and also 
for revamping of various facilities at Assam Asset through EOI on LSTK concept 
basis and same concept shall be followed in future projects also.      
 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO: 4) - NEED TO ADOPT PROJECT DESIGNS 
TO ENABLE MID COURSE CORRECTION  
 
 The Committee note that ONGC had und ertaken a number of studies on the 
performance behaviour and production profile of Demulgaon field at different points 
of time right from 1985. The inputs as well as findings of the studies carried out 
varied every time and these variations hav e been attributed to t he inherent trait of 
the business of explorati on and production which is wrought with uncertainty. 
Whereas the good production wit nessed from the initially drilled wells and the 
production assessments made in the period 1987-89 may have possibly prompted 
ONGC to opt for constructing a 1,000 TPD capacity GGS at first and then raise the 
capacity to 1314 TPD in respect of the re-conceptualized GGS of 1989, in the 
years that followed it became very appar ent to the Company that the actual 
production at Demulgaon woul d be in the range of about 300 TPD of oil on an 
average, thereby resulting in a huge mismatch between the production profile and 
handling capacity of GGS plant being built. The Committee, in this regard, observe 
that it was mainly the inherent inflexibilit y in the conceptual design of the project 
which envisaged a ‘single trai n’ or module’ for handling a capacity of 1314 TPD of 
oil that hindered ONGC from turning back from implement ing the project or making 
alternative arrangements when its utility became questionabl e. The fact that the 
designing of the project did not leave any scope for mid-course corrections in the 
handling capacity in view of the low or rec eding production profil e at the field was 
pointed out by the CMD, ONGC in the course of evidence and also brought out in 
very  clear terms by the Expert Team s ubsequently constituted by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to factually co mment on the observations made by Audit. 
Given the fact that ONGC is well aware of the imponderable nature of reservoir 
assessment or performance, the Committ ee feel that adequate care should have 
been taken at the designing stage of the GGS Plant to leave scope for mid-course 
corrections, which would have prevented  the eventually witne ssed situation of 
mismatch between capacity of the plant and actual requir ements at the oil field. 
The Committee, in this regard, also trus t that, in future, ON GC would give the 
deserved consideration to the recommendation made by t he Expert Team on the 
need to adopt a modular approach of design-  with provisions for mid-course 
corrections, as needed- especially in situati ons where the level of confidence or 
certainty of future production profile was not very high, as proven in the case of 
Demulgaon field. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 ONGC has decided to implement the recommendations of the Study Team, 
constituted by MOPNG regarding modula r approach wherever feasible for new 
projects of similar nature.  
 
 Further, ONGC has clarified that GGS  Demulgaon has been constructed in 
the form of two trains, each with 900 m3/d liquid handling capacity. These trains 

 
 
 together can handle total 800 to 1500 m3/d ay (700 to 1314 TPD) of oil, depending 
on water content in the liquid coming from wells. 
 
 If the cost of base case, i. e. two trains of 900 m3/ day is considered as 100, 
the cost of 3 trains of 600 m3/day would be about 10% higher and that of 4 trains of 
450 m3/day each would be about 20% hig her. The percentage investment for the 
first two trains, of 600 and 450 m3/day each, would be 80 and 72 respectively.” 
 
 Therefore, the cost saving with smalle r trains in GGS Project could have been 
in the range of 20 to 28%. The cost saving  in the project, which cost Rs.18.05 crore 
could have been of the order of 3.5 to 5 cr ores. But, this saving would have reduced 
the flexibility  of handling extra liquid, which was conceptualized during the design 
stage. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government 
 
 Instructions, if any passed on to executives to implement the 
recommendation of study team need to be supplied to audit to watch the 
implementation. 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office of the C&AG 
 
 
  The recommendations no. 4.1.1, 4.1.2,  4.1.3 and 4.1.4 of the Study Team  
(In both the Recommendations no. 4 & 6  of COPU  have stated to follow these)  
have been followed  di ligently and rigorously in resp ect of subsequent projects at 
CMG-EPS, safari EPS, Laiplinggaon, Banma li etc. Though these fields were found 
to be quite promising but in view of le ssons learnt from Demulgaon GGS, creation 
of temporary surface producti on handling facilities were done (Completely in line 
with various recommendations of Study Team).  In future depending on requirement 
modular approach as sugges ted by study team and endorsed by COPU would be 
followed and implemented. 
  
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. 6) -N EED TO IMPLEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS 
OF EXPERT TEAM  
 
 In response to the Committee’s specific questioning on whether the 
Company had considered shifting the GGS plant related equipment procured to 
some other site or location when the ut ility of setting up the plant at Demulgaon 
became questionable, ONGC has categorically informed that such a proposition 
was not considered to be feasible inter-ali a owing to considerations of costs. The 
Committee, in this regard, observe that t he Expert Team constituted by the Ministry 
have made a pertinent suggestion emphasizin g on using ‘modul ar skid counted 
GGS facilities’ with capacity varying from  500 to 1000 m3/day, that were easily 
transportable and hence have the added advantage of bei ng ‘re-located from 
location to another depending on requirements’. 
  
 
 Also, in regard to issues pertaini ng to Exploration and Production(E&P) 
business per-se, the Committee observe that  the Expert Team had, while pointing 
out that this was a field beset with a large number of imponderables and 
uncertainties, also stressed on the extreme importance of basing predictions of field 
performance on reliable and prudent data wh ich was matched with history. This 
exercise, coupled with usage of state-of-the-art technologies and skilled/experienced 
multidisciplinary team efforts have been po inted out to be a great facilitator in 
making judicious assessment of future production behaviour’. The Committee feel 
that if ONGC had given ade quate attention to these aspec ts- usage of modular skid 
mounted and transportable units and undertaking measures  for ensuring a judicious 
assessment of production profil e- the situation of looking for alternate routes for 
making a prudent usage of the GGS plant capacity built at Demulgaon could 
perhaps, have been avoided. The Committee, however, trust that the suggestions 
made by the Expert Team in this regard would be given due consideration by ONGC 
in implementing their projects in future. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ONGC has decided to implement the recommendations of the Study Team, 
constituted by the Ministry of Petroleum a nd Natural Gas. It has also clarified that 
state-of-art hardware and software for re servoir studies are under  process of 
procurement. Multi-Disciplinary Teams (MD T) have been kept in place for making 
judicious production assessment. 
 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s, O.M. No. O-27012/12/2002-ONG/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 
 
  A copy of the Instructions issued to  the executives for application of study 
team’s recommendation need to be sent to audit to watch the implementation. 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office of the C&AG 
 
 
 The recommendations no. 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3 and 4.1.4 of  the Study Teaam 
(In both the Recommendations no. 4 & 6  of COPU  have stat ed to follow these)  
have been followed diligently and rigorousl y in respect of projects at CMG-EPS, 
safari EPS, Laiplinggaon. B anmali etc. Though these fields were found to be quite 
promising but in view of lessons learnt from Demul GGS, creation of temporary 
surface production handling facilities were done  (Completely in line with various 
recommendations of Study Team)  In fu ture depending on requirement modular 
approach as suggested by study team and endorsed by COPU would be followed 
and implemented. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M. No. )-27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. NO:  8) - NEED  TO REVIEW THE PROJECT MONITORING 
SYSTEM IN THE MINISTRY  
 
The Committee note that ONGC, being a ‘Na vratna’ company, the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas play an active role only in overseeing/monitoring 
implementation of the Com pany’s mega projects with an investment in excess of 
Rs.100 crore. In the case of projects with smaller investments, such as the 
Demulgaon GGS project, the m onitoring role of the Ministry is mainly confined to 
Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) meetings and the role played by the 
Government Directors, including the Mini stry’s nominees, on the ONGC Board and 
the Company’s Sub-Committee on project appr aisal. In regard to the observations 
made by Audit on the Demulgaon GGS proj ect per-se, the Committee, however, 
note that it was only after they became seized  of the matter that the Ministry got into 
the pro-active mode of constituting a Study/Expert Team to factually comment on the 
Audit Observations and to suggest remedial  steps to ensure that such happenings, 
as witnessed in the case of Demulgaon GGS project, do not recur. The Committee 
feel that had the Ministry undertaken this exer cise of constituting a fact finding team 
beforehand, precious time could have been saved in settling the issues raised by 
Audit and also contributed positively in ensuring more effective project 
implementation mechanisms. The Committee also observe that the Study Team has, 
in its report, not only factually commented on the Audit Observations but also made 
many recommendations of significance on  the methodologies to be followed in 
project implementation, some of which have been deal t upon at length by the 
Committee.  The Committee  note  that  the  Ministry  has  instructed  ONGC to  take  

 
remedial measures as suggested by the Study team. The Committee desire that 
action should be taken by the Company withi n a definite time frame in this regard 
and the details should be communicated to the Committee. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Ga s should also review the 
system of monitoring the projects with a view to further streamlining its methodology. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 ONGC has noted the recommendations of the Study Team that  are mainly 
for reserve estimation and for creation of in frastructure facility  like GGS which are 
on going and long term proposition (on need basis) respectively.  
 
The Ministry of Petroleum & NG review s the projects costing more than Rs. 
100 crores through Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) route. However Ministry 
will introduce special exception reporting in respect of t he projects costing less than 
Rs. 100 crores so that any major slippages even in such projects  are expeditiously 
addressed. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M. No. )-27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2005) 
 
 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 
  A copy of special exc eption reporting method, if any, introduced by the 
Ministry in respect of projects costing less than Rs. 100 crores need be supplied to 
examine the adequacy of the action taken. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office on the C&AG  
 
ONGC is already  following all the re commendations of Study Team as well 
as COPU and taking all precautions while implementing pr ojects. The projects are 
being implemented with balanced approach and with continuous monitoring at the 
highest level (both at the regional and HQ level) 
 
This is already monitoring projects of more than Rs 100 crore for which a 
Ministry Monitoring Cell has been set up in Engineers India Limit ed (EIL).  It has 
now been decided to generate a special exception report in respect of projects 
under Rs 100 crore also, so that major slippages can be addressed. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M. No. )-27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. NO: 9) - NE ED TO STRENGTHEN MONITORING 
MECHANISM OF ONGC 
 
 
Although ONGC have informed that the Demulgaon GGS Project was 
monitored by the Exploration Producti on and Project Monitoring Committee 
(EPPMC) of the Company which comprises of the CMD, Functional Directors and 
other key executives, mainly on account of the fact that the process of implementing 
the project spanned over a de cade, involved significant cost escalations and also 
resulted in huge mismatch between the o il field requirements and the handling 
capacity of the plant, the Committee are inclin ed to believe that there were serious 
shortcomings in the project monitori ng mechanisms adopted. Also, there was no 
concrete evidence produced before the Commi ttee to show that the work progress 
on the project was monitored at  regular intervals and corrective measures taken, as 
needed. Despite the fact that the situation prevailing in the region was not conducive 
during the construction phase of Demulgaon GGS , the committee feel that there is a  
imperative need to strengthen monitori ng mechanisms adopted by ONGC, 
particularly in respect  of proj ects of not ‘very high’ or si gnificant value or investment 
as the Demulgaon GGS Project. This, the Committee feel, is all the more essential 
particularly on account of the current scenario where ONGC does not enjoy a 
monopoly in the business of oil and gas exploration and production. The Committee 
also wish to be apprised of the measures taken by ONGC in this direction. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ONGC has resubmitted that moni toring mechanisms have been  further 
strengthened. The Projects are reviewed in Virtual Corporate Meetings(VCM) at the 
region . The Heads of all the Groups includ ing Service Groups of the Asset attend 
the VCM which is chaired by the Executive Director-Asset Manager(who is the head 
of the Asset). 
 
 Since the present prevailing  situations are not so ad verse, the  projects are 
being taken up on turnkey basis. In some cases major equipment is being procured 
and supplied to the turnkey contractor, as free issue material, fo r installation and 
commissioning.  
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M. No. )-27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2005) 
 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 
No comments  
  
 
 

 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office on the C&AG  
 
No additional information. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M. No. )-27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. NO 2) - HIGHER ORIGINAL COST ESTIMATES 
 
 
 The Committee note that as per the re-conceptualized scheme of 
implementing the GGS projec t, as worked out by Engineers India Limited (EIL) in 
July, 1989, a full-fledged energy efficient plan t- with additional and modern facilities 
and utilities which were lacking in the initially conceptualized GGS- was planned for 
implementation at an estimated cost of Rs.16.46 crore. This proposal was examined 
and approved by ONGC’s Com petent Authority for implem entation at a cost of 
Rs.13.82 crore in June, 1991. While the big difference in  the cost estimates of 
Rs.2.54 crore in respect of the initially conceptualized GGS project of January, 1988 
and Rs.16.46 crore in respect of the s ubsequently planned technically advanced 
project formulated by EIL is understandable, what surprises the Committee is the 
fact that the Company’s management re sorted to initiating advance action for 
procuring machinery and equipm ent as well as acquisition  of land for the project 
even prior to the formal approval of the proposal by the Competent Authority. The 
Committee are of the considered view that  resorting to such measures, even if 
intended to save time and adhere to project schedules would have the effect of 
rendering the established norms and rules re lating to clearances of projects and 
cost estimates relating thereto meaningle ss. Also, as the events that followed 
showed the completion schedule of De cember, 1993 for implementing the re-
formulated project could not be adhered to and an additional amount of Rs.5.78 
crore (over and above the approved am ount of Rs.13.82 cr ore) had to be 
sanctioned for enabling its completion. 
 
 Yet another issue that deserves to be brough t to light in this regard is that no 
satisfactory explanation was forthcoming from ONGC on the observation made by 
Audit on the difference between the cost esti mates and actual cost of many of the 
project related equipments procured being of a very high order. The Department has 
to take strong action in this regard and  the inadequacies in  the law and the 
procedures in taking action may be taken care of and the details may be intimated to 
the Committee. This also applies to the observation about the cost estimates of 
Demulgaon GGS being much higher than the revised cost estimates of a 
comparable ongoing project of  ONGC viz. GGS cum S TF of North Santhal. The 
Committee expected a detailed explanation from ONGC on these aspects of the 
observations made by Audit. 
 
 
 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In the context of the observations of the Committee that resorting to initiating 
advance action for procuring machinery an d equipment as well as acquisition of 
land for the project even prior to formal appr oval of the proposal by the competent 
authority, would have the effect of r endering the established norms and rules 
relating to clearances of projects and cost  estimates relating thereto meaningless. 
ONGC has clarified that Project Team is  mandated that first oil on commercial 
scale from a field is realized without lo ss of undue time. For this purpose ONGC 
has in-built technical and managerial mech anisms for bringing new fields on steam 
at the earliest. Technical mechanisms for realizing early  first oil are temporary Well 
Head Installations (WHI) and Early Pr oduction Systems(EPS). Finally the full 
fledged infrastructure is created in the form of Group Gathering Stations (GGS) 
which takes time to construct. On the managerial front, when the project proposals 
are first put-up for the consideration of the management, it is examined from the 
requirement point of view and if project requirements are established, 
“Administrative Approval” can be granted  by the competent authority prior to 
“Financial Concurrence & Cost Sanction”, in case scope for project cost reduction 
is envisioned by the reviewing and approv ing authorities and thus, enabling  
advance action by the respective Project Group. Simultaneously, cost implications 
are analyzed from various angles with a view  to minimize financial implication and 
thus, improving the projec t economics.  Once these exercise are completed, 
‘Financial Concurrence & Cost Sanction’ is granted. 
 
According to  ONGC,  in the  inst ant case of GGS-Demulgaon also the 
project proposal was cleared by the Region and sent to HQs for sanction as project  
schedule was short and in order to avoid del ay in execution the advance initiate 
had to be resorted to. The  approval fo r going ahead with advance actions, of 
procurement and land acquisition, was a ccorded by the highest  decision making 
Finance Authority  in ONGC, viz. Member (Finance) and endorsed by the 
Chairman with the direction that  revised cost (with a view to lower the cost) be put  
for approval which was eventually done. This type of decision-making practice is a 
well-established management norm and also , happens to be project friendly. The 
Ministry is in agreement  with ONGC only to the extent that there is a need of 
commercial production from a new field without the loss of undue time. The 
Ministry agrees with the Committee that initiating advance action without formal 
approval of the proposal by the competent authority is not desirable. Any change in 
the extant management norm of ONGC necessitates review of the existing 
delegation of powers in ONGC. However, ONGC  being a Navratna company that 
have been delegated investment  making decision powers, t he matter of review of 
delegation of power has to be considered by ONGC B oard. The Board can review 
the extent to which the advance action co uld be permitted and  subject to what 
conditions.  Management is being advised to place this matter before its Board for  
appropriate directions on revision of delegation of powers. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
In the context of the observations of the Committee that detailed explanation 
may be given by ONGC on huge differences  between cost-estimates and actual 
cost of related equipments processed by GGS Demulgaon Project, ONGC has 
indicated the item-wise cost break-up as under:- 
 
 
(Rs. In lakhs) 
S.N WORK ORIGINAL 
sanctioned 
COST 
REVISED 
sanctioned 
COST 
ACT. 
EXP. 
1. Engineering 85 80.80 76.96 
2. Separators 20.7 18.58 18.58 
3. Oil Pump sets 37.7 32.03 30.31 
4. Heater Treaters 105.2 102.70 89.84 
5. DIDC- Digital Control 54 104.76 119.08 
6. Balance equipment 194.5 206.21 188.70 
7. Pipes/Valves/fittings 152.4 309.00 308.76 
8. Civil works 252.02 349.34 338.67 
9. C&M works & Tanks 150.1 220.01 217.18 
10. Electrical works 139 245.52 205.53 
11. Instrumentation  
work 
161 218.41 164.67 
12. Land 30 44 44 
13. Misc.  28.62 2.22 
 Total 1382 1960.00 1804.50 
 
ONGC has clarified that the cost of major items was well below duly 
sanctioned the revised cost estimates except  for DIDC. The increase in cost of the 
DIDC was mainly due to r upee devaluation and addition of certain features as per 
detailed engineering.  
 
 

 
 
 Further, the differences between the original sanctioned cost and revised 
sanctioned cost have been explained as under:- 
 
 
“The Demulgaon-GGS project was conceived on LSTK basis for early 
completion. However, local situation in  Assam deteriorated due to increase in 
militancy around this time and suspected ULFA militants abducted 6 ONGC 
officers. Two employees were killed. Th e other four officers were rescued/ 
released. This created panic and demoralization among all ONGC employees 
especially the non-local officers. ONGC operation got badly disrupted, field 
work especially suffered. In view of the prevailing situation, no contractor  was 
ready to work on LSTK basis. There was no option but to split the work into 
small contracts which were awarded to local firms. The project execution for 
GGS-Demulgaon was necessarily slow and several contracts had  to be re-
tendered. The situation was further  worsened when in 1994, ONGC’s rig in 
Nagaland was burnt  and in  1995 one of the local contractors was kidnapped 
thereby affecting the work. These seri es of local law and order crises 
continued to have adverse affect on ONGC’s personnel and operations. Due 
to adverse environmental problems and resultant splitting of LSTK project, the 
estimates were revised and additional sanction for Rs.5.78 crores was 
obtained (total revised sanctioned cos t, thus became Rs.19.60 crores). The 
project was finally completed at a cost  of Rs.18.05 crores
 
 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 
 Whether proposal to revi ew the delegation of powers  has been submitted to 
the ONGC Board and the ex tent to which the advance  action permitted and subject 
to what conditions, need to be communicated to audit to  give further comments  on 
action taken. 
 
 Against this, audit agrees with the comments made by Committee in 
Recommendation No. 3. Suggestion made need implementation. 
 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office on the C&AG  
 
 
 As per normal approved methodology, the Administrative Approval (AA) is 
sought first before Expenditure Sanction (ES). After preparation of estimates by EIL, 
the then Member (Finance) recommended re-examining cost estimates and to go 
ahead for placing order for long lead items keeping in view time bound schedule. 
AA was accorded at Chairman’s level as per the set procedures. The same is in line 
with the delegation of power as contained in the “Book of Delegated Powers” (BDP) 
for various functions. All investment proposals are evaluated before they are 
approved by the Competent Authority as defined in the BDP. The BDP is amended  
 

 
from time to time to keep pace with the organization’s goal and stru cture.  The last 
amendment was made in July’2004 as approved by Board of Directors. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M.  No. - 27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. NO: 7  ) - NEED TO FURNISH CORRECT 
INFORMATION  
 
 A particularly disturbing aspect noticed has been the tendency adopted by 
ONGC in not furnishing complete fact ual details/information sought by the 
Committee on the basis of certain observati ons made by Audit or furnishing the 
information desired in incomplete or unc ertain terms. While the committee had 
sought complete details as well as clarif ications on the doubts reportedly expressed 
by the Eastern Regional Business Centre (ERBC) of the Company in 1993 on the 
utilization of the 1314 TPD capacity GGS being built in view of the receding 
production profile – an observa tion made by Audit – ONGC has been categorical in 
stating that the Regional C entre had, at no point of time  expressed doubts that the 
project would not be utilized to  its optimum level in the long run’. The Audit, in this 
regard, has subsequently re iterated that the information furnished  by ONGC on the 
matter was not correct, particularly in view of the fact that the Eastern Regional 
Centre’s doubts on the utility of  the project were recorded in their files relating to the 
project. Also, the Report of the Expert Team  constituted by the Ministry later has 
brought out the factual aspects of the matte r in a more forthright manner, according 
to which, in 1993, when the case for approving an investment in excess of the earlier 
approved amount of Rs.13.82  crore was being processed the Senior DD(F&A), 
ERBC had raised ‘doubts regarding capacit y utilization of the GGS at Demulgaon’. 
The Committee strongly deplore the stanc e adopted by ONGC in not furnishing the 
details of the matter as sought for and dem and an explanation in this regard. As 
desired in an earlier para, t he Committee expect to be furnished with full details of 
the doubts expressed by the Ea stern Regional Centre in 1993 on the utility of the 
GGS plant, the management level at whic h this aspect was considered and the 
action taken thereon, particularly in regard to deciding on the prospects of the GGS 
project. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
ONGC has now furnished full details ab out the doubts expressed by Eastern 
Regional Centre in 1993 on utility of GGS Plant as follows:- 
 
“The project proposal was initiated bas ed on EIL estimates at Rs. 16.46 
crores in July’1989 which was approved  by the Member(O)/Member(F)/  
Chairman for Rs.13.82 crores  in June’1991. Till this  time there were no 
notings of doubt from finance. Subseque ntly, in May, 1993, a case for 
additional expenditure of Rs. 8.02 crores was init iated by the project group 
wherein Sr.Dy.Director(F&A) has noted on 23.6.1993 as under:  

 
 
“The possibility that the GGS, Demulgaon,  capacity will not be utilized to its 
optimum capacity seems to be a real problem. But w hen the project is  half 
way through there cannot at this stage be any break in expenditure. A 
Symmetry has got to be found by accelerated phase of dr illing so that  
sufficient  input is available for the GGS when it comes into being. Against 
this background, the proposal for additi onal sanction of Rs.802.00 lakhs is 
concurred in associated finance of OBG.  This being a long term plan, kind  
approval of Chairman will be required for the proposal. 
 
 
ONGC has therefore  re-submitted that the above notings clearly 
brings that while expressing doubt, t he concerned officer himself has also 
expressed that accelerated drilling shoul d be carried out so that sufficient 
input is available for the GGS when it comes into being. Accordingly,  the  
proposal along with above notings was put up to Additional Director (F&A) 
and GM(F&A) who were higher in the Fi nance hierarchy within the Region. 
The required pay-back periods and ec onomics including IRR and ERR were 
worked out. GM(F&A) had then  desired  that Agenda Note for Executive 
Committee (EC) may be put up and sent to  HQs. The Regional Director who 
heads the Region endorsed this decision. Accordingly, the Agenda Note was 
prepared and sent to  HQ s where it was again examined. Based on which 
certain facilities were del eted and additional reduc ed sanction for Rs.5.78 
crores was sought from the EC which was approved. Thus, the total project 
cost sanctioned was Rs.19.60 crores (13.82 + 5.78). 
 
 
From the foregoing ONGC has conclu ded that the Finance officer who 
expressed the doubt himself has  also  expressed that accelerated drilling 
should be carried out  so that sufficient input is available for the GGS when it 
comes into being. Region headed by the Regional Director(RD) in 
consultation with associated  finance, GM(F&A) were satisfied with the 
proposal and have cleared the  proposal for the considerations of the HQs. 
HQs after  due examination has sanctione d the reduced  additional cost of 
Rs.5.78 crores.”
 
 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M.  No. - 27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 
 
The decision of EC and its implementation would be scrutinized in future.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. NO: 10) - NE ED TO STEP UP PRODUCTION IN 
NORTH EAST  
 
 
 The Committee observe that as of now, production at Demulgaon field is to 
the extent of 350 m3/day, with the percentage utilization of the 1314 TPD of oil GGS 
Plant built at the field bei ng in the range of 30 to 40 per  cent. With a view to 
increasing the utilization capability of the plant to the level of about 70 per cent, 
ONGC has reportedly chalked out a strategy  which inter-alia involves enhancing the 
production at Demulgaon by anot her 200 m3/day of liquid and diverting well fluid of 
about 450m3/day from the adjoi ning marginal fields of Charali and Changmaigaon. 
The exercise, when completed, is expected to increase the handling capacity of the 
Demulgaon GGS to 1,000 m3/day of liquid.  The Committee also understand that in 
addition, ONGC proposes to divert the well fluid presently ha ndled at the ageing 
GGS facility at the nearby Lakwa field fo r processing at the newly built energy 
efficient GGS facility at Demulgaon, which would lead to a further enhancement in 
the handling capacity of the plant. The Commi ttee trust that in addition to taking 
expeditious measures  to gi ve effect to this strat egy for increasing the handling 
capacity of Demulgaon GGS, ONGC would also  take appropriate action for giving a 
fill up to exploration and product ion activities in the pros pective belt of the North 
Eastern Region. The Committee would also like to be  kept apprised of the progress 
made on this front. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 ONGC has clarified that actions are al ready in hand to bring oil from Charali 
and Changmaigaon fields to Demulgaon GGS. This activity will be completed 
shortly. 
 
Further, Demulgaon, Charali, Changmai gaon  areas are rated as highly 
prospective and are under focused exploration activities. The areas have been 
covered by 3D seismic surveys and based on this, generation of prospects is in 
progress. In the last two years, four explor atory wells drilled in this area, viz.: NZ#2, 
CA-24 and DML -32 & 33  have proved to be hydrocarbon bearing, the exact 
potential of which are being es tablished. Further, more locations for drilling will be 
generated depending on the result s of 3D surveys and exploratory drilling already 
done. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, O.M.  No. - 27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 
 The results of action taken on this woul d be watched in the Propriety Audit of 
the Project. 
 

 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office on the C&AG  
 
Noted. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas,  O.M.  No. - 27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. NO: 5) - INFLEXIBLE PROCEDURES  
 
Apart from the inflexibility in the conceptual design of the GGS Plant, the 
Committee note that the am ount expended or committed towards project related 
work as early as in 1992-93 was yet an other significant reason for ONGC to 
continue with the construction work, des pite the apparent low production at the 
field. The Committee observe that by mid June, 1993, apart from spending an 
amount of Rs.4.33 crore, the commitm ents made by the Company to various 
contractors and vendors amount ed to Rs.11.18 crore. Considering the fact that a 
total amount of Rs.15.51 crore, which am ounts to near about 86%  of the total 
project cost of Rs.18.05 crore, was either already  expended or committed by mid 
1993 and major civil, electrical and  rela ted works of the project were also 
reportedly completed by this  period, the committee are left to wonder as to what 
actually the progress of project execution was from  1993-94 to June, 2001, when 
the GGS plant finally became operational.  The Committee desire that on this 
aspect ONGC should review their existing practices and procedures.  
 
 The committee are also inclined to not e that on account of the reasons   
discussed in the preceding paragraphs, that is, rigidity of design and project costs 
expended or committed, by 1993-94, ONGC was faced wit h a situation where it 
could not turn back from going ahead with implementing the project despite the big 
question mark on its utility. And, mainly  as a consequential action the company 
sought to justify the utility of the project by inter-alia proposing usage of the GGS 
facility for handling ‘well fluid’ from the other oil fields located in the near vicinity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 ONGC has clarified that Rs.4.33 crores was spent around June, 1993 and 
including this amount the overall total co mmitment was Rs.11.18 crores which is 
61.94% of the total Project cost.  
 
 The advance action that resulted in committed amount was taken keeping in 
view the initial project  completion schedule of Dec. 1993 which subsequently  
slipped due  to various extraneous exigen cies, beyond the control of ONGC. Also, 
committed expenses imply only firmed order placement and/or equipment being at 
various stages of deliveries. After ma terial receipt, erection and commissioning 
works are taken up which requires lots of effort and time. 
 
 The efforts of project Group were to complete the project within time and 
therefore, the initiatives. However, ti me slipped mainly on a ccount of extraneous  
circumstances like killing, kidnapping,  bandh, barricades, disturbed environment, 
interrupted power supply, lack of compet itions, monsoon weather etc. and delays 

from repair/re-work in the works done by  contractors with inadequate tools and   
/or inexperienced manpower. 
 
 However, ONGC management has been advised to place the matter before 
its Board to review the existing prac tices and procedures so that avoidable 
commitments are not made in future and the project scheduled are maintained in 
future. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas,  O.M.  No. - 27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 15.6.2004) 
 
Audit remarks on the reply of the Government  
 In the ATN it has been inter-alia stat ed that  ONGC’s management has been 
advised to place the matter before its Board to review the existing practices and 
procedures  so that avoidable commitments are not made in future and the project 
scheduled are maintained in future”. The re levant agenda , if any, placed before the 
Board and its out come need to be intimated 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of the office of the C&AG 
  Due care will be taken to go for flexible type  of design as and when need 
arises i.e whenever projects of similar nature are implemented. 
 
 As per existing practices and procedure,  all the project sc hedules are closely 
monitored by ONGC through various control mechanisms at different levels and also 
by the Board and its Sub-Committee. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas,  O.M.  No. - 27012/12/2002-ONGC/US(EO) 
dated 12.4.2005) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paragraph 8 of the Chapter I of the Report) 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  THE WHICH FINA L REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi:                          Rupchand Pal 
17 August, 2005                             Chairman, 
 26 Sravana 1927(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 

 
APPENDIX - I 
 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  6th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  17th  AUGUST,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1540 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Shri Kashiram Rana 
8. Shri Mohan Rawale 
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
10. Shri Ajay Maroo 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
3. Shri S. B. Aror a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA 
 
 Shri Gulzari Lal, Director 
 
 
 

 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following Action Taken Reports 
without any modification :- 
(i) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX . 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Eighth Report (13 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings  on ONGC Ltd. – Avoidable 
expenditure due to creation of excessive handling capacity. 
 
3. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation. 
4. XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX . 
 
 
 
 

 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Eight Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “ ONGC – Avoidable expenditure due to creation of excessive handling capacity’. 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  10 
 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
 
Percentage of total  
6 
 
 
 
60% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Co mmittee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2, 7 and 10)] 
 
Percentage of total  
3 
 
 
 
30% 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…(vide recommendations at Sl. No 5) 
 
Percentage of total. 
1 
 
 
 
10% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 