19
 
C.P.U. No. 909 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
FCI – REVIEW ON EXPORT OF FOODGRAINS BY FOOD 
CORPORATION OF INDIA  
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD & PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 10th Report of the C ommittee on Public Undertakings (14th Lok 
Sabha) on FCI – Review on export of foodgrains by FCI) 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
April 2007 / Chaitra 1929 (S) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted 
by Government. 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies.  
 
20 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in  respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee. 
 
23 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
29 
 APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of sitting of COPU 
 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the recommendations cont ained in the Tenth 
Report of Committee on Public Undertakings 
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Review on export of 
foodgrains by Food Corporation of India”      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
( 2006 – 2007 ) 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
9. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Kashiram Rana 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
 
16. Shri Rishang Keishing  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
19. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
20. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
21. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
  
SECRETARIAT  
23. Sh. J.P. Sharma               Joint Secretary 
24. Smt. Anita Jain                Director 
25. Sh. N. C. Gupta          Deputy Secretary 
26. Sh.  Bala Guru G        Sr. Executive Asst. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Publ ic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by t he Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Food Corporati on of India (FCI) – Review on export 
of Foodgrains by FCI. 
 
2. The Tenth Report of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings (2005-2006) 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 nd December, 2005.  Action Taken Replies of 
the Government to the re commendations contained in the Report were received 
on 31.1.2007.  The Committee on Public  Undertakings considered and adopted 
this Report at their sittings held on 10.4. 2007.  The Minutes of the sitting are 
given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 19 th Report (2006-07) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: RUPCHAND PAL 
10   April, 2007  Chairman, 
Chaitra20    , 1929 Saka            Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings (2005-06) on “FCI-Review 
on export of foodgrains by FCI” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd 
December, 2005 
  
2. Action Taken notes have been received  from Government in respect of all 
the recommendations contained in the Re port.  These have been categorized as 
follows : 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 8 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
Sl. Nos. 3, 9 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter 
IV) 
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6 
 
(iv) Recommendations / observations to which the Government have 
furnished interim replies.(Chapter V)  
Sl. Nos.  7 
 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs, 
 
 
 
Recommendation SI No. 4 
 
Fixation of lower export price for wheat 
 
The Committee in their Tenth Report have recommended with regard to ‘Fixation 
of lower export price for wheat’  as follows: 
 
“The Committee have been informed that the Group of Ministers (GOM) decided 
in October, 2000  that wheat be offered for export at a price equal to the  
 
 
 
 

economic cost minus two years’ carryi ng cost but not lowe r than the Central 
issue Price (CIP) for BPL category. The Ministry adopted Rs. 8300 per MT and 
Rs. 2204 per MT, being the estimated economic cost  for 2000-01 and the 
related carrying cost respectively wh ich was worked out, was based  on the 
revised method of allocation of distri bution costs suggest ed by Expenditure 
Reforms Commission (ERC) . On the basis of recommendations of ERC, the 
issue  price of wheat was arrived at Rs. 3392, which was stepped up to Rs. 4150, 
that is the BPL price, the minimum rate at which the wheat was to be offered for 
export. As such the wheat for export was issued at Rs. 4150 between November 
2000 and March 2001. The Committee further note that  while taking the decision 
of export during a particular year, Ministry has taken the estimated economic cost 
and carrying cost of subsequent  two years. As per Audit this has resulted in a 
loss or additional subsidy burden of Rs. 1608 crore.   
 
However, Food Corporation of India and Ministry of Food have contended that by 
adopting the above criteria there was no loss and they adopted this criteria in 
consonance with ERC recommendations. T he Committee further note that the 
revised methodology suggested by the ER C and approved by the Cabinet had 
two effects, firstly reduction of economic cost and secondly increase in carrying 
cost, which finally resulted in fixation of lower export price. 
 
The Committee are not conv inced with the justificati on given by Ministry for 
adopting the criteria of calculation of Export Price based on ERC 
recommendations as the same were app licable for the PDS system and not for 
export scheme. The Committee therefor e deprecate the Ministry for adopting 
wrong criteria for calculation of export price.” 
 
 
The Government (Ministry of Consumer A ffairs, Food & Public  Distribution) in 
their action taken reply dated 31 st January, 2007 on the above recommendation 
have stated as follows:  
 
“In respect of foodgrains procured and distributed by the FCI, only one economic 
cost each for wheat and rice is fixed for all the schemes, including  PDS, export, 
open sale and  other  welfare schem es. ERC recommendation  was for 
methodology of fixation of economic cost  of the foodgrains procured/distributed 
by the FCI. ERC did not recommend different economic cost for different 
schemes. FCI’s accounts also reflect only one economic cost. Therefore the 
economic cost of the FCI as fixed at that time was taken for fixation of export 
prices. “
 
 
 
The remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government was as follows: 
 
“That there is one Economic cost each for wheat and rice which is determined by 
the FCI at the close of the financial year is correct.  Audit however, observed that 
the economic cost of 1999-2000 available at the time of exports was not taken for  
 
 
 
 
 

fixation of export price, but instead the Government relied on the estimated 
economic cost recommended by the ERC.” 
 
The comments of the Ministry on the a bove mentioned remarks of the C&AG is 
as follows: 
 
 
“For all purposes, for a particular year , FCI’s economic cost including other 
related costs such as carrying cost etc. is taken as fixed on the basis of budget 
estimates prepared in the beginning of the y ear, till it is revised at the end of the 
year, on the basis of actual expenditure  incurred till that period and estimated 
expenditure for the remaining period of the year.  Same policy was adopted for 
fixation of export prices and economic  cost of 2000-01 and carrying cost as 
available at that time was taken during 2000-01.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
  
In their original recommendation, the Committee noted that the 
Group of Ministers (GOM) had deci ded in October, 2000 that wheat 
be offered for export at a price equal to the economic cost minus two 
year’s carrying cost but not lower than the Central Issue Price (CIP) 
for BPL category.  The Committee ha d also noted that the Ministry 
adopted the estimated economic cost for 2000-01 and estimated 
carrying cost for the subsequent two years i.e. 2000-01 and 2001-02 
for fixation of export price for wh eat which was worked out on the 
revised method of allocation of distribution cost suggested by 
Expenditure Reforms Commission (E RC).  Consequently, wheat was 
issued for export at Rs. 4150 pe r metric tonne (MT) between 
November 2000 and March 2001.  As per Audit, the relevant costs 
should have been the economic cost of 1999-2000 and carrying costs 
of 1999-2000 and 1998-99 and as such wheat should have been  

issued for export at Rs. 6044 per MT .  Thus the adoption of Rs. 4150 
per MT as the export price for wheat as against Rs. 6044 had resulted 
in a short realization of Rs. 1608 crore which in turn led to increased 
subsidy burden on the Government of India.   
 The Committee were not convinced  with the justification given 
by Ministry for adopting the criter ia of calculation of export price 
based on ERC recommendations, which resulted in fixation of lower 
export price, as the same were applicable for PDS and not for export 
scheme.  The Committee had therefor e deprecated the Ministry for 
adopting wrong criteria for calculation of export price.   
The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have inter-alia stated 
that only one economic cost is fixed for all schemes, including PDS, 
export and other welfare schemes a nd that ERC did not recommend 
different economic cost for different schemes.   
The Committee are not convinced with the justification given 
by Ministry for not taking the econom ic cost of 1999-2000 for fixation 
of export price which was relevant in this case. The Committee agree 
with the views of Audit that Ministry has wrongly taken the estimated 
economic cost of 2000-01 and th e related carrying cost of 
subsequent two years, thereby resulting in the loss to the tune of Rs. 
1608 crore.  The Committee agree with the Audit observation and 
hold the view that huge losses to  the tune of Rs. 1608 crore have 
been caused because of the wrong cal culation done by Ministry/FCI 
while fixing the export price.  While reiterating their observation, the  

Committee recommend that in future, the Ministry/FCI should follow 
prudent financial norms and practice so as to avoid losses to the 
Government exchequer.   
 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 5    
 
Unfruitful expenditure on transportation 
 
The Committee in their Tenth Report have recommended with regard to 
‘Unfruitful expenditure on transportation’ as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that the sale price fixed for export of wheat and rice was on 
ex-FCI port godowns basis, which means tr ansportation charges from inland FCI 
depot to the port town was to be borne by FC I. This facilitated the exporters to lift 
foodgrains from the godowns of their choice and have them delivered at the port 
of their choice. As a result, the exporters lifted the foodgrains from the godowns 
of their choice situated in far-flung places, irrespective of the fact that sufficient 
stocks were available in nearby godowns with reference to the designated ports 
from where export took place. As per audit, FCI had incurred Rs. 516.36 crore 
towards freight charges. The high incidence of freight charges on inland 
movement had the effect of reducing the net realisation from exports which fell 
below the issue rate for BPL category. 
 
 The Committee further note that FCI has justified the lifting of foodgrains 
by the exporters from the godowns of their choice for several reasons, namely, 
nearness of final destinat ion (foreign country) to a particular port, easier 
availability of ships at a par ticular port at a cheaper rate etc.  According to them 
these steps were essential for the su ccess of the scheme and as such only rail-
freight through the shortest route wa s reimbursed and ec onomy in overall 
operations was maintained. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that  this is a clear case where undue 
benefit/advantage has been extended to the exporters. They also feel that the 
policy per se in this regar d of reimbursing of transport  charges from inland 
godown to port town, was a loss making pro position which resulted in issuing the 
foodgrains below the BPL price. In  the opinion of the Committee the 
reimbursement of transport charges is an export subsidy to traders, which should 
have been avoided. In so far as expo rt of foodgrains is concerned, the 
Committee recommend that a clear cut policy should be evolved with regard to 
reimbursement of transport charges.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Government (Ministry of Consumer A ffairs, Food & Public  Distribution) in 
their action taken reply dated 31 st January, 2007 on the above recommendation 
have stated as follows:  
  
“While noting the observations of the Co mmittee, the Departm ent would like to 
reiterate that no loss has been incurred on account of transport charges from 
inland godown to port town by reimbursi ng minimum rail freight. This expenditure 
would have been incurred by the FCI even if  the stocks had to be transported for 
PDS purposes to the port towns.  As the element of transportation is already built 
in the BPL price, hence t he freight charges need not be deducted from the BPL 
price on account of transportation of the stocks from godown of choice to the port 
town. 
As recommended by the Committee clear cut policy would be evolved 
regarding reimbursement of  transport charges as and when the situation 
warrants.” 
 
The remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government was as follows: 
 
“As per the GOM decision the export pric e should not fall below  the BPL price, 
whereas it was found that the net realization per MT of foodgrains from exports 
was below the BPL price.  In the reply it  was further stated that the element of 
transportation is included in BPL price.  The elements that enter the BPL price 
may be furnished to Audit.” 
 
The comments of the Ministry on the a bove mentioned remarks of the C&AG is 
as follows: 
 
“Calculation sheets for economic cost of  wheat and rice for the years 2000-01 to 
2004-05 is attached.  During the year 2000, a decision was ta ken, in principle, by 
Government that the Central Issue Pric es (CIPs) under the Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) may be fixed at 50% of the economic cost for Below 
the Poverty Line (BPL) households.  Based on this principle, Government, on 21st 
July 2000 fixed the Central Issue Prices at Rs. 565 per quintal for rice and Rs. 
415 per quintal for wheat for the BPL households.  These CIPs for BPL 
households have been retained at this level, ever since.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
 The Committee in their original recommendation had noted 
that sale price fixed for export of foodgrains was on ex-FCI port 
godowns basis (i.e. transportation charges from inland FCI depot to 
the port town was to be borne by FCI) which facilitated the exporters  
 

to lift foodgrains from the godown s of their choice and have them 
delivered at the port of their choice.   As a result, the exporters lifted 
foodgrains from the godowns of th eir choice situated in far-flung 
places, irrespective of the fact that sufficient stocks were available in 
nearby godowns.  The high incide nce of freight charges on inland 
movement had the effect of reducing the net realization from exports 
which fell below the issue rate for BPL category.  The Committee had 
thus observed that the policy per se in regard to reimbursement of 
transportation charges from inland godown to port town was a loss 
making proposition and therefore recommended that a clear cut 
policy should be evolved for reimbursement of transport charges.   
 The reply of the Ministry th at no loss has been incurred on 
account of transport charges from inland godown to port town by 
reimbursing minimum rail freight is not acceptable to the Committee 
as it has not been substantiated wi th adequate documentary proof.  
The Committee would like the Mi nistry to furnish adequate 
explanation on the basis of which they have arrived at the above 
conclusion. The contention of the Government that the expenditure 
on transport charges would have b een incurred by FCI even if the 
stocks had to be transported for PDS purposes to the port towns is 
not financially prudent as transportation of stocks for PDS purposes, 
which is a welfare activity, could not be equated with transportation 
of stocks for export purposes, which is a commercial activity. 
  
 

 Further the Committee are highly constrained to note that 
Ministry has taken no concrete  action on their recommendation 
regarding evolving of a clear cut policy on reimbursement of 
transport charges for exports.  The Committee are of the firm view 
that there is an imperative need to  evolve such a policy so that the 
transport subsidy available for welfare activity like PDS is not 
extended to commercial activity like exports. While reiterating their 
earlier recommendation, the Committee desire that Ministry should 
formulate a comprehensive policy in this regard. 
 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 6 
 
Undue benefit to exporters of foodgrains to Bangladesh 
 
 
The Committee in their Tenth Report have recommended with regard to ‘Undue 
benefit of Rs. 44.25 crore to  exporters for foodgrains exported through rail to 
Bangladesh’ as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that Post Delivery Expenses  (PDE) which inter-alia include 
shipping freight, loading and un loading ch arge etc. allowed to exporters ranged 
from Rs. 1700 to Rs. 3850 per MT for ri ce and Rs. 1175 to Rs. 2850 per MT for 
wheat.  This was paid irrespective of des tinations i.e the dist ance involved in 
export of foodgrains to various countries . No exercise was done to work out the 
realistic PDE, which exporters would be incurring. For instance in case of exports 
to Bangladesh, FCI moved goods directly from godowns to various destinations 
in Bangladesh by rail. 
 
 The Committee further note that t he allowance towards PDE ranging from 
Rs. 1175 per MT to Rs. 3850 per MT was extended in respect of foodgrains 
issued for export and transported by rail to Bangladesh as against only Rs. 30 
per MT borne by the exporter thereby allowing a subsidy of Rs. 1750 per MT 
which, as per audit, led to excess reimbursement of Rs. 44.25 crore. 
 
 The Committee are not satisfied with FCI’s contention that the 
reimbursement of PDE (irrespective of destinations) was WTO compatible as  
 
 
 
 
 

they feel that the Ministry should have got  clarification from Group of Ministers, 
as to whether post delivery expenses had to be allowed uniformly. The another 
argument advanced by FCI t hat without additions in manpower, it would have 
been a Herculean task to handle all exports transactions on a case by case basis 
is also not acceptable to  the Committee as FCI bein g a commercial organization 
can not fritter away Government money on such frivolous grounds. 
 
 The Committee feel that there is no commercial prudence in giving a PDE 
of Rs. 1750 per MT, as against only Rs. 30 per MT borne by t he exporters.  The 
Committee highly deprecate the Ministry/F CI for having failed to work out a 
realistic PDE and save the Govern ment money. The Co mmittee therefore 
recommend that a proper and fool proof syst em of export (sale) operations 
should be evolved which may also include realistic assessment of PDE for export 
purposes in future.” 
 
The Government (Ministry of C onsumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) in their action taken reply dated 31 st January, 2007 on the above 
recommendation have stated as follows: 
 
 “The Government on the basis of a High Level Inter Ministerial Committee fixed 
a minimum level of PDE with the objective  to provide certain monetary incentives 
to the exporters for expediting the liquidation of huge foodgrains stocks under the 
Central Pool.  As there was no intention to extend this benefit on the basis of 
actual expenses incurred by an expor ter, there was no need to prescribe 
separate levels of PDEs for different des tinations/modes.    The objective of the 
Government was also to restrict the subsidy for every ton of foodgrain exported.   
 
 On the basis of this policy of the Go vernment, it was fo r the exporters to 
choose where they would like to export.  In case the Government had set graded 
PDEs for different destinations and modes, there was a lik elihood that the 
exporters would have chosen to export to destinations, which earned them higher 
subsidy, thereby causing higher out go of monetary incentive from the 
government coffers, for the same amount of wheat exported.  Thus the policy of 
the government to follow uniform PDE was most economical, easy to implement 
and transparent and has to be  seen against the fact t hat the total outgo of 
subsidy even for far off destinations was ke pt at the lower end of the permissible 
range of PDE. “  
 
 
The remarks of Office of C&AG on the reply of the Government was as follows:- 
 
It is clear from the reply that the main obj ective of the export was to expedite the 
liquidation of huge stocks of  food grains, which had piled up and hence the Inter 
Ministerial Committee had fixed a minimum level of PDE with the objective of 
providing certain monetary incentive to expo rters.  It was furt her stated that the 
objective of the Government was also to  restrict the subsidy but this was not 
fulfilled.                   
 
 
 
 
 

The contention of the Minist ry regarding gain of higher subsidy by exporters in 
case of fixation of graded PDEs/modes is not supported by adequate data.  The 
claim that the application of the uniform PDE led to economy may be furnished to 
audit.  
 
 
The Comments of the Ministry on the above mentioned remarks of the C&AG is 
as follows:- 
 
“The purposes of the Government was to enable exports at internationally 
competitive prices.  Since there was huge accumulation of wheat and rice stocks 
the international prices were taken into  consideration and export prices were 
fixed by the Government from time to time .  Initially uniform export prices were 
fixed for all years of procurement.  Later on, separate export prices were fixed for 
each year of procurement.  To keep the export prices uniform for all the port 
depots/storage points of FCI, the post de livery expenses were used to equalize 
the export price at all por t depots/storage points of FCI with respect to the open 
market sale price.  In case the PDE wa s fixed differently taking into account the 
actual cost of exports, it would have been  very difficult to implement such a 
decision and a lot of discretion would have rested with field officers.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
  
 The Committee in their original recommendation had noted 
that the allowance towards post  delivery expenses (PDE) which 
included shipping freight, loadi ng and unloading charges etc.,  
was extended in the range of Rs. 1175 per metric ton (MT) to 3850 
per MT in respect of foodgrains issued for export and transported 
by rail to Bangladesh as against only Rs. 30 per MT borne by the 
exporter thereby allowing a subs idy of Rs. 1750 per MT,  which 
led to excess reimbursement of Rs. 44.25 crore.   Deprecating the 
Ministry/FCI for having failed to work out a realistic PDE and save 
the Government money, the Co mmittee had recommended that a 
proper and foolproof system of export (sale) operations should be  
 
 

evolved which may also include realistic assessment of PDE for 
export purposes in future.   
The Committee are unhappy to note that Ministry has not 
taken any action on their above recommendation.  Instead the 
Ministry has tried to justify thei r action of not fixing a realistic 
PDE by inter-alia  stating that in case the Government had set 
graded PDE for different destin ations and modes, there was a 
likelihood that the exporters w ould have chosen to export to 
destinations, which earned them higher subsidy, thereby causing 
higher outgo of monetary incentive from the Government coffers, 
for the same amount of wheat expor ted.  The Ministry has further 
stated that policy of Government to follow uniform PDE was most 
economical, easy to implement and transparent and has to be 
seen against the fact that the total outgo of subsidy even for far 
off destinations was kept at th e lower end of the permissible 
range of PDE.  The above contention of the Ministry which is not 
based on any supporting document is not acceptable  to the 
Committee.   As observed by A udit, the Committee also desire 
that Ministry may furnish documents justifying their claim that the 
application of uniform PDE lead to economy.  
 The Committee take strong exception to another argument 
advanced by the Ministry that  in case the PDE was fixed 
differently taking into account the actual cost of exports, it would 
have been very difficult to implement such a decision and a lot of  
 
 

discretion would have rested with field officers.  The Committee 
feel that a premier Government organisation of the size and 
stature of FCI, having operations in  the entire length and breadth 
of the country cannot absolve themselves of the responsibility of 
not fixing PDE taking into account actual cost of exports on such 
frivolous grounds.  This is indicative of lack of professional 
approach in the functioning of FCI.   
 While disapproving the reply of the Government, Committee 
strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that 
Ministry/FCI should take steps to  evolve a proper and foolproof 
system of export (sale) opera tions which may also include 
realistic assessment of PDE for export purposes in future.  
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the Governm ent of India in October 1998 fixed 
the norms for the quantity of minimum st ocks of wheat and rice to be held at the 
beginning of every quarter in the Centra l Pool under the buffer stocking policy, 
which ranged from 15.8 Million Metric Tonne (MMT) to  24.3 MMT. As against 
this, the stock position as on 30th S eptember 2000 was 40.06 MMT. In view of 
the burgeoning stock position, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, in September 2000 submitted a proposal for consideration of the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for “Revamping of Public 
Distribution System (PDS)-Measures to improve off-take of foodgrains”. A Group 
of Ministers constituted, to consider the above proposal, in October, 2000, 
decided inter-alia, that FCI might be permitted to offer wheat for export at a price 
equal to economic cost minus two years’ carrying cost but not lower than the 
Central Issue Price (CIP) for ‘below pove rty line’ (BPL) category of families. 
Based on the above decision, FCI commenced the export of wheat in November, 
2000. 
 
They were also permitted to issue rice  for exports in December 2000 and wheat 
for export of wheat products in Decem ber 2001. Accordingly, FCI issued 19.71 
MMT of wheat and 13.53 MMT of rice for exports during November 2000 to 
February 2004.  The economic cost and the sale value of the quantity of wheat 
and rice issued for export (based on the highest sale price obtained in a year) 
were Rs. 33,927 crore and Rs. 19,792 crore respectively involving a subsidy 
burden of Rs. 14,135 crore being the diff erence between economic cost and 
sales realization. 
  
 
Factors contributing to export of foodgrains 
 
(a)  Excess procurement of foodgrains 
 
The Food Corporation of India and Ministry of Cons umer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution have justified excess procur ement of foodgrains on the contention 
that the procurement of f oodgrains operations in India, are actually MSP driven 
and not based on the demands of PDS, t herefore, FCI or state procurement 
agencies do not have any flexibility of not  accepting foodgrains offered by the 
farmers. The Committee have also been in formed that, if exports had not been 
done. FCI would have incurred an additi onal cost of Rs. 27626.34 crore for 
holding the stocks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(b)  Inadequate Storage Capacity 
 
The Committee note that covered storage capacity available with FCI was not 
adequate to store the surplus stocks of foodgrains and almost 100 lakh tonnes of 
foodgrains were being stored under Central Accounts Pool (CAP) storage, which 
was likely to be easily damaged becaus e of the elements of nature.  
Deterioration of foodgrains, increasi ng administrative and storage charges for 
maintaining the stocks and for making available storage space for coming 
procurement, were other reasons which necessitated export of foodgrains. 
 
The Committee fail to understand as to why steps were not taken well in advance 
for augmenting the storage capacity so as to obviate the present situation of 
foodgrains lying in the open and exposed to  vagaries of nature. The committee 
cannot absolve  both the Ministry and FCI of their responsibility of not addressing 
this problem sufficiently in advance and in proper perspective. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a comprehensive revi ew of storage capacity 
of all the godowns of FCI be made and adequate steps be taken for augmenting 
the storage capacity. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 Construction of storage capacity has  to be seen in context of normal 
storage requirement for stocks to be main tained in the Central Pool. It was in 
view of the surplus accumulation of sto cks, that the Government started the   
Seven Years Guarantee Scheme in the year 2001-02 under which additional 
storage capacity to the tune of 85.25 la kh MT in Punjab, Haryana Andhra 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Prad esh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttaranchal, 
Orissa, Rajasthan and Bihar was approved.  Against this allocation, a capacity of 
about 68.83 lakh MT has been built and taken over.   The total capacity of FCI is 
245.36 lakh MTs with 35% utilization as on 1.12.2005.  In add ition, the Central 
and State Warehousing Corporat ions also have substantial storage capacity and 
the total storage capacity in the country is almost 550 lakh Mts.  
 
 The revised buffer norm for 1 st July is 269 Lakh MTs for which the existing 
storage capacity is adequate to take care of normal circumstances. The situation 
in 1999-2003 was exceptiona l and it would not be cost  effective and financially 
prudent to plan permanent storage capacity  for such exceptional build up of 
stocks, which had gone up to three time s the annual requirement in the year 
2002. 
 
However, in compliance of the Co mmittee’s recommendation, the storage 
capacity is being regularly reviewed at the Department level and capacity 
building is being taken up wherever necessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
Even though Govt. took steps to sanction  the construction of  additional storage 
capacity (godowns) under SYGS during the period 2001-02.  FCI could take over 
these godowns only during the period Ja nuary 2001 to December 2004 and by 
which time the situation had eased. 
 
Proper planning in assessi ng godown capacity require ment through periodical 
review was not rigorously carried out in the past.  
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
The FCI had been doing periodic reviews in past too.  Storage capacities were 
increased / decreased with increase / decrease in the stock level, as could be 
seen from the following table: 
 
Year (as on 31st 
March) 
Capacity held by 
FCI (lakh MT) 
1993-94 236.59 
1994-95 273.96 
1995-96 264.10 
1996-97 226.42 
1997-98 223.69 
1998-99 233.41 
1999-00 254.08 
2000-01 314.46 
2001-02 358.40 
2002-03 317.34 
2003-04 272.37 
2004-05 260.31 
2005-06 255.56 
 
Maximum amount of hired capacity was de -hired with the dwindl ing of the stock 
level. As on 30.6.2002, the FCI was hav ing a peak hired capacity of 226.71 lakh 
MT which has been brought down to 92.50 la kh MT as on 30.9.06.  out of the 
present hired capacity of 92.50 lakh MT ab out 70 lakh MT capacities pertains to 
the SYGS which has to be kept by the FCI per force unitl the period of guarantee 
scheme is over.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation Sl No. 2 
 
Delay in liquidation of excess stocks 
 
        
The Committee note that the Ministry has woken up very late and taken nearly 
two years in submitting the proposal  to CCEA for export of excess foodgrains. 
The Committee therefore deprec ate the delay on the part of  the Ministry for not 
addressing to the problem of  burgeoning buffer stocks of FCI in the right earnest 
despite the fact that FCI had been highlighting this problem through letters and 
deliberations in the High Level Committee meetings 
 
The Committee are also unhappy to note  that the Ministry of Food allowed 
distribution of surplus foodgrains  for ‘F ood for Work programme’ only after the 
then Chairman, FCI, mooted this proposal  to the Ministry. The Committee also 
find it distressing that the decision regardi ng increase of supply of foodgrains for 
BPL and APL families was taken only in  2002, when the problem of surplus 
stocks of foodgrains had actually become insurmountable. The Committee, 
therefore, take a serious view of the situation and feel that had the Ministry taken 
these corrective steps earlier, the stocks of foodgrains mi ght not have swelled to 
a level which warranted exports. 
 
The Committee recommend that to obviate re currence of such situation in future, 
Ministry should periodically make assessm ents of stocks at t he disposal of FCI 
and initiate suitable remedial steps, well in advance, for their disposal without 
causing any loss to the exchequer. 
 
 
Reply of the Government : 
 
The Government was seized of the issu e of the burgeoning buffer stocks of the 
FCI, which followed in the wake of successive good monsoon seasons much 
before the Chairman FCI, sought Governm ent’s approval on 13 November 2000 
for using the surplus foodgrains for, “ Food for Work Programme”.  In order to 
liquidate the excess stocks, the Government  took steps to increase the off take 
amongst the domestic consumers by adopti ng several measures, which included 
the following:  
 
i)   The allocation for BPL families at the rate of 20 Kg per family per month 
was made on the basis of popu lation projections of the Registrar General, as on 
1.3.2000 instead of the base of projected population of 1995. 
 
ii)   Foodgrains at BPL rates were allott ed to State Governments at the rate of 
5 kg. per head per month, for covering categories of indigent  people living in 
Welfare Institutions such as beggar homes, hostels for SC/ST/backward class 
students, homes for nari niketans etc. s ponsored by State Governments and the 
concerned Administrative Ministry of Government of India. Foodgrains were also  
 
 
 
 
 

allocated under the Annapurna Scheme to indigent ol d persons even in the case 
of those receiving old age pension from the State Governments. 
 
iii)  Foodgrains at Central Issue Pr ice applicable for BPL families were 
allocated for all welfare schemes implemen ted by various Ministries of the Govt. 
of India. 
 
iv)  Foodgrains at the rate applicable for BPL families were allotted to the 
State Governments for undertaking “Food for Work” programmes in the States. 
 
v)  Foodgrains were also allotted at  BPL rates to development schemes, 
where the beneficiaries belong to the BPL category, implemented by Non 
Governmental Organisations sponsored  by the State Governments and 
Administrative Ministry in Government  of India as also by International 
Organisations like World Food Programme. 
 
     But as the domestic measures to liquidate the huge stocks of foodgrains did 
not bring about desired results, the option to export was adopted as a last resort 
measure. 
 
    However as per the recommendation of  the Committee periodical reviews are 
being made for assessing the stocks at the disposal of the FCI. 
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
Ministry replied that periodical reviews are being made  for assessing the stocks 
at the disposal of FCI.  The Ministry may intimate the periodicity of these reviews, 
the composition of the Review Committees and forward to audit the minutes of all 
the Committee(s) that met since January 2003 till date.  It appears that the 
creation of additional storage is required but the pressing need is to create 
scientific storage in various regions of t he country where the food grains can be 
preserved for long period without loss in quality in silos.  
 
 
Further reply of the Government : 
 
Periodical reviews are being made for assessing the stocks at the disposal of FCI 
at least since in a month by FCI.  It is  also being reviewed at the level of 
Secretary (F&PD) and CMD (FCI).  Concerned Senior officials of FCI and the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution attend the meetings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation Sl No. 8 
 
Internal Audit 
 
The Committee deprecate that the internal Audit wing of  FCI was not entrusted / 
involved for checking the documentati on throughout the export operations, in-
spite of clear cut directions of HLC in May, 2002. This lead to many omissions 
and commissions.  The Committee do not agree with the contention  of FCI that 
Finance Division of regional office of FC I was associated at all stages of export 
operations and this served the same purpose of exercising a check, as was the 
job of Internal Audit. The Committee are of the opinion that the role of Internal 
Audit is totally different from that of Finance Division. They would like to 
emphasise that Internal Audit Wing has th e wherewithal and special acumen to 
critically analyse the cases of om issions and commissions, which Finance 
Division is not equipped of. 
 
The Committee feel that had the internal audit wing been associated at all stages 
of export operation, various irregularities and deficiencies which have occurred in 
export operations would not have take n place.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that FCI should invariably associ ate the Internal Audit Wing at all 
effective stages of export operations in future and follow the audit norms strictly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 Internal audit is an in dependent function from exec utive working and it is 
free to carry out Audit at all stages of Corporation working. The Internal Audir did 
conduct audit of sale of w heat and rice for export purposes and even submitted 
its consolidated Internal Audit Repor t on 1.11.02, which carried the Audit 
conducted till 31.3.02.  
 
As recommended by the Committee a more  proactive approach of internal audit 
involvement would be ensured in the future.   
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
Only transactions after May 2002 were sc rutinized by Internal Audit despite 
exports having started from November 2000 onwards.  This showed that there 
were inherent failure of inte rnal controls and checks.  This IA report was not 
produced to the sole auditors  and no reasons were adduced for the same.  This 
report may now be furnished to the sole auditors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Further reply of the Government 
 
Internal Audit Report has been furnished to Sole Auditors i.e. CAG officials sitting 
at 2nd Floor of FCI Headquarters, New Delhi. 

CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation Sl no. 3 
 
Food Subsidy  
 
As per audit observation, the Committee no te that a subsidy of Rs. 14135 crore 
has been given to the exporters under th e Head food subsidy. The Committee 
highly deprecate that the “f ood subsidy’ basically meant for social activity i.e. 
PDS covering BPL families has been wrongfully extended to exporters which is a 
commercial activity. 
 
The Committee therefore, totally disapprove the decision of the Ministry of giving 
subsidy to exporters for liquidating th e excess buffer stocks and strongly 
recommend that in future food subsidy to exporters should be strictly avoided. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Export of wheat was undertaken with t he sole purpose of reducing the 
burgeoning stocks in whic h heavy amount would have  been incurred towards 
storage costs. Food subsidy has two components, viz. consumer subsidy and 
buffer subsidy, i.e. cost of holding sto cks. When the decision to permit release of 
stocks for exports was taken, FCI was incurring heavy carrying (holding) cost 
which would have to be reimbursed as par t of the food subsidy. The average 
period of storage was much in excess of two years. This expenditure towards 
holding of excess stocks would have had to be released as buffer subsidy. For 
example, stocks as on Ist July, 2002 was 219 lakh tones of rice and 411 lakh 
tones of wheat against the buffer norm of 100 lakh tones of rice and 143 lakh 
tones of wheat for Ist July at that time. This represents a surplus stock of 119 
lakh tones of rice and 268 lakh t onnes of wheat. For hol ding these stocks, 
additional buffer subsidy would have to be released. It is against this background 
and with a view to reducing the expenditure on buffer subsidy on account of 
excess holding of stocks, which was subj ect to deterioration, the Government 
permitted the release of surplus stocks for export on condi tion that the subsidy is 
less than two years’ holding co st of grain. This led to savings in the buffer 
subsidy, as the average stor age period was in excess of  two years. It is further 
noted that foodgrains stocks have limi ted shelf life and the stocks would 
otherwise have deteriorated, if not, liquidated.  
  
It is further stated that no portion of the budget earmarked for “Consumer 
subsidy” was released to exporters. On ly the portion of the budget which would 
have to be reimbursed as buffer subsidy was released to the exporters as per  
 
 
 
 
 

approved policy. In case foodgrains had not been exported, FCI would in any 
case have incurred storage costs/carrying costs, which would have been borne 
as food subsidy. 
  
The Ministry, however, has taken note of the recommendation of 
Committee on Public Undertaki ngs in the matter and taking measures to ensure 
that there is improved f oodgrains management so  that the situation that had 
arisen in the past does not recur in future. 
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
In the ERC recommendation note it wa s realized that ‘t here is no clear 
demarcation of operational stocks or buffer stocks.  This is done at the corporate 
office level.           
 
In the absence of clear demarcation of sto cks, it is not clear how the Ministry 
claims that no portion of the budget ea rmarked for ‘Consumer Subsidy’ was not 
released to exporters.  Further, it w ould not be possible on the part of FCI to 
distinguish between different categories of sales.  
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
As the export of foodgrains was allowed for the liquidation of surplus stocks and 
export prices were fixed at a cost equal to economic cost minus two years’s 
carrying cost, as decided by the Group of Ministers (GOM), the subsidy given for 
export was in lieu of buffer subsidy wh ich the FCI otherwise would have had to 
incur as carrying cost for holding the surplus stocks for two years’ period or more.  
Therefore, only the buffer subsidy portion was released as export subsidy. 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 9  
 
Need for a long term policy regarding export of foodgrains. 
 
The Committee take a serious view of exte nding of food subsidy to exporters in 
the instant case as food subsidy is intended only for the PDS system for BPL 
families. To avoid recurrence of such a situation the Committee observe that 
there is an imperative need fo r evolving a long term policy regarding export of 
foodgrains. The Committee have been info rmed that a High Level Committee 
(HLC) under the Chairmanship of Sh. Abhi jit Sen has gone into this aspect and 
submitted a report suggesting framing of a scheme which would open direct 
procurement and export to private sect or. The Committee ther efore desire that 
this matter may be pursued vigorously wi th Ministry of Commerce so that an 
export policy for foodgrains is framed expeditiously.  
   
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 As regards the need for a long-term policy regarding export of foodgrains, 
this Department is of the view that as per the extant EXIM policy, export of 
foodgrains is free and no new policy initiative is envisaged at this stage. 
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
The reply of Government is noted.  
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
No further comments required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation SI No. 4 
 
Fixation of lower export price for wheat 
 
The Committee have been informed that t he Group of Ministers (GOM) decided 
in October, 2000  that wheat be offered for export at a price equal to the 
economic cost minus two years’ carryi ng cost but not lowe r than the Central 
issue Price (CIP) for BPL category. The Ministry adopted Rs. 8300 per MT and 
Rs. 2204 per MT, being the estimated economic cost  for 2000-01 and the 
related carrying cost respectively whic h was worked out, was based  on the 
revised method of allocation of distri bution costs suggeste d by Expenditure 
Reforms Commission (ERC) . On the basis of recommendations of ERC, the 
issue  price of wheat was arrived at Rs. 3392, which was stepped up to Rs. 4150, 
that is the BPL price, the minimum rate at which the wheat was to be offered for 
export. As such the wheat for export was issued at Rs. 4150 between November 
2000 and March 2001. The Committee further note that  while taking the decision 
of export during a particular year, Ministry has taken the estimated economic cost 
and carrying cost of subsequent  two years. As per Audit this has resulted in a 
loss or additional subsidy burden of Rs. 1608 crore.   
 
However, Food Corporation of India and Ministry of Food have contended that by 
adopting the above criteria t here was no loss and they adopt ed this criteria in 
consonance with ERC recommendations. T he Committee further note that the 
revised methodology suggested by the ER C and approved by the Cabinet had 
two effects, firstly reduction of economic  cost and secondly increase in carrying 
cost, which finally resulted in fixation of lower export price. 
 
The Committee are not conv inced with the justificati on given by Ministry for 
adopting the criteria of calculation of Export Price based on ERC 
recommendations as the same were app licable for the PDS system and not for 
export scheme. The Committee therefor e deprecate the Ministry for adopting 
wrong criteria for calculation of export price. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In respect of foodgrains procured and di stributed by the FCI, only one economic 
cost each for wheat and rice is fixed for all the schemes, including  PDS, export, 
open sale and  other  welfare schem es. ERC recommendation  was for 
methodology of fixation of economic cost  of the foodgrains procured/distributed 
by the FCI. ERC did not recommend different economic cost for different  
 
 
 
 

schemes. FCI’s accounts also reflect only one economic cost. Therefore the 
economic cost of the FCI as fixed at that time was taken for fixation of export 
prices.  
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
That there is one Economic  cost each for wheat and rice which is determined by 
the FCI at the close of the financial year is correct.  Audit however, observed that 
the economic cost of 1999-2000 available at the time of exports was not taken for 
fixation of export price, but instead the Government relied on the estimated 
economic cost recommended by the ERC. 
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
For all purposes, for a particular year, FCI’s economic cost including other 
related costs such as carrying cost etc. is taken as fixed on the basis of budget 
estimates prepared in the beginning of the y ear, till it is revised at the end of the 
year, on the basis of actual expenditure  incurred till that period and estimated 
expenditure for the remaining period of the year.  Same policy was adopted for 
fixation of export prices and economic  cost of 2000-01 and carrying cost as 
available at that time was taken during 2000-01. 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 5    
 
Unfruitful Expenditure on Transportation 
 
The Committee note that the sale price fixed for export of wheat and rice was on 
ex-FCI port godowns basis, which means tr ansportation charges from inland FCI 
depot to the port town was to be borne by FC I. This facilitated the exporters to lift 
foodgrains from the godowns of their choice and have them delivered at the port 
of their choice. As a result, the exporters lifted the foodgrains from the godowns 
of their choice situated in far-flung places, irrespective of the fact that sufficient 
stocks were available in nearby godowns with reference to the designated ports 
from where export took place. As per audit, FCI had incurred Rs. 516.36 crore 
towards freight charges. The high incidence of freight charges on inland 
movement had the effect of reducing the net realisation from exports which fell 
below the issue rate for BPL category. 
 
 The Committee further note that FCI has justified the lifting of foodgrains 
by the exporters from the godowns of their choice for several reasons, namely, 
nearness of final destinat ion (foreign country) to a particular port, easier 
availability of ships at a particular port at a cheaper rate etc.  According to them  
 
 
 
 
 

these steps were essential for the su ccess of the scheme and as such only rail-
freight through the shortest route wa s reimbursed and ec onomy in overall 
operations was maintained. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that  this is a clear case where undue 
benefit/advantage has been extended to the exporters. They also feel that the 
policy per se in this regar d of reimbursing of transport  charges from inland 
godown to port town, was a loss making pro position which resulted in issuing the 
foodgrains below the BPL price. In  the opinion of the Committee the 
reimbursement of transport charges is an export subsidy to traders, which should 
have been avoided. In so far as expo rt of foodgrains is concerned, the 
Committee recommend that a clear cut policy should be evolved with regard to 
reimbursement of transport charges.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
While noting the observations of the Comm ittee, the Department would like to 
reiterate that no loss has been incurred on account of transport charges from 
inland godown to port town by reimbursi ng minimum rail freight. This expenditure 
would have been incurred by the FCI even if  the stocks had to be transported for 
PDS purposes to the port towns.  As the element of transportation is already built 
in the BPL price, hence t he freight charges need not be deducted from the BPL 
price on account of transportation of the stocks from godown of choice to the port 
town. 
As recommended by the Committee clear cut policy would be evolved 
regarding reimbursement of  transport charges as and when the situation 
warrants. 
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
As per the GOM decision the export pric e should not fall below the BPL price, 
whereas it was found that the net realization per MT of foodgrains from exports 
was below the BPL price.  In the reply it  was further stated that the element of 
transportation is included in BPL price.  The elements that enter the BPL price 
may be furnished to Audit. 
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
Calculation sheets for economic cost of wheat and rice for the years 2000-01 to 
2004-05 is attached.  During the year 2000, a decision was taken, in principle, by 
Government that the Central Issue Pric es (CIPs) under the Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) may be fixed at 50% of the economic cost for Below 
the Poverty Line (BPL) households.  Based on this principle, Government, on 21st 
July 2000 fixed the Central Issue Prices at Rs. 565 per quintal for rice and Rs.  
 
 
 
 

415 per quintal for wheat for the BPL households.  These CIPs for BPL 
households have been retained at this level, ever since. 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 6 
 
Deficiencies in Sale operations 
 
Undue benefit of Rs. 44.25 crore to Exporters for foodgrains exported 
through rail to Bangladesh. 
 
 The Committee note that Post Delivery Expenses  (PDE) which inter-alia include 
shipping freight, loading and un loading ch arge etc. allowed to exporters ranged 
from Rs. 1700 to Rs. 3850 per MT for ri ce and Rs. 1175 to Rs. 2850 per MT for 
wheat.  This was paid irrespective of des tinations i.e the dist ance involved in 
export of foodgrains to various countries . No exercise was done to work out the 
realistic PDE, which exporters would be incurring. For instance in case of exports 
to Bangladesh, FCI moved goods directly from godowns to various destinations 
in Bangladesh by rail. 
 
 The Committee further note that t he allowance towards PDE ranging from 
Rs. 1175 per MT to Rs. 3850 per MT was extended in respect of foodgrains 
issued for export and transported by rail to Bangladesh as against only Rs. 30 
per MT borne by the exporter thereby allowing a subsidy of Rs. 1750 per MT 
which, as per audit, led to excess reimbursement of Rs. 44.25 crore. 
 
 The Committee are not satisfied with FCI’s contention that the 
reimbursement of PDE (irrespective of  destinations) was WTO compatible as 
they feel  that  the Ministry should have got clarification from Group of Ministers, 
as to whether post delivery expenses had to be allowed uniformly. The another 
argument advanced by FCI t hat without additions in manpower, it would have 
been a Herculean task to handle all exports transactions on a case by case basis  
is also not acceptable  to the Committee as FCI being a commercial organization 
can not fritter away Government money on such frivolous grounds. 
 
 The Committee feel that there is no commercial prudence in giving a PDE 
of Rs. 1750 per MT, as against only Rs. 30 per MT borne by the exporters.  The 
Committee highly deprecate the Ministry/F CI for having failed to work out a 
realistic PDE and save the Govern ment money. The Co mmittee therefore 
recommend that a proper and fool proof syst em of export (sale) operations 
should be evolved which may also include realistic assessment of PDE for export 
purposes in future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government : 
  
 The Government on the basis of a High Level Inter Ministerial Committee fixed a 
minimum level of PDE with the objective to provide ce rtain monetary incentives 
to the exporters for expediting the liquidation of huge foodgrains stocks under the 
Central Pool.  As there was no intention to extend this benefit on the basis of 
actual expenses incurred by an expor ter, there was no need to prescribe 
separate levels of PDEs for different des tinations/modes.    The objective of the 
Government was also to restrict the subsidy for every ton of foodgrain exported.   
 
 On the basis of this policy of the Go vernment, it was for the exporters to 
choose where they would like to export.  In case the Government had set graded 
PDEs for different destinations and modes, there was a lik elihood that the 
exporters would have chosen to export to destinations, which earned them higher 
subsidy, thereby causing higher outgo  of monetary incentive from the 
government coffers, for the same amount of wheat exported.  Thus the policy of 
the government to follow uniform PDE was most economical, easy to implement 
and transparent and has to be  seen against the fact t hat the total outgo of 
subsidy even for far off destinations was ke pt at the lower end of the permissible 
range of PDE.   
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
It is clear from the reply that the main obj ective of the export was to expedite the 
liquidation of huge stocks of  food grains, which had piled up and hence the Inter 
Ministerial Committee had fixed a minimum level of PDE with the objective of 
providing certain monetary incentive to expo rters.  It was furt her stated that the 
objective of the Government was also to  restrict the subsidy but this was not 
fulfilled.                   
 
The contention of the Minist ry regarding gain of higher subsidy by exporters in 
case of fixation of graded PDEs/modes is  not supported by a dequate data.  The 
claim that the application of the uniform PDE led to economy may be furnished to 
audit.  
 
 
Further reply of the Government : 
 
The purposes of the Government was to enable exports at internationally 
competitive prices.  Since there was huge accumulation of wheat and rice stocks 
the international prices were taken into  consideration and export prices were 
fixed by the Government from time to time .  Initially uniform export prices were 
fixed for all years of procurement.  Later on, separate export prices were fixed for 
each year of procurement.  To keep the export prices uniform for all the port 
depots/storage points of FCI, the post de livery expenses were used to equalize 
the export price at all port depots/storage points of FCI with respect to the open  
 
 
 
 
 

market sale price.  In case the PDE wa s fixed differently taking into account the 
actual cost of exports, it would have been  very difficult to implement such a 
decision and a lot of discretion would have rested with field officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Sl No. 7 
 
Irregularities in export transactions 
 
According to C&AG, there were instances of  irregularities in export transactions 
such as non-recovery of penalties, non- submission of export documents, non-
submission of original documents, diversion of stocks to domestic market instead 
of exporting, etc. FCI has also admitted that during t he course of the operations, 
there might have been some mistakes and that there were complaints of 
diversion and misuse of grains. The Committee have noted that in many such 
irregularities, cases have been referred to  CBI and FIRs have been lodged and 
further investigations are being made. 
 
 The Committee recommend that the investigations in all the cases of 
irregularities should be ex pedited and appropriate action be taken against erring 
exporters/delinquent officials of FCI.  The Committee also desire that suitable 
steps be taken as suggested by Abhijit Sen Committee, to tighten procedures to 
prevent leakages of foodgrains meant for export into domestic market. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 All the cases of alleged irregularitie s in export transactions mentioned by 
the CAG in its report are being exam ined in detail. The CBI, which is 
investigating the allegations of irregularities in export of  foodgrains by the FCI, is 
being extended full cooperation both by the FCI and this Department. 
 
The Abhijit Sen Committee in its R eport on Long term Foodgrains Policy has 
made recommendations for encouraging ex port on private account, where the 
subsidy, if any, should be payab le not at point of sale but  at the point of export. 
The Ministry of Commerce had mooted a pr oposal in this regar d but it has been 
dropped for the present, as the surplus f oodgrain scenario in the Central Pool 
has undergone a change and entr epreneurs, even without any subsidy, are 
making exports.  
 
As regards leakages of foodgrains from the PDS channel,  which has been 
commented upon in the report, the Governm ent is fully seized of the matter and 
efforts are being made in consultation wit h the State Governments to tackle the 
menace.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

The recommendations of the The Abhijit Sen Committee in its Report on Long 
term Foodgrains Policy would be kept in view as and when the need arises. 
 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
The final outcomes of the CBI cases may be reported to audit.   
A copy of the Abhijit Sen Committee Report may be furnished to audit.  
Have the recommendations of this Report been accepted by the Government?  
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
A copy of the High Level Committee Report set up under the Chairmanship of 
Shri Abhijit Sen along with statement showing its main recommendation, whether 
accepted or not and Action Taken on it is enclosed (Annexure).  Any fresh report 
regarding outcome of CBI cases relating to irregularities in export transaction has 
not been received in the FCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:       RUPCHAND PAL 
10   , April 2007            C h a i r m a n  
Chaitra 20    , 1929 Saka       Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE 20th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 10th April, 2007 
 
 The Committee sat from 1300 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS  LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
9. Shri Kashiram Rana 
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
 
MEMBERS  RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo  
12. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
13. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
14. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri N. C. G upta Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri C.V.Avadhani,  Deputy C&AG  – cum- Chairman, Audit Board. 
2. Shri A K. Awasthi,  Director General (commercial) C&AG office. 
 
2. The Committee considered the dr aft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 10 th Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings regarding Food Corporation of India – ‘A review on export of 
foodgrains by FCI’ and adopted the same without any modification. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report for 
presentation. 
 
4 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 2 of Introduction) 
 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommend ations contained 
in the 10 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings 
(2005-06) on FCI-A review on export of foodgrains by FCI. 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations 
  
9 
II. Recommendations/observations that have been 
accepted by the Government  (vide recommendations at 
SI. Nos. 1, 2, 8) 
3 
 Percentage to total 
 
33.33%
III. Recommendations/observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies (vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3,  9) 
2 
 
 Percentage to total 
 
22.22%
IV. Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
reply of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee (vide recommendation at SI. Nos. 4, 5, 6) 
3 
 
 Percentage to total 
 
33.33%
V. Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. (vide 
recommendation at Sl. No. 7) 
1 
 Percentage to total 
 
11.11%
 
 
 
 
 
 