C.P.U. No. 926 
 
THIRTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING AND TOURISM CORPORATION LIM ITED   
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 30 th  Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th  Lok 
Sabha) on Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2008 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2008 / Agrahayana 1930(S) 
 
33  

  
CONTENTS  
 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-2009) (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  
 
1 
CHAPTER   lI   Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
 
15 
CHAPTER   
lII  Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies.  
 
19 
CHAPTER   
IV  Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
 
20 
CHAPTER   
V Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
26 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 I  Minutes of the sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
  
28 
 II 
  
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the 30 
th  
Report of Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th  
Lok Sabha) on  Indian Railway Catering and 
Tourism Corporation Limited. 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

  
 
C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2008 - 2009) 
 
 
  Shri Rupchand Pal  - Chairman      
Members  
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5. Shri Francis K. George 
6. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
7. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale 
10. Shri K.C.”Baba” Singh 
11. Smt. Pratibha Singh  
12. Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
13. Shri K.V.Thangkabalu 
14. Shri Rajesh Verma 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Rahul Bajaj 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
20 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
21 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
22 *Shri Amar Singh 
 
 
 Secretariat 
 
 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2 Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
3 Shri N.S. Hooda  Deputy Secretary 
4 Shri Girdhari Lal  Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent on his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
 
(iii) 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf, present this Thirty-third 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the rec ommendations contained in 
the Thirtieth Report of the Committee on Public Und ertakings (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited. 
 
2. The Thirtieth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2007-2008) 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 
th  April 2008.  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
24 th  October 2008.  The Committee on Public Undertaking s considered and 
adopted this Report at their sittings held on 19 th  December, 2008. The Minutes of 
the sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Repor t (2008-09) of the Committee 
is given in Appendix – II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL 
19 
th  December, 2008       Chairman 
28 Agrahayna, 1930(S)          Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

  
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action  taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public U ndertakings (2007-08) on 
“Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Li mited” which was presented 
to Lok Sabha on 29 
th  April, 2008. 
 2. Action Taken notes have been received from Gove rnment in respect of all 
the recommendations contained in the Report.  These  have been categorized as 
follows : 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 7, 8, 10, and 12.    (Total 5) 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observations which the Commi ttee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
        (Nil) 
 
(iii) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 9     (Total 5) 
 
(iv) Recommendations / observations to which the Go vernment have 
furnished interim replies.(Chapter V)  
Sl. Nos.  6 and 11      (Total 2) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes  on the 
Recommendation/Observation contained in Chapter-I a nd final replies in 
respect of the recommendations for which only inter im replies have been 
furnished by the Government included in Chapter-V s hould be furnished 
expeditiously.   
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Take n by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 2) 
5. Regarding vacancies of the Board of Directors of  IRCTC, the Committee in 
their 30 th  Report recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee find that the post of Managing Dire ctor on Board of 
Directors of IRCTC has been lying vacant since 23 rd  October, 2007 and 
Director (Tourism and Marketing) has been entrusted  with the additional 
responsibility of Managing Director.  The Committee  have been apprised 
that the recruitment process is on and likely to be  completed soon.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that the vacancy of Ma naging Director in any 
organization particularly with commercial venture l ike IRCTC for 
considerably longer time have cascading effect on t he efficiency of the 
company.  They, therefore desire that the recruitme nt process for filling up 
the vacancy of Managing Director should be complete d urgently so that a 
duly appointed MD is in office without further loss  of time.  The Committee 
further note that besides the vacancy of MD, there are three other 
vacancies existing on the Board of Directors of IRC TC, namely Director 
(Finance) and two non-official Directors.  The recr uitment process for filling 
up of these vacancies is said to have been initiate d.  The Committee desire 
that the vacancies of Director (Finance) and two no n-official Directors 
should be filled up expeditiously.” 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply to the recommendatio n of the Committee, the 
Government have stated as follows:- 
            “As regards, filing of   vacancy of the  post Managing Director and Director 
(Finance) of IRCTC, the post of Managing Director, IRCTC fell vacant on 
24.10.2007 as the incumbent of the post was prematu rely repatriated to the 
Railways. The vacancy was circulated and this Minis try’s recommendations 
were forwarded to the PESB (Public Enterprises Sele ction Board) for 
consideration.  The PSEB held selection and recomme nded panel for 
appointment to the post of MD/IRCTC.  However, the panel was not 
accepted.    Accordingly, a reference has been made  to the Department of 
Personnel and Training for obtaining approval of th e ACC (Appointment 
Committee of the Cabinet) to the proposal that a fresh panel may be sought 
from the PSEB.  The decision of the ACC is awaited. 
 
The post of Director (Finance), IRCTC fell vacant o n 04.12.2007 as the 
incumbent of the post resigned and was relieved by the IRCTC on 
03.12.2007.  The vacancy was circulated and this Mi nistry’s 
recommendations were forwarded  to the PSEB for con sideration.  The 
PESB held selection and recommended panel for appoi ntment to the  post.  

  
After obtaining CVC’s  clearance and approval of MR , the proposal for 
appointment to the post of Director (Finance)/IRCTC  has been  submitted to 
the Department of personnel and Training for obtain ing approval of the ACC 
on 24.07.2008.  The ACC’s approval is awaited. 
 
Presently there is no vacancy of non-official part- time directors in IRCTC, 
after appointment of Shri Jagdeep S. Chhokar, Ex. P rof. I.I.M., Ahmedabad 
and Shri Alok Shivpuri, Principal, Pusa Institute o f  Hotel Management, New 
Delhi.” 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee, while taking a serious note of th e fact that vacancies 
of the Managing Director, Director (Finance) and tw o non-official Directors 
exist in IRCTC, had recommended that the recruitmen t process which was 
reported to have initiated for filling up the afore said vacancies should be 
completed without loss of time 
In their action taken reply, the Government have st ated that the posts 
of two non-official directors have been filled up a nd filling up of the 
vacancies of Managing Director and Director (Finance) is still under process. 
As regards the post of Managing Director, Ministry of Railways have 
stated that the panel recommended by the Public Ent erprises Selection 
Board for appointment to the post of Managing Direc tor was not accepted, 
accordingly, a reference has been made to the Depar tment of Personnel and 
Training for obtaining approval of the Appointment Committee of the 
Cabinet to the proposal that a fresh panel may be s ought from the PESB.  
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of t he Government as it has 

  
been more than a year’s time that the post of MD ha s been lying vacant.  The 
Committee are unhappy to note that while the panel recommended by PESB 
was not accepted, but no mention about the reasons of the non-acceptance 
of the panel has been made.  Even the proposal for obtaining the approval of 
ACC to start afresh the selection and short-listing  process of the panel by 
PESB is still under ACC consideration.  The Committ ee wish to point out 
that the vacancy of Managing Director for a long ti me in a company like 
IRCTC, which is required to perform in a more profe ssionalized and efficient 
manner in the fiercely competitive hospitality indu stry particularly 
consequent upon the conferment of mini-ratna status , may have an adverse 
effect on the efficiency  and decision-making proce ss of the Company.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate the Govern ment’s indifference in 
pursuing the appointment process and reiterate thei r earlier 
recommendation that the whole exercise of appointme nt of Managing 
Director should be completed without any further delay.    
As regards the vacancy of Director (Finance), the C ommittee have 
been informed that though the panel recommended by the PSEB has been 
approved by the Ministry of Railways and CVC’s clea rance obtained, the 
proposal for appointment to the post of Director (F inance) is under 
submission for approval of the ACC.   The Committee  desire that the 
appointment process of Director (Finance) should al so be completed at the 
earliest.  

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 3) 
8. On the issue of staff strength of IRCTC, the Com mittee in their original 
report had inter-alia  recommended as under: - 
“The Committee note that IRCTC took over catering s ervices from Indian 
Railways on as is where is basis along with the cat ering staff on deemed 
deputation basis.  The deemed deputationists staff is being repatriated to 
the Railways and simultaneously a review is also be ing undertaken to 
determine the manpower requirement of the IRCTC.  T he Committee have 
been informed that as on 31 st  December, 2007, IRCTC had a total staff 
strength of 5521 and out of which 4221 were deemed deputationists staff 
comprising of 1094 Group C and 3127 Group D employe es.  The 
Committees have been informed that in its repatriat ion process of these 
deemed deputationists staff, which is taking place in phased manner, till 
now a total of 790 Group D staff has been repatriat ed to the Railways and 
the balance of Group D staff is also likely to repa triated in 2008 itself.  
Regarding Group C staff, the Committee, however, no te that Ministry of 
Railways has not indicated any time-frame for compl etion of repatriation 
process. The Committee are of the opinion that due to non-fixation of any 
time-frame for the completion of repatriation proce ss of Group C staff, the 
planning for induction of new staff is likely to su ffer.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the repatriation of Group  C staff should also be 
completed within a stipulated time-frame so that a proper planning could be 
done for recruitment of new staff for smooth runnin g of its mandated 
activities.”  
 
9. In reply to the recommendation of the Committee,  the Government in their 
Action Taken Reply submitted as follows:-          
      “The issue of repatriation of Group ‘C’ deemed dep utationists staff from 
IRCTC to the zonal railways is under finalization i n the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board ).  
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
Comments of the Committee  
 
10. In the backdrop of non-finalization of the repa triation process of 
Group C deemed deputationists staff while the Group  D employees were 
slated to be repatriated by the year 2008 itself, t he Committee recommended 
that Ministry of Railways should indicate a time-fr ame for finalization of 

  
repatriation process of Group C employees also so t hat management may 
review its manpower requirement accordingly.   
In this regard, Ministry of Railways in their actio n taken reply have 
stated that the issue of repatriation of Group C de emed deputationist staff 
for IRCTC to zonal railways is under finalization.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Government as even after a lapse of more than 
six months, the Ministry of Railways still have not  finalised the issue of 
repatriation of Group C deemed deputationist staff.   As the planning for 
induction of new staff is likely to suffer due to n on-fixation of time-frame for 
completion of repatriation process of group ‘C’ sta ff, the Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry of Railways 
should not only finalise the issue of repatriation of Group C deemed 
deputationist staff but also prescribe a time frame  by which this whole 
process of repatriation will be completed. 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 4) 
11. On the decision of Government for imposition of  haulage cost, the 
Committee on Public Undertakings in their 30 th  Report,had inter-alia 
recommended as follows: - 
 
“The Committee find that during the year 2006-07, the gross profit of IRCTC 
was capped by the Ministry of Railways by issuing a  directive that full 
marginal cost of haulage of pantry car will be born e by IRCTC and that for 
the year 2006-07, after keeping the gross profit of  Rs. 30 crore, the surplus 
money will be paid by IRCTC to Indian Railways as p antry car haulage 
charge.  Once IRCTC starts paying the marginal cost  of haulage in full, 
Indian Railways’ share of License fee for mobile un its (15%) plus payment 
of 5% as maintenance cost of pantry cars would be r eviewed and suitably 
reduced.  The Committee note that contesting the de cision of the Ministry, 
IRCTC tendered a contention that since catering ser vice is a passenger 

  
amenity, haulage cost cannot be added to the cost o f meal.  Moreover, the 
haulage cost for pantry car will add at least 10% t o the overhead costs and 
will affect the quality of food and services on mob ile units, unless tariffs are 
suitably raised.  Justifying the imposition of haul age cost on IRCTC, 
Ministry of Railways have stated that they have dec ided to levy haulage 
cost for pantry cars as Indian Railways has incurre d losses for catering 
services amounting to Rs. 494.46 crore in 2005-06 a lone.  A sizeable 
portion of these losses is on account of haulage co st of pantry cars.  The 
Committee are surprised to note that how Ministry o f Railways can put a 
cap on the gross profit of IRCTC by imposing an abr upt and arbitrary 
decision on IRCTC.  The Committee have been further  informed by IRCTC 
that there was no such provision in the Memorandum of Understanding 
2006-07 signed between the IRCTC and Ministry of Ra ilways.  The 
Committee fail to understand as to how the Ministry of Railways have levied 
haulage charge in the absence of any such clause in  MOU.  As regards the 
tenability of haulage cost, the Committee feel that  since this being 
passenger amenity, the pantry car is normally attac hed to the trains with a 
view to provide on board catering services to the rail passengers, imposition 
of haulage charges would affect the profitability o f the company as this 
extra cost cannot be transferred to the passengers.   Since haulage cost for 
pantry cars levied on IRCTC adds at least 10% to th e overhead cost, which 
would affect the quality of food and services on mo bile units, unless the 
tariffs are suitably raised, in this regard, the Co mmittee recommended that 
the request of IRCTC for withdrawal of haulage cost  should be considered 
favorably so that the company is not forced to tran sfer this cost to the 
passengers using catering services.” 
 
12. The Government in their action taken reply on t he above mentioned 
recommendation have stated as under: - 
 
“The request of IRCTC for not imposing on it the ha ulage charges of pantry 
cars, has been examined in the Ministry of Railways , but has not been 
agreed to. Instead of payment of full haulage charg es, it has been decided 
by the Ministry of Railways to realize only Rs.30 c rore from IRCTC as 
haulage charges for the year 2007-08.” 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
13. Expressing a serious concern over the Ministry of Railways’ arbitrary 
decision to levy haulage cost on IRCTC for pantry c ar to make good the 
losses, occurring to Railways due to catering servi ces, the Committee had 

  
opined in their original report that catering servi ces being passenger 
amenity, the pantry car is normally attached to the  trains with a view to 
provide on board catering services to the rail pass engers, imposition of 
haulage charges would affect the profitability of t he Company as this extra 
cost cannot be transferred to the passengers. The C ommittee had, therefore, 
recommended that the request of IRCTC for withdrawa l of haulage cost 
should be considered favourably so that the Company  is not forced to 
transfer this cost to the passengers using catering services.   
 The Ministry of Railways in their action taken rep ly has stated that the 
request of IRCTC for not imposing on it the haulage  charges of pantry cars 
has been examined in the Ministry of Railways but h as not been agreed to, 
and instead of payment of full haulage charges, it has been decided to 
realize only Rs. 30 crore from IRCTC as haulage cha rges for the year 2007-
08.  The Committee are not at all convinced with th e vague and evasive reply 
of the Government as the Government has not indicat ed in explicit term the 
basis as to how it has determined Rs. 30 crore as h aulage charges to be 
realized from IRCTC for the year 2007-08 and also w hether the levy of 
haulage cost would continue even after 2007-08.  Th e Committee, therefore, 
while reiterating their recommendation for withdraw al of haulage cost for 
pantry cars desire to know the basis of determining  the haulage charges.   
The Committee is at a loss to understand that by this formula whether IRCTC 
will be benefited or adversely affected. The Commit tee while reiterating their 
original recommendation desire that mini-ratna stat us conferred recently on 

  
IRCTC should not be jeopardized by way of burdening  it with haulage 
charges.  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 5) 
 
14. Stressing the need for expediting the developme nt process of budget 
hotels, the Committee had recommended as follows: - 
 
“The Committee note that with a view to utilize its  surplus land 
commercially, the Ministry of Railways decided to s et up 100 budget hotels 
in the vicinity of the railway stations for tourist s and rail users and 
authorized IRCTC to develop them on public private partnership mode in 
2006.  The Committee further note that IRCTC which identified 100 
locations for the purpose simultaneously initiated the tendering process for 
29 sites and requested the Ministry of Railways to give its clearance for 
allotment of land. 
The Committee, however, note that during the year 2006-07, Ministry 
of Railways put on hold the process of handing over of 29 budget hotel sites 
on the pretext that the matter of fixing norm and m odalities of sparing of 
land to IRCTC, Railway Land Development Authority, Mumbai Rail Vikas 
Corporation etc. for various uses was under conside ration of Railway Board 
and that the Government is reviewing the proposed s ites with a view to 
develop world class station.  The Committee have fu rther been informed 
that after IRCTC again took up the matter with the Railway Board, Ministry 
of Railways decided to clear 21 sites, leaving 8 si tes for development of 
world class stations.  The Committee are distressed  to note that due to the 
sudden introduction of Government’s new concept of developing world 
class stations on the identified sites of IRCTC in 2007, the process of 
clearing the sites for construction of budget hotel s got delayed by almost 
one year and created a conflict between the process  of development of 
budget hotels and world class stations at the propo sed sites.  The 
Committee desire that this conflict should be resol ved expeditiously and 
therefore, recommend that in order to avoid any con flict between 
development of budget hotels and world class statio ns, Ministry of Railways 
should first undertake a review of all the remaining sites identified by IRCTC 
for the purpose of developing world class stations by stipulating a time-
frame so that no delay is caused in finalizing the sites for the development 
of budget hotels of IRCTC.” 
 
 
15. In response to the recommendation of the Commit tee, Ministry of Railways 
have furnished the action taken reply as under: - 

  
“The Ministry of Railways has decided to set up 100  Budget Hotels through 
IRCTC with Public Private participation. IRCTC init iated tendering process 
in respect of 29 locations. In the meanwhile, some of the locations identified 
for setting up of Budget Hotels has also been ident ified for development as 
World Class Stations. Out of these 29 locations, 11  locations has been 
identified for development as World Class Stations,  as an interim measure, 
IRCTC was permitted to go ahead with such locations  which has not been 
identified for development as World Class Stations. 
 
In respect of the18 locations not identified for de velopment as World 
Class Stations and for which tendering process was initiated, some 
discrepancies were noted in the tender document/pro posed agreement. 
IRCTC is yet to take corrective measure in this reg ard before going ahead 
further. 
 
As regards the balance 71 locations and also 11 loc ations for which 
tendering process has been initiated but has also b een identified for 
development as world-class stations, this issue is still under review.”     
     
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
16. 
The Committee, while noting that the conflict betwe en the 
development process of budget hotels and world clas s stations at the 100 
sites identified by IRCTC had resulted in a delay o f almost one year in 
clearing the sites for construction of budget hotel s, recommended that 
Ministry of Railways should undertake a review of a ll the sites identified by 
IRCTC for the purpose of developing world class sta tions, by stipulating 
the time frame to avoid any delay in finalizing the  sites for development of 
budget hotels.   
From the reply of the Government, the Committee, ho wever, note that 
in respect of the 18 locations for which IRCTC was permitted to go ahead 
with the tendering process as they were not identif ied for development as 

  
World Class Stations, some discrepancies were noted  in the tender 
document/proposed agreement. IRCTC is yet to take c orrective measures 
in this regard before going further.  As regards th e remaining 71 sites and 
also 11 locations for which tendering process has b een initiated but has 
also been identified for development as world class  stations, the matter is 
under review of Government. The Committee are not s atisfied with the 
reply of the Government as firstly, due to the conf lict between the world 
class station and budget hotels and secondly, due t o scanning of 
discrepancies in the tender document, the whole pro cess of clearing and 
development the budget hotels has been inordinately  delayed.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendatio n and desire that the 
aforesaid exercise should be completed in a time bo und manner so as to 
ensure that there is no further delay in setting up of budget hotels.     
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9) 
17. Stressing the need for a review of the Catering  Policy of the Government, 
the Committee in their original Report observed as follows:- 
“The Committee note that catering activities of IRC TC which were taken 
over from Indian Railways in 1998 on as is where is  basis are governed by 
the Catering Policy 2005 of the Ministry of Railway s.  In order to modernize 
and upgrade the catering activities of IRCTC, the M inistry of Railways 
brought a Revised Catering Policy.  One of the main  features of the Extant 
Catering Policy is to lay down technical criteria t o ensure that only 
experienced business entities with specified turnov er, experience in 
catering/hospitality sector are selected through te nder process so that 
quality catering services are provided to the rail passengers.  The 
Committee also note that with a view to provide cat ering services of highest 
quality to their rail passengers, IRCTC has taken a  number of initiatives like 
setting up complaint monitoring cells at major loca tions to handle related 
complaints through computerized system, circulation  of feed back Performa 

  
to assess the expectations of customers and to pinp oint the grey areas, 
remedial measures by quality inspectors after inspe ction at source point, 
hiring of international food audit system or better ment of services etc.   The 
Committee are, however, surprised to note that desp ite all the initiatives 
taken by the IRCTC/Ministry, the quality of caterin g services could not be 
improved as complaints against the existing caterin g licenses for poor 
quality services, over charging, non-working of pan try car equipments, 
under-supply of food, improper and unhygienic cooki ng methodology, poor 
service technique etc. are pouring in incessantly.  IRCTC is blaming the 
Catering Policy of the Government as it is unsuppor tive to the selection of 
quality catering licensees.  IRCTC informed the Com mittee that prior to the 
evolution of catering policies, catering services o n stations were being 
managed by individual propriety firms, partnership firms etc. without any 
tender system for licensing.  Since these catering units were awarded 
licenses without going through any tendering proces s and evaluating their 
technical capabilities, they have been providing su b-standard and 
adulterated food services at the rail stations stak ing the image of IRCTC.  
The extant Catering Policy has not taken care of th e fact that catering 
units/individual propriety firms, having no technic al know-how are still 
continuing to provide catering services at railway stations which is 
substandard and adulterated as per the version of t he IRCTC.  Thus, 
catering practices by such firms/individual have a damaging effect on the 
credibility of IRCTC.   They also observe that ther e is widespread 
unauthorized vending prevalent at the railway stati ons which the existing 
catering policy has not addressed to and has neithe r suggested nor 
appeared to have taken preventive measures.  In the  light of the fact that 
the Catering Policy has not dealt with a number of grey areas, which is 
badly affecting the working of IRCTC and its public  image, the Committee 
feel that the so called Revised Catering Policy 200 5 with particular 
reference to the selection process of quality cater ing licensees is required 
to be re-looked.  The Committee also desire that wh ile making a review of 
the Catering Policy, the suggestions of IRCTC may b e called for and 
suitably looked into so that IRCTC can carry out th eir mandated activities 
and fulfills the aspirations of the rail users.” 
 
18. Government in their Action Taken Reply to the a bove-mentioned 
recommendation of the Committee have stated as under:- 
“Some amendments in earlier catering policy issued on 16.03.2005 have 
been undertaken and revised instructions have been issued in December, 
2005 in respect of tenure of licence, renewal of li cence etc.  The 
amendments in the policy have been done keeping in view the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee of parlia ment on railways, 
and representations received from various quarters.  The guidelines for 
tendering/screening of applications which include t he eligibility criteria,  

  
technical bid and financial bid along with general conditions of contract has 
been circulated   vide letter No. 2005/TG.III/600/5  dated 23.12.2005 by the 
Board. These guidelines are indicative and not exha ustive.  Suitable 
modification in these conditions can be done as per  local and market 
conditions by MD/IRCTC.  Further IRCTC will follow the basic spirit of 
catering Policy.  Since open tendering is the most appropriate and 
transparent method of selection, IRCTC should attai n greater expertise in 
tendering.  Within the parameters of the extant Cat ering Policy, IRCTC is 
competent to issue suitable conditions for bidders to bid for various 
contracts. The system of functioning of IRCTC in te rms of regulation and 
discharging the functions of catering are detailed in MOU between IRCTC 
and Railway Board.   
Unauthorized hawking is not permitted in railway pr emises as per 
Indian Railways Act, 1989 and as amended from time to time.  Unauthorized 
vending and hawking in trains and in passenger area  is prohibited and 
constitutes an offence under section 144 of Railway  Act 1989 and Railways 
Act 2003 (Second Amendment). Zonal railways are tak ing action 
accordingly.  
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
19. Concerned over the absence of stringent guideli nes against the poor 
catering services by the existing catering licensee s and widespread 
unauthorized vending, in the Catering Policy of the  Government which is 
staking the public image of IRCTC, the Committee re commended for a 
review of the catering policy with particular refer ence to the selection  
process of quality catering licensees and desired t o have a considered 
view to the suggestions, if any, made by IRCTC in this regard .  
In this regard, the Government in the Action Taken Reply have inter 
alia stated that the guidelines enshrined in the caterin g policy are 
indicative and not exhaustive and suitable modifica tions in these 
conditions can be done as per local and market cond itions by MD/IRCTC.  
They also stated that the unauthorized vending and hawking in trains and 

  
in passenger area is prohibited and constitutes an offence under Section 
144 of the Railways Act, 1989 and Railways Act, 200 3 (Second 
Amendment).  Zonal Railways are taking action accor dingly.  Further, from 
the Action Taken Reply, it appears that there is a lack of understanding 
between IRCTC management and the Ministry of Railwa ys with regard to 
catering policy as both of them are playing blame g ame while the image of 
IRCTC is getting a setback.  In the opinion of the Committee, any 
commercial organisation should function on sound bu siness principles 
and prudent commercial practices.  The Committee, t herefore, desire that 
the Ministry of Railways should play more supportiv e role to IRCTC in the 
pursuit of these objectives.  

  
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Mini Ratna Status 
 
 The Committee note that IRCTC was incorporated on 27 
th  September 1999 
as a limited company to professionalize and manage catering and hospitality 
services in railways and to promote domestic and in ternational tourism.   To 
achieve their objectives, IRCTC has undertaken vari ous initiatives and has been 
able to get commendable success in some of the area s.  However, in certain 
areas such as catering services, rail-neer packaged  drinking water etc.  IRCTC’s 
performance has been far from satisfactory. The Com mittee have been informed 
that due to catering activities covering 3152 railw ay stations being largely in 
unorganized sector, lack of standardization, well-e ntrenched catering 
contractors, competition from low cost carriers etc ., it is facing difficulties in 
achieving its intended objectives.  In the opinion of the Committee, hospitality 
industry in the country has undergone a tremendous change in the last few years 
leading to a greater competition in the sector.  In stitutional catering operations 
too have undergone vast changes and there is an inc rease in emphasis on 
hygienic and better quality food.  As such it is in creasingly imperative for IRCTC 
to perform in a more professionalized and efficient  manner.  In this connection, 
the Committee note that IRCTC has submitted a propo sal to Ministry of Railways 
for grant of Mini-Ratna status and the same is unde r consideration of the 
Ministry.  The Committee have also been informed th at the IRCTC fulfills all the 
conditions required for claiming Mini-Ratna status.   The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to expedite the proposal so tha t the Mini-Ratna status can be 
accorded to IRCTC enabling it to have desired funct ional autonomy for 
managing the Company in a professionalized manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal of IRCTC for grant of Mini Ratna statu s has been considered 
by Ministry of Railways. Ministry of Railways has g ranted Mini Ratna Category I 
status to IRCTC.   
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 7) 
 
Luxury Tourist Train 
 
 The Committee note that IRCTC has been mandated by  Ministry of 
Railways to promote tourism in general and rail bas ed tourism in particular.  The 
Committee have been informed that in order to promo te tourism in the country, it 
has mooted a proposal to launch a PAN India Luxury Tourist Train with specially 
designed coaches with luxurious interiors, entertai nment lounge, bar and 
executive cuisine in partnership with ITDC/State De partment/reputed private 
enterprises.  The Committee have been informed that  the said proposal has 
been approved in principle by the Board and present ly the quantum of 
investment by IRCTC and management of the train, th rough a joint venture 
company, is under consideration of the Ministry.  T he Committee feel that in the 
quest for tapping the huge potential of tourism in different areas of our country, 
there is a need to run more such luxury trains to c over whole of India and to 
cater to the travel needs of the high end Indian & foreign tourists and, therefore, 
Ministry of Railways should extend its full support  to IRCTC proposal and clear 
this project at their earliest by taking an ‘in pri nciple’ policy decision in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The in principle approval for operation of the prop osed Luxury Tourist Train 
was conveyed to IRCTC in November, 2007. The formal ities for operation and 
management of the train, including formation of Joi nt Venture Company, has to 
be finalized by IRCTC.  
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 8) 
 
Rail Tour Packages 
 
 The Committee note that in order to promote rail-b ased tourism in the 
country, IRCTC has designed 73 tour packages and ou t of these, 49 are 
presently in operation.  Some of the popular tour p ackages which offer the 
facilities of to and fro confirmed journey by train , hotel accommodation and sight 
scene etc. are Delhi-Mata Vaishno Devi, Delhi-Amritsar, Delhi-Puri, Howrah-Puri, 
Ahmedabad-Pune, Secunderabad-Shirdi, Tirupati-Chenn ai, Chennai-
Rameshwaram etc.   From the financial performance o f these tour packages 
during the last three years, the Committee are surp rised to know that there has 
been a continuous loss of revenue to the Company.  Explaining the reasons, 
IRCTC stated that during the year 2006-07, its role  in the tour packages was 
very limited and it was confined to the arranging o f booking of charter trains, 
charter coaches and block booking of berths from Ra ilways.  In such cases, 

  
IRCTC was collecting only the taxes, charges of Rai lways plus IRCTC’s service 
charges.  The net income to IRCTC after making payment to Railways was about 
5 to 6% of the gross revenue.  After apportionment of the administrative 
expenditure of zonal office and corporate office, t he package tour of IRCTC 
revenue turned out to be in losses.  The Committee fail to understand how 
IRCTC, which was mandated to promote tourism in gen eral and rail based 
tourism in particular, was reduced to a mere travel  agent for Indian Railways 
during these years.  The Committee are of the opini on that though IRCTC has 
put in efforts to design various rail packages, and  has launched a rail tourism 
portal which has proved to be very popular also, ye t failed to take initiatives to 
market these packages.  The Committee, therefore, r ecommend that IRCTC 
should take all necessary initiatives including pop ularizing their tour products 
through print and electronic media.  The Committee also recommend that IRCTC 
should focus on designing more affordable tour pack ages considering the 
requirements of the various age-groups and sections  of the society such as 
students, senior citizens, Government employees as also suitable attractive 
packages for foreign tourists.  The Committee stron gly believe that if new tour 
packages are designed in tune with the taste and th e requirement of these 
aforesaid groups, the Company can fetch good returns from this segment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All the tour packages are developed and promoted by  IRCTC. The role of 
the Railways is limited to allocation of number of seats/berths in various trains 
according to their requirement, the extent possible . Therefore, the performance 
as well as profit margins on the packages tours wil l depend entirely on the 
marketing capability of IRCTC. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 10) 
Food Plazas 
 The Committee have been apprised that with a view to setting up of food 
plazas to provide multi-cuisine food outlets giving  a variety of choice for eating at 
market prices at 183 sites, the IRCTC had invited t enders during the year 2006-
07 in line with the Ministry of Railways Policy.  T he Committee, however, note 
that due to poor response from the public out of 18 3 sites, 122 sites, primarily at 
smaller stations where food plazas were not found t o be financially viable are 
being re-tendered by IRCTC.  The Committee feel tha t while identifying sites for 
setting up of food plazas, IRCTC has not undertaken  any proper assessment 
which is indicative of the fact that there was neit her any vision of the company 
nor any feasibility study of the sites done in this  regard.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that before embarking upon any  identification process for 

  
development of food plazas, IRCTC should undertake a thorough feasibility 
study of the sites for setting up food plazas.  
 
Reply of the Government                
The suggestion of the committee has been noted. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 12) 
Food Audit by an Indian Agency 
 The Committee are constrained to note that for the  purpose of undertaking 
food safety and hygiene audit, IRCTC has engaged an  International Agency 
namely, M/s TUV SUD South Asia.   The Committee exp ress their strong 
displeasure over the decision of appointing a forei gn firm for examining the 
quality of Indian food.  In the opinion of the Comm ittee, since IRCTC is 
mandated to provide a good quality food to their cu stomers, majority of whom 
are common people who prefer to have simple and who lesome food at an 
affordable price, the Swiss firm, which may possibl y be apt to examine the food 
from hygienic point of view but not be in a positio n to examine the quality of 
Indian food.  The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat the decision for getting 
the food audit conducted by an International firm s hould be discouraged and 
instead, a qualified Indian agency should be appoin ted for examination of the 
food quality. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestion of the committee has been noted. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 

  
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 - NIL -
 

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 2) 
Board of Directors 
 
 The Committee find that the post of Managing Direc tor on Board of 
Directors of IRCTC has been lying vacant since 23 
rd  October, 2007 and 
Director (Tourism and Marketing) has been entrusted  with the additional 
responsibility of Managing Director.  The Committee  have been apprised that 
the recruitment process is on and likely to be comp leted soon.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that the vacancy of Managing Dir ector in any organization 
particularly with commercial venture like IRCTC for  considerably longer time 
have cascading effect on the efficiency of the comp any.  They therefore desire 
that the recruitment process for filling up the vac ancy of Managing Director 
should be completed urgently so that a duly appoint ed MD is in office without 
further loss of time.  The Committee further note t hat besides the vacancy of 
MD, there are three other vacancies existing on the  Board of Directors of 
IRCTC, namely Director (Finance) and two non-offici al Directors.  The 
recruitment process for filling up of these vacanci es is said to have been 
initiated.  The Committee desire that the vacancies  of Director (Finance) and 
two non-official Directors should be filled up expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As regards, filing of   vacancy of the post Managi ng Director and Director 
(Finance) of IRCTC, the post of Managing Director, IRCTC fell vacant on 
24.10.2007 as the incumbent of the post was prematu rely repatriated to the 
Railways.  The vacancy was circulated and this Mini stry’s recommendations 
were forwarded to the PESB (Public Enterprises Sele ction Board) for 
consideration.  The PSEB held selection and recomme nded panel for 
appointment to the post of MD/IRCTC.  However, the panel was not accepted.    
Accordingly, a reference has been made to the Depar tment of Personnel and 
Training for obtaining approval of the ACC (Appoint ment Committee of the 
Cabinet) to the proposal that a fresh panel may be sought from the PSEB.  The 
decision of the ACC is awaited. 
 
 The post of Director (Finance), IRCTC fell vacant on 04.12.2007 as the 
incumbent of the post resigned and was relieved by the IRCTC on 03.12.2007.  
The vacancy was circulated and this Ministry’s reco mmendations were 
forwarded to the PSEB for consideration.  The PESB held selection and 
recommended panel for appointment to the post.  Aft er obtaining CVC’s 
clearance and approval of MR, the proposal for appo intment to the post of 
Director (Finance)/IRCTC has been submitted to the Department of personnel 
and Training for obtaining approval of the ACC on 2 4.07.2008.  The ACC’s 
approval is awaited. 

  
 Presently there is no vacancy of non-official part -time directors in IRCTC, 
after appointment of Shri Jagdeep S. Chhokar, Ex. Prof. I.I.M., Ahmedabad and 
Shri Alok Shivpuri, Principal, Pusa Institute of Hotel Management, New Delhi. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please see paragraph 7 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 3) 
Staff Strength 
  
 The Committee note that IRCTC took over catering s ervices from Indian 
Railways on as is where is basis along with the cat ering staff on deemed 
deputation basis.  The deemed deputationists staff is being repatriated to the 
Railways and simultaneously a review is also being undertaken to determine 
the manpower requirement of the IRCTC.  The Committ ee have been informed 
that as on 31 
st  December, 2007, IRCTC had a total staff strength o f 5521 and 
out of which 4221 were deemed deputationists staff comprising of 1094 Group 
C and 3127 Group D employees.  The Committees have been informed that in 
its repatriation process of these deemed deputation ists staff, which is taking 
place in phased manner, till now a total of 790 Gro up D staff has been 
repatriated to the Railways and the balance of Grou p D staff is also likely to 
repatriated in 2008 itself.  Regarding Group C staf f, the Committee, however, 
note that Ministry of Railways has not indicated an y time-frame for completion 
of repatriation process. The Committee are of the o pinion that due to non-
fixation of any time-frame for the completion of re patriation process of Group C 
staff, the planning for induction of new staff is l ikely to suffer.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the repatriation of Group  C staff should also be 
completed within a stipulated time-frame so that a proper planning could be 
done for recruitment of new staff for smooth running of its mandated activities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
        The issue of repatriation of Group ‘C’ deem ed deputationists staff from 
IRCTC to the zonal railways is under finalization i n the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board).  
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please see paragraph 10 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 4) 
Imposition of Haulage Cost 
  
 The Committee find that during the year 2006-07, t he gross profit of 
IRCTC was capped by the Ministry of Railways by iss uing a directive that full 

  
marginal cost of haulage of pantry car will be born e by IRCTC and that for the 
year 2006-07, after keeping the gross profit of Rs.  30 crore, the surplus money 
will be paid by IRCTC to Indian Railways as pantry car haulage charge.  Once 
IRCTC starts paying the marginal cost of haulage in  full, Indian Railways’ share 
of License fee for mobile units (15%) plus payment of 5% as maintenance cost 
of pantry cars would be reviewed and suitably reduc ed.  The Committee note 
that contesting the decision of the Ministry, IRCTC  tendered a contention that 
since catering service is a passenger amenity, haulage cost cannot be added to 
the cost of meal.  Moreover, the haulage cost for p antry car will add at least 
10% to the overhead costs and will affect the quali ty of food and services on 
mobile units, unless tariffs are suitably raised.  Justifying the imposition of 
haulage cost on IRCTC, Ministry of Railways have st ated that they have 
decided to levy haulage cost for pantry cars as Ind ian Railways has incurred 
losses for catering services amounting to Rs. 494.46 crore in 2005-06 alone.  A 
sizeable portion of these losses is on account of h aulage cost of pantry cars.  
The Committee are surprised to note that how Minist ry of Railways can put a 
cap on the gross profit of IRCTC by imposing an abr upt and arbitrary decision 
on IRCTC.  The Committee have been further informed  by IRCTC that there 
was no such provision in the Memorandum of Understa nding 2006-07 signed 
between the IRCTC and Ministry of Railways.  The Co mmittee fail to 
understand as to how the Ministry of Railways have levied haulage charge in 
the absence of any such clause in MOU.  As regards the tenability of haulage 
cost, the Committee feel that since this being pass enger amenity, the pantry 
car is normally attached to the trains with a view to provide on board catering 
services to the rail passengers, imposition of haul age charges would affect the 
profitability of the company as this extra cost can not be transferred to the 
passengers.  Since haulage cost for pantry cars lev ied on IRCTC adds at least 
10% to the overhead cost, which would affect the qu ality of food and services 
on mobile units, unless the tariffs are suitably ra ised, in this regard, the 
Committee recommended that the request of IRCTC for  withdrawal of haulage 
cost should be considered favorably so that the com pany is not forced to 
transfer this cost to the passengers using catering services.  
 
Reply of the Government 
            The request of IRCTC for not imposing o n it the haulage charges of 
pantry cars, has been examined in the Ministry of R ailways, but has not been 
agreed to. Instead of payment of full haulage charg es, it has been decided by 
the Ministry of Railways to realize only Rs.30 cror e from IRCTC as haulage 
charges for the year 2007-08. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please see paragraph 13 of Chapter I of the Report. 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Budget Hotels 
  
 The Committee note that with a view to utilize its  surplus land 
commercially, the Ministry of Railways decided to s et up 100 budget hotels in 
the vicinity of the railway stations for tourists a nd rail users and authorized 
IRCTC to develop them on public private partnership  mode in 2006.  The 
Committee further note that IRCTC which identified 100 locations for the 
purpose simultaneously initiated the tendering proc ess for 29 sites and 
requested the Ministry of Railways to give its clearance for allotment of land. 
 
 The Committee, however, note that during the year 2006-07, Ministry of 
Railways put on hold the process of handing over of  29 budget hotel sites on 
the pretext that the matter of fixing norm and moda lities of sparing of land to 
IRCTC, Railway Land Development Authority, Mumbai R ail Vikas Corporation 
etc. for various uses was under consideration of Ra ilway Board and that the 
Government is reviewing the proposed sites with a v iew to develop world class 
station.  The Committee have further been informed that after IRCTC again 
took up the matter with the Railway Board, Ministry of Railways decided to clear 
21 sites, leaving 8 sites for development of world class stations.  The 
Committee are distressed to note that due to the su dden introduction of 
Government’s new concept of developing world class stations on the identified 
sites of IRCTC in 2007, the process of clearing the  sites for construction of 
budget hotels got delayed by almost one year and cr eated a conflict between 
the process of development of budget hotels and wor ld class stations at the 
proposed sites.  The Committee desire that this con flict should be resolved 
expeditiously and therefore, recommend that in orde r to avoid any conflict 
between development of budget hotels and world clas s stations, Ministry of 
Railways should first undertake a review of all the  remaining sites identified by 
IRCTC for the purpose of developing world class sta tions by stipulating a time-
frame so that no delay is caused in finalizing the sites for the development of 
budget hotels of IRCTC. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Railways has decided to set up 100  Budget Hotels through 
IRCTC with Public Private participation. IRCTC init iated tendering process in 
respect of 29 locations. In the meanwhile, some of the locations identified for 
setting up of Budget Hotels has also been identifie d for development as World 
Class Stations. Out of these 29 locations, 11 locat ions has been identified for 
development as World Class Stations, as an interim measure, IRCTC was 
permitted to go ahead with such locations which has  not been identified for 
development as World Class Stations. 
 
In respect of the18 locations not identified for development as World Class 
Stations and for which tendering process was initia ted, some discrepancies 
were noted in the tender document/proposed agreemen t. IRCTC is yet to take 
corrective measure in this regard before going ahead further. 
 

  
As regards the balance 71 locations and also 11 loc ations for which 
tendering process has been initiated but has also b een identified for 
development as world-class stations, this issue is still under review.     
     
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please see paragraph 16 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9) 
Catering Policy 
 The Committee note that catering activities of IRC TC which were taken 
over from Indian Railways in 1998 on as is where is  basis are governed by the 
Catering Policy 2005 of the Ministry of Railways.  In order to modernize and 
upgrade the catering activities of IRCTC, the Minis try of Railways brought a 
Revised Catering Policy.  One of the main features of the Extant Catering 
Policy is to lay down technical criteria to ensure that only experienced business 
entities with specified turnover, experience in cat ering/hospitality sector are 
selected through tender process so that quality cat ering services are provided 
to the rail passengers.  The Committee also note th at with a view to provide 
catering services of highest quality to their rail passengers, IRCTC has taken a 
number of initiatives like setting up complaint monitoring cells at major locations 
to handle related complaints through computerized s ystem, circulation of feed 
back Performa to assess the expectations of custome rs and to pinpoint the 
grey areas, remedial measures by quality inspectors  after inspection at source 
point, hiring of international food audit system or  betterment of services etc.   
The Committee are, however, surprised to note that despite all the initiatives 
taken by the IRCTC/Ministry, the quality of caterin g services could not be 
improved as complaints against the existing caterin g licenses for poor quality 
services, over charging, non-working of pantry car equipments, under-supply of 
food, improper and unhygienic cooking methodology, poor service technique 
etc. are pouring in incessantly.  IRCTC is blaming the Catering Policy of the 
Government as it is unsupportive to the selection o f quality catering licensees.  
IRCTC informed the Committee that prior to the evol ution of catering policies, 
catering services on stations were being managed by  individual propriety firms, 
partnership firms etc. without any tender system fo r licensing.  Since these 
catering units were awarded licenses without going through any tendering 
process and evaluating their technical capabilities , they have been providing 
sub-standard and adulterated food services at the r ail stations staking the 
image of IRCTC.  The extant Catering Policy has not  taken care of the fact that 
catering units/individual propriety firms, having n o technical know-how are still 
continuing to provide catering services at railway stations which is substandard 
and adulterated as per the version of the IRCTC.  T hus, catering practices by 
such firms/individual have a damaging effect on the  credibility of IRCTC.   They 
also observe that there is widespread unauthorized vending prevalent at the 
railway stations which the existing catering policy has not addressed to and has 
neither suggested nor appeared to have taken preven tive measures.  In the 

  
light of the fact that the Catering Policy has not dealt with a number of grey 
areas, which is badly affecting the working of IRCT C and its public image, the 
Committee feel that the so called Revised Catering Policy 2005 with particular 
reference to the selection process of quality catering licensees is required to be 
re-looked.  The Committee also desire that while ma king a review of the 
Catering Policy, the suggestions of IRCTC may be ca lled for and suitably 
looked into so that IRCTC can carry out their manda ted activities and fulfills the 
aspirations of the rail users. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Some amendments in earlier catering policy issued o n 16.03.2005 have 
been undertaken and revised instructions have been issued in December, 2005 
in respect of tenure of licence, renewal of licence  etc.  The amendments in the 
policy have been done keeping in view the recommend ations of the Standing 
Committee of parliament on railways, and representa tions received from 
various quarters. The guidelines for tendering/scre ening of applications which 
include the eligibility criteria,  technical bid an d financial bid along with general 
conditions of contract has been circulated   vide l etter No. 2005/TG.III/600/5 
dated 23.12.2005 by the Board. These guidelines are  indicative and not 
exhaustive.  Suitable modification in these conditi ons can be done as per local 
and market conditions by MD/IRCTC.  Further IRCTC w ill follow the basic spirit 
of catering Policy.  Since open tendering is the mo st appropriate and 
transparent method of selection, IRCTC should attai n greater expertise in 
tendering.  Within the parameters of the extant Cat ering Policy, IRCTC is 
competent to issue suitable conditions for bidders to bid for various contracts. 
The system of functioning of IRCTC in terms of regu lation and discharging the 
functions of catering are detailed in MOU between IRCTC and Railway Board.   
 Unauthorized hawking is not permitted in railway p remises as per 
Indian Railways Act, 1989 and as amended from time to time.  Unauthorized 
vending and hawking in trains and in passenger area  is prohibited and 
constitutes an offence under section 144 of Railway Act 1989 and Railways Act 
2003 (Second Amendment). Zonal railways are   taking action accordingly.  
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please see paragraph 19 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 

  
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 6) 
Rail Neer-Packaged Drinking Water 
 
 The Committee have been informed that with a view to provide the good 
quality packaged drinking water on railway premises  and in trains, IRCTC 
presently owns and operates two Rail Neer manufactu ring plants at Nangloi 
(Delhi) and Danapur (Bihar).  Since its inception, Rail Neer has been highly 
popular among the bonafied railway passengers since  the brand was providing 
good quality drinking water of international standa rds and is cheaper when 
compared to other brands, at the nominal rate of Rs . 10/- fixed by Ministry of 
Railways.  However, the Committee are surprised to note that despite the good 
market of Rail Neer, it has been continuously showi ng losses.  Regarding the 
reasons for loss, IRCTC clarified that the loss was  due to the transfer of 
Railneer-packaged drinking water to other outlets ( catering units) at various 
Railway Stations on stock transfer price @ of Rs. 7 .00 per bottle of 1000ml.  
Further, Railway Board has fixed procurement price of Railneer at the following 
rates:- In Delhi and Patna area-Rs. 6.50 (per bottl e), outside Delhi/Patna area- 
Rs. 7.00 (per bottle).  IRCTC is supplying Railneer  to its licensees as well as 
various railway departments at the above stated rat es.  The Committee 
recommend that the procurement prices of Rail Neer should be suitably 
rationalized to offset the losses occurring to IRCT C due to its under price sale 
to its licences and other catering units. 
 
 The Committee further note that as a part of IRCTC ’s strategy to make 
available Rail Neer to maximum number of trains and  static units, there is a 
plan to enhance the production capacity of Rail Nee r Plant, Nangloi from 5500 
to 8500 cartons per day followed by Danapur Plant, for which the necessary 
ground work is being done.  Further, as a continuation of the original plan to set 
up additional Rail Neer Plants to strengthen the su pply logistics, two locations 
have been identified i.e. Palur in Tamilnadu and Am bernath in Maharashtra.  
The preliminary studies have been got done and nece ssary inputs have been 
incorporated from the learning experience obtained from the operation of the 
existing Rail Neer Plants.  The final approval is a waited from Railways for 
taking possession of the land.  The Committee find that there is a huge demand 
of Rail Neer in the market but due to inadequate supply by IRCTC, certain other 
brands are also managing to sell their packaged dri nking water at railway 
stations premises thereby eroding the profitability  of the Company.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that besides enhancing  the capacity of existing 
two manufacturing plants, the IRCTC’s plan to set u p two more plants at Tamil 
Nadu and Maharashtra should be expeditiously finali zed and recommend that 
the proposals for final approval of the land which is currently awaited from the 
Ministry of Railways should be accorded at the earliest.  
 

  
Reply of the Government  
 
 IRCTC had requested for revision of the price of ‘ Rail Neer’ from Rs. 10 to 
Rs. 12 per 1 litre bottle, which has been agreed to  by the Ministry of Railways. 
Railway Board have also cleared the proposal for se tting up of two new Rail 
Neer plants in terms of the existing MOU between In dian Railway and IRCTC 
subject to the condition that:-  
 
1. Land proposed to be allotted to IRCTC should be approved by 
General Manager of the concerned Railway.   
 
2. No encumbrances of any private investor/party sh ould be created 
by IRCTC in the said land. 
 
Zonal Railways and IRCTC have been advised to take further necessary 
action accordingly. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 11) 
Price Revision 
 The Committee note that the prices of most of the food products catering 
items that are being presently sold at railway stat ions and in trains were fixed by 
the Ministry of Railways in 1999.  The Committee un derstand that prices of the 
inputs have increased manifold since 1999 and no re vision of the prices of 
catering items has been undertaken since then which  has badly affected the 
quality of the catering products and financial heal th of IRCTC.  The Committee 
desire that the price of the products should be rev iewed and 
revisions/adjustments if required should be made at  the earliest.  In future, the 
pricing policy of beverages and food articles inclu ding its quality and standard 
should be reviewed periodically. 
  
 The Committee further desire that IRCTC should eco nomies their 
expenditure by way of reducing overhead charges. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A committee was set up to review menu and tariff of  catering services of 
Railways and the recommendations of this Committee are presently under 
examination in the Ministry. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 24.10.2008) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL 
19 
th  December, 2008       Chairman 
28 Agrahayna, 1930(S)          Committee on Public Undertakings 

  
 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 13 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600   hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
4 Shri H.Ram Prakash Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee considered the following two draft  reports and adopted 
both with minor modification: 
 
(i) Draft report on Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 30 
th  Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (14 th  Lok Sabha) on Indian Railway Catering & 
Tourism Corporation Limited; and   
 
(ii) Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx. 
 
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finali ze the above Reports for 
presentation to the House. 
 
4. xxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx .  
 
5. The Committee then adjourned.  
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Francis K. George 
4 Shri Harikewal Prasad 
5 Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Smt. Pratibha Singh 
7 Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
8 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri Rahul Bajaj 
10. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Thirtieth Report of t he Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Indian Rail way Catering and Tourism 
Corporation Limited”.   
 
I Total number of recommendations  12 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 7, 8, 
10, and 12.] 
 
Percentage of total  
 
 
 
 
41.67% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desir e to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. Nos.  
 
Percentage of total  
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of t he 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
[vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4,5 and 9] 
 
Percentage of total 
 
 
 
41.67% 
 
 
V Recommendations / observations to which the 
Government have furnished interim replies (Chapter V) 
Sl.Nos. 6 and 11  
 
Percentage of total 
 
 
 
 
16.66% 
 
 