C.P.U. NO. 910 
20
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2006  - 2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF WLL SERVICES PROVIDED BY BSNL 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
 
 
[Based on C&AG Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2006] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2007 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2007/ Vaisakha, 1929  

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
Composition of the Committee (2006-07)   v 
Introduction vii 
List of Abbreviations ix 
  
 REPORT 
 
 
Overview  1 
CHAPTER-I Non-Introduction of latest technology 
 
2 
CHAPTER-II Non-Analysis of financial vi ability and profitability and 
separate costing records 
12 
CHAPTER-III Non-Formulation of Marketing Strategies 
 
21 
CHAPTER-IV Excess Payment due to delay in finalisation of rates 
 
28 
CHAPTER-V Failure to obtain performance bank guarantees 
 
33 
CHAPTER-VI Absence of penalty provis ion in the procurement 
manual 
 
39 
CHAPTER-VII Delay in finalisation of annual maintenance contract  
 
45 
CHAPTER-VIII Liquidated damages 50 
CHAPTER-IX Utilisation of equipped capacity 52 
CHAPTER-X Achievement of planned targets 60 
CHAPTER-XI Accumulation of revenue arrears on account of 
short/delayed billing 
68 
CHAPTER-XII Quality of WLL Service 79 
CHAPTER-XIII Monitoring by Corporate Office  87 
CHAPTER-XIV Role of Government in implementation of WLL project 
 
97 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Highlights of the Audit Report 103
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 106
  
     
- (iii) 

 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2006 – 2007) 
 
CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
9. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Kashiram Rana 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
16. Shri Rishang Keishing  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
19. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
20. Shri Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
21. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
      SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.  Shri S.K. Sharma         Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri J.P. Sharma          Joint Secretary 
 3.  Smt. Anita Jain          Director 
4.  Shri Ajay Kumar          Deputy Secretary 
 5.  Smt. K. Rangamani Narasimhan         Committee Officer 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to present th e Report on their behalf, present this 
Twentieth Report on Perfo rmance Audit of WLL Services provided by BSNL.  
This report based on C&AG Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2006. 
 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings  (2006-07) took oral evidence of 
the representatives of Bharat S anchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) on 6 th February, 
2007 and the represent atives of the Department of Telecommunications on 
10.04.2007.  The Committee also heard the views of experts on the WLL Service 
launched by BSNL on 6 March, 2007. 
 
3. The Committee on Public Under takings (2006-07) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 26 April, 2007. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express t heir thanks to the Department of 
Telecommunications and BSNL for plac ing before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection wit h examination of the subject.  The 
Committee also wish to extend their grat itude to the experts who enlightened the 
Committee on the subject.  They also  wish to thank in particular the 
representatives of the Department of Telecommunications and BSNL who gave 
evidence and placed their considered views before the Committee. 
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered by the officials of  Comptroller & Auditor General of India.  The 
Committee would also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for 
the invaluable assistance rendered to t hem by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND PAL  
26 April, 2007                       CHAIRMAN 
06 Vaisakha, 1929               COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE C&AG’S REPORT NO. 9 (COMMERCIAL) OF 
2006 ON PERFORMANCE AUDIT RELATED TO WLL SERVICES IN BSNL. 
 
1.  AMCs Annual Maintenance Contracts 
2.  AT Acceptance Testing 
3.  BS Base Station (part of WLL) 
4.  BSC Base Station Controller (part of WLL) 
5.  BTS Base Transceiver Station 
6.  CDMA Code Division Multiple Access (an advanced technology) 
7.  CGMs Chief General Managers 
8.  CMTS Cellular Mobile Telephone Service 
9.  Cor. Dect Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecomm unication System developed by IIT 
Madras which is similar to CDMA. 
 
10.  CT-2 Cordless Telephony – Second Generation (a technology) 
11.  DGS&D Director General of Supply and Disposals. 
12.  FWT Fixed Wireless Terminal 
13.  FRS Fixed Remote Stations 
14.  HHT Hand Held Wireless Terminals 
15.  IS-95A A technology 
16.  LD Liquidated Damage 
17.  MARR Multi Access Relay Radio 
18.  MSC Mobile Switching Centre (part of WLL) 
19.  NIB National Internet Backbone 
20.  NMS Network Management System 
21.  NSC Network Switching and Commissioning  
22.  NTP – 99 New Telecom Policy – 1999 
23.  PBG Performance Bank Guarantees 
24.  PNC Price Negotiation Committee 
25.  PPA Patch Panel Antennae – These are designed to optimize the transmission 
and reception of signals between the base transceiver station and FWT. 
 
26.  PSTN Public Switched Telecom Network (part of WLL) 
27.  Rollout-
obligations 
Obligations of licensees to commence services within a prescribed time 
frame and cover the service area stipulated in the licences received from 
DOT. 
28.  RS Remote Stations 
 
(ix)

 
 
 
29.  SACFA  Standing Advisory Committee on Frequency Allocation 
 
(it is the apex body in the WPC wing of DOT, consisting of members 
drawn from DOT and user departme nts such as All India Radio, 
Doordarshan, Defence, Railways,  Civil Aviation, BSNL, etc. for 
considering matters regarding coordination for frequency allocations and 
other related issues and for issue of clearance of sites for fixed stations 
and their Antennae Masts)  
 
30.  SDCA Short Distance Charging Areas (the Smallest territorial unit for charging 
purposes. Calls within the same SDCA  are charged as local calls SDCAs 
normally coincide with Tehsils or Talukas.) 
 
31.  SSA Secondary Switching Areas (area in which the country is divided by the 
telecom authorities.  These are generally co-terminus with revenue 
districts.) 
 
32.  T&D Technical and Development Circle 
33.  TNF Technically Non-feasible Areas (areas where it is not possible to lay 
cables) 
 
34.  TRA Branch Telephone Revenue Accounting Branch 
 
35.  TRAI Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
36.  USO Universal Service Obligations (it envisaged providing telephone on 
demand, besides telephone coverages in all villages in the country.) 
 
37.  VPT Village Public Telephones 
38.  WLL Wireless in local loop (a telephone system) 
39.  WPC Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing for allocation of frequencies to 
Telecom Operators. 
 
40.  WS Wall Sets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x)

 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
The Wireless-in-Local Loop (WLL) tel ephone system is a digital wireless 
local loop system designed to subs titute underground cables by linking 
exchanges to the customers through wireles s. WLL connections can be provided 
through various technologies. One of the most advanced technologies is the 
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), whic h allows many users to occupy the 
same frequency at the same time in a given band.  A typical WLL telephone 
system consists of Base Station (BS), Ba se Station Controller (BSC) or Mobile 
Switching Centre (MSC) connected to  the Telephone Exchange or Public 
Switched Telecom Network (PSTN), Base Transceiver Stations (BTS), Network 
Management System (NMS) and Remote Stati ons (RS). The remote stations are 
the customers’ terminals which communicate  within the Base Station area.  The 
WLL telephone system has fixed as well as m obile facilities. In the fixed system, 
the customers’ terminals are fixed like la ndline telephone instruments known as 
fixed wireless terminals (FWTs) or fixed remote stations (FRS) or wall sets (WS). 
In the mobile system, the customers’ terminals are akin to cellular mobile 
telephone handsets known as handheld wireless terminals (HHTs). 
 
 The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) proposed the launching of 
the WLL telephone service in the country in 1994, mainly to provide telephone 
connections in technically non-feasible (TNF) areas. In pursuance of New 
Telecom Policy 1999 (NTP-99), the Government of India decided to corporatise 
the service provision functions of D epartment of Telecommunications (DoT). 
Accordingly, the Department of Teleco m Services and Department of Telecom 
Operations concerned with providing telecom services in the country and 
maintaining the telecom network/telecom factories were separated and carved 
out of the Department of Telecommunication s as a precursor to corporatisation. 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited was inco rporated as a public limited Company 
under the Companies Act, 1956, on 15
th September, 2000 and the Company 
became entitled to commence business w.e.f. 19th September, 2000. 
 
The major objective before the Company on its formation was fulfillment of 
its Universal Service Obligations under  NTP-99. The performance audit of the 
WLL Service in the BSNL was conducted by the C&AG during April to August, 
2005, covering the period from 2000-01 to  2004-05. The Corporate office, 24 
Telecom Circles and 2 metro districts of  Chennai and Kolkata were reviewed in 
Audit. A survey was also conducted by Audit to evaluate the quality of WLL 
Service provided by the Company to t he Customers in rura l and Urban areas.  
The Audit has noticed many deficiencies in  planning, creation of infrastructure, 
procurement, capacity utilisation, operational performance, billing and collection 
of revenue and quality of the WLL te lephone service, which needed to be 
addressed urgently, especially in  the light of competiti on from private operators. 
These deficiencies are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
(xi)

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
NON-INTRODUCTION OF LATEST TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
1.1 The Planning and Network Switchin g Wing of the corporate office 
ascertains the availability of various te chnologies in the market and thereafter 
submits proposals for procurement of the most suitable ones. The Audit in para 
1.9.2 of the Report has pointed out that during 2000-01 to 2004-05, the Company 
opted for IS-95A, V-5.2 and MSC based 2 000-IX WLL CDMA technologies as 
well as CorDect WLL technology. T he advanced third Generation (3G) CDMA 
2000-1X technology based commercial system developed by SK Telecom 
(Korea) was launched in October 2000 and av ailable in the gl obal market since 
then. Even the Management Committee of the Board of Directors of the 
Company had observed (March 2002) that  V 5.2 CDMA technology was an 
outdated one and that the MSC based soluti on using International Operating 
Standards (IOS) was the latest technol ogy for CDMA WLL systems which could 
be upgraded to the CDMA 2000 1X  3G version. The Committee further observed 
that the MSC based CDMA 2000-1X tech nology was expected to be cheaper on 
per line cost basis due to its higher capacity and as such the Company should go 
in for this technology. It was however observed that the Company procured WLL 
systems worth Rs 1,479.87 crore during the period October 2000 to March 2005 
based on tenders floated for obsolete techno logies. Out of these procurements, 
WLL systems worth Rs 1,158.25 cror e were procured even after the 
abovementioned observations of the Ma nagement Committee. The tender for 
procuring WLL equipment based on CDMA 2000-1X technology was floated (July 
2002) but the purchase order was pl aced in only March 2004. WLL systems 
worth Rs 243.26 crore were procured (Ma rch 2005) based on this tender and a 
further tender of July 2004. 
 
1.2 In response to the query as to whether any other more advance 
technologies were available at the time of placing the purchase, order the BSNL 
in their reply  submitted that :. 
 
 “The various technologies available during the year 1994 were Analogue 
FDMA, TDM/TDMA, CDMA and TDD Cord less including CT-2, CT-2plus, 
Dect.  The Telecom Commission decided that field trial may be conducted 
on CDMA and CT-2 before induction in to the network.  Subsequently it 
was proposed to conduct field trials for CDMA at Delhi and Madurai and 
for CT-2 technology at Calcutta and AP Circle. Then DoT procured one 
system of 1000 lines of  CDMA for MTNL, Delhi for field trial of WLL.  Two 
systems of 1000 lines each of CT-2  technology for Calcutta and 
Vijayawada were also procured for field trials.  The system was offered for 
testing in April - May,  1996 and they failed to meet the departmental 
requirements.  During field trials spec ifications were also framed to be 

 
 
used for future procurements of WLL equipment.  As a result GR for WLL 
was finalized in May, 1996. 
 
  First tender for procurement of WLL system was floated on 31.05.2000.  
(Tender No. MM/RN/052000/000202 dated 31.5.2000).  At that time 
CDMA 2000 IX was not commercia lly deployed.  As per CDMA 
International Magazine for October, 2005, it is only in March, 2000 that 
first CDMA 2000 1X voice calls wa s successfully completed and   
Commercially CDMA 2000 1X system was deployed for only one million 
lines worldwide by August, 2001.  It wa s therefore neither practicable nor 
advisable to adopt the CDMA 2000 1X technology in a nascent stage at 
that time. 
 
1.3 Further the above action is in acco rdance with the direct ives of PMO on 
the choice of technology for rural areas, which are as follows: 
 
“Only proven technology should be deployed and field trials conducted 
before mass deployment of equipment in rural areas” 
 
In addition as per the Department of Telecom policy conveyed vide their 
 letter No.10-2/2000-BS-II  dated 12-09-2001  “the wireless access 
system has to be planned  on V5.2  interface.  The system shall be 
engineered to be connected to the telephone exchanges through Short 
Distance  Charging Area (SDCA) on a ccess network protocol based on 
national standards for V5.2  based CDMA WLL system as per Telecom 
Engineering Centre (TEC) specifications “.   It is also to be mentioned that  
TEC released  the specifications  for CDMA 2000 1X in February, 2004 
only”. 
 
1.4 On the above issue, the CMD of t he Company during oral evidence before 
the Committee on 6 February, 2007 submitted as under:- 
 
“BSNL came into being in 2000 and it was the decision of the Government 
because BSNL was carved out of the Department of Telecommunications. 
The MARR technology was not successful  and we have not been able to 
maintain it for many reasons. The Government decided that CDMA 
technology, which was the latest, should be utilized for providing village 
public telephones. That is how, IS-95A, which was the latest technology at 
that time, was ordered to be install ed at those places where the village 
connectivity was very poor. That is how many eastern States like Bihar, 
Jharkhand, and eastern UP, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh were 
covered. If you kindly see the graph, it will be seen that with the advent of 
WLL, at that time, the best available technology was only IS-95A.” 
 
1.5 On being  asked as to who is responsible in the company for selection of 
technology and to whom he is accountable in case of making wrong choice of 

 
 
technology in the context of the above observation of the Audit the Company 
submitted that :- 
 
 “The Committee headed by Minister of State for Communications 
recommended wireless in local loop as the most appropriate technology 
for achieving targets during the year 1999.  Accordingly type approval of 
equipment, pilot trial was conducted by the department before induction of 
the equipment through one of its branches, i.e. Telecom Engineering 
Centre (TEC) which is specialized in this work.  Field trial was conducted 
in detail based on the specificati ons (GR) prepared by the TEC for the 
particular equipment.  GRs are made by TEC after detailed discussions 
with experts/manufacturers and conduc ting tests on the equipments 
procured in small quantity for such purposes.  
 
1.6. Supplementing further , the CMD, BSNL stated before the Committee that :- 
 
“At that time the process of choosing technology was with 
telecommunication centre, a Government body and DoT people are 
posted for different jobs but they we re taking the decision what was the 
best available.  In DoT earlier and now in BSNL we have been in the 
forefront of our technology.  If the world is doing 2G, we are also doing 
2G.  If they are doing 2.5G, we are al so doing 2.5G.  The difference could 
be of two to three months but we are matching with the technology of the 
world.  As and when the technology was developed we have procured it 
and we have kept in line with that.  At that time what was best available, 
that was provided and that  is why we could cover almost 3 to 4 lakh 
villages.” 
 
 
1.7 Regarding the mechanism  adopted by  the Company to keep itself abreast 
of the latest technological  developments in the global ma rket and availability of 
latest WLL technologies, the Company replied that:- 
 
“From time to time the Planning Cell  of Corporate o ffice & TEC get up-
dated information and knowledge about  latest WLL technology by 
attending Seminars, Workshops, Exhibi tions in India and as well as 
abroad.  In addition to above the CDMA technology developer 
QUALCOMM is also consulted about the latest trends/developments in the 
field relating to WLL.  International bodies’ like ITU, 3GPP2, CDG 
websites are also scanned for latest developments in the field.”   
 
 
1.8 In response to a query raised by t he Committee during oral evidence of 
the representative of BSNL regarding observation of the Audit that despite the 
recommendation of the Management Commi ttee for selection of latest 

 
 
technology, the Company went for obsol ete technologies, the Company in a 
written note stated as under:-   
 
“As observed by the audit, t he Management Committee of BSNL 
discussed in March, 2002 for pr ocuring MSC based CDMA WLL 
equipment for future deployment.  However, DoT while conveying the 
license condition to BSNL vide letter No. 10-2/2000-BS.II dated 12.9.2001 
(as already referred above) clearly mentioned that “the wireless access 
system has to be planned on V5.2 interface.  
 
Despite the fact that the Management Committee of BSNL had decided for 
procurement of MSC based CDMA 2000 1X  equipment during its meeting 
on 01-03-2002, the committee in its m eeting held 17. 03.2002 decided to 
go ahead with the procurement  of various WLL technologies like V5.2 
based CDMA WLL, cor-DECT and MSC based CDMA WLL. The decision 
was taken by the committee after detailed discussions and considering the 
various pros and cons of technology selection, keeping in view to wipe out 
the waiting list in rural areas to the most possible extent. The decision was 
required to be taken as procur ement of MSC based CDMA WLL 
equipment may involve lot of precious ti me for its validation etc. which in 
turn would adversely hamper the targets assigned to BSNL.” 
 
1.9 On being asked as to what justification the government has to offer on 
the inability of the BSNL to opt for latest technology available at that time due to 
the restrictions imposed by the licensing conditions. Th e DoT in a written reply 
submitted:- 
 
 “BSNL could not procure the latest  technology equipment because the 
Generic Recommendation (GR) of MSC based equipment were available 
only in 2004. License is technology neutral.” 
 
 
1.10 The Committee desired to know whether  it was true that at that time, 
some private players went  ahead with the procurement of MSC technology in 
violation of the licensing conditions but subsequently the violations were 
regularized, the DoT responded as under:- . 
 
 “ The license is free to use any available technology subject to following 
conditions:- 
(a) The technology should be based on standard issued by 
ITU/TEC or any other International Standards Organisation 
provider/industry. 
Any digital technology having been us ed for a customer base of one lakh 
or more for a continuous period of once year anywhere in the world shall be 
permissible for use regardless its changed version. 

 
 
 
A certificate from the manufacturers  about satisfactory working for a 
customer base of one lakh or more for the period of one year, shall be 
treated as established technology.” 
 
1.11 At their sitting held on 6 March, 2 007, the Committee separately heard the 
views of two experts namely Shri D. P.S. Seth, former CMD, BSNL and Member 
Telecom Commission and Shri Anil Kumar, Secretary, Telecom Watchdog (an 
NGO) about the selection of technology by BSNL in providing WLL Services. The 
former expert during the evidence submitted that :-  
 
“The basic idea of providing wireless c onnectivity is to be able to provide 
access to a customer without  having to wait for a long time and spend a 
lot of money in putting copper cable.  Now, when you provide connectivity 
in this manner with wireless, the signa ls are there in the atmosphere all 
over and, therefore, if you have got  an instrument which you can carry 
with you, then wherever the signal is available you can take that along.  
So, in a way, the moment you use wir eless, you are exposing yourself to 
the possibility of providing a mobile  connection.  Now, the dilemma which 
was faced was that at the time w hen Wireless Local Loop was considered 
especially for the village public telephones, the tariff of mobile phones was 
quite high, it used to be, if I remember  right, of the order of five to six 
rupees a minute, may have been higher than that, whereas Wireless Local 
Loop was being provided at the rate of forty paisa per minute.  So, if we 
provided it in a manner  that the telephone could be moved around, then 
there is an anomaly getting created.  Here are some people who are 
paying five or six rupees per minute with a telephone instrument because 
somebody else is providing that mobile service. 
 
 Here there are people who, with a slightly bulkier equipment, are 
getting the same service at the rate of  40 paise per minute. Certainly, for 
the villages we want to give even cheaper than that. That is where the 
requirement came from the Department  of Telecom, Government of India 
that all such connections will be pr ovided with V-5.2 interface which has 
been mentioned in the Report. 
 
The V-5.2 interface is really an  interface which extends a local 
telephone exchange that we use for the push button telephone, the 
landline telephone, to a longer distanc e. Therefore these wireless local 
loop connections were really nothi ng other than six- line connections 
because still with wireless, they coul d move around but in a limited area 
which the tower could cover. You coul d consider it more like a cordless 
telephone but with an ex tended coverage. Instead of 100 or 200 meters 
that the ordinary home cordless te lephone covers, these phones could 
cover five kilometers, or in rural areas even up to 20 kilometers but there 
was no provision that you move fr om one area to another area and your 

 
 
call will not be disconnected.  That was a basic thing.  V-5.2 interface was, 
therefore, specified. 
 
Now, under this condition, the general check had to be done. The 
technology which is used by the BSNL,  which is the IS95 technology, was 
the best amongst the technologies av ailable, which had this V-5.2 
interface. The same wireless local loop service could have been provided 
by more advanced technologies, the mobile technology GSM or the 2000 
IX technology about which the C&AG  has talked about. But those were 
mobile technologies. It is because they  were mobile technologies, these 
phone connections will have been mobile telephones. Even if you had 
decreed that you cannot move the telephone, people have their own 
methods and they would have moved ar ound. That is why, the moment a 
condition was put that there had to be a V-5.2 interface, there was no 
alternative. As I see today, this is the best technology.” 
 
1.12 On being asked whether it was justif ied on the part of the Company to 
continue to purchase WLL equipments based on obsole te technologies even 
upto the year 2004, it was opined by Dr. Seth   “ My own feeling is that around 
2004 they could have stopped fu rther purchases and they could have gone in for 
the mobile systems to give  the connections. Before that, it may not have been 
possible.” 
 
1.13 When asked about the earliest possi ble period for the BSNL to induct 
latest CDMA 2000-IX technology and by whom  it was launched for the first time 
in the country, the expert submitted :- 
 
“The first network was set up in Korea in October, 2000, but even in our 
country, the first CDMA 2000 IX netwo rk was introduced by Tata Tele 
services some time in the year 2002.  Obviously when you bring in a new 
technology, you do carry out certain things. The first thing that was carried 
out was a trial in the field to see w hether it suits the Indian conditions and 
get the people also familiar with it. Ob viously, assuming that by 2000, the 
equipment was available, two factors remained to be seen. One was a 
practical trial within our country and se cond, whether the availability is 
there in the world from a large number  of suppliers and enough number of 
quantities have been supplied so that the prices will be competitive. These 
two factors are normally the important factors. A trial would have been 
conducted by BSNL. I would imagine that even if they had decided in 2000 
through Government permission to go a head, they would have conducted 
a field trial and they would have purchased making sure that enough 
suppliers were available. Something like year and a half would be roughly 
needed to carry out such an exercise.” 
 
1.14 Giving his comments on the issue of selection of technology, the other 
expert Shri Anil Kumar of Telecom watchdog submitted that: - 

 
 
.” I feel that V5.2 technology was adequate with that objective in mind 
because their requirement was not mobilit y at that time. All that we are 
talking now is of futuristic technology  2001x.  We are saying that BSNL at 
that point in time could have gone fo r 2000 1X. Yes, the technology was 
available at that point in time in 2001 in some parts of the world. It was 
already commercially available even in India, and also some of the private 
operators have procured t hat particular technology at that time. For 
example, Tata and Reliance, right fr om the beginning, are on CDMA 2000 
1X technology, but they launched their services some time in 2002 only. 
They have started procur ing the equipment, that par ticular 2000 1X, right 
from 2000 onwards. Their network rolled out in late 2002 and beginning of 
2003. MTNL, BSNL’s counterpart in Delhi and Mumbai, which is a 
Government operator, procured initia lly V 5.2 technology in 2000 and 
2002. They switched over to 2000 1X because their requirement was 
different. They wanted to provide a fully mobile service or Garuda and 
limited mobile service through that te chnology. They divided the project 
into two to three phases. In the first phase, MTNL procured the old version 
for 50,000 lines, that is, V 5.2. In t he subsequent versions, they upgraded 
the technology to CDMA 2000 1X. Even the original 50,000 lines were 
upgraded at an 18 per cent additional cos t. That was the kind of facility 
available and used by MTNL. Probably, BSNL’s intention was not to go in 
for that Tata capability network. T hey just wanted to have only voice 
capability. Wherever ther e was no physical wire, t hey wanted to provide 
the network of V 5.2. That could be the intention for not going for 2000 1X. 
Now also, if BSNL wants to upgrade that  old technology, they can very 
well do it at a very incremental  cost. They can very well do it . As far as 
CorDect technology is concerned, it is not upgradable. I feel CorDect 
technology was forced on BSNL; it was not their own choice. Some people 
forced on BSNL to get that technology. That was a wrong choice, I feel" 
 
1.15 Giving his opinion on upgr adation  of the existing  technology, Shri Anil 
Kumar further stated that :- 
 
“Even if you want to upgrade the CDMA , it can be upgraded.  What is 
2000 1x?  It is just a data capability and only two per cent of people are 
using it.  BSNL has already got network  in the entire country.  Their only 
motive  is to put WLL system and Wireless Local Loop system was to 
provide interim relief to only those areas and those houses where there is 
shortage of wire, extending their wir e to houses. Only for that limited 
purpose and for that particular hous es which needed voice connection.  I 
think, that was their objective and they fulfilled the same with that 
technology.  In case, there is a requirement of upgrading the data 
capability, the still can very well do it, not necessarily they should do it in 
the entire country, they can even select this particular area.  Only thing is, 
it has to be upgraded.  Only up gradat ion is required and they can save 
the cost also that way.”. 

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO. 1 
 
 The Committee note that in pursuance of the National Telecom 
Policy (NTP-99), the Government ma ndated BSNL for replacement of 
existing MARR based VPTs and providi ng telephone connectivity in the 
rural areas as well as technically non-feasible and far-flung areas. For this 
purpose Committee headed by the Mini ster of State for Communications 
recommended wireless in Local Loop (WLL) as the most appropriate 
technology for achieving the targets envisaged in NTP-99. 
 In this regard, the Committee note that audit in their Report has 
observed that BSNL procured WLL Systems based on obsolete 
technologies like IS 95A, V-5.2 as well as CorDect Valued at Rs.1479.87 
crores during the period from October, 2000 to March 2005 though the 
latest CDMA 2000-IX technology was ava ilable since October, 2000. The 
audit has further pointed out that the Company went for such obsolete 
technologies despite the observations made by the Management 
Committee of the Board of Director s in March, 2002  that V.5.2 CDMA 
technology was an outdated one.   
 The Committee, however, note th at BSNL has justified their 
procurement of technology on the grou nds such as - (i) the directive from 
PMO that only proven technology sh ould be deployed but CDMA 2000 IX 
was not a proven technology at that  time as it was not commercially 
deployed world wide; (ii) the DoT po licy conveyed to BSNL in September 
2001 that the wireless access system has to be planned on V.5.2 interface; 

 
 
(iii) the Telecom Engineering Centre (TEC) released the specifications for 
CDMA 2000 IX in February, 2004 only; (iv) it would have taken another 2 
years for deployment if CDMA IX was chosen. 
 Analysing the position explained above, the Committee observe that 
insofar providing telephone coverage to rural and far-flung areas is 
concerned, the prime objective was to  provide telephone connectivity and 
not the mobility. From this point of view and also taking into consideration 
the opinion given by the experts, the Committee feel that V.5.2  technology 
was adequate with that limited object ive in mind.  However, at the same 
time, the Committee find that BSNL started launching WLL Service in urban 
areas of the country also primarily to  counter threat from private basic 
operators who had already commenced their operations in urban areas. 
From this angle the Committee find that  BSNL has definitely lagged behind 
in induction of latest technologies. Wh ile the private service operators like 
Reliance, Tata as well as the Government owned PSU MTNL rolled out their  
WLL networks based on CDMA IX 2000 technology during late 2002 or 
beginning of 2003, the BSNL continued to purchase WLL equipment based 
on obsolete technologies even upto the year 2004. In view of these facts 
the Committee do not agree with the ju stification offered by BSNL that 
CDMA 2000 IX was not a proven tech nology at that time and Telecom 
Engineering Centre (TEC) released the specifications for it only in 
February, 2004.  It is on record that even the management Committee of the 
Board of BSNL had observed in March 2002 itself that V.5.2 CDMA 

 
 
Technology was an outdated one and the MSC based solution using 
International Operating Standards ( IOS) was the latest  technology for 
CDMA WLL Systems which could be easily upgraded to CDMA IX 2000 
version. The Committee therefore deprecate the failure on the part of BSNL 
to get the Generic Recommendation (GR) of MSC based equipment only in 
2004 i.e. after around 3 years since this latest technology was approved by 
International Telecom Union (ITU) be fore October 2000 and inducted by 
other operators during 2002-03. AS a re sult, besides losing the business to 
other service operators, the BSNL now  has to spend hefty amounts on 
upgradation of obsolete technology.  In the opini on of the Committee, 
BSNL should have provided the WLL Services particularly to their urban 
customers based on latest technologi es irrespective of certain bottlenecks 
faced by them.  The Committee, therefor e, recommend that in future BSNL 
should ensure to their customers better technically equipped services 
setting a bench-mark for the other service providers to follow.  

 
 
CHAPTER – II  
 
 
NON-ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL VIABI LITY AND PROFITABILITY AND 
SEPARATE COSTING RECORDS 
 
 
2.1 The Audit in para 1.9.3 has observ ed that while planning for launching and 
expansion of the WLL telephone service for the y ears 2000-01 and 2001-02, no 
analysis of the financial viabi lity and profitability of the project was done by the 
Company on the ground that the project had been tak en up on the basis of a 
Cabinet decision, which reflected the social commitment  of the Government. The 
contention was unacceptable,  as the analysis would have helped the Company 
to assess the quantum of losses likely to be suffered for carrying out this social 
commitment of the Government so that the same c ould be subsidized from the 
USO Fund . It was noticed that the Company did the analysis in 2002-03 and 
2004-05, but not in 2003-04. It was also s een that the corporate office had not 
compiled separate year-wise details of t he total revenue billed and collected and 
the profit and loss account pertaining to the WLL telephone service for any of the 
years from 2000-01 to 2004-05. In the ab sence of these details, it was not 
possible to accurately assess the remunerativeness of its WLL telephone 
service.  
 
2.2 The corporate office issued (March 2003 and May, June and October 
2004) instructions to all the circles to prepare separate costing records for the 
WLL telephone service but 13 circles and the two metro distri cts did not prepare 
these records. Eleven circles prepared these records only for the year 2003-04 
and of these seven circles viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, J&K, 
Karnataka, Kerala and UP (East), had su stained a total loss of Rs 122.15 crore 
and one Circle (Madhya Pradesh) had earned a profit of Rs 54.68 lakh during the 
year 2003-04 on operation of the WLL telephone service, as detailed in 
Appendix-IV. Three circles viz., Himacha l Pradesh, Maharashtra and UP (West) 
did not prepare complete records. The ci rcles were also required to prepare 
yearly revenue projections based on t he expected number of connections and 
average revenue per user and compare t he same with the actual revenue 
realization. Test checks in 10 circles, viz., Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and UP 
(East), revealed that there was a total shortfall of Rs 139.31 crore in revenue 
realisation vis-à-vis the projections during 2001-02 to 2004-05. The shortfall was 
mainly because of poor capacity utilisation and problems of network coverage, as 
discussed later. It was noticed that other  circles did not prepare the revenue 
projections in respect of the WLL telephone service.  
 
2.3 Regarding investments made, vis-à-vis the projected revenue, actual 
revenue generated under various heads like  profit / loss, revenue billed and 

 
 
collected etc., information furnished by the Company upto t he ending 2005-2006 
was as under: - 
 “The separate figures for WLL is not available up to year 
2002-03 as it was included in the total revenue.  
 
                      (Rs. In crore) 
Year Investment 
amount 
Estimated 
Revenue Amount 
Actual 
2003-04 1333.04 424.00 188.00 
2004-05 951.44 436.00 347.00 
2005-06 806.60 521.00 481.66 
  
 
2.4 As regards the inve stments made specifically  for rural areas, the 
Committee were informed that the availabl e information in respect of investment 
made and revenue generated during the year 2003-04 , 2004-05 and 2005-06 in 
providing WLL system in rural areas is as follows: 
 
      (Rupees in crores) 
Year Expenditure Revenue 
2003-04 510.29 -- 
2004-05 366.53 172.05 
2005-06 364.20 283.74 
 
 
2.5 It was also stated that the profit/loss in respect of WLL service provided in 
the rural areas is not readily available.  However, the operational losses incurred 
for our rural telephony   assessed and certified by the Auditors are as under: 
         (Rupees in 
crores) 
Year 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
 6913.16 7960.80 9528.88 9792.23 9944.30 
 
2.6 On being asked as to why the financ ial and operational targets were not 
predetermined before venturi ng upon new telecom projects as well as on their 
expansion, the Company submitted that each field unit where equipment is to be 
delivered and deployed prepares  a separate Project Estimate containing details 
of financial and operational aspects.  
 
2.7 Regarding the monitoring mechanism being followed by the Company to 
ensure that separate costing records and revenue projections for the WLL 
telephone services are prepared by all Ci rcles, the Company stated that all the 
Circles have prepared Costing records for the Financial Year  2003-04 and 2004-
05 and the records are avai lable in Corporate Office .  The records for the 
Financial Year 2005-06 are under preparation. The preparation of costing 
records is monitored through correspondence with the Circles.   

 
 
 
2.8 The revenue target/projections for WLL are not being communicated 
separately to circles. However this is included in consolidated revenue 
targets/projections.  All the Circles are now preparing the costing records as per 
the notification issued by BSNL. of Company Affairs.  Hence, no action is 
required to be taken against erring officials on this issue.   
 
2.9 On the issue of revenue targets, the Company has stated that the WLL 
revenue projections are included in the Fixed – line projection / targets fixed by 
BSNL corporate office in respect of indi vidual circles and communicated to them. 
The year wise WLL / revenue is furnished below: 
              ( R s .  I n  C r o r e )  
Year No. of DELs Yield of revenue 
2003-04 9,58,792 188.00 
2004-05 16,28,111 347.00 
2005-06 25,72,525 481.66 
    
 However in view of observation of  COPU, communication of targets 
separately to circles is under consideration, which will be followed from RE 
2006-07/BE 2007-08 onwards. 
 
2.10 Stating the latest position with regard to preparation of separate profit and 
loss accounts, the Company submitted that  Profit and Loss Acco unt is prepared 
for the Company as a whole as per the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.  
However, Profit & Loss statement fo r WLL service is prepared through 
Accounting Separation Reports as per th e Notification of Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India.  Now company has started compiling the details of revenue 
billed and collected from the WLL telephone services. Performa for preparation of 
required information has already been forw arded to circles for preparation of 
separate annexure with monthly revenue Sub-ledger. 
   
2.11 On the query whether Company has been able to get back the returns on 
the original investment, the Company in their written reply submitted that BSNL is 
not maintaining the operating expenditure  of WLL service  separately since it 
uses various common network elements of  wire-lines services and even the 
services are provided under the Basic serv ice license only. Ther efore, it is not 
possible to ascertain the return on orig inal investment. However, the revenue 
earned from WLL service in last 5 years is as follows:     
         (Fig in Crores) 
 Year    Amount  
 2001-02     11.77 
 2002-03     66.80 
 2003-04   187.99 
 2004-05   347.00 
2005-06   481.66 

 
 
2.12 To the pointed question as to why the Company has not maintained any 
separate profit and loss account in respec t of WLL, the Company has stated as 
under: - 
 
“As per the section 210 of The Indian Companies Act, 1957, every 
company has to prepare the Profit & Loss account and the Balance Sheet 
at the end of each account ing period. These Financial statements have to 
be prepared for the company as a whole and not the product/service wise. 
Therefore, as per the Co mpanies Act, the BSNL has  to prepare the Profit 
& Loss Account and Balance Sheet company wise only and not the 
service wise. 
 
However, as per the Accounting St andard -17, every company has to 
disclose the segmental results under “segment reporting” if any product or 
service is having revenue more than 10% of the total revenue of the 
company. In the present case, the WLL service has never contributed to 
the revenue more than 1.5 % of the company in any financial year. The 
details of total revenue from services and revenue from WLL service along 
with % is as given below:  
     
   
Year  WLL Revenue in 
Cr 
Total Revenue 
in Cr 
% Share 
2001-02 11.77 24,297.21 0.05 
2002-03 66.80 25,293.15 0.26 
2003-04 188.00 31,399.34 0.59 
2004-05 347.00 33,450.04 1.03 
2005-06 481.66 36,138.94 1.33 
 
From the above, it can be seen t hat BSNL was not required even to 
disclose the segmental results regar ding WLL in the annual financial 
statement since the rev enue contributed by WLL service was significantly 
lower than prescribed 10%.  
 
It will be prudent to mention that BSNL is providing CDMA based Wireless 
in Local Loop (WLL) services under the Basic service license only. 
Therefore, BSNL has not allocated separate accounting heads for 
operating expenditure for WLL service since it is using various common 
network elements and infrastructure of basic wired lines only.  
 
However, from the financial year 2003-04, BSNL is preparing the costing 
records and accounting separation reports in compliance of the notification 
of the Department of Co mpany Affairs and Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India respectively which are m ade applicable only from 01.04.2003 
onwards. These statements disclose the profitability of WLL service 

 
 
separately for financial control and decision making purpose of the BSNL 
management.” 
 
2.13 During evidence, a representative of BSNL submitted that: - 
 
 “ Sir, WLL was actually a part of t he fixed wire system in our overall 
business.  Therefore, a separate ‘head’ of account was not created.  We 
are now collecting some sample data and trying to analyze it.” 
 
  
2.14 Keeping in view the fa ct that the WLL Service wa s initially deployed to 
meet out the Government’s objectives of  providing connectivity to uncovered 
villages in a time bound manner irre spective of demographic/ commercial 
considerations, it was inquired from t he Company whether any financial support 
by way of subsidy or any technical sup port was provided by the Government to 
meet this social commitment.  The Co mmittee were informed that with the 
formation of USOF in the year 2002 financia l support for maintenance of existing 
VPTs was provided to the company so as to  compensate to some extent only for 
the losses incurred by BSNL. For variou s activities of USOF undertaken by 
BSNL, subsidy for Rs.297 crore, Rs.197 crore, Rs.1311 cror e & Rs.1744 crore 
have been received from USOF during th e year(s) 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 & 
2005-06 respectively.  Elaborating the USOF, the Company submitted that: - 
 
“USOF means Universal Service Obli gation Fund, established under Sub-
section (1) of Section 9 A of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.  The universal 
service support policy came into effect from 1.4.2002.  The fund is to be 
utilized exclusively for meeting the rura l obligation.  The universal service 
levy is presently 5% of the adjust ed gross revenue of all the telecom 
service provider except telephone va lue added services like internet, e-
mail, etc.”  
 
2.15 On being asked whether the deploym ent of WLL Services in rural areas 
can be considered as a loss-making proposit ion for the Company, it was stated 
that in the present scenario , deployment of WLL services in rural areas is not a 
loss making proposition as the company is being compensated by subsidy for 
maintenance of VPTs and installation of new VPTs on WLL/landlines, etc.  
During evidence, it was submitted befor e the Committee “Our commitment is to 
provide connectivity to the rural people 
 
2.16 When asked about the steps were ta ken by the Company to protect its 
own interests to be best possible extent of sound business principles and prudent 
commercial practices while meeting th is social commitment, the Company 
submitted that while deploying WLL in the ru ral areas it was  always kept in mind 
the possible utilization of the spare capacity of WLL in rural areas by meeting the 
scattered demand of DELs.  Th ere was huge waiting list in the circles at that 
time.  The spare capacity was utilized to clear the waiting list for the best possible 

 
 
extent.  As on date around 23.85 lakh WLL connections have been provided in 
the rural areas and 5.96 lakh in urban areas by BSNL. 
 
2.17 On the issue of private players towa rds meeting this social commitment of 
the Government, the Company informed t hat six private operat ors were earlier 
given the opportunity along with BSNL, erstwhile DoT,  to meet the social 
obligation of government.  Howe ver, they miserably failed to meet the obligation.  
Now, BSNL has been awarded the work by  USOF to provide telephone facility in 
the remaining accessible, undisputed and undisturbed 66822 v illages having 
population more than 100 by November, 2007. 
 
In this regard, during evidence, the CMD, BSNL, submitted: - 
 
“The USO Fund has come subsequently. From that USO Fund, we are 
now getting some support. Last year, it was around Rs. 1,500 crore. We 
cannot say that we incurred losses because they were recovered.” 
 
2.18 On being asked whether WLL is forever likely to remain a loss making 
proposition or the Company has come out / proposed to come out with some turn 
around plans to convert this social commitment into a profit making proposition in 
the coming future, the Company stated that the social commitment is for 
coverage of the existing 6682 2 uncovered villages only.  The losses are being 
compensated in the form of subsidy from USOF for providing new VPTs in these 
villages and for their day to day maintenance cost as decided by USOF in 
accordance with their terms & conditions. With the present poor tele-density in 
rural area, there is huge potential for demand of telecom services which BSNL 
will be able to capture with little incremental cost. 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. 2 
 The Committee note that BSNL while planning for launching and 
expansion of WLL Telephone Service did not carry out financial viability and 
profitability analysis of WLL Proj ects during the years 2000-01, 2001-02 and 
2003-04 on the ground that the projects had -been undertaken on the basis of 
a cabinet decision which reflected a so cial commitment of the government. 
Also, no separate year-wise details of total revenue billed and collected and 
the profit and loss account were compiled by the Company from 2000-01 to 
2004-05. The Committee further observe th at inspite of the instructions 
issued by the Corporate Office to all its Circles in 2003 and 2004 to prepare 
separate costing records, 13 Circles a nd two metro district s did not prepare 
these records. Further, many Circles did not prepare the required revenue 
projections also. The BSNL has trie d to justify the above-mentioned 
deficiencies pointed out by the audit on  the grounds that – profit and loss 
account is prepared as a whole and not the product/service-wise in 
accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.; the WLL 
Services are provided under the Basi c Service Licence only which include 
wire-line services also; WLL Service h as never contributed to revenue by 
more than 1.5% of the Company’s total revenue in any financial year and as 
such even product wise segmental repor ting which is required for products 
having more than 10% of the total r evenue of the Company was not required 
in this case. 

 
 
The Committee feel dismayed at su ch a lackadaisical response of the 
Company in justifying their imprudent act of not maintaining any separate 
costing records for WLL Service.  The Committee find it unbelievable that 
profit/loss records  in respect of WLL Services provided in rural areas are  
not readily available with the Company.  Even the Corporate office on their 
part did not compile the year-wise details of total revenue billed and 
collected and the profit and loss accoun t taking the excuse that this was not 
required in terms of the provisions of Companies Act, 1956. The Committee 
while observing that the Company is getting a financial support from the 
government in the form of Universal Se rvice Obligations Fund (USOF) since 
the year 2002 onwards for providing connect ivity in the rural areas, feel that 
it was absolutely necessary for the Company to accurately carry out the 
financial viability and profitability analysis of the WLL Projects and 
preparation of separate costing records.  This would have  indeed helped the 
Company to accurately assess the quantum  of losses suffered/ likely to be 
suffered while carrying out this uneconomical but socially desirable  
commitment of the Government so that the same could be appropriately 
subsidized from the USOF besides helping the Company in accurately 
assessing the remunerativeness of its WLL Services. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Government issue appropriate 
directions to the BSNL for preparation of separate costing records pertaining 
to WLL Service by each Circle so as to ascertain the Circle-wise operational 
and financial viability besides ensuring that the subsidy released under 

 
 
USOF has been properly accounted for. This would enable the Company to 
assess the returns on original investment s which is presently not possible 
for the Company.  The Company on its part needs to strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism over its Circles for ensuring adherence to such 
directions. Any failures by the Circles in compliance with such directions 
need to be dealt with sternly.  
 Coming to the issue of financial vi ability of providing WLL Services in 
rural areas, the Committee note that  presently these services are 
uneconomical though socially desirable. In this context, the Committee feel 
that there is a huge scope for bringing a financial turn around in the 
situation. The Committee has been informed by representatives of the 
Ministry during their oral evidence that the Government has the plans to 
achieve a rural tele-density of 25 percen t from the presently low tele-density 
of 2 percent by the year 2012. As such, in the coming years there is going to 
be a huge demand for telecom in the rural areas.  With all the necessary 
infrastructure and expertise already in place, the Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the BSNL shou ld be able to capture the majority 
share of this expansion with very little incremental costs when compared to 
private service providers who have ju st stepped in to commence their 
operations in rural areas. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Company 
should immediately start chalking out appropriate turnaround strategies and 
ensure their implementation in a time bound manner so as to convert this 
loss making proposition into a profitable venture. 

 
 
CHAPTER – III  
 
NON-FORMULATION OF MARKETING STRATEGIES 
 
3.1 The audit in para 1.9. 4 of the report has observe d that strategies for 
launching and marketing of the WLL serv ice had not been formulated either at 
the initial planning stage or during its subsequent ex pansions. A Media Plan 
prepared by the Company (2004-05), incorporating the advertising and marketing 
strategies for various services did not i ndicate specifically any plan for the WLL 
telephone service. Since launching (Janua ry 2001), the marketing wing of the 
corporate office of the Company had incurred (2002-03) Rs 61,000 on printing of 
20,000 brochures and Rs 21.44 lakh on newspaper advertisements (2003-04). 
No budget was exclusively allotted for marketing the WLL service. In comparison, 
the Company spent Rs 14.25 crore on prom otion and marketing of its CMTS up 
to March 2005 though an inve stment of Rs 4,967.91 cr ore (including terminals) 
was made in the WLL telephone service as against investment of Rs 5657.06 
crore made in CMTS upto March 2005.  
 
3.2 Further , in para 1.11.1.2 the audit has observed that a review of records 
of 17 circles and two metro districts re vealed tha  3,40,380 HHTs, 40660 FWTs, 
8,975 Fixed Remote Stations (FRS) and 8 200Wall sets valued at Rs 229 crore, 
purchased during January 2003 to December  2004, were lying idle in various 
circles as of August 2005 as detailed in  Appendix-VII. The local managements 
stated that customers disliked these HHTs  due to their bulky size, problems with 
network coverage, batteries and limited mobility. It was also noticed that FWTs, 
FRS and Wall sets were lying idle, as  there was no demand for them. Thus 
procurement of terminals without keeping  the customers’ pr eferences in view 
resulted in infructuous investment of Rs 229 crore 
 
3.33 As per Audit, though a market survey through a reputed agency was 
approved by the CMD of t he Company, the same was not conducted and the 
Circles were instructed to plan for one Basic Transceiver Station (BTS) per Short 
Distance Charging Area (SDCA), One Basic Station Controller (BSC) per 
Secondary Switching Area (SSA) and one Mobile Switchi ng Centre (MSC) at the 
Circle headquarters.   
 
3.4 On being asked as to why the Planni ng Wing did not conduct any market 
Survey to assess the likely demand for WLL connections, the Company in their 
written reply submitted that :-   
 
 “While processing the case for proc urement of 5.00 lakh lines of CDMA 
WLL equipment for urban areas, t he Finance Wing had advised to 
undertake  a survey  through reput ed agency  to access  the likely 
demand  and the expected customers re sponse  prior  to procurement. 
The Planning Cell after examination arrived at a decision that the WLL 

 
 
equipment already commissioned in the urban areas is giving good 
response from the customers.  Loading of the systems varied from 5.5 to 
96.5 per cent as on 30.9.2001.    In view of the fact s mentioned, BSNL 
decided not to go ahead with the proposed survey, instead case was 
processed further for procurement of 5.0 lakh CDMA WLL equipment after 
getting the approval of the competent authority.”   
 
3.5 On being asked about the  justification for concluding that conducting 
survey would be very costly in terms of  its estimated cost of Rs.36 lakh which 
otherwise appeared to be a ve ry meager amount as compared to the huge 
expenditure incurred on the WLL project, the Company submitted that : 
 
  “The proposed Survey by a private company was not conducted 
due to the following reasons: 
 
(a) There was good response from t he subscribers of the existing 
commissioned WLL system.   
(b) Loading of WLL system varied from 5.5 to 96.5 in different circles as 
on 30.9.01. 
(c) About 96 million lines of CDMA WLL were already working 
worldwide at that point of time.” 
 
 
3.6 According to the Company, for WLL procurement in respect of rural areas, 
the market survey was not required as this procurement was exclusively made 
for providing Village Public Teleph ones (VPTs) and to meet the scattered 
demands of telephones in the rural ar eas considering the existing MARR 
technology had been discarded and further procurement of MARR was stopped 
on instructions from PMO during 1997.  The WLL equipment was also 
necessitated so as to m eet the commitment of gover nment to provide telecom 
facility in the remaining uncovered identified villages. 
 
3.7 Regarding the strat egies adopted by the Company for marketing and 
promoting the WLL Service in the country  during the last 5 years, the Committee 
were informed that there is no separate st rategy for marketing and promoting the 
WLL service in BSNL.  However, the br and Tarang is displayed in all Corporate 
Advertisements/Hoardings/ Posters / ca lendars and greetings cards.  The 
Committee were also informed that no studies were ever undertaken by the 
Company to assess the impact of such strategies. 
 
3.8 Regarding the justif ication for spending a meager amount of Rs. 22 
lakh only for marketing the WLL system as compared to Rs. 14 crore 
spent on promotion of Cellular Mobile  Telephone Service keeping in view 
the fact that almost similar in vestments have been made on both these 
projects, it was submitted by the Company that: 
 

 
 
“WLL service had been initially introduc ed in BSNL for providing VPTs, 
replacement of MARR VPTs & clearing waiting list in scattered pockets of 
rural areas and to clear waiting list in TNF pockets of urban areas.  
Introduction of WLL services ther efore helped in providing VPTs, 
replacement of MARR VPTs and clearing the waiting list at much faster 
rate. Therefore there was not much ma rketing expenditure incurred in the 
promotion of WLL system as compared to mobile services that is the 
fastest growing service of BSNL.” 
 
3.9 On the observation of Audit r egarding procurement of handsets without 
ascertaining the customers’ preference,  the Committee desired to know whether 
before placing orders for FWTs, HHTs and  Wall Sets, any study was made to 
ascertain customers’ choice for such inst ruments as available in the market or 
supplied by the private operators. The response of the Company was as under: 
 
“The WLL Terminals (FWTs, HHTs, and Wall Sets) being proprietary items 
are not available in the open market.  These are to be purchased from the 
vendors only.  The hand held termi nals procured durin g 2002, 2003 and 
2004 were of latest state of  the art terminals at the time of procurement.  
Their procurement has since been st opped.  Presently, FWTs/IFWTs are 
being procured with latest state of the art technology, which are at par with 
such terminals being provided by ot her private operators.  As these 
terminals were to be provided by the BSNL to the subscriber so no study 
was required for its procurement.  
 
3.10 In this context, it was further submitted by the Company: 
 
 “The WLL Terminals (FWTs, HHTs, and Wall Sets) being proprietary items 
are not available in the open market.  These are to be purchased from the 
vendors only.  The hand held termi nals procured during the years 2002, 
2003 and 2004 were latest  state – of – the - art terminals. The 
procurement of these terminals has  since been stopped.  Presently, 
FWTs/IFWTs are being procured with la test – state - of – the - art 
technology, which are at par with terminals being provided by other private 
operators.  As the provis ion of terminals to subscribers is mandatory by 
BSNL, so no further study was requir ed for its procurement.  The FWTs 
are quite popular in t he villages and are being dep loyed progressively.  
The Wall Sets, which were procur ed along with the co r-DECT equipment 
an indigenous technology developed by IIT Chennai and M/s. Midas 
Communication, have attained a util ization percentage of around 70%.  
Balance sets are being utilized progressively for new connections as well 
as a small percentage fo r day-to-day maintenance.  HHT was procured to 
provide limited mobility service within the SDCA mainly in urban areas as 
at that point of time fu ll mobile service was very  costly (More than Rs.16 
per minute) and incoming calls were also charged.  The HHT was popular 
due to its low tariff (almost equal to la nd line) for limited mobility (serving 

 
 
within city or SDCA where a custom er moves mostly) and free incoming 
call.  However, after steep fall in call  rates especially in mobile services, 
with free incoming facility and availabili ty of attractive variety of handsets 
in the local market at much c heaper rates, the de mand for HHT was 
drastically reduced.  
 
All out efforts are being made to utilize the existing terminals (HHT, 
FRS and IFWTs) in the field units.  Fo r utilization of HHTs in the field units 
BSNL had introduced two special tariff plan (Plan 100 and Plan 799). 
There is also a proposal to give one HHT terminal (as rent free WLL 
connection) along with a new landline connection.” 
 
3.11 On being asked as to  how the Company plans to utilize the instruments 
worth Rs. 229 crore presently lying idle, the Committee were informed that : 
 
 “FWTs are quite popular in the villages and are being deployed 
progressively.  The Wall Sets, which were procured along with the cor-
DECT equipment an indigenous technology developed by IIT Chennai and 
M/s. Midas Communication, have a ttained a utilization percentage of 
around 70%.  Balance sets are being utilized progressively for new 
connections as well as a small percentage for day-to-day maintenance.   
 
 HHT was procured to provide limit ed mobility service within the SDCA 
mainly in urban areas as at that point of time full mobile service was very 
costly (More than Rs.16 per minute)  and incoming calls were also 
charged.  The HHT was popular due to it s low tariff (almost equal to land 
line) for limited mobility (serving within city or SDCA where a customer 
moves mostly) and free incoming call.  However, after steep fall in call 
rates especially in mobile servic es, with free incoming facility and 
availability of attractive variety of handsets in the local market at much 
cheaper rates, the demand for HHT was drastically reduced. “ 
 
3.12 In this regard, the CMD of BSNL during evidence, submitted: 
 
“What happened is that our purchase of ha nd-sets was there. At the same 
time mobiles came and the tariff wa s so low that it was less in demand 
and we had surplus equipment. Now what  we are doing is for some time 
when there is shortage of fixed wirel ess terminals, we have sold it also. 
Now we are trying to give to each fixed line one free WLL line.”  
  
3.13 When asked about competition from private players the CMD stated as 
under- 
 
“Sir, I got a comment that there is no co mpetition.  But I think that we are 
facing the severest competition almost in all fields.  In all fields, six 
operators are there.  In mobiles, we hav e got six operations  - four in the 

 
 
GSM, and two in the CDMA. If they do not want to go to the villages, that 
is a different thing.  But there also there is a competition.  It is due to the 
competition only that last year we  could provide almost 82 lakh net 
addition of connections.   This year, our target is to provide  85,000 to 
95,000 telephones.  We have already pr ovided 60 lakh.  We hope that we 
would come closer to that.  So, we are taking a lot of steps to see that our 
landline surrender is arrested.   We popularize it by Plan, by giving it more 
feature-ful instruments.  We hope that   we would be able to maintain our 
profitability although it is a very severely strain.  It is because with the 
falling tariff, we would also  seek support of the hon.  Members.  We have 
been getting some compensation.  From  time memorial, we have been 
investing more where the returns that are coming are very less.  For that 
we are getting some ADC, actual difference charge.  Somehow, the 
decision has been taken that from this ye ar, it would stop.  That also is a 
point.  We are trying to reach TRAI t hat it should not be stopped.   It is 
because, the village and rural connection is supported by us only.  Nobody 
else is going there. “  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. 3 
 
The Committee note that the BSNL did not formulate any strategies 
for launching and marketing of the W LL Services either at its initial 
launching or subsequent expansion. No budget was exclusively made for 
this purpose.  While the Company ha d spent an amount of Rs.14.25 crore 
for promotion of its cellular Mobile  Telephone Service, a meager amount 
only of Rs.22.05 lakh was spent during 2002-03 to 2004-05 on promotion 
and marketing of WLL Service though si milar investments have been made 
in these projects.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the Company 
even did not care to conduct any market survey through some reputed 
agency to assess the likely demand an d customers response to the WLL 
Service though the approval for such survey was given by the CMD of the 
Company. Further, as admitted by the Company, no study has ever been 
undertaken by the Company regarding marketing/promotion strategies in 
respect of WLL Services.  In addi tion to this, the Company procured 
terminals worth Rs.229 crore without keeping customer’s preferences in 
view resulting in their lying idle  as there was no demand for them. The 
Company has tried to justify their failur e by stating that market survey was 
not required as the WLL Service was initially launched for providing Village 
Public Telephones and to meet the scattered demands of telephones in the 
rural areas.  As such, not much marketing expenditure incurred in the 
promotion of  WLL system as compar ed to mobile services which is the 
fastest growing service of BSNL.  As  regards ascertaining of customers’ 

 
 
preferences during procurement of WL L terminals worth Rs.229 crore, the 
Company has come out with the reply that their further procurement has 
since been stopped and presently, lat est State of art technology terminals 
at par with terminals provided by  other private operators are being 
procured. The Company is making all out efforts to utilize the terminals 
procured earlier by progressively deploying them in rural areas. 
 The Committee strongly deplore the  non-professional approach of 
the Company in handling the marketin g and promotional aspects  of WLL 
services. Though, there was no competiti on involved in respect of rural 
areas, the private players were very much there in the urban areas 
providing WLL Services.  As such, the Committee feel that there was a 
strong need for the Company to chalk out appropriate marketing strategies 
for atleast urban areas.  Now, as th e private players have started making 
their presence in the rural areas also, it is high time for the Company to 
evolve suitable marketing strategies so as to ensure that the present status 
of being a major service provider of  WLL services in the rural areas is 
retained by it and the Company do not lose it to the private players. For this 
purpose, the Company must put in place a system of conducting market 
surveys through reputed agencies to ascertain the customers response in 
respect of quality of service as well as choice of instrument s etc. vis-à-vis 
those being offered by private operators.  
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
EXCESS PAYMENT DUE TO DELAY IN FINALISATION OF RATES 
 
4.1 The audit in para 1.11.2 has observed that corporate office places the 
purchase orders for WLL equipment and termi nals and the respective circles that 
receive the delivery, release the payment  to suppliers. Audit noticed that the 
Company placed purchase orders on M/s ARM Limited, Hyderabad in September 
2002 and on M/s United Teleco m Limited (UTL), Bangalore in November 2002 
for supply of 28,500 and 34,000  numbers of WLL CDMA FWTs, respectively, at 
provisional rates. The provisional uni t rate for FWT without Patch Panel 
Antennae (PPA) was Rs 7,453 and for FWT with PPA was Rs 8,092. These rates 
were firmed up (December 2002) by the corporate office as Rs 8,281 for FWT 
without PPA and Rs 8,971 for FWT wi th PPA and communicated to the 
concerned Circle in the sa me month. The scheduled delivery periods for the 
purchase orders were up to 8 January 2003 in respect of M/s ARM Limited and 
up to 28 February 2003 in respect of M/s UTL The corporate office (November 
2004) made a downward revision of these firm rates to Rs 5,959 for FWT without 
PPA and Rs 6,648 for FWT with PPA for t he supplies made after the scheduled 
delivery periods and intimated (Novem ber 2004) the same to the concerned 
circles. It was noticed that there was a delay of about two years in finalising the 
rates from the date of pl acement of the purchase orders. The suppliers made 
delivery during the period 18 January 2003 to 30 July 2003. However, against the 
supplies, all the concerned SSAs and the Chennai Telephones District released 
payments at the rates communicated by th e corporate office in December 2002. 
Thus due to delayed finalisation of the rate s by the corporate office in November 
2004, the circles released the excess payments of Rs 5.59 crore to the suppliers. 
The local managements accepted (June/July 2005) the facts. 
 
4.2 The reasons attributed by the Com pany for such delays in finalizing the 
rates are as under:  
 
“In the instant case, the PO of FWT was issued on M/s ARM on 9-9-02 on 
provisional prices, which were firmed up for scheduled delivery period on 
25-10-02. POs to M/s UTL & Shyam Telecom were placed on these firm 
prices on 1-11-02 as they did not acc ept the POs on provisional prices. 
These firm rates were also convey ed to M/s ARM on 5-12-02. New tender 
was opened on 8-11-02 but the applicability of prices of this new tender for 
the supplies received in extended peri od were contested by the suppliers 
on the grounds that the specifications of the two tenders were different. 
While the FWTs in the old tender were based 95-A technology, those in 
the new tender were 2000 1x technolog y based. In the same tender, the 
Management of BSNL had decided not to link the prices of HHTs with that 
of new tenders. The case was examined and it was finally decided that the 
prices in case of FWTs shall be li nked with the new tender for supplies 

 
 
received in extended period. The delivery period extension was granted to 
the vendors on 75% provisional price.  The reduced rates were applicable 
only during the extended delivery period.” 
 
4.3 On being asked whether the Company  has made any efforts to recover 
the excess payment from these suppliers, the Company stated that :- 
 
Notices of recovery were issued to the suppliers but M/s ICOMM 
(previously ARM) approached High Court of AP and the recoveries were 
stayed by the Court and an arbitrator was appointed. Presently recoveries 
are held up as the case is under ar bitration. As there is no lapse and 
action has been taken to get maximum advantage by reducing the prices, 
so there is no need to fix responsibility of any officer. 
 
However, in future to strengthen the position of BSNL in case of 
litigation, a Fall Clause has been in troduced in the Procurement Manual 
which is applicable for supplies in extended delivery periods. The clause is 
as under: 
 
Fall clause: 
The prices once fixed will rema in valid during the scheduled 
delivery period except for the provis ions in Clause 12.1 of Section 
III. Further, if at any time during the contract. 
(a)  It comes to the notice of purchas er regarding reduction of price for 
the same or similar equipment/service 
 
    And/or 
 
(b)  the prices recited in new tender for the same or similar/ service or 
less than the prices chargeable under the contract. 
 
The purchaser, for the purpose of de livery period extension, if any, will 
determine and intimate the new price, taking into account various related 
aspects such as quantity, geographical location etc. and the date of its 
effect for the balance quantity of the service to the vendor. In case the 
vendor does not accept the new price to be made applicable during the 
extended delivery period and the date of its effect, the purchaser shall 
have the right to terminate the cont ract without accept ing any further 
supplies. This termination of he c ontract shall be at the risk and 
responsibility for the supplier and t he purchaser reserves the right to 
purchase the balance unsupplied quantity/ service at  the risk and cost of 
the defaulting vendor besides cons idering law forfeiture of his 
performance security. 
 
The vendor while applying for ext ension of time for delivery of 
equipment/services. If any shall have to provide the undertaking as ‘We 

 
 
have not reduced the sale price, and/or offered to sell the same or similar 
equipment/service to any person/organi zation including Department of 
Central/State Government or any cent ral/state PSU at a price lower than 
the price chargeable under the contract for scheduled delivery period’. 
 
Regarding the procedure followed by t he Company for fixation of prices, 
the Committee were informed that most of the purchase orders are issued 
at firm prices but in many cases, provisional price is given in the POs     if 
they are being issued at the time of forthcoming budget so that reduction 
in Taxes/levies may be incorporated while finalizing the prices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL NO. 4 
 
The Committee note that as per the existing procurement  procedure, 
the Company places the purchase orders for WLL equipment and terminals 
and the respective Circles that receive the delivery, release the payment to 
suppliers. In this regard, the Committee observe that Company placed 
purchase orders for supply of Fi xed Wall Terminals (FWTs) on two 
suppliers namely, M/s ARM Limited a nd M/s United Telecom Limited, in 
September and November 2002 respec tively on provisional rates. These 
rates were firmed up by the Corporat e Office in December, 2002. However, 
in November 2004 i.e. after two years from the date of placement of 
purchase orders, the Corporate office made a downward revision of the 
firm rates in respect of the supplies made after the scheduled delivery 
period. The audit has pointed out that due to this delayed finalisation of 
rates by the Corporate Office, excess payments to the tune of Rs.5.59 crore 
were made to these two suppliers by the respective circles. Presently, the 
issue of recovery of the excess payments is under arbitration as per the 
direction of the High Court. The Committee are not convinced with the 
explanation of the Company that most of the Purchase orders are issued at 
firm prices but in many cases, the provisional price is given if these are 
issued at the time of forthcoming budget so that reduction in taxes/levies 
may be incorporated while finalizing the prices. 
Taking a holistic view, the Committ ee are of the opinion that the 
prevalent procurement practice is ambiguous in respect of the price 

 
 
settlement mechanism. Also, there appe ars to be  a lack of coordination 
between the Corporate Office and the Ci rcles in releasing payments to the 
suppliers. No definite time-limits exist within which, the provisional prices 
are required to be firmed up in the cases of purchase orders placed on 
provisional rates. As a result, the Company has to waste their time and 
energy for recovery of excess payments by  way of avoidable litigations in 
courts and arbitration proceedings. Towards this end, the Committee note 
that now the Company has introduced a “Fall Clause” applicable to the 
supplies made during the extended delivery period in the Procurement 
Manual to strengthen the position of BSNL in the cases of litigations. The 
Committee feel that this step should have been taken  by the Company 
much earlier. The Committee, therefore, recommend that BSNL should 
undertake a comprehensive review of its procurement manual to streamline 
their procurement procedure with a vi ew to remove deficiencies in the 
purchase system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERFORMANCE BANK GUARANTEES 
 
5.1 The Audit in para 1.11.3.1 has obser ved that the Company’s manual of 
procurement of telecom equipment and stores Addendum-I (July 2003) provides 
for an additional Performance bank Gaurantees (PBG) at the rate of five per cent 
of the value of the remaining quantity to be supplied during the extended delivery 
period from the supplier. According to  purchase orders (December 2004), M/s 
Tera Com and M/s HECL were to make bulk supplies of FWTs up to 10 July 
2005 valued at Rs 142.60 cr ore and Rs 71.30 crore res pectively. M/s Tera Com 
and M/s HECL did not supply FWTs valued at Rs 75.57 crore and Rs 64.56 crore 
within the scheduled delivery period which required submission of additional 
PBGs of Rs 3.78 crore and  Rs 3.23 crore respectively before granting 
extensions. It was however noticed that  the Company directed M/s Tera Com 
and M/s HECL to furnish additional PBG s for only Rs 1.99 crore and Rs 2.53 
crore respectively. Thus additional PBGs amounting to Rs 2.49 crore were short 
realized from these suppliers. Similarly,  M/s ITI was to make bulk supplies of 
4.50 lakh FWTs valued at Rs 183.02 cror e and 33,137 FWTs valued at Rs 14.97 
crore against purchase orders of November and December 2004 with scheduled 
delivery periods up to 4 April 2005 and 1 May 2005 respectively. M/s ITI did not 
supply any FWTs within the scheduled delivery periods. According to the 
provisions of the Manual and the terms and conditions  of the purchase orders, 
M/s ITI was to furnish initial PBGs in the form of corporate guarantee amounting 
to Rs 9.90 crore and addi tional PBGs of Rs 9.90 cror e. The Company neither 
recovered the initial corporate guarantee nor the additional PBGs before granting 
extensions to the original delivery schedule up to 30 June 2005 and 31 July 
2005. The Company short closed (August 2005) both the purchase orders as M/s 
ITI could supply only 1.18 lakh FWTs during the extended delivery period against 
the purchase order of November 2004 an d could not supply any FWTs against 
the purchase order of December 2004. The Company directed (August 2005) 
M/s ITI to pay the amount  of PBGs, which had not been received till date 
(October 2005) Report No. 9 of 2006. 
 
5.2 Further, in para 1.11.3. 2., the Audit has stated that according to the 
general conditions of the contract, 100 per cent payment could be made against 
supplies after delivery, provided an additional bank guarantee for an amount 
equivalent to five per cent of the value of supplies, valid for a minimum period of 
seven months, was furnished by the suppl ier along with an undertaking that the 
equipment supplied would be free from damages and shortages. The additional 
bank guarantee was to be released only a fter cases of damages or shortages, if 
any, in the supplies were settled. The Company issued (January 2001) a 
purchase order on M/s HFCL for supply of WLL systems for 49,000 lines along 
with FRS to three circles, viz., Assam, Himachal Pradesh and Orissa. It was 
observed in the Orissa Circle that M/s HFCL had furnished an additional bank 

 
 
guarantee of Rs 4.11 cr ore covering a period of six months (24 January 2002 to 
23 July 2002) instead of 7 months as r equired. Besides, M/s HFCL als o did not  
furnish any undertaking that the WLL systems supplied would be free fro m 
damages and shortages. During the validit y of this additional bank guar antee, 
complaints were received by t he Orissa  Circle from its field units regarding 
defective FRS, BTSs and BSCs  and malf unctioning of the syste m leading to 
disconnection of calls, failures in call processing, network coverage problem and 
poor signals etc. Despite the fact that M/s HFCL did not rectify the complaints the 
Orissa Circle released t he additional bank guar antee of Rs 4.11 crore after six 
months. 
 
5.3 On being asked about the objecti ve of obtaining Performance Bank 
Guarantees from the suppliers and whether the said purpose was achieved in the 
present case, the Company stated as under:-  
 
   “As per para No.4.2 of section III of procurement Manual, the PBG against 
the supply  is taken as a compensati on for any loss resulting from the 
supplier’s failure to complete its obli gations under the contract. M/s ITI is  
exempted from submitting the PBG against RQ.  Details of PBG submitted 
against these order are as follows: 
 
 Vendor BG Amount Status/validity 
M/s  
Teracom 
7 Crore 25-12-2007 
M/s  HFCL 5,94,24,700/- 19-12-2007 
M/s  HECL 2,94,18,300/- 30-12-2007 
M/s  ITI Exempted  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 The said purpose has  been achi eved as  the vendors against the 
tendered quantity hav e completed the supplies.  Furt her, as ITI failed t o 
execute the supply and s ubmit additional BG, so its order(RQ) has been 
short closed and amount equal to PBG + additional BG has been 
recovered. 
 
PBGs are released after ensuring that the equipment has been taken over 
satisfactorily, no claim  is pending against the supplier and the equipment 
are working satisfactorily during warranty period. 
 
Further, additional 5% BG has to be taken at the time of extension 
of delivery period for t he balance of quantity.  However no duration 
of validity  was mentioned for addi tional BG in this tender/ 
Procurement Manual/PO.” 
 
 
 

 
 
5.4 On being asked as to why the addi tional bank Guarantee of Rs. 22.2 crore 
was not obtained from the suppliers, it was submitted by the Company that the 
additional BGs have already been obt ained and Rs.19.79 Crores has been 
recovered from M/s ITI.  M/s Teracom subm itted additional BG of one crore.  M/s 
HFCL submitted additional BG of Rs.2,37,69,852/- and M/s HECL submitted 3 
additional BGs totaling Rs.6, 48,33,903/-.  M/s ITI failed to supply the equipment, 
hence the POs were short closed and the amount of Rs.19.79 Crores has been 
recovered from M/s ITI. 
 
5.5 Regarding the remedial action ava ilable with the Company in case of non-
supply of the requisite equi pment or deficient service by the suppliers, the 
Committee were informed that in case of non supply of equipment, BSNL has 
right to short close the purchase order and forfeit the PBG as well as additional 
Guarantee. In case of deficie nt service, 20% payment is still pending which is to 
be released only after entering into AM C after one year of warranty period.  
Further, set off clause is included in t he PO and cost can be recovered from any 
other bill/order of the supplier. 
 
5.6 To a pointed question as to whether  any responsibility has been fixed on 
the defaulting officials of the Company fo r not obtaining the requisite additional 
PBGs from these suppliers, it was submi tted that as there has been no default 
and additional PBGs have been taken  & successful bidders have completed 
supplies, so there is no reason for fixing responsibility.  In case of ITI, the amount 
equivalent to PBG & additional BG has already been recovered.  
 
5.7 On being asked as to what mechani sm is available in the Company to 
ensure that suppliers are granted extens ions in delivery schedule, only if 
additional PBGs have been obtained from t hem, the reply of the Company was 
as under :- 
 
“As per para 15.3 of Sect ion III of procurement ma nual, if required, the 
BSNL may extend the delivery period subj ect to furnishing of additional 
5% BG, but the competent authority ma y relax the date of submission of 
additional BG to meet the urgent requirements.” 
 
5.8 Regarding the reasons for non-co mpliance of the conditions of the 
contract for accepting and release of  additional bank guarant ee with respect to 
HFCL, the Committee were informed that during the validity of the PBG some 
complaints, which were received by Orissa Circle, were intimated to M/s HFCL 
for rectification, which they attended to.  Further, as M/s HFCL attended the 
faults, no action was taken by Orissa circle. 
 
5.9 With regard to the provision co ntained in the proc urement manual of 
BSNL that the Company may extend the delivery period subject to furnishing of 
additional 5% Bank Guarantee, but the competent authority may relax the date of 
submission to meet urgent requirements, it was clarif ied by the Company that 

 
 
normally no relaxation is given for submission of PBGs. However, if the 
equipment is urgently required to meet the development  targets, then at the time 
of granting delivery period extension and on vendor’s request, a reasonable time 
may be allowed for submitting additional PBG. In the instant case, as already 
mentioned in the initial repl y, additional PBGs were obtai ned and in no case any 
loss has been incurred by the company on this account. Normally, delivery period 
extension is granted up to 20 weeks. 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
The Committee note that as per the Procurement manual of the 
Company,  there is a provision fo r obtaining from the suppliers  an 
Additional Performance Bank Guarantee (PBGs) @ 5% of the value of the 
remaining quantity to be supplied dur ing the extended de livery period. In 
this regard the Audit has pointed out  that such additional PBGs amounting 
to Rs.2.49 crores were short realized from two suppliers namely M/s Tera 
Com and M/s HFCL.  Similarly, in r espect of one purchase order placed on 
M/s ITI, the audit has observed that  the Company neither recovered the 
initial corporate guarantee nor the additional PBGs before granting 
extensions to the original schedule. In addition to this,  the Company in the 
case of Orissa Circle, released prematur ely the additional Bank Guarantee 
of Rs.4.11 Crore after six months inst ead of the prescribed requirement of 
seven months. The audit has,  therefore,   concluded that this failure on the 
part of the Company to obtain PBGs and premature release of PBGs has 
resulted in undue financial benefits of Rs.26.40 crore to the suppliers. 
 In the above context, the Committee observe that the main purpose 
of obtaining the PBG is to safeguard the interests of the buyer by way of a 
compensation for any loss resulting from the supplier’s failure to complete 
its obligations under the contract.  Thi s purpose gets defeated if PBGs are 
relased without ensuring that the equi pment  supplied is fault-free and no 
claim is pending against the supplie r.  The extant case not only casts a 
reflection on the monitoring role of th e Corporate Office over its various 

 
 
Circles in their adherence to vari ous prescribed procedures in the 
procurement manual but also does not ab solve the Circle authorities from 
their responsibilities of safeguarding the financial interests of the 
Company.  The Committee, therefore,  strongly recommend that in order to 
safeguard its financial interests,  the Company must strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that procedures relating to performance 
Bank Guarantees as prescribed in the procurement manual are strictly 
adhered to by all the Circles and accoun tability must be fixed wherever the 
lapses are detected. The Corporate Offi ce must keep itself apprised of the 
status of obtaining/releasing of PBGs as well as the extensions, if any, 
granted to the suppliers by the Circles and make necessary interventions 
wherever necessary.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – VI 
 
ABSENCE OF PENALTY PROVISION IN THE PROCUREMENT MANUAL 
 
 
6.1 The Audit in para 1.11.4 has obser ved that the Company’s manual for 
procurement of telecom equipment and stores  did not specify any specific terms 
and conditions for levy of penalty on s uppliers for delays in installation, 
acceptance testing and commissioning of the projects to be executed on turnkey 
basis. According to the terms and conditio ns of the purchase orders, acceptance 
testing (A/T) of WLL equipment was to be got done by the suppliers from the 
Technical and Development (T&D) Circ le of the Company before their 
commissioning. Further, according to in structions (February 2003) payments for 
installation and commissioning of  equipment were to be made after satisfactory 
completion of the A/T by the T&D Circle. Audit observed that due to non-inclusion 
of any clause for levy of penalty on the su ppliers for delays in installation, A/T 
and commissioning of the WLL equipment, t he Management could not levy any 
penalty on the defaulting suppliers for del ays in these activities as discussed 
below.  M/s LG Electronics delayed the commissioning of WLL equipment 
installed in the Punjab Circle by seven to  15 months, as it could not get the A/T 
certificate from the T&D Ci rcle of the Company due to  poor coverage and other 
defects. This resulted in blocking of capital amounting to Rs 26.65 crore. No 
penalty was levied on the supplier for t hese delays. At Panjim SSA under the 
Maharashtra Circle, the W LL equipment supplied (Dec ember 2002) by M/s LG 
Electronics could not be commissioned up to May 2005 due to a number of 
deficiencies being pointed out  by the T&D Circle such as  poor quality of calls, 
discrepancies in meter reading and switching delays. This resulted in blocking of 
capital of Rs 2.62 crore. No penalty was levied on the supplier for these delays.  
Under eight circles  and the Calcutta Telephones District, 40 BSCs and 489 BTS 
were allowed by the Company to be put  to commercial use by the suppliers 
without satisfactory completion of A/T.  In UP (East) Circle, it was noticed that full 
payment of Rs 2.52 crore was released by the Circl e to M/s LG Electronics 
towards installation, commissioning and A/T charges on the basis of a provisional 
A/T certificate, which was irregular. No penalty was levied on the supplier for not 
getting A/T cleared.  In 16 SSAs of seven circles , Audit observed that out of 30 
WLL systems received during August 200 1 to August 2004, 29 systems were 
commissioned after a delay of two to 19 months. One system had been 
commissioned provisionally without formal A/T till August 2005 despite the lapse 
of 28 months. This resulted in blocking of  funds aggregating Rs  103.18 crore for 
periods ranging between two to 28 months.  No penalt y was however levied on 
M/s HFCL, M/s LG Electronics, M/s AR M, M/s UTL and M/s ITI for delays in 
commissioning of the WLL systems. 
 
6.2 On being asked as to why the Company’s procurement manual have no 
specific terms and conditions for levy of  penalty on suppliers for delays in 

 
 
installation, acceptance testing and commi ssioning of projects to be executed on 
turnkey basis, the reply was as under :-   
 
 “The terms & conditions in the Company’s Procurement Manual are 
framed/ incorporated from time  to time depending upon the need and 
requirement.  The terms & conditions for levy of penalty for delayed supply 
in equipment installation; acceptanc e testing, etc. have already been 
included in the tender documents for 10.5 lakh lines on WLL equipment” 
 
6.3 To the query whether the Company proposes to incorporate a provision 
for levy of penalty in the Company’s m anual, the Committee were informed that , 
BSNL has already initiated action to inco rporate a provision for levy of penalty in 
the Company’s manual. 
 
6.4 When asked whether M/s LG Electr onics, M/s HFCL, M/s ARM, M/s UTL 
and M/s ITI commissioned the projects in q uestion as of now, it was submitted 
that  M/s ARM, M/s UTL and M/s ITI have already commissioned their 
equipment.  However, M/s LG  and M/ s HFCL could not commission their 
equipment at many places in urban areas due to poor coverage.  The matter was 
taken up with the concerned co mpanies and to sort out the coverage issue, a 
High Power Committee (HPC) was formed by BSNL Board who in their 
recommendations have suggested differ ent penalties be imposed for different 
activities. The circles that have been recently provided with the recommendations 
of the HPC are taking suitable action.  However, these equipments are in 
commercial use. 
 
The issue is expected to be settled before 31-3-2007. 
6.5 On the observation of the Audit that  company’s manual for procurement of 
equipment did not specify any specific terms and conditions for levy of Penalty on 
suppliers for delays in commissioning of projects to be executed on Turnkey 
basis resulting it not only the blocking of capital of Rs.134.97 crore but also 
penalty could not be levied on some suppliers, the Committee were informed that 
the Company has already initiated action to  incorporate to provision for levy of 
penalty in the Company’s manual.  
 
6.6 On being asked as to why such an obvious clause has been absent in the 
Company’s procurement manual, the Company has submitted:- 
 
“Most of the tenders/ procurement is done for supply of material and only 
a few projects are executed on turnkey basis. As these projects have 
special requirements, so a generaliz ed clause is not mentioned in the 
procurement manual and is usually added in the spec ial conditions of the 
tender on case to case basis. Instru ction issued to Planning Cells. Vide 
UO No.3-2/2004-MMT/Pt.III dated 18.8.2006 is as follows: 
 

 
 
‘The planning cells of BSNL Corporate office while processing the case 
of procurement should make provis ion of a Penalty clause in the 
special condition of the contract for delay in installation & 
Commissioning of the turnkey projects’. 
 
It is to mention that from the first tender of MSC based CDMA 2000 1X  
in year 2002-03, the provision for penalty clause for delay in installation 
and commissioning has been inserted in special condition of the 
tender.” 
 
6.7 Regarding the procedure being followed to device/ review the Company’s 
procurement manual, it was submitted  by  the  Company that  the procurement 
manual is updated regularly as and when the requirement is felt through 
experience or feedback from field unit s with the approval  of BSNL Board. 
Further, for updating, suggesti ons are also invited from  TEMA, Field Units and 
various Cells of BSNL HQ.  Major amendments in the procurement manual have 
been carried out 12 times since June 2003.  
 
6.8 It was noticed that the company as we ll as the HPC have  identified many 
deficiencies in the equipment supplied by M/s. HFCL and M/s. LG Electronics.  
Further the HPC recommended many pointy measures against the defaulting 
vendors.  In view of this clear identification of deficiencies on the part of the 
suppliers, the Committee desired to know as to what precise action has so far 
been taken against them by way of imposing penalties / debarment for future and   
how the Head Office is monitoring this case to ensure that appropriate penalties / 
debarment are levied on the defaulting  suppliers and implementation of 
recommendations of the HPC in a time bound manner. The reply of the Company 
was as under:-  
 
 “ As per the payment terms, 80% pay ment has been released by circles 
against supply of the equipment.  The balance 20% payment is held up 
with circles. 
 
The HPC has recommended a total penalty of 10% of the order of the PO.  
In addition the HPC has recommended many measures like shifting of 
equipment to rural areas. 
 
However before shifting of equipment, new equipment is required for 
continuation of working WLL connection.  BSNL has already ordered 
equipment for the replacement.  It is expected the 100% implementation of 
the recommendation of the HPC shall be completed by year 2007-08. 
 
BSNL HQ is reviewing the status of im plementation of HPC during routine 
development meeting held with circles time to time in chairmanship of 
Director (Plg. & NS). “ 
 

 
 
6.9 On being asked whether any time frame has been fixed within which the 
recommendations of the HPC are to be implemented by the circles, it was 
submitted by the Company that as su ch no time frame has been fixed for 
implementation of the reco mmendations of the HPC.  However, it is expected 
that the by year 2007-08, all the recommendations will be implemented. 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
 The Committee note with concern that, the Company’s manual for 
procurement of telecom equipment and stores did not specify any specific 
terms and conditions for levy of pe nalty on suppliers for delays in 
installation, acceptance/testing and commissioning of the WLL projects to 
be executed on turnkey basis. The audit scrutiny has revealed that absence 
of any such penalty provisions has resulted in blocking of capital of Rs 
134.97 crore.  As per the Audit the  Co mpany has failed to levy appropriate 
penalties on the concerned Companies namely, M/s LG Electronics, M/s 
ARM, M/s UTL and M/s ITI in respect of deficiencies in the equipment 
supplied by them on various counts like delays in installation, acceptance 
and testing and commissioning of WLL equipment, coverage and other 
defects.  The Committee have been a pprised that  the BSNL Board has 
constituted a High Power Committe e (HPC) which has recommended 
different penalties to be imposed on the defaulting companies for different 
activities and the Circles have been  recently provided with the 
recommendations of the HPC with inst ructions to take suitable action 
against the defaulting suppliers. 
 The Committee note with concern that absence of any penalty 
provision either in the tender documen t or in the procurement manual has 
led to the failure of the Company in imposing the required penalties on the 
suppliers. The Committee, therefor e, strongly recommend that the 
Company should invariably ensure that suitable penalty clause is included 

 
 
in the tender document/ other legal doc uments so that no party can take 
undue advantage of the provision.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - VII 
 
DELAY IN FINALISATION OF ANNUAL MAINTENANCE CONTRACT  
 
7.1 The Audit in para 1.13. 3 has observed that according to the provision of 
bid documents, Annual Main tenance Contracts (AMCs) for the maintenance of 
the WLL terminals were to be signed by the circles with the concerned suppliers 
at the end of the warrant y period. Audit scrutiny re vealed that against tender 
enquiries of October 2001 and August 2002, 13 purchase orders were issued 
(between September 2002 and March 2004) for supply of WLL terminals to 
different suppliers viz., M/s HFCL, ARM Li mited, LG Electronics, and XL Limited. 
The consignments were received bet ween January 2003 and June 2004 and the 
one-year warranty period was to expire between Janu ary 2004 and June 2005 
for these purchase orders. The bid documents and the purchase orders 
contained the terms and conditions and the rates to be paid to the suppliers for 
AMC periods. However, the corporate offi ce prepared fresh terms and conditions 
for AMCs with a view to make them cl earer and to further negotiate the rates. 
The same were circulated (March 2005) to these suppliers for acceptance with 
the condition that the rates for AMCs wo uld be negotiated with reference to the 
rates obtained for AMCs against the tender issued on 15 July 2004. None of the 
suppliers except M/s XL Limited a ccepted this condition.  A Committee 
constituted (May 2005) by the corporate office recommended that an AMC 
should be signed only with M/s XL  Limited. Further, the corporate office also 
instructed (June 2005) all the circles not to  sign AMCs with the other suppliers till 
the AMC guidelines were finalized. Thus due to abnormal delay in finalization of 
the AMC guidelines, AMCs could not be signed with any of the other suppliers till 
date (November 2005). Scrutiny of the reco rds of various circles revealed that 
55,475 defective WLL terminals valued at Rs 47.95 crore were lying in various 
SSAs under 16 circles.   The suppliers due to non-ex ecution of AMCs had not 
repaired these terminals. As a result the entire investment of Rs 47.95 crore in 
these WLL terminals was rendered un-remunerative till date. It was also noticed 
that in the UP (east), Ra jasthan and Bihar circles that 7,161 FWTs valued at Rs 
6.78 crore which had been sent for repairs to the suppliers had not been returned 
although a period of more than six months had elapsed from the date of sending. 
No penalty could be levied on the suppliers due to non-execution of AMCs. 
 
7.2 On being asked about the reasons for the undue delay in finalisation of 
guidelines for execution of AMCs with the suppliers, the Company submitted that:  
 
 “The delay in finalization of AMC agreement for FWT/HHTs/IFWTs is due 
to the reason that the P.Os/Bid Documents (T.E. 233 and 246), mentioned 
the broad terms and conditions to be followed by the successful 
bidder/supplier.  The AMC document did not contain the details on the 
proper and uniform implementation proc edures across the Circles.  NM 
Branch prepared the draft AMC document containing detailed instructions 

 
 
for its proper implementation, whic h was circulated to the suppliers 
concerned.  The suppliers raised quer ies/issues including those, which 
were part of the original terms and conditions.  It took time to negotiate the 
final terms and conditions.   
 
 Further the AMC price and FWT/HHTs (subscriber’s terminal) cost was 
coming down progressively in subs equent tenders.  The competent 
authority constituted a committee to negotiate and settle the AMC related 
issues along with the rates with t he suppliers.  The Committee discussed 
with the vendors and the doc ument finalized based on discussions, was 
forwarded to Circles for signing with the Suppliers. “ 
 
7.3 It was further informed that for T.E.  No.233 and 246, the guidelines have 
been finalized. Regarding  the present status of ex ecution of AMCs with the 
suppliers in these Circles, it was inform ed that for T.E. No. 246, the AMC with all 
the suppliers viz M/s. XL Telecom, M/ s. ITI, M/s. Bhagyana gar, M/s. Surana 
Telecom, M/s. I.COMM,  M/s. Teracom and M/s. UTL have been signed.  
Regarding T.E. No.233, the guidelines have been finalized  recently with one of 
the supplier and are under th e process of signing with Circles concerned.  The 
same guidelines are being offered to ot her Suppliers for sending their consent 
and signing the AMC agreement.   
 
7.4 On being asked whether the 55,475 defective WLL terminals have been 
repaired and put to use, it  was submitted that as per  provisions in the AMC 
agreement, the faulty terminals have been got repaired and became part of the 
available FWTs which are issued for use as per requirement.  
 
7.5 To the query whether the 7, 161 FWTs have been returned by the 
suppliers which were sent to them for repairs, the answer was in the affirmative.  
  
7.6 On the observation of the Audit that due to abnormal delay in finalization 
of the AMC guidelines by  the Company, AMCs coul d not be signed with a 
number of suppliers resultin g in  unremunerative investment of Rs. 47.95 crore 
and further no penalty could be levied on the suppliers, the Company submitted 
that  AMC guidelines were prepared in time.  Howe ver, as the company decided 
to re-negotiate the prices of the AMC, which were fi nalized in the PO earlier. It 
took some time to finalize the new rate s.  Secondly the vendors have also raised 
certain issues about the implementation of the AMC which were discussed and 
sorted out after holding meetings with in dividual vendors.  Therefore, the matter 
of fixing responsibility on any person does not arise.  
 
7.7 On being asked about the  procedur e  followed in drafting and execution 
of AMCs in time and   whet her it is at variance with the procedures followed in 
respect of other telecommunication servic es like Cellular Mobile, fixed land line 
etc. , it was submitted that : 
 

 
 
“AMCs are part of tender document. However, they indicate only the broad 
terms and it is necessary to prepare detailed guidelines incorporating the 
tender conditions so that AMCs are un iformly implemented in all field 
units.  AMC was first made part of WLL tender.  The Cellular tenders were 
floated only later. In the ce llular tender also there is  a provision for AMC.  
As far as fixed land line is concerned, there is no provision of AMC in the 
tender.  A separate tender for AMC was floated for NT switches, which is 
currently operative. It is  to mention that for W LL equipment T. E. no. 277 
dated 15-07-2004 onwards, detailed AMC has been made part of the 
tender obviating the need to issue further  guidelines at a later date, which 
was required in the earlier cases.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
 The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Bid documents, 
Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMCs) for the maintenance of WLL 
Terminals were to be signed by the Ci rcles with the concerned suppliers at 
the end of the warranty period.  The audit scrutiny has revealed that  55475 
defective WLL terminals were lying in  16 Circles due to non execution of 
AMCs with the suppliers, resulting in unremunerative investment of Rs 
47.95 crore.  According to the Company, the AMC guidelines were prepared 
in time. However, as the Company deci ded to renegotiate the prices of the 
AMC which were finalized in the earlier Purchase Orders, it took some time 
to finalise the new rates. Also there were some delay due to negotiations 
with the suppliers for implementa tion of the new AMC guidelines so 
finalized.  The Company has further been informed that now onwards, 
detailed AMCs has been made as part of the tender thus obviating the need 
to issue further guidelines at a later date.  The Committee has also been 
informed that all the defective WLL te rminals have since been got repaired 
by the concerned suppliers as per the provisions of the finalized AMC 
agreement. 
 
 Taking into view the aforesaid posit ion, the Committee feel that there 
has been a definite avoidable delay on the part of the Company in finalizing 
the AMC guidelines resulting in not only the delayed  rectification of the 
faulty WLL terminals but also  the consequential revenue loss due to non-

 
 
deployment of the defective  equipm ent. The Committee f eel that the bid-
document itself should have containe d the details of the AMCs. The 
Committee has not been provided with any information justifying as to why 
the AMC guidelines were not finalized at the purchase order stage itself. 
This type of imprudent practice followed by the Company for AMCs is 
bound to create bitterness between the Company and the suppliers. The 
Committee recommend that the AMC guidelines should be made a part and 
parcel of the procurement manual so as to serve as a reference point for 
future procurements and the provisions of the procurement manual should 
strictly be followed in all the bid documents.  

 
 
CHAPTER – VIII 
 
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES 
 
8.1 The audit in para 1.11.5.3 has obser ved that purchase orders for WLL 
projects issued by the corporate office s pecifically provided for levy of liquidated 
damage (LD) charges on the suppliers in cases of delays in delivery of WLL 
equipment. Audit observed that in 34 cases in nine circles ↓ and the Chennai 
Telephones District, LD charges were eit her not levied or short levied on the 
defaulting suppliers despite non delivery and delayed delivery of WLL equipment 
and terminals by them. Consequently, the Company had to incur a loss of Rs 
11.97 crore due to non-levy a nd short levy of LD charges on the defaulting 
suppliers 
 
8.2 In the light of the above audit observation, the Company was asked to 
explain --Why the Company had not levi ed/deducted the L.D. for delayed supply; 
Has the Company made any efforts to re cover the L.D. charges due from the 
defaulting suppliers; Has responsibility been fixed on the defaulting officials of the 
Company for non-levy/short levy of L.D. charges on suppliers. The reply of the 
Company was as under:- 
 
 “BSNL has levied LD for delayed s upplies as per procedure. As per audit 
report, the short fall of LD recover ed by Circles is Rs. 11,97,43,779/-
(18,26,73,830-6,29,30,051). As per reports  received from field units, the 
LD already recovered against the c oncerned POs is Rs. 34,02,14,352/-. 
Besides Rs. 11,80,313/- to be recove red is held up due to stay on 
recoveries as the case is subjudice with the arbitrator and balance amount 
is under recovery. As there is no laps e in recovery of LD, so question of 
fixing responsibility of any official does not arise.”    
 
8.3 As the Company has stated that BSNL has levied LD for delayed suppliers 
as per procedure and there is  no lapse in recovery of LD and at the same time, 
the Company has admitted a shortfall of LD recovery of Rs.11.97 crore, the 
company was asked to clarify the posit ion since  the two statements appeared 
contradictory. The clarification furnished by the company was :- 
 
“From the initial reply it is clear that there is no contradiction. It was 
stated that as per audit report the shortfall of LD recovered by Circles 
is Rs.11.7 crores whereas, as per reports received from field units, 
the LD already recovered against the concerned POs is Rs. 34.02 
crores. There is no deficiency in levying of LD and no shortfall in LD 
thereof. Some LD is yet to be recovered which is held up due to stay 
from Court.” 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
The Committee note that Purchase orders for WLL projects issued 
by the corporate office specifically pr ovided for levy of liquidated damage 
(LD) charges on the suppliers in cases of delays in delivery of WLL 
equipment. The  Audit has  pointed out  that in 34 cases in nine circles and 
the Chennai Telephones District, LD charges were either not levied or short 
levied on the defaulting suppliers despite non delivery and delayed delivery 
of WLL equipment and terminals by them. Consequently, the Company had 
to incur a loss of Rs 11.97 crore due to non-levy and short levy of LD 
charges on the defaulting suppliers. In response to this audit observation 
the Company has submitted that LD was levied as per the procedure and 
only a meager amount of Rs.11,80,313 is to be recovered which is held up 
due to stay on recoveries as the case is sub-judice with an arbitrator. The 
Committee would, however, like to re commend that the Corporate Office 
should constantly monitor the levy  of prescribed liquidated damage 
charges by the Circles on the defaulting  suppliers to protect its financial 
interests and avoidance of entering into unnecessary litigations against the 
suppliers for recoveries.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IX 
 
UTILISATION OF EQUIPPED CAPACITY 
 
9.1 The expansion of the WLL project commenced mainly from 2002-03. Audit 
observed that while projec ting the demands for expans ion of their existing 
capacity for the year 2002-03 and the subsequent years, only four circles and the 
Chennai Telephone District took the unutiliz ed capacity of their existing WLL 
exchanges into account. Similarly, while drawing up the overa ll expansion plan 
for the WLL system for the year 2002-03, t he unutilized capacities of the existing 
WLL exchanges were not cons idered by the corporate o ffice. It was also noticed 
that in 22 SSAs under seven circles, , the total number of working connections at 
the time of expansion (April 2002 to F ebruary 2004) was only 16283 against the 
installed capacity of 110850 lines mainly  due to poor demand and shortages of 
WLL terminals. In spite of this, the ex isting capacity was expanded by 113650 
lines. As of March 2005, the total number of working connections was only 94866 
which was less than the initial capac ity of 110850 lines. The expansion of 
capacity was thus unwarranted and resulted in injudicious expenditure of Rs 
108.64 crore. The audit has made the follo wing observations on this subject 
matter:- 
 
1.9.1.3 Non consideration of the impact of WLL telephone services 
provided by private operators 
 
While planning for capacity expansion of t he WLL systems, especially in urban 
areas, the impact of the presence of  private operators should have been 
considered for a more realistic assessm ent of demand. Year-wise status of the 
coverage by private operators could hav e been ascertained from their rollout 
obligations# available in DoT or from their websites. Audit observed that o nly 
three circles, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Ke rala and Maharashtra and the two metro 
districts at Chennai and Calcutta c onsidered the impact of  the WLL telephone 
services provided by private operators in  their areas in proj ecting their demands 
for the period 2001-02 to 2004-05. Even the corporate office did not consider this 
impact. 
 
1.9.1.4 Non consideration of the en visaged growth of Company’s own 
landline service and Cellular Mobile Telephone Services 
 
It was noticed that only Tamil Nadu Circle and the Calcutta Telephones District 
considered the anticipated growth of their own landline service and Cellular 
Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS) wh ile projecting demands for capacity 
expansion of their WLL systems for the years 2001-02 to 2004-05. The corporate 
office, however, considered the envisag ed overall growth of its own CMTS while 
planning for the overall expansion of t he capacity of the WLL system for the 
above years. 

 
 
 
1.12  Utilisation Of Equipped Capacity 
 
In order to ensure proper returns on the investment made in a project, it is 
imperative that the equipped capacity of the projec t is optimally utilised and all 
prescribed targets for capacit y utilisation are met. The ov erall utilization of the 
equipped capacity of 26.89 lakh lines of  WLL systems of the Company as of 
March 2005 was only 16.28 la kh lines i.e. 60.53 per cent. Against the equipped 
capacity of 16.90 lakh lines in the rura l areas and 9.99 lakh lines in the urban 
areas, the capacity utilisation was only 11.32 lakh lines (67 per cent) and 4.96 
lakh lines (49.6 per cent) respectively. The capacity uti lisation in different circles 
and Metro districts ranged between 35.20 per cent (Andaman and Nicobar 
Circle) and 90.07 per cent (Madhya Pradesh). The capacity utilization was below 
50 per cent in the rural areas of three ci rcles, viz., Andaman and Nicobar, 
Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh (East) and in the urban areas of 10 circles, viz., 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Orissa, Punjab, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh (East) circles. The capacity utilisation 
was more than 100 per cent in the urban areas of five circles, viz., Assam, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, North-Ea st-I and West Bengal. Audit observed 
that utilisation of the equipped capacity of the W LL systems remained largely 
unsatisfactory mainly due to deficienc ies in planning and procurement, as 
discussed in paragraphs 1.9 and 1.11 earlier. Besides,  poor network coverage 
and quality of service also contributed to low capacity utilization 
 
9.2 On being asked as to why & when t he initial need was felt for expansion of 
the WLL project over its existing capacity, the company submitted: - 
 
“Initially BSCs and BTSs for rural applications were procured with capacity 
of 5000 and 500 lines with provision for expansion up to 10000 and 1000 
lines respectively.  There was huge waiting list of 21.66 lakh lines as on 
1.7.2001 in the rural areas of the count ry.  Initially only 1200 SDCA out of 
2642 were planned to be provided with WLL BTSs.   Some of the SDCAs 
are having large geographical areas and different terrains where a single 
WLL BTS is insufficient to provide full coverage.  In addition to these 
aspects for optimum and economical ut ilization of existing WLL systems 
and to meet the target of telephone on demands it was decided to expand 
the existing BTSs to 1000 lines and BSCs to 10000 lines, besides 
additional procurement of BSCs and BTSs.” 
 
9.3 On being asked about the policy formulated by t he Corporate Office while 
issuing instructions to the Circles for expansion of the exis ting capacity, the 
company submitted that:- 
 
 “Prior to issue of order for exp ansion of WLL equipment all the circles 
were instructed to give their requir ement of WLL systems for expansion of 
existing WLL capacity. Based on the ac tual requirements from the circles 

 
 
and keeping in view the ge ographical area of  SDCAs, difficult terrains in 
the SDCAs and waiting list, etc. order for expansio n of WLL were placed 
with the vendors. It was fu rther stressed that prio rity should be given to 
VPTs, replacement of MARR,  waiting list, etc. in specific SDCA before 
finalizing the expansion/additional requirement on WLL system.” 
 
9.4 The Company was asked to furnish their justification on the observation of 
the Audit that for the year  2002-03, the unutilized capacities of the existing WLL 
exchanges were not consider ed by the Corporate Offi ce while drawing up the 
overall expansion plan. In reply, the Company submitted that the Corporate 
Office has always kept in mind while considering ex pansion of WLL equipment 
that the existing unutilized capacity is utiliz ed for future programmes.  In certain 
cases the expansion of W LL systems with unutilized capacity is necessitated 
considering the technical utilizations on account of geographic and difficult terrain 
situations in the specified SDCAs.  
 
9.5 When asked under what circumstanc es few circles like Bihar, Haryana, 
Jharkhand etc. were allowed to expand their existing capacity when already large 
amount of unutilized capacity was available with them, the reply of the company 
was:- 
 
 “Circles like Bihar, Jharkhand were allowed for expansion of existing WLL 
technology as large number of uncover ed villages were st ill available in 
these circles requiring telecom facilities as per commitment of the 
government besides keeping the antici pated demand of telephones in the 
coming years.  There was huge waiting list in some of the states like Bihar 
with 58164 and Haryana with 60379.  The expansion on the capacity were 
also kept in mind in order to m eet the time bound programmes set by 
USOF for provision of VPTs besides  the replacement of 141233 MARR 
based VPTs in accordance with the terms  & conditions of the agreement.  
The expansion also depends on geographica l terrains, etc. in particular 
SDCA which may need more number of WLL BTSs for full coverage.      It 
can be seen from the table that most of the capacity has been utilized/over 
utilized.  As on 31.7.2006 WLL capacity available and utilized in these 
states is as under:- 
  
Circle WLL Capacity Working 
Connection 
Percentage 
Bihar 1,31,000 1,19,560 91.26 
Jharkhand 63,500 43,363 68.28 
Haryana 37,800 49,674 131.41 
 
 
9.6 When asked about the efforts made by the Corporate Office in assessing 
the existing capacity/utilized capacity and additional requirement of expansion of 
the capacity in respect of each of the circles, it was submitted that: 

 
 
 “There was huge waiting list in rural areas  of the circles at that time.  To 
wipe out the waiting list and make telephone on demand, steps for 
expansion of the WLL system were taken.  However expansion equipment 
was procured on submission of receipt of requirements from the circles, 
which had undergone a signal survey keeping in view the waiting list, 
commitment of USOF, etc.  The expans ion on the capacity were also kept 
in mind in order to meet the ti me bound programmes set by USOF for 
provision of VPTs besides the replacement of 1,41,233 MARR based 
VPTs in accordance with t he terms & conditions of the agreement.  The 
expansion also depends on geographical terrains, etc. in particular SDCA, 
which may need more number of WLL BTSs for full coverage. “    
 
9.7 The Company was asked to state w hether the Company/individual circles 
took into consideration the envisaged gr owth of the com pany’s own landline 
service and Cellular Mobile Telephone Service while projecting demand for 
capacity expansion of their WLL syst ems for the years 2001-02 to 2004-05 and 
also the  instructions/guidelines if any issued in this regard to different circles, the 
Company submitted:- 
  
 “The planning of WLL in urban areas was primarily with the objective to 
provide telephone connections in technically non-feasible (TNF) areas, to 
give limited mobility, for faster ro ll-out with negligible maintenance and to 
counter threat from existing private operators.  On the other hand planning 
in rural areas for WLL, the stress was mainly to provide VPTs, 
Replacement of MARR VPTs, clear the waiting list and to meet scattered 
demand in remote areas. While planning WLL equipments it was 
envisaged that growth of WLL should progressively reduce the demand for 
landline connections and subsequently its related equipment. However, 
while WLL was being planned as alternat ive to landline service, mobile 
services were planned simultaneously with full mobility.  These being two 
different categories of services with different types of facilities will serve 
different segments of the customers as  such these two different services 
can not be considered together.” 
 
9.8 When asked whether the company fo rmulated any strategy for ensuring 
optimum utilization of the equipped capac ity of its WLL systems and whether the 
same was followed scrupulously in the pr esent case, the Company stated that 
most of the WLL equipment is deployed in rural areas where demand is scattered 
and loading of the system is expected to be much less.  However, the present 
loading in the rural area has already crossed 76% on country basis as on 31 st 
July, 2006. Present status of capacity ut ilization in rural and urban areas is 76% 
and 42% respectively. 
 
9.9 Regarding the installa tion capacity vis-à-vis t he demand, the Company 
furnished the following information:- 
 

 
 
 “The growth of capacity of WLL equipment and WLL connections   
indicating a continuous increase in the demand of the WLL can be seen in 
the table and chart below: 
 
As on WLL Capacity  
WLL Connections 
31.3.2003 7,34,000 5,15,919 
31.3.2004 22,23,450 9,58,792 
31.3.2005 26,89,400 16,28,111 
31.3.2006 39,75,410 25,72,525 
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
3000000
3500000
4000000
WLL Capacity WLL
Connections
31.3.2003
31.3.2004
31.3.2005
31.3.2006
 
The above graph clearly indicates that there is a steep  growth in demand 
of WLL connections.  It is expected that  built in capacity up to a certain 
period is mostly being utilised within the next 6 to 12 months.” 
  
 
9.10 On the observation of the Audit  that  for the year 200 2-03, the unutiliz ed  
capacities of the existing WLL exchanges were not  considered  by the Company   
while drawing  up the over all expansion plans, the BSNL has  stated that in 
certain cases the expansion  with unutilized capacity is necessitated  considering 
the technical utilization on account of geogr aphic and difficu lt  ter rain situations. 
The Company was asked to explain it wit h illustrations. The com pany submitted 
as under:- 
 
“The expansion of WLL has been taken mainly for providing the coverage 
which also result into capacity addition. Since very large geogr aphical 
area need to be cov ered to meet t he sc attered demand in rural areas , 
large no. of BTSs were planned and c ommissioned. Howev er these 
capacities are being utilised progressively. The present capacity utilization 
in rural areas is more than 70%  whic h is optimum. Out of total 47 lakh 
lines capacity of WLL, 32lakh lines capacity is in rural areas.”  
 
9.11 When ask ed on what basis was it dec ided to expand the capacity in the 
urban areas during April 2005  to December 2006 when the already  existing 
capacity was grossly under utilized (42%  only) it was stated that BSNL has  

 
 
planned to provide WLL equ ipment for all SDCAs in cluding urban areas by 
deploying at least 3 BTS per  SDCA on an average fo r full coverage in all the 
SDCAs of the country. Priority for Capac ity expansion in urban areas during 2005 
to Dec. 2006 was given to those area s which were without WLL coverage, 
whereas no expansion of existing WLL equ ipment in urban areas has been made.  
However BSNL has planned to provide full coverage by WLL in urban areas with 
latest MSC based CDMA equipment with a ll value added service like SMS, high 
speed internet, pre-paid services etc. It is  expected with availability of value added 
services, the loading in urban areas will improve.  
 
9.12 Regarding the benchmark fo r capacity utilization, the Company informed the 
committee that 70% loading of CDMA W LL system is considered optimum loading 
of the system.  The expans ion of the equipment is cons idered after achieving 70% 
overall loading of the system.  However individual BTS can be loaded even more 
than 100% depending upon actual traffic of t he BTS. The loading of WLL in rural 
areas has continuously been around 70% and hence cannot be termed as under 
utilization of capacity.  However in urban areas, t he WLL system was deployed 
basically to clear the TNF cases, to pr ovide connections at a faster rate, low 
maintenance cost and to counter strate gic threat from the growing private 
operators. All these fa ctors contribute, towards low ca pacity utilization of WLL in 
urban areas. 
   
9.13 On being asked as to  what initiatives have been taken to increase the low 
capacity utilization particularly in urban areas, the Company submitted:- 
 
 “ To improve the loading in urban areas, now IS  95 CDMA equipment has 
been planned to be replaced with MSC based CDMA 2000 1X WLL system.  
The order for this purpose has already been placed and likely to be 
commissioned in year 2007-08.  The equipm ent has all kind of value added 
services like prepaid services high speed internet, SMS etc. It is expected 
that with availability of all value added services , the loading in urban areas 
will improve.” 
 
9.14 When asked by what time thes e bench marks are expected to be 
achieved,it was stated that by providing MSC based CDMA 2000 1X equipment in 
urban areas with valu e added services and improvin g the coverage by putting 
additional BTSs etc. the lo ading will increase to 70%  progressively during 2007-
08. 
 
9.15 Regarding the quantum of losses being incurred by the company on 
account of low utilization of equipped capacity, the Co mmittee were informed that 
with USOF subsidy and reve nue generated, there is no loss in rural areas.  
However there may be some loss in urban ar eas due to low utiliz ation of capacity.  
However overall WLL can be considered as profit mainly taking into account the 
USOF support already received. 

 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 The Committee note that In order to ensure proper returns on the 
investment made in a project, it is im perative that the equipped capacity of 
the project is optimally utilised and all prescribed targets for capacity 
utilisation are met. The Audit has poi nted out that the capacity utilisation 
was 60.53 per cent against the total equipped capacity of 26.89 lakh lines of 
WLL systems as of March 2005 mainly on account of deficiencies in 
planning, procurements, network cover age and poor quality of service.  
The Company formulated the plans for launching of the WLL telephone 
service and its subsequent expansion  with inadequate assessment of 
demand and requirement and did not consider identification of areas based 
on population and trade statistics, unut ilised capacity, presence of private 
operators and the envisaged growth  of its other telephone services. 
Expansion of the capacity during 2002-03 to 2004-05 in seven circles 
despite underutilisation of the exist ing capacity, led to injudicious 
expenditure of Rs 108.64 crore on expansion. 
 
 The Company on the above-me ntioned audit observations has 
submitted that the planning of WLL in urban areas was primarily to counter 
the threat from existing private operato rs and in rural areas the stress was 
mainly to provide VPTs, replacement of MARR VPTs, clear the waiting list 
and to meet scattered demands in re mote areas. Regarding the further 
expansion of the WLL service inspite of the existence of untilised capacity, 

 
 
the Company has stated that this has been done mainly for providing 
coverage in very large geographical area needed to be covered to meet the 
scattered demands in rural areas. The expansion of the capacity was also 
done to meet the time-bound programmes set by USOF.  Regarding the 
latest position of the capacity utilizat ion, the Committee has been informed 
that for rural areas the present loadi ng has already crossed 76% and for 
Urban areas it is 42%. The Company has also justified the expansion on the 
ground that the existing unutilized capacity is being progressively utilized 
for future programmes.   
 
 The Committee observe that although the capacity utilization for 
WLL service in the rural areas is almost 76%, it is very low for urban areas 
which is only about 42%.  The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Company must adopt appropriate measures like upgrading the existing 
technology and providing value-adde d services like SMS, High-speed 
internet, pre-paid services etc. to make WLL services more attractive so as 
to increase its capacity utilization in the urban areas also.  This whole 
exercise must be conducted in a time-bound manner. The Committee 
further recommend that the Comp any should consider unutilized 
capacities, presence of other private operators and envisaged growth of its 
own landline and cellular mobile telephone services while forecasting 
demand and requirements in the future . The Company should also prepare 
appropriate strategies for ensuring optimum utilisation of the equipped 
capacity of its WLL systems 

 
 
CHAPTER – X 
 
ACHIEVEMENT OF PLANNED TARGETS 
 
10.1 The annual plan targets of replacem ent of faulty MARR VPTs by WLL 
systems were 40,000, 80,000 and 64,42 4 for the years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 
2004-05 against which the Comp any replaced 43,430 (109 per cent), 36,049 (45 
per cent) and 28973 (45 per cent) MARR VPTs respectively. The Management 
stated (August 2005) that the targets had  been fixed in anticipation of the 
availability of WLL equi pment but equipment could not be made available and 
that the initial procurement  of equipment was not sufficient for covering even 50 
per cent of the 2,642 SDCAs of the country. They also stated that MARR VPTs 
were scattered throughout the length and breadth of the country including remote 
and far-flung areas. The reply was not acceptable, as these aspects should have 
been addressed adequately at the time of finalising the targets.  
 
10.2 In the annual plans, the targets fix ed for installation of new VPTs were 
144771, 39439, 7135 and 8061 for 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 
against which the achievement was 70755, 36929, 4737 and 9310 respectively. 
There were shortfalls in achievement of targets by 51 per cent, 6 per cent and 34 
per cent during 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04, respectively.    The Management 
stated that the targets could not be achieved due to delay in supply of equipment 
by the suppliers and shortage of FWTs besides local problems in certain areas 
such as insurgency. 
 
10.3 The Company signed (November, 2004) an agreement with the USO 
Fund for providing VPTs to 66,822 villages in 14 circles•. According to the terms 
and conditions of the agreement, at least 20 per cent of the VPTs were to be 
provided by these circles within one year from the date of agreement, a minimum 
60 per cent by the end of the second year and the remaining by the end of the 
third year. It was noticed that a total of 14,233 VPTs (21 per cent ) were provided 
during the first year ended during October  2005. There was overall achievement 
of the first year target. However, it was observed that only six circles viz., Assam, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pr adesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan could 
achieve their individual targets but ei ght circles, viz., Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir, J harkhand, Orissa, NE-I, NE-II and 
Uttaranchal failed to achieve the same. The shortfall in achievements of the first 
year target by these eight circles was 3.2 per cent , 31.15 per cent, 39.65 per 
cent, 91.15 per cent, 100 per cent, 81.90 per cent, 90.35 per cent and 74.50 per 
cent, respectively. 
 
10.4 On being asked about the time fr ames fixed for providing telephone 
connectivity in the entire country, it was submitted to the Committee that: - 
 

 
 
 “ As per NTP 99, time frame was fixed to provide telephone facility in all 
the 607491 revenue villages of t he country by the end of 9 th Five Year 
Plan i.e. 2002, including 97806 VPTs to be provided by the 6 private basic 
service operators.  This condition was stipulated by DoT at the time of 
issue of the licence agreement to private basic service operators during 
1997-98.  All these VPTs were to be provided by 2002.  However, very 
meager percentage of 0.86 was achieved by these private operators i.e. 
only 846 VPTs were provided by March, 2002 and by May, 2003, 10698 
VPTs.  In the mean time  BSNL, the then DoT, continued to provide VPTs 
in some of these areas also.  Wi th the formation of USOF during 2002, 
BSNL was assigned the work of provisioning of VPTs in 66822 villages by 
the end of November, 2007.  Out of  this, BSNL has already provided 
38795 VPTs and 28027 are yet to be provided on WLL technology.  
Around 11038  VPTs are to be provided on DSPTs. 
 
10.5 On being asked about the  the present status of achievement of targets, 
the company stated that:- 
 
 “BSNL has been entrusted with the wo rk of replacement of 1,41,223 
MARR VPTs.  Out of these, 1, 11,221 MARR VPTs have already been 
replaced by 31.07.2006.  Balanced 30,002 MARR VPTs are planned to be 
replaced in the current financial year  itself. A total of 1,56,870 MARR 
VPTs have already been replaced by BSN L in accordance with the terms 
and conditions of agreement with USOF. “  
 
10.6 On being asked about the reas ons for non-procurement of adequate 
number of WLL equipm ents for meeting the planned targets for replacement of 
MARR VPTs by WLL systems, the Committee were informed that some of the 
MARR VPTs are located in extreme remote and isolated villages.  These villages 
are not covered by any of the existing WLL equipment.  Additional WLL BTSs are 
required for full coverage of the SDCAs, wh ich will help in replacement of these 
MARR VPTs.  As per present policy of BSNL on an average three BTSs are 
required to cover one SDCA for which the procurement of equipment is in 
process.  It is expected that once the additional equipment is procured, the 
remaining MARR VPTs shall be replac ed progressively during the current 
financial year 2006-07.   
 
10.7 As per the observation of the Audit in para 1.13.1.2 , as against the targets 
of installation of 144771, 39439, 7135 and 8061 new VPTs during 2001-02, 
2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05, the actual achievement was 70755, 36929, 4737 
and 9310 respectively.  There were shortfalls in achievement of targets by 51 per 
cent, 6 per cent and 34 per cent  during 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 
respectively.  The management stated that the targets could not be achieved due 
to delay in supply of equipment by the suppliers and shortage of FWTs besides 
local problems in certain areas such as insurgency. In this context , the 

 
 
Committee were informed that  the present status of achievement of these 
targets as follows :- 
 
 “As on 31.07.2006 BSNL has already pr ovided VPTs in 5,39,278 villages.  
29,173 villages out of 52,639 villages awarded by USOF to BSNL have 
already been provided with VPTs.  The remaining 23,466 villages are 
planned to be provided with telephone facilities progressively by 
November 2007 in accordance with the terms & cond itions of the 
agreement.  Around 14,000 remote and is olated villages, which cannot be 
covered by any terrestrial technol ogy, are planned to be provided with 
Digital Satellite Phone Terminals (D SPTs) progressively by November, 
2007 in accordance with the terms & conditions of the agreement.”   
 
10.8 On being asked as to how many  new WLL VPTs were planned during 
each of the years 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 in the insurgency 
affected areas and what is the actual achievement there aga inst the Company 
informed that VPTs are planned for the whol e circle irrespective of insurgency 
affected areas in the concerned circle .  Most of the VPTs now are being 
planned/provided on WLL technology.  Thus  VPTs are also being provided in 
insurgency-affected areas as well where t here is no resistance from the public 
and custodian are available to take the VPTs for the benefit of villagers. 
 
10.9 On being asked  why adequate numbers of FWTs were not procured for 
meeting the targets for installation of new VPTs it was submitted that – 
 
 “At the time of procurement of 6 lakh lines of WLL equipment, equal 
number of FWTs were also procured and distributed to the circles, in the 
proportion of number of lines allocated to the circles. So adequate number 
of FWTs were procured for VPTs, however, as stated above the shortfall  
was mainly  due to villages falling  in extremists affected areas, etc.” 
 
10.10 The Committee were also inform ed that prior to the launch of WLL 
Service, as on April, 2000, 2,32, 886 villages were without any telephone facility 
in the country. As regards VPTs based on MARR Technology, the Committee 
were informed that at the time of disco ntinuance of MARR technology during the 
year 2000, 2,11,313  MARR based VPTs were working through out the country.  
Around 14755 MARR based VPTs are still av ailable in the c ountry which are 
being replaced. Around 1,21, 610 MARR VPTs have been r eplaced almost all by 
WLL technology as on 31.12.2006 in the rural areas. Efforts are being made to 
complete the replacement of MARR VPTs  during the current year itself.  
Additional equipment to meet the commi tment for USO Fund activities has 
already been ordered on M/s. ITI.  
 
10.11 Regarding the  extent  of coverage  of villages under WLL Service  since 
its launch, the Company submitted that  290697 villages, including MARR VPT 
replacement, have already been provided  with WLL services up to 31.12.2006. 

 
 
16989 villages are still to be provided with WLL services in accordance with the 
agreement signed with USOF.  In addition to these villages, 11038 villages which 
cannot be covered by any existing terrest rial technology have also been planned 
to be provided with DSPTs.  In accor dance with these terms and conditions of 
the agreement signed with USOF , all these remaining villa ges are planned to be 
covered by November, 2007. 
 
10.12 Regarding  the present st atus of waiting  lists for WLL telephone Services 
in various  rural areas on the country and t he time by which the   waiting lists are 
expected  to be cleared, it was informed that the waiting li st for telephone 
connections including WLL telephone services  in the various rural areas of the 
country is 7.37 lakh  as on 31.12.2006.  The clearance of waiting list is 
continuous process.  The present waiting list is expected to be cleared during  
2007-08. 
 
10.13 As regards the extent of covera ge in urban areas, the Company informed 
that the coverage and capac ity in urban areas has been continuously increasing 
from 56000 lines to 15 lakh lines as on t oday.  BSNL has also ordered additional 
5 lakh lines of MSC based CDMA 2000 1X system for replacement of the older 
IS 95 CDMA WLL system.  
 
10.14 Regarding the role played by th e private service providers by way of 
mandatory requirement for providing teleco m   connectivity   and   replacement  
of  VPTs   based   on   MARR technology in the rura l and far flung areas of the 
country, the ministry informed the Committee that:- 
  
 “The private basic service operators who were granted licences in July, 
2001 and onward stipulate coverage of Short Distance Charging Areas 
(SDCA) in equal proportion in each phase  in each category of urban, 
semi-urbanland rural SDCAs in a service area.  All the old Basic Service 
Operators and almost all the private basic service operators who were 
granted licences in July, 2001 and onwa rds, have migrated to Unified 
Access (basic and cellular) Service License in November 2003, as per 
Guidelines NO. 808-26/2—3 – VAS dat ed the 11/11/03, whereby the 
Rollout Obligations were changed to as follows: 
   
In the metros 90% of the service area shall be covered within one 
year of the effective date of the lice nse.  In Telecom Ci rcles, atleast 10% 
of District Headquarters (D HQs) will be covered in the first year of the 
effective date of the li cense and 50% of the DHQ s will be covered in the 
first three years of the effective da te of the license. The Licensee shall 
also be permitted to cove r any other town in the district in lieu of the 
DHQ.  Coverage of a DH Q/town means that alte ast 90% of the area 
bounded by the Municipal limits should get the required st reet as well as 
in building coverage.  The further expansion over and above 50% of the 
DHQs depends on the licensee’s busi ness decision.  There is no 

 
 
requirement of mandatory coverage of rural areas.  District Headquarter 
shall be taken as on the effective date of the lic ense.  The requirements 
of Universal Access in rural areas wo uld now be met from the Universal 
Service Obligation Fund and  Access Deficit Charge. 
    
 The status of provisioning of VP Ts by old BSOs and coverage of 
SDCAs by new BSOs in October 20 03 are enclosed as Annexure – I 
and II respectively.” 
 
 10.15 The committee enquired from the Ministry about the present status of 
achievement of telecom coverage in terms of the number of villages covered and 
yet to be covered and the time by which all the villages in the country are likely to 
be covered, the Ministry informed the Committee that:- 
 
“Provision of telephones in rural areas are not mandatory for private 
operators. However, all the operators have to pay  5% of Adjusted gross 
Revenues (AGR) as USO levy. In turn, the USO fund is used for 
expansion of rural network in whic h private operators also play part.  
Agreements were signed with M/s BSNL in November, 2004 to provide 
subsidy support for provision of VPTs in 66,822 no. of uncovered villages 
in the country excluding those vill ages having population less than 100, 
those lying in deep forests and those affected with insurgency. Out of 
these, 14183 remotely located villages  are to be provided with VPTs on 
Satellite based technology (Digital Satellite Phone Terminals). A total of 
39,741 VPTs have been provided till January 2007 and the remaining 
27,081 villages are likely to be provided with VPTs by November 2007.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
 The Committee note that the Uni versal Service Obligations (USO) 
under New Telecom Policy (NTP- 99) envisaged providing telephones on 
demand, besides telephone coverage of all the villages in the country by 
the end of the Ninth Five Year Plan i.e. 2002.  Based on these obligations, 
Department of Telecommunications decided in August 2000 to replace all 
faulty VPTs working on the Multi Access Radio Relay (MARR) System by 
the WLL System by the end of 2002 an d to provide new VPTs only through 
WLL.  In pursuance of this objecti ve, the BSNL had set out a target of 
providing one Wireless-in-Local Loop (W LL) system in each of the 2,642 
Short Distance Charging Areas (SDCAs ) in the country till 2001-02.  
However, the audit scrutiny has revealed that the targets so set out had not 
been achieved and the Company has failed to achieve the annual plan 
targets fixed for replacement of faulty MARR based  VPTs for the years 
2003-04 and 2004-05 and for installation of new VPTs for the years 2001-02, 
2002-03 and 2003-04.  In this regard, the Committee note from the latest 
information furnished by the Company that out of the the total replacement 
of 1,41,223 MARR VPTs, 1, 11,221 MARR VPTs have been replaced by 
31.07.2006 and the balance 30,002 MARR  VPTs are planned to be replaced 
in the current financial year itself.  As regards providing new VPTs based 
on WLL Technology, the Committee not e that as on 31 July, 2006, the 
Company has provided VPTs in 5,39,278 villages and the remaining villages 
are planned to be provided with te lephone facilities by November, 2007.  

 
 
Even in the year 2007, th ere is a huge waiting list of  7.37 lakh for telephone 
connections including WLL telephone services in various rural areas of the 
country and the Company is planning to clear it by the year 2007-08.  The 
Company has tried to justify their under-performance by stating that - there 
was delayed supply of the WLL equipment; the MARR VPTs were scattered 
throughout the length and breadth of th e country including remote and far-
flung areas; problem of insurgencies in certain areas etc.  
 
Analyzing the reasons for non-achi evement of the planned targets, 
the Committee feel that primarily, the Company failed to fix realistic targets 
for year-wise achievement due to deficiencies in planning, creation of 
infrastructure, procurement, capacity utilization, operational performance.  
It was imperative on the part of th e Company to plan the launch of WLL 
telephone service and its future expansions very carefully and these issues 
should have been addressed prior to the setting up of the targets.  However 
this did not happen to be the case and targets for the years 2001- 02 to 
2003-04 could not be fully achieved in  one respect or the other. No 
information has been brought to th e notice of the Committee which may 
indicate that any serious efforts were ma de either by the Government or by 
the Company for achievement of the planned targets.  The Committee 
observe that while some circles manage d to over perform, a majority of 
Circles have under perfor med. This indicates that  there was lack of 
coordination and monitoring on the part of the Corporate Office.  Another 
factor which has contributed to th e non-achievement of targets envisaged 

 
 
in NTP-99 is the under-performance of private service providers in fulfilling 
their part of the social commitment of government of providing 97806 VPTs 
in the rural areas by the year 2002.  This condition was stipulated by the 
DoT at the time of issue of license agreement to private basic service 
operators who could actually provide only 846 VPTs by March, 2002 and 
10698 VPTs by May, 2003.  This happene d because these Basic Service 
Operators were subsequently allowed to migrate to a new license namely, 
Unified Access (basic and cellular)  Service License in November 2003 
which did not carry the requirement of mandatory coverage of rural areas.  
The Committee attribute the failure of  achievement of targets on both  the 
Government as well as the BSNL and  recommend that all out efforts must 
be made by the BSNL to achieve the targets of complete replacement of 
faulty MARR VPTs, installation of new VPTs and clearance of the existing 
waiting list in the rural areas within the specified schedule fixed by them 
i.e. by November 2007.  The Commi ttee further recommend that the 
Government on their part instead of re maining a mute spectator, also see 
to it that this issue of national impor tance is fully achieved in a time bound 
manner by playing an active monitoring role over the implementing 
agencies.   
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – XI 
 
ACCUMULATION OF REVENUE ARREARS ON ACCOUNT OF 
SHORT/DELAYED BILLING 
 
11.1 The Audit in para 1.14 has m ade the following observations:- 
 
1.14 SYSTEM OF BILLING, COLLECTION AND ACCOUNTING OF REVENUE 
 
Billing, collection and accounting of revenue in respect of all the telephone 
services of the Company were done by  the Telephone Reve nue Accounting 
(TRA) Branch in each SSA. The functions of the TRA Branch were computerized 
and mainly two types of software viz., ‘DO TSOFT’ and ‘TRICHUR’ were used for 
the purpose. An efficient and effective system of billing, collection and accounting 
of telephone revenue would be  based on the following:  timely receipt of advice 
notes from the commercial wing after comple tion of activities relating to opening, 
shifting and closure of connections, so t hat bills are issued i mmediately; prompt 
receipt of meter readings from exchanges and billing of the sa me without delay; 
immediate stopping of billing after disconnection and closure of connections; 
proper monitoring of outstanding revenue. Billing, collection and accounting of 
the WLL service and the landline serv ice of the Company were being done 
together. Due to non-maintenance of separate year-wise details of revenue 
billed, collected and outstanding in respect of the WLL service the overall return 
on the investment made in th is service could not be ascertained. However, Audit 
scrutiny revealed various inadequacies in billing, collection and accounting of 
revenue with respect to WLL connection s as discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
1.14.1 Accumulation of revenue arrears due to delays in submission of 
completed advice notes to TRA branch 
 
Rules stipulate that completed advi ce notes should be forwarded by the 
Commercial branch to the TRA branch within a week after providing the 
connections to enable the TRA branch to iss ue bills to the customers. Scrutiny of 
relevant records revealed that in 69 SSAs under 19 circles, completed advice 
notes pertaining to 1,858 WLL tel ephone connections during the period 
September 2002 to July 2005were not re ceived within the st ipulated period in 
TRA branch.   As a result, 19200 bills could not be issued to the concerned 
customers, which led to accumulation of  revenue arrears amount ing to Rs 1.00 
crore.  
 
1.14.2 Short billing of WLL connections 
 
Audit observed that in the Agra SSA under the UP (West) Circle, bills were 
issued only for 48843 WLL connections as against 52120 working connections 
during the year 2004-05. This led to short billing of Rs 3.28 lakh in respect of 

 
 
3277 WLL connections. On this being pointed out th e Management stated that 
the billing was not done due to non-receipt of advice notes. Similarly in J & K 
Circle, bills in respect of 4,399 and 5,025 W LL connections were issued against 
7,119 and 14,508 working connections dur ing 2003-04 and 004-05, respectively. 
This resulted in non-billin g of Rs 2.23 crore and Rs 7.14 crore during the years 
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively.  
 
1.14.3 Delayed billing of WLL connections 
 
The Company while notifyi ng (February 2001) the tariff for the WLL fixed 
and mobile services, fixed the billing cycle for this service as a monthly one. 
Audit, however, observed that in t he Hazaribagh SSA under the Jharkhand 
Circle, bills were issued after delays of  two to six months during the year 2004-
05. In the Haridwar SSA under the Uttaranchal Circle, bimonthly bills were issued 
for the initial period of one year (August 2003 to August 2004) and subsequently, 
the bills were issued monthly. Similarl y, in Baripada and Cuttack SSAs under the 
Orissa Circle, bills were issued bim onthly instead of on m onthly basis. The 
Management of the Hazaribagh SSA stat ed (July 2005) that the delay was 
mainly due to non-receipt of meter readings in time and failure of the computer 
system and the Management of the SSAs of the Orissa Circle accepted the 
failure. 
 
1.14.4 Non monitoring of bills of heavy callers 
 
According to instructions (March 2001), customers making over 3,000 
calls in a month were to be treated as heavy callers. Such subscribers were to be 
identified in each SSA and a cell created for ensuring timely billing and collection, 
besides offering better customer care to  them. Test checks in seven SSAs under 
the Assam, Bihar and Orissa circles revealed that Rs 20.58 lakh was outstanding 
against heavy callers and no separate monitoring was being done by these 
SSAs. 
 
1.14.5 Heavy outstanding against WLL customers 
 
The corporate office issued (November  2000) instructions to all the SSAs 
to sensitize themselves early to the signi ficance and criticality of timely revenue 
billing and collection. It al so emphasized the need to take concrete steps to 
increase the revenue of the SSAs and to  reduce their failures through close 
monitoring. Audit noticed that in 35 SSAs in five circles and all SSAs in eight 
circles, the percentage of collection of revenue over the amount billed during 
2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 was 65.60 per cent, 64.88 per cent and 50.17 per 
cent respectively.  The percentage of outstanding calculated at the minimum rate 
of rent of Rs 100 per connection revenue showed an increasing trend. At the end 
of March 2005, the total outstanding agai nst WLL customers in the above SSAs 
was Rs 113.88 crore. 
 

 
 
1.14.6 Non-closing of WLL connecti ons even after 90 days of their 
disconnections 
 
Rules provide that a disconnect ed telephone should be closed 
permanently after a period of 90 days from  the date of disconnection. Thus no 
bills for rent should be generated thereafte r. Audit scrutiny in 20 SSAs under the 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Or issa, Rajasthan and 
UP (East) circles revealed that WLL c onnections were not permanently closed 
after 90 days of the disconnections and bills for rentals continued to be issued to 
the customers. It was furt her observed in 12 SSAs of the Jharkhand, Rajasthan 
and Orissa circles that closing advice not es were not issued by the respective 
Commercial branches even after the l apse of 90 days and the TRA branches 
continued to issue bills. This resulted in issue of wrong bills for Rs 22.36 lakh in 
respect of 1,663 cases of closed connections in these SSAs. 
 
1.14.7 Non availability of automatic disconnection facilities in billing 
software 
 
Rules provide that a telephone bill should be paid within 15 days from the 
date of issue. In cases of non-payment, the telephones in respect of individual 
customers were liable to be disconnected on  the fortieth day after the date of 
issue of bills. A test checks of reco rds of 19 SSAs under the Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Uttaranchal circles revealed that the 
automatic disconnection facilit y was not available in their billing software. Audit 
further observed that in 30 SSAs under ei ght circles, viz., Assam, Chhattisgarh, 
Orissa, Rajasthan, Bihar, UP (east), Uttaranchal and all the SSAs in the Madhya 
Pradesh Circle and Chennai Telephone Dis trict, disconnections of telephone 
connection were not done on time even w hen two to 19 bills (between 2001-02 
and 2004-05) were pending. This led to ac cumulation of outstanding revenue to 
the tune of Rs 42 crore against WLL customers 
 
11.2 Explaining briefly the functions of the Telephone Revenue Accounting 
(TRA) Branch in each SSA, it s accountability to Corporate office & monitoring of 
its functions, it was submitted by t he Company that TRA unit of a SSA is 
responsible mainly for billi ng and Collection. I ssue of bills, collection-monitoring, 
billing complaint handling, issue of  reminder for payment, preparation of 
disconnection list and dispatch to  each exchange for implementing 
disconnections, preparation of defaulter list and pursuit thereafter, preparation of 
revenue sub-ledger and reporting to circle office, are the main functions of TRA 
unit in SSA. Circle office is monitori ng performance of TRA branch of each SSA, 
which appears in the Sub ledger in t he form of performance parameters like- 
collection efficiency, total amount billed for, revenue per  user, outstanding etc. 
Corporate office of BSNL is monitori ng revenue performance of each circle, and 
circles are monitoring revenue performa nce of their SSAs. Performances of 
SSAs are reflected in the revenue sub le dger of each Circl e. Performance of 

 
 
Circles is reviewed at corporate office level, and in case of any shortcoming 
noticed at circle’s part, necessary instructions are issued. 
 
11.3 On being asked as to how  it is ensured that bills are timely issued by the 
TRA Branch and what monitoring mechanism is prevalent in the Company to 
ensure that all customers are billed in  time and the billed amounts are also 
recovered in time, the Company subm itted that all SSAs have already been 
instructed to issue bills before 14th of the next month and disconnection has also 
to be carried out after 35 days of issue of  bills, in case of non-payment. Circle 
office is monitoring timely the issue of bills and disconnection of telephones. 
 
11.4 On the issue of revenue loss on acc ount of short billing and delayed billing 
of WLL connections since 2002, the Company has opi ned that there is no 
revenue loss due to short billing /delayed billing. As soon as the opening advice 
note is received from commercial/operation branch, bills are issued and recovery 
is made. 
  
11.5 Regarding the present st atus of recovery of revenue arrears incurred on 
account of short billing / delayed billing,  the Committee were informed  that total 
outstanding against WLL connections( as on 31.03.05) is approx. Rs. 111 Cr. It is 
difficult to ascertain exact outstanding amount d ue to factors like short 
billing/delayed billing and amount recovered against such outstanding as no 
segregation of this kind is being made in the total outstanding amount. 
 
11.6 On being asked about the reasons for short billing / delayed billing and the 
action taken by the Company against its own defaulting offici als, the Committee 
were informed that: 
 
“Main reason for short billing/ delayed billing was non-receipt of intimation 
of activation of service i.e comple ted advice note in TRA branch. Non-
receipt of meter reading, failure of bi lling hardware and software at times 
is other reason. Regarding action taken against officials, we have time and 
again issued instructions to the circle s to educate the concerned staff to 
ensure prompt billing, so  that such instances of  non/delayed billing do not 
re-occur.” 
 
11.7 It was further submitted that as mo st of the areas, say about 80% served 
by WLL technology in BSNL circles falls in Rural areas and ar e located very far 
from TRA office, the delivery of mess age/Dak takes time resulting delay in 
receipt of activation of service, which may cause short billing. 
 
11.8 Regarding the monitoring of Bills of heavy callers, the Company stated 
that as per instruction issued by BSNL customers making more than 3000 calls in 
a month were to be treated as  heavy callers. It is again re-iterated that for any 
amount outstanding against such subscriber s, efforts are being made to recover 

 
 
money from such defaulting subscribers. Generally company’s instructions for 
separate monitoring of billing and coll ection are adhered to by the circles. 
Separate CIC cells were formed in each SS A to provide better customer service 
to heavy callers and to monitor billing and collection. Cases pointed out by the 
audit are only isolated ones. All out e fforts are being made by department to 
recover money from defaulters. Monitoring of heavy callers is being done in each 
SSA and Circle level also. Corporate office is also sensitizing their field units 
regarding need of monitoring of billing and collect ion of heavy callers to minimize 
instances of default. 
 
11.9 Regarding the quantum of  present revenue arrears as accumulated during 
last 5 years, the Company st ated that as per report given by circles, the  total 
Outstanding revenue as on 31.03.2005 wa s Rs. 111 Cr.The revenue arrears of 
Rs. 111 crore (including o/s for bills is sued during February-05 and March-05) is 
not for a particular year/Circle, but a ccumulated over last 5-6 years and more 
than 330 SSAs.  The main reasons for accumulation of arrears is due to 
competition in the telecom sector and as such subscribers have the options to 
shifts towards other operators/ service after keeping outstanding amount.  Now, 
the disconnection of telecom services incl uding WLL has not much effect to the 
subscribers due to easy availability of services from other oper ators within a very 
short period.  However, time and again, instructions have been issued to take all 
necessary steps to realize/reduce the outstanding dues of BSNL including WLL 
service. However, it is pertinent to m ention that Rs. 111 cror e is about 15% of 
amount billed for during the period (i.e . about 85% of amount billed has been 
realized).   There is marked improvement  in collection efficiency from 79% for 
2001-2002 to 85% for 2004-2005.  As per i ndustrial norms this is more than 
satisfactory performance. 
 
11.10 On being asked about the existing inst ructions for recovery of outstanding 
arrears, the Company submitted that: 
  
“1.   As per Rule 178 Telecom M anual Vol. XIV on 5th of the month 
following the month of   closure of a connection, the name of the 
subscriber who has defaulted payment is included in Defaulter List 
prepared separately for Government and Private Subscribers. 
 
2.  Notices in prescribed form are sent to such defaulters and 
acknowledgement thereto is watched and placed on record, if received. 
  
3.  After 15 days of issue of the not ices mentioned above, the defaulter 
list is submitted to the DE concerned, to order further course of action to 
be taken i.e., Departmental action by getting the cases pursued through PI 
or TRI or by Legal action.  
 

 
 
4.  As per Rule 187 of the Telecom Manual Vol. XIV after the 
accounting clerk has prepared the defaulter list, the same is sent to pursuit 
cell for further pursuance till the amount is realized or written off.” 
 
11.11 On being asked about  the extent of recovery of the outstanding arrears 
year-wise for the last 5 years , it was s ubmitted that no separate record for the 
recovery of outstanding arrears is ava ilable. However the outstanding arrears at 
the end of each financial year are indi cated as Opening Balance for next year. 
This gets merged with the ‘Amount B illed For during the next year and the 
Amount Realised in the next year w hen subtracted from  ABF and Opening 
Balance gives details of outstanding arrears for the next year and so on.  
 
11.12 Regarding the procedure followed for closure of connections on 
customers’ requests and non- issuance of bills therea fter, the Committee were 
informed that after receipt of request for closure of connection, the Commercial 
branch issues closure advice note. On t he basis of such closure advice note, 
balance deposit money is refunded to the customer and further billing is not 
done.  
 
11.13 Regarding the monitoring mechanism av ailable with the Corporate Office it 
was stated that Circles are addressed regularly, reports are also being asked and 
on the basis of report given by circle s, their performance being monitored and 
further course of action is also suggest ed by corporate office. Information of 
disconnection, closure and refund is being sent in monthly MI S prescribed by 
TRA and quarterly Performance Monitoring Report.  
 
11.14 Regarding the criter ia being followed by the Company for automatic 
disconnection of telephone connections on  account of non-payment of telephone 
bills and why this criteria was not followed by few circles, it was answered that 
except exempted categor y and outstanding up to a certain limit, all other 
connections having outstanding can be disc onnected automatically. Our existing 
billing packages – Dotsoft and Trichur are not having auto disconnection facility. 
Some of the circles have arranged softw are for auto disconnection facility locally. 
As CDR based billing is already in pi peline and existing software have to be 
replaced by CDR based new state of art bi lling software, with such change in 
existing billing software Auto disconnection facility would be av ailable in the new 
billing software all over Indi a. Auto disconnection facili ty is already in use in 
CMTS billing system on all India basis.  
 
11.15 On being asked whether automatic  disconnection facilities have been 
provided in the billing software to each Circle it was replied that except exempted 
category and outstanding up to a certain limit, all other connections having 
outstanding can be disconnected automatically. Our existing billing packages – 
Dotsoft and Trichur are not having auto disconnection facility. Some of the circles 
have arranged software for auto disconnection facility locally . As CDR based 
billing is already in pipeline and exis ting software have to be replaced by CDR 

 
 
based new state of art billing software, with such change in existing billing 
software Auto disconnection facility would be available in the new billing software 
all over India. Auto disconnection facility is already in use in CMTS billing system 
on all India basis . 
 
11.16 On the issue of recovery of outstanding revenue of Rs. 42 crore on 
account of non-availabilit y of the automatic disconnection facilities, the 
Committee were informed that such ty pe of segmentation of outstanding and 
monitoring is not possible at corporate office level.  Necessary monitoring and 
pursuit for realization of outstanding dues is being made for the total outstanding, 
instead of pursuing the same segment-wise. 
 
11.17 The Committee while observing t hat on one hand the BSNL is claiming 
that there is no revenue loss due to short billing/ delayed billing, on the other the 
Company has admitted that total outs tanding against WLL connection (as on 
31.3.2005) is approximately Rs. 111 crore and it is difficult to ascertain exact 
outstanding amount due to short billing/ delayed billing.  In view of this, the 
Committee desired to know as to how the Company can claim with certainty that 
there is no revenue loss on these account s in view of the above contradictory 
statements. The reply was as under: - 
 
“Outstanding does not imply revenue loss. Outstanding is created when 
bills are raised and payment is not rece ived.  This does not imply that the 
amount stated as outstanding is irrecover able or lost revenu e.  Therefore, 
the contention of giving contradictor y statement does not arise. Revenue 
loss may occur in cases of short billing/ non-billing, failure of billing system 
etc.  For this, standing instructions and systematic checks within the billing 
system are available. Standi ng instructions to the circles are available to 
educate the concerned staff to ensure prompt billing, so that such 
instances of non/delayed bi lling do not occur. In specific cases where 
officers are found lacking in their per formance action is taken as per 
rules.“ 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
  
The Committee note that according to Audit, there were many 
inadequacies in the billing, collection and accounting of revenue practices 
followed by the BSNL with respect to  WLL connections. These deficiencies 
include accumulation of revenue arr ears due to delays in submission of 
completed advice notes; short billi ng of WLL connections; delayed billing 
of WLL connections; non-monitoring of bills of heavy callers; heavy 
outstanding against WLL customers; non-closing of WLL connections after 
their disconnection and non-availability of automatic disconnection 
facilities etc. According to the A udit, due to these short-comings, the 
percentage of outstanding revenue h as showed an increasing trend and at 
the end of March, 2005, the total outstanding against WLL customers was 
Rs.113.88 crore.  In this regard , the Committee note that as per the 
procedure followed in the Company, Telephone Revenue Accounting (TRA) 
unit of a Secondary Switching Area (SSA ) is mainly responsible for billing 
and Collection.  The main functions of TRA unit is issue of bills, collection-
monitoring, billing complaint handli ng, issue of reminder for payment, 
preparation of disconnection list a nd dispatch to each exchange for 
implementing disconnections, preparati on of defaulter list and pursuit 
thereafter, preparation of revenue sub- ledger and reporting to circle office. 
The performance of TRA branch of each SSA is monitored by the Circle 
concerned in the form of performa nce parameters like - collection 
efficiency, total amount billed for, r evenue per user, outstanding etc. The 

 
 
Corporate office of BSNL is monitoring revenue performance of each Circle 
and in case of any shortcomings necessar y instructions are issued by it. 
As per the information furnished by the Company, the total outstanding 
against WLL connections is approximately Rs.111 crore on account of 
short billing/delayed billing, non-recei pt of completed advice note in TRA 
Branch, non-receipt of meter-reading, failing of billing hardware and 
software etc. Regarding non-receipt of timely intimation to the TRA Branch, 
the Company has stated that in about 80% of areas served by WLL 
Technology, Circles fall in rural ar eas and are located very far from TRA 
office. As such the delivery of message/dak takes time. 
 The Committee note that the Company has taken a number of 
remedial measures to do away with the short-comings/deficiencies pointed 
out by the Audit so as to ensure minimum revenue arrears due to 
short/delayed billing in the future. All the SSAs have been instructed by the 
Company to issue bills before 14 th of next month and in case of non-
payment,  disconnection wi thin 35 days is to be carried out. Instructions 
have been issued to the Circles to educate the concerned staff to ensure 
prompt billing and the need of monitoring of billing and collection of heavy 
callers .The Committee has also been informed that an automatic billing 
software is already in pipeline and auto disconnection f acility would be 
made available all over India. 
 

 
 
 The Committee take a seri ous note of huge outstanding arrears to the tune 
of Rs.111 crore in the BSNL on account of deficiencies in the billing process. 
The Committee feel that various justifications furnished by the Company for 
accumulation of these arrears are of routine nature and reflects a non-
professional approach in the matter.  This fact is further strengthened by the 
admission of the Company that no separate accounts are available to 
segregate the various outstandings.  Even no separate records relating to 
recovery of outstanding arrears are ava ilable in the Company. The Company 
has failed to devise any method to ensure that advice notes are timely 
received in the TRA Branch from the far-flung rural areas and have continued 
to depend upon the manual message/dak delivery system. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Company should further strengthen 
its coordination mechanism amongst its various wings for ensuring 
complete billing and revenue realization. The Company should ensure a fool-
proof mechanism in respect of timely  receipt of advi ce notes from the 
commercial wing after completion of ac tivities relating to opening, shifting 
and closure of connections, so that bi lls are issued immediately; prompt 
receipt of meter readings from exchan ges and billing of the  same without 
delay; immediate stopping of billing after disconnection and closure of 
connections; proper monitoring of out standing revenue etc. The Company 
should ensure effective monitoring of outstanding revenue to avoid the risk 
of accumulation of revenue arrears.  The TRA branch should prepare 
separate details of the revenue billed, collected and outstanding in respect of 

 
 
their WLL telephone service to monitor the return on investment on this 
service.  The Company may also ensure  that automatic billing software 
should be deployed at the earliest. The  Committee further emphasize that all 
out efforts must be made for recovery of outstanding arrears from the 
defaulting parties. In order to avoid recurrence of such lapses in the future, 
the Committee recommend that a syst em be put in place for fixing 
responsibility on the persons found guilty of dereliction of duties assigned 
to them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - XII 
 
QUALITY OF WLL SERVICE 
 
12.1 The audit in para 1.15 of their Report has made the following observations 
on the quality of wll services being provided by BSNL:- 
 
1.15. QUALITY OF WLL TELEPHONE SERVICE 
The quality of the WLL se rvice provided by the Co mpany was not completely 
satisfactory in most of the circles as there were complaints regarding poor 
coverage, non-provision of um brella network coverage, system failures, very low 
signals or no signals in peak hours, call dropping, faulty WLL terminals, 
frequency overlapping, etc. A field survey  on the quality of the WLL telephone 
service of the Company in rural and urba n areas was conducted by Audit during 
August 2005. A total of 3,260 customers in 81 SDCAs of rural and urban areas of 
17 circles and two metro districts of the Company were surveyed of which 2,359 
customers were from 64 SDCAs of rural areas and 901 customers were from 17 
SDCAs of urban areas. The important findings of the survey are described below:  
 
1.15.1.1 Non-releasing of new WLL connections in time  
Out of the total number of customers surveyed, 2,313 customers (98.05 per cent) 
of rural areas and 897  customers (99.56 per cent) of urban areas responded on 
this issue. According to the norms prescribed by TRAI for basic service 
providers, after booking of the new con nection by the customer, the connection 
should be released in ‘le ss than seven days’. Howeve r, the response received 
from the above customers revealed that in the case of 61.52 per cent of rural and 
48.72 per cent of urban customers the time tak en by the Company in release of 
new connections exceeded seven days after the booking of connections.  
 
1.15.1.2 WLL telephones remained out of order  
According to the norms prescribed by TR AI for basic service providers, the 
number of telephones lying out of order in a month should be ‘less than three per 
100 customers’. Out of the total number of  customers surveyed, 2311 customers 
(97.97 per cent ) of rural areas and 893 customers (99.11 per cent ) of urban 
areas responded on this issue. The response received revealed that in a month, 
the WLL telephones of 41.11 per cent and 48.49 per cent of rural and urban 
customers, respectively, remained out of order. 
 
 1.15.1.3 Non-rectification of faults within the prescribed time period  
According to the norms prescribed by TRAI for basic service providers, the faults 
of more than 90 per cent of faulty telephones should be cleared by the next 
working day of their reporting. Out of the total number of customers surveyed, 
937 customers (39.72 per cent ) of rural areas and 462 customers (51.28 per 
cent) of urban areas responded on this iss ue. The response received revealed 
that the Company did not repair the faults of the WLL telephones of 29.67 per 

 
 
cent and 27.71 per cent of rural and urban customers respectively by the next 
working day showing lack of coordinat ion between the customer care and 
operational wings of the Company.  
 
1.15.1.4 Poor voice quality of WLL telephone calls  
According to the norms prescribed by TR AI for CMTS operat ors, the number of 
calls with good voice quality should be ‘more than 95 per cent of calls’. Out of the 
total number of customers su rveyed, 2,323 customers (98.47 per cent) of rural 
areas and 901 customers (100 per cent) of urban areas responded on this issue. 
The response received revealed that less than 95 per cent of calls with good 
voice quality were received by 35.13 per cent and 63.71 per cent of rural and 
urban costumers, respectively indicating  of poor network coverage of the WLL 
system.  
 
1.15.1.5 Repeat dialing to get the desired connections  
Out of the total number of customers surveyed, 2345 customers (99.41 per cent) 
of rural areas and 878  customers (97.45 per cent) of urban areas responded on 
this issue. Responses received from the above customers revealed that 17.99 
per cent and 23.81 per cent of rural and urban costumers,  respectively, had to 
dial the desired telephone numbers two or more times from their WLL telephones 
to get the connections, which was indica tive of poor network coverage of the 
WLL system. 
 
1.15.1.6 Non-provision of additional facilities like STD and ISD in time 
According to the norms prescribed by TRAI for basic service providers, additional 
facilities should be provided to a cust omer within less than 24 hours of the 
request received for the same. Out of t he total number of customers surveyed, 
opted for STD/ISD facilities, 260 customer s in rural areas and 87 customers in 
urban areas responded on this  issue. The response rece ived revealed that 25 
per cent and 16.09 per cent of rural and urban custom ers, respectively, got 
additional facilities such as STD and ISD after more than 24 hours of making 
requests for the same.  
 
1.15.2 Inadequate arrangement for power supply 
 Audit observed that power supply had become one of the major bottlenecks in 
the operation of the WLL te lephone service, especially  in rural areas and in 
states like Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and We st Bengal. Besides 
`the requirement of power for WLL ex changes, there was the requirement for 
charging the batteries of the WLL terminals by the customers, which should have 
been assessed properly. In response to t he survey conducted by Audit, 1099 
customers in rural and 544 customers in urban areas reported problems in 
charging of their WLL terminals due to n on-availability of power supply. Of these 
customers, 57.97 per cent customers in rural and 24.35 per cent customers in 
urban areas reported that t heir WLL telephone sets remained non-functional for 
more than two days due to non-availability of power. 
 

 
 
12.2 On being asked about the norms  prescribed for release of new 
connections and whether these norms are uniform for rural and urban areas, the 
company replied that as per TRAI norms , new telephone connect ions are to be 
provided within 7 days after registration of demand subject to technical feasibility 
in 100% cases. The parameter is applicable only in those areas where telephone 
is available ‘On Demand’.  In all other cases, the connections are to be released 
in a non-discriminatory manner as per the waiting lis t, objectively pre-determined 
for various categories. The norms are uniform for both urban and rural areas.   
 
12.3 Regarding the reasons  for not comply ing with the prescribed norms, the 
submission of the Company was as under:- 
 
 “While every effort is made to  adhere to the prescribed norms, in 
some cases delays do occur due to  the reasons beyond the control 
of BSNL some of which are as under:    
  1. Subsequent to release of OB, subscriber desires telephone 
connection to be provided at a different address. 
  2. Subscriber himself desires the telephone connection be 
provided on day, which may be later than 7 days. 
  3. Landlord may object for installation of telephone connection 
for the tenant. 
  4. Subscriber has a telep hone connection, disconnected due to 
non-payment or is a close relative  of a subscriber for whom a 
telephone connection has been di sconnected due to non-payment 
at the same address. 
  5. On verification the subscr iber is found to be non-genuine 
and thus the applicant is a pseudonymous. 
  6. In hilly terrain and in remote areas the demand is very 
scattered and the provision of telephone sometimes requires 
erection of posts which required time.   
  7. Sometimes in areas which are infested with terrorist 
activities, bandhs called by such outfits as also due to non-
availability of police protection to the staff due to their pre-
occupation, it is not possible to carry out the installation work.   
  8. Natural calamities such as earthquake, floods, heavy 
snowfall, land slides resulting in delay in execution of the work.   
  9. Refusal of the subscriber to accept WLL based fixed 
connection, where cable pair is not available”. 
   
12.4 On being asked about  the monitoring mechanism devised by the 
Company to ensure compliance of TRAI’s norms for release of the connections 
to customers after their booking, the Company replied as under:- 
   
“Constant monitoring is being done at the highest level in the field units 
and at BSNL Corporate Office on monthly basis and the Circles are 
persuaded constantly to achieve the ta rgets.  Monthly reports are called 

 
 
for to monitor the achievement of eac h circle regarding provision of new 
connections in areas ‘on demand’ including the WLL connection.   
 
BSNL has simplified its commercial procedure drastically w.e.f. 
20.4.2006.  Integration of  the commercial, billing and FRS software is 
being carried out progressively.  With gradual computeriz ation of these 
activities the position is  expected to improve substantially.  The constant 
monitoring of the paramet ers has shown substantial improvement during 
the past.” 
  
12.5 On being asked about the steps taken by the Company during the last 5 
years for improving the voice quality / net work coverage and other faults of the 
WLL Systems and how is it ensured that the technology is continuously upgraded 
to keep pace with the development of new  technologies and their deployment by 
other private players besi des the   mechanism evolved by the Company for 
timely rectification of the complaints of the customers on this account, the 
Company informed:- 
 
 “The following steps have been taken by the company to improve the 
quality/network coverage and other f aults in the WLL system during the 
last five years:-  
 
(a) On an average 3 BTSs per SDCA  have been plan ned for network 
coverage and to improve the quality of WLL equipment.  As on date 4956 
BTSs are working in the SDCAs; 
(b) V 5.2 based CDMA WLL are be ing upgraded to MSC based CDMA 
2000 IX wherever technically and co mmercially feasible.  Order for 
procurement of 5 lakh lines ZT E make equipment have already been 
issued. For remaining WLL systems, te chno-commercial evaluation is in 
process.  
(c) The value added services like pre-paid, SMS, high-speed packet 
data, MMS etc. are being introduced progressively.   
(d) In rural area the WLL subscrib ers are being provided with 12 V 
SMPS power pack to make the FWT us able/workable for at least one to 
two days in case of non-availability of electricity in a village. 
(e) Circles have been instructed to  provide charging facility in 
telephone exchanges for WLL terminals to  the customers who bring their 
terminals for charging due to lack of elec tricity in their vill ages in the rural 
areas.” 
 
12.6 When enquired about the  steps taken / instructions issued by the 
Company for ensuring adherence to the quality of service norms fixed by TRAI to 
avoid the risk of migration of the custom ers to other private operators, it was 
submitted that  there is no differentia tion made in WLL tel ephone and wired line 
telephone for those parameters, which are applicable for basic services for which 
instructions are issued from time to ti me.  BSNL has issued Do’s and Don’t for 

 
 
the WLL subscribers so that they can us e the service in a better manner.  BSNL 
has also issued instructions to the circles regarding refreshing charge to be given 
to the in-built batteries supplied along with FWTs / SMPSs at a regular interval so 
as to keep the terminal / SMPS units in  charged condition till these are deployed 
in the field.  Circles have been inst ructed to deploy the IFWTs supplied with 
SMPS for replacement in the rural and other areas having poor and deficient 
commercial supply.  Instructions regardi ng use of HHTs inst ead of FWTs, if not 
available, for giving new connections and replacing faulty FWTs of VPTs were 
also given to the circles. 
     
12.7 When asked whether the Company c onducts surveys at regular intervals 
to obtain feedbacks from its customers about the quality of its WLL Service and if 
so, the outcome thereof and the corrective actions taken thereon during the last 5 
years, the Company in their reply stated:-  
   
“No Sir. BSNL on its own has not c onducted any survey exclusively for 
WLL services during the last 5 years.   Further it is mentioned that 
corrective action for improving WLL services are being taken in the field 
units on the basis of feed ba ck received during “OPEN HOUSE 
SESSIONS” held at Division, SSA and Cir cle level, interaction with and 
feed back on services received from Dis trict Authority, locally registered 
complaints at FRS etc. “  
      
12.8 In the above backdr op when it was asked as to what monitoring 
mechanism is available to monitor the customer’s satisfactionand whether any 
study has been made to ascertain the cu stomers’ satisfaction, the Company 
stated:- 
 
 “BSNL has not conducted any separate survey to monitor customer’s 
satisfaction for WLL services.  Howe ver, based on interaction with the 
public on day to day maintenance basis, corrective and preventive actions 
are initiated for improving WLL servic es to the best possible customer's 
satisfaction in the field units. The feedbacks received during interaction 
with the customers, during various stages of open house sessions held at 
Division, SSA and Circle `l evel, and also from distri ct authorities, locally 
registered complaints at FRS etc., is  the basis for knowing customer’s 
satisfaction and initiating the corrective measures for WLL system.  
 
 
12.9 On being asked about the steps taken by the company during the last five 
years to improve upon the areas of  poor voice quality, repeat dialings and lack of 
additional facilities like STD / ISD and  inadequate arrangement  of power supply 
etc, the company stated that:-. 
 
 “ The BSNL has continuously expanded and upgraded the WLL system to 
improve the quality of service.  T he main aim has been to provide full 

 
 
coverage of the SDCAs.  Initially it  was decided to provide one WLL BTS 
per SDCA.  Further it has been decid ed to increase the number of BTS 
per SDCA to three to have better coverage.  Approximately 5000 BTS are 
working and 1900 BTSs are under supply / installation.  In addition around 
3800 more BTSs have been ordered recently. 
 
With deployment all the BTSs, it is expected that both urban / rural areas 
will have proper coverage and quality of service shall improve to great 
extent.  However ‘Electricity’ is one of  the major problem in rural areas for 
poor quality of services in respect of Fixed Wireless Terminals(FWT).”   
 
12.10 When asked about the  monitoring mechanism  devised by the Company 
to ensure compliance of TRAI’s Quality of  Service norms by all its units across 
the country it was stated that:- 
 
 “It is expected that there is  no differentiation made in WLL 
telephone and wired line telephone fo r those parameters, which are 
applicable for basic services for which instructions are issued from time to 
time.  BSNL has issued Do’s and Don’t for the WLL subscribers so that 
they can use the service in a better manner.  BSNL has also issued 
instructions to the circles regarding refreshing charge to be given to the in-
built batteries supplied along with FWTs  / SMPSs at a regular interval so 
as to keep the terminal / SMPS units  in charged condition till these are 
deployed in the field.  Circles have  been instructed to deploy the IFWTs 
supplied with SMPS for replacement in the rural and ot her areas having 
poor and deficient commercial supply.  Instructions regarding use of HHTs 
instead of FWTs, if not available, for giving new connections and replacing 
faulty FWTs of VPTs were also given to the circles.” 
 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl NO. 12 
 
 The Committee note that quality of service is the main indicator of 
the performance of a telephone service  as well as of the degree to which 
the service conforms to the stipulat ed norms.  The Committee observe that 
the norms prescribed by TRAI for the quality of service performed by basic 
service operators were applicable for the WLL service of the Company 
also. In this regard a survey conduct ed by Audit has revealed that the 
Company had failed to achieve the quality of service norms prescribed by 
TRAI pertaining to release of connections, incidence of faults and their 
rectification, voice quality, getti ng connections to desired telephone 
numbers and provision of additional facilities like STD and ISD etc. The 
Committee note that in order to do away with these short-comings, the 
Company has taken a number of remedi al measures to improve the quality 
of service. The Company has planned to increase the number of  Base 
Transceiver Station(BTS) per Shor t Distance Charging Area (SDCA) to 
improve the network coverage besid es upgrading the existing V.5.2 based 
CDMA technology to MSC based CDMA 2000 IX.  Further value added 
services like pre-paid, SMS, high-speed packet data, MMS etc. are being 
introduced progressively. The Circles h ave also been instructed to provide 
charging facilities in telephone exchanges for WLL terminals to the 
customers in rural areas where there is lack of electricity. 
 The Committee while appreciat ing the various measures so 
undertaken by the Company to improve the quality of service by the 

 
 
Company are of the view that these steps were required to be taken much 
earlier.  The Committee are constrained to note that the Company has 
never conducted any market surveys ex clusively for WLL Service to obtain 
feedbacks from its cust omers to ascertain the ground realities regarding 
the quality of WLL service and take immediate corrective action on the 
same.  The Committee feel that this  exercise should be undertaken by the 
Company from time to time to enab le it to provide a better operational 
performance besides also competing with the private players in the field.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company should 
strengthen its monitoring mechanism by obtaining monthly reports from all 
the circles on customer care. The Company must ensure implementation of 
the various remedial measures suggested by them to improve the quality of 
service at the earliest possible.  The Committee further recommend that   
the Company should ensure adherence to the quality of service norms 
fixed by TRAI to avoid the risk of migration of the customers to other 
operators. The Company should ensu re proper coordination among its 
customer care, commercial and opera tional wings for minimizing the 
delays in attending to customers’ complaints and requests for additional 
facilities to avoid the risks of losing them to their competitors. 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - XIII 
 
MONITORING BY CORPORATE OFFICE  
 
13.1 The audit in their report has point ed out a number of s hortcomings on the 
part of Corporate Office in respect of t he monitoring role expected to be played 
by it in implementation of  WLL project by various Circles of the BSNL. The 
Company failed to formulate proper strat egies and detailed plans  at the time of 
launching the WLL telephone service in 2000-01 and its subsequent expansions. 
The capacity remained grossly under-u tilized both in rural and urban areas 
mainly on account of deficient planning; mismatches in the procurement of WLL 
systems and terminals; poor network coverage and poor quality of service. The 
Company suffered financial losses due to  inaccurate assessments of demand 
and requirement and selectio n of obsolete technologies.  The following are some 
of the important audit observations made in this regard:- 
 
(i) Despite instructions, 13 circles and th e two Metro districts did not prepare 
separate costing records for the WLL te lephone service. The records showed a 
total loss of Rs 122.15 crore in seven circles. (Paragraph 1.9.3) 
 
(ii)Most of the circles failed to make time ly arrangements for sites, towers, power 
supply, etc, which led to delays in in stallation and commissioning of the WLL 
telephone systems. (Paragraph 1.10.1)  
 
(iii) The corporate office’s failure to moni tor receipt of frequency allocations from 
the WPC Wing of the DoT resulted in operation of CorDect WLL telephone 
service in five circles and two Metro districts without mandat ory ‘Agreements in 
Principle’. It was also noticed that detail ed records in respect of Circle-wise and 
site-wise frequency allocations from WPC for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05 were 
not maintained at the corporate office. 
 
(iv)  Commencement of operations without requisite ‘Agreement in 
Principle’ from the Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing 
. It was noticed that the ‘Agreements in  Principle’ for the requisite frequencies 
were received from the WPC Wing only in  respect of eight circles up to 
December 2004/July 2005. In respect of th e remaining five circles and two metro 
districts, though the ‘Agr eements in Principle’ ha d not been received (August 
2005) from the WPC Wing, t he systems were being operat ed, which violated the 
conditions of obtaining the licence for use of frequencies. 
 
(v)   Non-obtaining of SACFA↓ clearances for sites 
Telecom operators also have to seek clear ances for the sites where they intend 
to install wireless equipm ent from SACFA. SACFA has to give these site 
clearances within a period of two to six m onths from the dates of receipt of the 
applications. A test check of records of 19 circles and one metro district revealed 

 
 
that out of 2,729 sites for which SACFA  clearance had been sought, clearances 
for only 1,399 sites had been received till June 2005 while clearances for the 
balance 1,330 sites were still pending (March-September 2005). The 
Management stated (June 2005) that letters regarding site clearance were 
directly issued to the concerned circles by WPC due to which the status of 
clearance of sites was not available in corporate office. On this being pointed out, 
the local managements stated (May-S eptember 2005) that there were 
considerable delays in re ceiving clearances from th e WPC wing and SACFA in 
spite of clear instructions from DoT 
 
(vi)  Non-compliance to terms and conditions on releasing payments 
The Management should have ensured that the terms and conditions of the 
purchase orders and the conditions for gr anting extensions in delivery schedules 
were scrupulously adhered to by the ci rcles while releasing payments to 
safeguard the Company’s interest. Some circles failed to adhere to the terms and 
conditions of the purchase orders while releasing the payments to the suppliers.  
 
13.2 The Company was asked to state w hat monitoring mechanism is available 
with the Corporate Office for its WLL servic es and whether there is any exclusive 
division in Corporate Office to monitor the WLL Services in the various States. In 
reply the company submitted as under:-  
 
 “WLL was being deployed as a new te chnology for the first time in the 
rural areas and hence the monitoring of the whole process was of prime 
importance and has been given the due  consideration in the whole 
implementation.  The commissioning of the systems  day-to-day basis 
monitoring and co-ordination was being do ne by one of the senior officers 
of the rank of Sr. DDG at corporate office.  Adequate monitoring 
mechanism and well led Management Info rmation System for collection of 
the status reports of the progress related to the project was followed which 
included the carrying out the meet ing of senior management even at 
Chairman (TC) level, executing agencies and suppliers.   
 
There is not any exclusive division  for the purpose of monitoring.  
SW Cell is a nodal  agency for the works relati ng to WLL planning and its 
procurement.  However, planning works relating to the initial introduction 
of WLL for covering the villages were handled by RN Cell up to 2002-
2003.  NM Cell is a nodal agen cy for day-to-day operation and 
maintenance of the WLL equipment.  The performance of WLL equipment 
was quite satisfactory in rural as well as urban areas, which can be seen 
from the fact that BSNL has provided 27,52,887 connections as on 
31.7.2006.   For further improvement  of WLL services, company has 
already decided and deployed MSC based WLL equipment. “ 
 
13.3 On being asked whether there are  exclusive divisions  in the Company 
for other  kinds of telecommunication Services being offered  by the Company 

 
 
and also in view of the huge  investments made in the WLL Services and also the 
large  number of  connections   provided  under it, will it not be more appropriate  
to have an exchange  divis ion for  proper  planning  and e ffective  monitoring  of  
WLL operations by various  circ les  in the country, the following c omments were 
offered:- 
 
“The Director (Plg & NS) BSNL Board is overall responsible for planning , 
procurement, installation / commissi oning of WLL system in BSNL.  
Director (Operation) BSNL Board is overall responsible for operation & 
maintenance of the WLL syst em.  Director (Fin.) is overall responsible for 
all finance activities incl uding billing, accounting, profit and loss et c.  The 
detail of organisational structure at Corporate. 
 
For Planning & Procurement For Operation & Maintenance 
 
Director (plg. & NS)    Director (O) 
 
DDG (SW)      DDG (NM) 
 
Jt. DDG (E)      Jt. DDG (WLL) 
 
Supporting Staff     Supporting Staff 
 
  
For Finance 
 
Dir (Finance) 
 
Sr DDG (PF)  
 
DDG(TRF) 
 
Supporting Staff 
 
It is to mention that BSNL foll ows function based   and not product  
based organisational s tructure. This organisational structure is being 
followed from the time of Deptt. Of Telecom Service. 
 
The function based or ganisational structure are most suited for a big 
Organisation like BSNL.  Howeve r BSNL reviews t he man power 
requirement for each product category like WLL / GSM from time to 
time.” 
 
13.4 Regarding the various deficiencies pointed above by the Audit, the BSNL 
was asked to state the mechanis m available with the Corporate Office to ens ure 

 
 
that instructions were strictly followed by the Circles, the Company submitted as 
under:- 
 
“Circles were instructed to strictly follow the instructions and guidelines 
issued from the corporate office.  In order to ens ure that the circles are 
following the instructions regula r monitoring of the progress of 
infrastructure to be deployed for deployment of WLL system was being 
done on weekly, fortnightly or monthly basis apart from holding 
coordination meetings involving all stakeholders including vendors.  
Circles also made all out efforts to co mply with the instructions wherever 
technically feasible. “  
 
13.5 Regarding monitoring mechanism  being followed by the Company to 
ensure that separate costing records and revenue projections for the WLL 
telephone services are prepared by all,  the Company submitted that the 
preparation of costing records is m onitored through correspondence with the 
Circles.   
 
13.6 On the observation of the audit that despite instru ctions from the 
Corporate Office, most of the circles failed to make timely arrangements for sites, 
towers, power supply, etc. which led to  delays in installation and commissioning 
of the WLL telephone systems, the comments of the Company were as under:-. 
 
“Circles are instructed well in advanc e to keep infrastructure like towers, 
power supply, etc. ready before de livery of the WLL equipment.  The 
monitoring was done regularly on weekly basis for progress of the 
infrastructure.  However, Corporate Of fice monitors all such projects at 
macro level through mont hly development report as well as Management 
Information System statistics.  Micr o level monitoring is done by all the 
circles, each headed by a Chief General Manager level officer.  In addition 
Director (Plg.& NS) holds  meetings along with  the concerned  Planning  
Cell  officers at zonal level from   time to time to review  & monitor the 
progress of ongoing projects like creation of infrastructure, site towers, etc. 
and installation of BTSs,  installation of equipment and its commissioning.” 
 
 
13.7 On being asked about the reasons fo r non-compliance of the instructions 
issued by the Company to the Circles and what role was played by the Corporate 
office in resolving problems being faced by different circles, the Company 
submitted that:-.   
 
“Most of the infrastructure was ready by  the Circles in time.  However, at 
few sites the  Circles could not give compliance due to non-commissioning 
of the infrastructure with reasons bey ond control of the Circle.  In such 
places BSNL does not have its own land  for installation of BTS sites, the 
sites are hired from the private parties after making extensive search for a 

 
 
site suitable to BSNL requirements.  Negotiation with the party for 
finalization of terms and conditions and hiring  rates is time consuming.  
However, to cut--short the delays and resolve such problems the 
Corporate Office liberalized the po licy of hiring accommodation for non-
BSNL sites. “ 
 
13.8 Regarding the control mechanism av ailable with the Company to ensure 
that the mandatory ‘Agr eements in Principle’ are obtain ed in time by the Circles, 
the Company submitted that the mandatory ‘Agreement in Principle’ is issued by 
WPC, which is under the control of Govern ment.  BSNL has no control - direct or 
indirect over WPC.    BSNL can only monitor the status and pursue the cases 
with WPC only.  The same is being done on regular basis.  
 
13.9 On being asked whether  the Company has now started maintaining  
records in respect of Circle-wise and site-wise frequency allocations for WLL 
telephone services from WPC, it was stated  that the telecom circles maintain the 
site wise frequencies. However as per  recommendation of the audit, BSNL 
Corporate office is now maintaining the, circle-wise and site-wise frequency 
allocation as received from WPC, for WLL telephone services.  
  
13.10 On being asked about the control mechanism  available with the Company 
to ensure that the mandatory site clearanc es are obtained in time from SACFA 
by all Circles, the Company stated t hat the process of SACFA clearance has 
been made web based by WPC. The application is made online on the WPC web 
site by the respective circles. SACFA clearance is issued subsequently by WPC 
which is under the control of Governm ent.  BSNL has no control - direct or 
indirect over WPC.    BSNL can only monitor the status and pursue the cases 
with WPC only.  The same is being do ne on regular basis through regular 
meetings.  
 
13.11 The Committee desired to know whet her the  Company has laid down any 
monitoring mechanism and MIS for monito ring timely execution of different 
stages of the turnkey projects by the vendors. In reply the Company submitted:- 
 
 “The following mechanism is alr eady available in the BSNL for 
monitoring the progress of CDMA WLL projects:  
a) Calling for monthly development  reports from all circles/metro 
districts. 
b) Periodic reports from  the respective vendors. 
c) Monthly MIS report of the Company having all statistical details of 
targets and achievements of the circles/metro districts. 
d) To arrange periodic development review meetings at the level of 
Director (Plg. & NS), BSNL Board with CGMs/GMs of the circles.” 
 

 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO 13 
 
 The Committee note that as per th e organizational set-up of BSNL, 
the administrative and overall functiona l control is vested in the Board of 
Directors headed by the Chai rman and Managing Director. The 
telecommunication operations of the Company are managed by its 24 
telecom Circles located in various St ates of the country and two telecom 
districts (Chennai and Kolkata) under the overall monitoring of the 
Corporate office. Each Circle contains many secondary switching areas 
(SSAs) whose monitoring is done by th e respective circles.  The audit in 
their report has pointed out many shortcomings and deficiencies 
concerning the monitoring role of the Corporate Office. The Audit has 
observed that despite instructions, 13 circles and the two Metro districts 
did not prepare separate costing records for the WLL telephone service. 
Most of the circles failed to make ti mely arrangements for sites, towers, 
power supply, etc, which led to delays in installation and commissioning of 
the WLL telephone systems.  The cor porate office’s failure to monitor 
receipt of frequency allocations from the WPC Wing of the DoT resulted in 
operation of CorDect WLL telephone ser vice in five circles and two Metro 
districts without mandatory  ‘Agreements in Principle’.  Even the detailed 
records in respect of Circle-wise and site-wise frequency allocations from 
WPC for the years 2000-01 to 2004-05 were  not maintained at the Corporate 
Office. The Management failed to ensu re the terms and conditions of the 
purchase orders by some Circles while releasing payments to the 

 
 
suppliers. Excess payments were relea sed by some Circles in respect of 
Sales tax and subsequent revision of  tender rates etc.  The Audit has 
concluded that the Company failed to formulate proper strategies and 
detailed plans at the time of launching the WLL telephone service in 2000-
01 and its subsequent expansions. The capacity remained grossly under-
utilized both in rural and urban areas mainly on account of deficient 
planning; mismatches in the procurem ent of WLL systems and terminals; 
poor network coverage and poor quality of service. The Company suffered 
financial losses due to inaccura te assessments of demand and 
requirement and selection of obsolete technologies. 
 The Committee observe that acco rding to BSNL Circles were 
instructed from time to time to st rictly follow the instructions and 
guidelines issued by the Corporat e Office. The Company has also 
submitted that since the WLL was bei ng deployed as a new technology for 
the first time in the rural areas, th e Company realized the importance of 
monitoring of the whole process and due consideration was given to its 
whole implementation. It has been cl aimed by the Company that constant 
monitoring is being done at the highest level in the field units and at BSNL 
Corporate Office on monthly basis and the Circles are persuaded 
constantly to achieve the targets.  M onthly reports are called for to monitor 
the achievement of each circle regardi ng provision of new connections in 
areas ‘on demand’ including the WLL connection.   
 

 
 
The Committee are not inclined to agree with this submission of the 
Company.  The Committee note that  the WLL Project was of huge 
magnitude involving large investments. However, the Committee are 
dismayed to note that as admitted by the Company there is no exclusive 
division in the Company to monitor its implementation. Despite the tall 
claims made by the Corporate Office re garding their strict monitoring of 
implementation of WLL Project, the Committee fail to understand  as to 
why so many shortcomings and deficiencies were committed by the Circles 
as pointed out by the Audit in their findings. The Committee feel that there 
has been laxity on the part of th e Corporate Office in enforcement of 
instructions issued by it from time to time by the Circles.  It reflects that 
there is a lack of coordination be tween forward planning and demand 
assessment.  The justification that BS NL follows function based and not 
product based organizational structure thus cannot be accepted.  Keeping 
in view the fact that  the WLL Project in the rural areas is being 
implemented by the Company by wa y of a social commitment of the 
Government and also since the Company is getting financial support from 
the Government in the form of USOF, the Committee strongly recommend 
that the Company should form an e xclusive division at  the level of 
Corporate Office to monitor it.  In addition to this, the Committee 
recommend that  the following actions  are required to be taken by the 
Company: -   
 

 
 
(i) The Company should monitor the performance of the suppliers in 
carrying out their responsibility to wards providing adequate and 
uninterrupted network coverage to avoid the risk of poor quality 
of service and losing its customer base.  
(ii) The Company should prescribe in advance the time schedules for 
the various activities to be undert aken by Circles for creation of 
necessary infrastructure.   
(iii) The Company should devise a monitoring mechanism for 
ensuring timely receipt of ‘Agreements in Principle’ from the WPC 
wing for use of allotted frequenc ies and clearances of SACFA for 
sites for installation of wireless equipment.  
(iv) The Company should monitor the compliance of the terms and 
conditions of the purchase orders by its circles to avoid the risk 
of irregular payments. 
(v)  The Company should monitor the levy of prescribed liquidated 
damage charges by the circles on the suppliers to protect its 
financial interests. 
(vi)  The Company should ensure effective monitoring of outstanding 
revenue to avoid the risk of accumulation of revenue arrears.  
(vii) There is an urgent need for the Company to improve planning and 
monitoring mechanism in respect  of the WLL telephone service, 
besides improving procurement practices.  

 
 
(viii) The system for billing, collect ion and accounting of revenue from 
the WLL telephone requires stricter monitoring. 
(ix) The quality of service being pr ovided needs further improvement 
through better network coverage and customer care. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – XIV 
 
ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN IMPLEMENTATION OF WLL PROJECT 
 
14.1 The Department of Te lecommunications (DoT) pr oposed the launching of 
the WLL telephone service in the country in 1994, mainly to provide telephone 
connections in techni cally non-feasible  (TNF) areas. In pursuance of NTP-99, 
Government of India had decided to corpor atise the service provision function of 
Department of Telecommunications (DOT ). Accordingly, BSNL was set up on 1 st 
October 2000 by corporatisation of the Department of Telecom Services (DTS) & 
Department of Telecom Operations (DTO).  Consequently, the service provision 
obligations of the DoT were transferr ed to BSNL.  In its Meeting dated 27 th 
September 2000, the Cabinet decided th at a package of measures shall be 
provided to ensure that t he viability of BSNL is not impaired on account of the 
services provided by BSNL, which are un economic but socially desirable, at the 
behest of the Government. This has been the underlying basis for providing relief 
measures to BSNL. Subsequently, Cabinet in its various decisions taken from 
time to time approved the package of measures for BSNL. 
 
14.2 On being asked about the  steps ta ken by the.governm ent to strengthen 
the BSNL while mandating it with the huge task of covering the whole of the rural 
India as well as technically non-feas ible areas and repl acement of MARR 
technology based VPTs by providing WLL c onnectivity, the Ministry submitted as 
under:-. 
 
“The Govt. had taken a decision that  1,86,872 no. of VPTs which were 
earlier working on Multi Access Radio Relay (MARR) technology and 
installed before 01.04.2002 would be replaced as most of these were non 
functional. In this regard, agreem ents were signed with M/s BSNL in 
September, 2003 and March, 2004 to repl ace such VPTs. The duration of 
Agreement is 7 years to 9 years. De termination of subsidy support is 
based on Net Cost (NC) for the r eplacement of MARR VPTs taking into 
account Annualized capital recovery and Annual operating cost minus 
Annual Revenue, where Annu alized Capital Recovery takes into account 
the Aggregate of Depreciation, Return on Equity and Interest on Debt. The 
Representative Rate for the annual equated subsidy varies from Rs. 9,400 
to Rs. 16,900. A sum of Rs. 325.93 Crore has already been disbursed to 
M/s BSNL for this purpose as on 31.01.2007. As on January 2007, 
168559 MARR VPTs have been replaced by M/s BSNL.” 
 
14.3 Regarding the instructions/guidelines , if any,  issued by the  government 
to the BSNL while mandating it to implement the WLL system in the rural areas 
and replacement of MARR based VPTs, in respect of Planning and 
implementation of targets, Creation of infrastructure, Additional manpower 
requirement,  Quality of work executed,  monitoring and information system etc. , 

 
 
the Ministry submitted that . BSNL being a Board managed company, it frames its 
own guidelines and executi on strategy in such matte rs. In this regard, the 
Secretary, DoT, during his evidence before the Committee submitted:- 
 
“…..as far as commercial decisions ar e concerned, as far as on-going 
vendors are concerned, these are decis ions that are taken by the BSNL 
on their own because they are a public undertaking. But what is the 
progress made by them has been reviewed at my level almost every 
month.” 
 
14.4 Similarly, when asked about what guidance/assistance has been provi ded 
by the government to BSNL towards vari ous ongoing litigations/arbitration cases 
involving recovery of funds from va rious vendors/suppliers, the Ministry 
submitted that  BSNL follows its own proce dures for such activities as per their 
procurement policies and as per standing guidelines /instruction of DOT/DTS. 
 
14.5 On the issue of mechanism is available with the Ministry to 
monitor the implementation of its social  commitment of telephone connectivity 
in rural areas by the BSNL. And whet her any guidelines/directions have been 
issued by the government to the Company in pursuance of such monitoring, the 
Ministry in the reply submitted as under:- 
 
“(a) One of the prime concerns is that the funds disbursed towards 
provision of services covered under USO are effectively utilized and the 
services are available to the users as intended. To en sure proper quality 
of service and maintenance of various re cords, conditions do exist in the 
Agreements with the USPs. The Agreem ents also provide for deductions 
in subsidies if the facility is non- functional on account of faults, or 
disconnected for non- payment or do not record any calls over the 
specified period. The Agreements for new  installations further provide for 
imposition of liquidated dam ages in case of not meeting the roll-out 
obligation within the specif ied period. In terms of the stipulations in the 
Agreements, the service providers have to submit a self-certification of 
fault incidence while subm itting the claims in the Proforma prescribed. 
Monthly review meetings is bei ng taken by Secretary, DoT with 
Administrator USOF, CMD BSNL, CMD ITI and to review the progress of 
the installation of BTS equipment fo r provision of VPTs. RCPs, MARR 
replacement etc. including the issues related to Department of Space for 
DSPTs.     
While the Quality of Service (QoS) provided is the domain of TRAI, 
USO Fund is concerned with the availabi lity of facilities supported by it 
and that the claims reflect the correct position in respect of incidences of 
fault etc which qualify for deductions in subsidy. The job of verification has 
been entrusted to the Controller of Communications Accounts (CCAs) of 
DOT with the purpose of es tablishing the veracity of claims from the 
records maintained by the service providers. “ 

 
 
 
14.6 In the above context it was further  submitted by the Ministry that: 
  
“The Department of telecom reviews the performance of BSNL on  regular 
basis. Apart from quarterly performance reviews, monitori ng  & review of 
specific projects of BSNL such as WLL, GSM cellular mobile and 
Broadband  are undertaken by the Gov t.. Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoUs) are being signed between DoT & BSNL every year since 2004-05 
in which targets are fixed for physi cal parameters aim ed at achieving 
higher teledensity in both urban & ru ral areas.As a result, the rural 
teledensity has increased from 0.93 as  on 31-3-01 to 1.87 as on 28-02-
07.” 
 
14.7 To a pointed query as to whether during the implementation  of WLL 
System by BSNL,  the government has identified shortcomings in some areas 
that could have been handled more appropriately and If so, the steps   
undertaken  by  the   government  to re move   such shortcomings and ensuring 
non-recurrence of the same subsequent ly, the government furnished the 
following reply:-. 
 
 “After formation of BSNL, the company  is taking its own decisions about 
implementation of various services including WLL and following the 
standing guidelines / instruction of DO T / DTS within  the framework of its 
license conditions.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL NO. 14 
 
 
 The Committee understand that the New Telecom Policy (NTP-99) 
envisaged telephones on demand and covering all uncovered villages in 
the country with telephone by the end of the year 2002. In pursuance of 
NTP-99, the Government corporatised the Service Provision Function of 
DoT to set up BSNL on 1 st October, 2000. To ensure  that viability of 
BSNL is not impaired on account of carrying out this social commitment 
of the Government in providing ser vices which are uneconomical but 
socially desirable , the BSNL is getting a package of relief measures 
including financial support from th e government in the form of 
Universal Service Obligation Fund(USOF).  In view of this, the 
Committee are of the opinion that though the BSNL is a Corporate body, 
it is answerable to the Government in respect of carrying its social 
commitment.  Similarly, it was exp ected of the Government to ensure 
that the social commitment as envisa ged in NTP-99 is being adequately 
carried out by the Company.  
 
 The Committee are, however, constrained to observe that the 
government has miserably failed in its monitoring role in ensuring that 
the goals set out in NTP-99 are ach ieved by the BSNL in a time bound 
manner. The targets required to be achieved by the end of the year 2002 
have not been fully met even as on date and also the service provided is 
not upto the mark.   Providing tele phone connectivity in the rural areas 
and far-flung areas of the country is an issue of national importance. As 
such, a duty was cast upon the government to seriously monitor its 
implementation by the implementing agency namely the BSNL. 
Unfortunately, no information has be en brought by the government to 
the notice of the Committ ee which may indicate that  any serious efforts 
were made by them  to ensure that the targets were achieved by the 

 
 
BSNL within the stipulated time. Instead, the government has chosen to 
absolve itself of its responsibility by taking the stand that BSNL being a 
Board managed Company, it fram es its own guidelines and execution 
strategy in such matters. Though this stand might be true for the other 
commercial activities of the BSNL, it   is not at all acceptable to the 
Committee as far as this social commitment is concerned. The 
Committee therefore strongly recommend that the government must 
evolve a suitable monitoring mechanis m to ensure  implementation of 
the objectives set out in NTP-99 by the BSNL in a time bound manner 
and also fixing their accountability in the case of lapses by suitably 
penalizing the agencies concerned.  The government must review the 
progress of BSNL at the highest level with respect to the rural telephony 
on monthly basis and issue the appropriate directives wherever needed.  
Besides verifying that the quality of service in rural areas is upto the 
mark, the Government must also ensu re that the funds being given to 
BSNL under USOF are properly utilized and case of losses on 
Infructuous accounts, responsibility must be fixed on the officials 
concerned.  The committee also find  that inadequacy of electricity 
supply in a number of rural areas is also adversely affecting the 
operation of WLL based telephony. The Committee desire that this issue 
be adequately addressed by the Government in a realistic manner by 
coming out with plans like using solar energy or some other non-
conventional sources of energy in consultation with the agencies 
concerned.  The Committee stress that the  important issue of providing 
telephone coverage to the entire count ry particularly in rural and far-
flung areas should take precedence over the other  commercial 
interests of service providers by implementing this project of national 
importance on top priority.  In a liberalized environment of fierce 
competition in the Telecom Sector the prime goal of private operators is 
to earn profit and not to fulfil the social obligation of rural connectivity. 
In such a scenario, the Committee feel that government intervention is 

 
 
absolutely necessary. The Committ ee, therefore, desire that 
Government should adequately support the public sector telecom 
Companies to fulfil this social ob ligation of telephone connectivity in 
rural areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND PAL  
26 April, 2007                       CHAIRMAN 
06 Vaisakha, 1929               COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
 
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE AUDIT REPORT 
 
 
  Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (Com pany) had a target of providing one 
Wireless-in-Local Loop (WLL) system in each of the 2, 642 Short Distance 
Charging Areas (SDCAs) in the country  till 2001-02, but even up to October 
2005, it had not reached the target  and had provided WLL systems only in 2,185 
SDCAs.(Paragraph 1.8) 
 
  The capacity utilisation was 60.53 per cent against the total equipped 
capacity of 26.89 lakh lines of WLL systems as of March 2005 mainly on account 
of deficiencies in planning,  procurements, network co verage and poor quality of 
service. (Paragraph 1.12) 
 
  The Company formulated the plans for launching of the WLL telephone 
service and its subsequent expansi on with inadequate assessment of demand 
and requirement and did not consider identification of areas based on population 
and trade statistics, unutilis ed capacity, presence of private operators and the 
envisaged growth of its other telephone services. (Paragraphs 1.9.1.1 to 1.9.1.4) 
 
  Expansion of the capacity during 2002-03 to 2004-05 in seven circles despite 
underutilisation of the existing capacity, led to injudicious expenditure of Rs 
108.64 crore on expansion. (Paragraph 1.9.1.2) 
 
  The Company procured WLL systems based on obsolete technologies 
valued at Rs 1,479.87 crore during October 2000 to March 2005 though the 
latest WLL CDMA 2000-1X technology was available since October 2000. 
(Paragraph 1.9.2) 
 
  The Company did not carry out financial viability and profitability analysis of 
the WLL projects during the years 2000-01, 2001- 02 and 2003-04. (Paragraph 
1.9.3) 
 
  Despite instructions, 13 circles and the two Metro districts did not prepare 
separate costing records for the WLL te lephone service. The records showed a 
total loss of Rs 122.15 crore in seven circles. (Paragraph 1.9.3) 
 
  Ten circles, which prepared revenue  projections for the WLL telephone 
service, failed to realize the projected re venue by Rs 139.31 crore during the last 
five years up to 2004-05. (Paragraph 1.9.3) 
 
  An amount of only Rs 22.05 lakh was spent dur ing 2002-03 to 2004-05 on 
promotion and marketing of  the WLL telephone service compared to Rs 14.25 

 
 
crore spent on its Cellular Mobile Telephone Service during the above period. 
(Paragraph 1.9.4) 
 
  Most of the circles failed to make timely arrangements for sites, towers, 
power supply, etc, which led to delays in installation and commissioning of the 
WLL telephone systems.  (Paragraph 1.10.1) 
 
  The corporate office’s failure to monitor receipt of frequency allocations from 
the WPC Wing of the DoT resulted in operation of CorDect WLL telephone 
service in five circles and two Metro districts without mandat ory ‘Agreements in 
Principle’. (Paragraph 1.10.2) 
 
  The mandatory clearance of sites for inst allation of wireless equipment from 
the SACFA was not obtained for 1,330 sites by 19 circles. (Paragraphs 1.10.3) 
 
  Procurement of 40660 FWTs, 3, 40,380 HHTs, 8,975 FRS and 8200 Wall 
Sets for 17 circles and two Metro district s without keeping in view the customers’ 
preferences and demand led to idle investment of Rs 229 crore. (Paragraph 
1.11.1.2) 
 
  Procurement of power plants and batteries without requirement by 12 SSAs 
under five circles and one Metro District resulted in blocking of funds to the 
extent of Rs 3.26 crore. (Paragraph 1.11.1.3) 
 
  The corporate office delayed the finalis ation of rates of FWTs which resulted 
in excess payment of Rs 5.59 crore to M/s ARM Limited and M/s United Telecom 
Limited (UTL). (Paragraph 1.11.2) 
 
  Failure to obtain the PBGs and prematur e release of PBGs resulted in undue 
financial benefits of Rs 26.40 crore to suppliers. (Paragraphs 1.11.3.1 and 
1.11.3.2) 
 
  Absence of any provision in the purchase orders for levy of penalty on 
suppliers for delays in installation,  acceptance testing and commissioning 
resulted in blocking of capital of Rs 134.97 crore. (Paragraphs 1.11.4) 
 
  The Company incurred a loss of Rs 11.97 crore due to non-levy or short levy 
of L.D. charges on suppliers who delay ed the delivery of WLL equipment and 
terminals. (Paragraph 1.11.5.3) 
 
  The Company failed to achieve the annual  plan targets fixed for replacement 
of faulty MARR, VPTs for the years 2003- 04 and 2004-05 and fo r installation of 
new VPTs for the years 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04. (Paragraphs 1.13.1.1 
and 1.13.1.2) 
 

 
 
  In 16 SSAs of eight circles, due to poor radio frequency coverage of the WLL 
systems, the underutilis ation of capacity ra nged between 26 and 100 per cent, 
which led to blocking of funds to the tune of Rs 78.74 cror e.  The suppliers’ 
response to attend to complaints regar ding network coverage was poor, which 
led to non-provision of umbrella netwo rk coverage, system failures, very low 
signal or no signal in peak hours, call dropping, frequency overlapping, etc. 
(Paragraphs 1.13.2.1 to 1.13.2.2) 
 
  55475 defective WLL terminals were lyi ng in 16 circles due to nonexecution 
of AMCs with the suppliers, resulting in  unremunerative invest ment of Rs 47.95 
crore. (Paragraph 1.13.3) 
 
  Despite the closure of WLL connections, 16,712 FWTs and 20,590 HHTs 
were not recovered from the concerned customers in 16 circle and one Metro 
District, which led to a loss of Rs 25.94 crore. (Paragraph 1.13.4) 
 
  No bills were issued for any of the working connections in the J&K Circle and 
in the Agra SSA in the UP (East) Circle leading to short billing of revenue of Rs 
9.40 crore. (Paragraph 1.14.2) 
 
  Improper monitoring of revenue collecti on in 35 SSAs under five circle and all 
SSAs under eight circle resulted in accumulation of revenue arrears of Rs 113.88 
crore. (Paragraph 1.14.5) 
 
  Lack of an automatic disconn ection facility in the billing packages resulted in 
delayed disconnections and accumulation of revenue arrears to the tune of Rs 42 
crore in nine circle.  (Paragraph 1.14.7) 
 
  A survey conducted by Audit, rev ealed that the Com pany had failed to 
achieve the quality of service norms prescr ibed by TRAI pertaining to release of 
connections, incidence of faults and their rectification, voic e quality, getting 
connections to desired telephone numbers and provision of additional facilities 
like STD and ISD. (Paragraphs 1.15.1.1 to 1.15.1.6) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE 15TH SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  6th FEBRUARY,  2007 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais  
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Mohan Rawale 
7. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Shri Ajay Maroo 
11. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
12. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri C.V. Avadhani Deputy C& AG-cum-Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
3. Shri Vikram Chandra Direc tor General of Audit (P&T) 
 
 

 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LIMITED 
 
1. Shri A.K. Sinha CMD, BSNL 
2. Shri R.L. Dube Director (Plg. & NS) 
3. Shri S.D. Saxena Director (Finance) 
4. Shri A.N. Rai DDG (RN) 
5. Shri Y.P. Kataria DDG (SW) 
6. Shri A.K. Garg DDG (MM) 
7. Shri A.K. Mittal DDG (NM) 
8. Shri Mukesh Mathur DDG (TRF) 
9. Shri K.C.G.K. Pillai DDG (BBF) 
10. Shri P.K. Purwar DDG (CA) 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Jt. DDG (E) 
 
 
2. At first, the Committee had a briefing by the officials of the C&AG about 
the audit findings contained in the C&AG’s  Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2006 
regarding Performance Audit on Wireless-in -Local Loop (WLL) services provided 
by Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) which has been selected as a subject 
for examination during the year 2006-2007.  
 
3. The Committee then took oral evidenc e of the representatives of BSNL on 
the above-mentioned subject.  The Chairm an welcomed the representatives of 
BSNL and drew their attenti on to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker 
relating to evidence before Parliam entary Committee.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of BSNL m ade an audio-visual presentation on the Wireless-in-
Local Loop (WLL) services provided by BS NL.  After audio-visual presentation, 
Members raised queries on various aspects  pertaining to the subject and the 
explanations/ clarifications on the same  were made by the representatives of 
BSNL.  Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was not 
readily available with the representatives of BSNL.  It was, however, promised by 
them that the same woul d be furnished to the Commi ttee Secretariat in due 
course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the represent atives of BSNL for providing the 
material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF THE 16th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 6 MARCH, 2007 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs to 1600 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA  
 
2. Dr. M. Jagannath 
3. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
4. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA  
 
5. Shri Rishang Keishing 
6. Shri Ajay Maroo 
7. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
8. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri N. C. G upta Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary 
 
EXPERTS  
 
 
12. Shri D.S.P. Seth Former Member, Telecom Commission 
13. Shri Anil Kumar Secretary, Telecom Watchdog 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee condoled the demise of Shri Sunil Mahato, a 
sitting member of 14th Lok Sabha and observed a two minutes silence. 
 

 
 
3.   The Committee then took up the hearing of views of the two experts, 
separately, in connection with the ex amination of C&AG’s Report No. 9 
(Commercial) of 2006 relating to WLL Services in BSNL. During his welcome 
address, the Chairman drew the attention of both the experts to Direction 58 of 
the Directions by the Speaker regar ding evidence befor e Parliamentary 
Committee.  After the hearings were  over, the Chairman thanked both the 
experts for providing all the information on the subject matter as desired by the 
Committee. 
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF THE 19th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 10th April, 2007 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS  LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
9. Shri Kashiram Rana 
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
 
MEMBERS  RAJYA SABHA  
 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai 
13. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
14. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri N. C. G upta Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri C.V.Avadhani,  Deputy C&AG  – cum- Chairman, Audit Board. 
2. Shri A K. Awasthi,  Director General (commercial) C&AG office. 
 
 

 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION  
TECHNOLOGY (DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
1. Shri D.S. Mathur Secretary, Department of Telecommunications
2. Shri G.S. Grover Member (Services)  
3. Shri Shantanu Consul Administrator USO(F) 
4. Shri K. Sridhara Member (T) 
5. Shri M. Sahu JS(T) 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of  the representative s of Ministry of 
Communications and Information Te chnology, Department of 
Telecommunications in connection with th e examination of the C&AG’s Report 
No. 9 (Commercial) of 2006 relating to Wi reless in Local loop Services in BSNL 
which has been selected as a subject for examination during 2006-2007.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology, Deptt. of Telecommunications and 
also drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating 
to evidence before the Parliamentary Co mmittees.  Thereafter, Members raised 
queries on various aspects perta ining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the representatives of 
Ministry.  Information on some of the points raised by Chairman and Members of 
the Committee was not readily available with the representatives of Ministry 
which they promised to furnish to the Committee Secretariat. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for expressing their free and 
frank views and providing all the materi al/information on the subject matter as 
desired by the Committee. 
 
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF THE 21st SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 26th APRIL 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs to 1700 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
1. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumar Singh Deo 
4. Dr. M. Jagannath 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
6. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
11. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
12. Shri Rishang Keishing 
13. Shri Ajay Maroo 
14. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri N. C. Gupta Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary 
  
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Ms. Bharti Prasad Deputy C&AG (Commercial) C&AG office 
2. Shri A K. Awasthi Director General (commercial) C&AG office 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft Repor t on Performance Audit of Wireless in 
Local Loop Services provided by BSNL based on C&AG’s Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 
2006 and adopted the same without any modification. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report for presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  