 
28
C.P.U. No.  919 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF WLL SERVICES PROVIDED BY BSNL 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
 
[Based on C&AG Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2006] 
 
 
(Action Taken b y th e Govern ment on the recom mendations contain ed in 
the 20th Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha)  
on Performance Audit of WLL Services provided by BSNL) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.04.2008 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.04.2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2008 / Vaisakh 1930(S) 
 

CONTENTS 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-2008)  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  1 
 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
5 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of the sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
  
40 
 
 II   Analysis of the Action Taken by Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 20 th 
Report of Committee on Public Undertakings 
(14th Lok Sabha) on Performance Audit of WLL 
Services provided by BSNL. 
42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. *Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. *Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 **Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 **Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 **Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary - II 
5. Smt. K. Rangamani N. Executive Officer  
 
______________________________________________________________ 
*  Elected w.e.f. 17.5.2004 Dr. Rameshwar Oraon and Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be Members of the 
Committee consequent on their appointment as Ministers of States w.e.f. 6.04.2008. 
** ceased to be Members of the Committee consequen t on their retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
02.04.2008 and 09.04.2008. 
(iii)

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Performance Audit of WLL Services 
provided by BSNL. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report of the Co mmittee on Public Undertakings (2006-
2007) was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 th April, 2007.  Action Taken Replies of 
the Government to the re commendations contained in the Report were received 
on 28.03.2008.  The Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted 
this Report at their sittings held on 24 Ap ril, 2008. The Minutes of the sitting are 
given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 20 th Report (2006-07) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL, 
24 April, 2008      Chairman, 
 Vaishakha, 1930(S)          Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings (2006-07) on 
Performance Audit of WLL Services prov ided by BSNL which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 27 April, 2007. 
 
 The Action taken notes have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. It has been 
observed therefrom that the Government  has accepted and implemented all the 
14 recommendations made by the Committee in their Report as discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. The Recommendations of the Co mmittee as well as the 
corresponding action taken replies have been reproduced in Chapter-II of the 
Report. 
 
 The Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) on Performance Audit of 
WLL Services provided by BSNL was based on C&AG Report No.9 
(Commercial) of 2006. The Report dealt wit h various issues raised in the C&AGs 
Report which were examined by t he Committee in depth and the Committee 
made 14 recommendations on such issues. The key issues dealt with in the 
recommendations included – Non-introduction of latest technologies like MSC 
based CDMA IX 2000 for WLL based system though the same were available at 
that time (Recommendation No.1); N on-Analysis of Financial Viability and 
Profitability and failure to maintain separ ate costing records in respect of WLL 
Projects during the y ears 2000-01, 2001-02 and 2003-04 (Recommendation 
No.2); Non-formulation of appropriate marketing strategies for the WLL 
Telephone Service as compared to cellular mobile telephone service 
(Recommendation No.3); Excess payment s made by the Company to the 
vendors due to the delay in finalisation of rates in respect of Fixed Wireless 
Terminals (Recommendation No.4); Failu re of the Company to obtain 
performance Bank guarantees and premature release of the same resulting in 

 2 
 
undue financial benefit to suppliers (Rec ommendation No.5); Absence of any  
penalty provisions in the procurement manual for levy of penalty on suppliers for 
delay in installation,  acceptance, testing and commissioning etc. 
(Recommendation No.6); Delay in finalis ation of Annual Main tenance Contracts 
for maintenance of WLL Terminals with the concerned suppliers at the end of the 
warranty period (Recommendation No.7);  Incurring losses due to non-levy or 
short levy of liquidity damage charges on suppliers who delayed the delivery of 
WLL equipment and terminals (Recomm endation No.8); Under-utilisation of 
equipped capacity on account of deficiencies in pla nning, procurements, net-
work coverage and poor quality of servic e (Recommendation No.9); Failure of 
the Company  to achieve the planned targ ets of providing one WLL system in 
each of the 2642 Short Distance Charging Areas (Recommendation No.10); 
Accumulation of Revenue Arrears on account of short/delayed billing, delays in 
submission of completed advice notes  to telephone revenue accounting Branch, 
non-monitoring of Bills, heavy outstandi ng, non-availability of automatic 
disconnection facility etc. (Recommendat ion No.11); Poor quality of WLL 
Services provided by BSNL like non-rel easing of WLL connections in time, poor 
response for rectification of faults, poor voice quality, inadequate arrangement for 
power supply etc. (Recommendation No.1 2); Poor monitoring by the Corporate 
Office of its various Circles resulting in  number of shortcomings/deficiencies in 
execution and proper implementatio n of WLL Telephone Services 
(Recommendation No.13); and Failure of the Government in its monitoring role in 
ensuring that goals set out in the Nationa l Telecom Policy are achieved by BSNL 
in a time bound manner (Recommendation No.14).   
 
 From the action taken replies receiv ed from the Government, it has been 
seen that the Government and the BSNL has taken all the necessary steps to 
implement the recommendations made by the Committee on the above-
mentioned aspects. It may be seen from the action taken replies that the 
Company has already proc ured equipments based on latest technology namely 
MSC based CDMA 2000 IX equipments with the provisions for various value 
added services like wireless intelligent network, short message service, packet 

 3 
 
core network, unified messaging system etc. for the purpose of setting a bench 
mark for the other service providers to follow.  The Corporate office has issued 
the instruction to maintain separate costing records for WLL Services to ascertain 
financial liability and profitability analysis of WLL projec t vide their letter dated 8
th 
June, 2007. On the marketi ng front, the Company has ta ken the initiative to 
promote the WLL Services by way of appropriate marketing strategies like 
launching of promotional schemes in ur ban areas by way of giving rent-free 
FWTs with no registration/installation charges, offering various value-added 
services including high-speed internet and conducting of periodic market survey 
by respective BSNL Circles.  The Company has also issued instructions to all its 
telecom circles vide their communication dated 20 June, 2007 for ensuring that 
procedures relating to performance bank gu arantees are strictly adhered to and 
accountability must be fixed wherever the lapses are detected.  As regards 
incorporation of suitable penalty clause in the procur ement manual in case of 
default by the suppliers, the Company has incorporated the same in section IV of 
the procurement manual  and issued instructions to al l telecom circles vide their 
communication dated 13 April, 2007. On the issue of making Annual 
Maintenance Contract guidelines a par t and parcel of pr ocurement manual, a 
proposal is already under consideration of the BSNL  Board and after approval 
necessary clauses will be incorporated in the procurement manual. On the 
recommendation of the Committee that t he Corporate Office should constantly 
monitor the levy of prescribed liqui dated damage charges, the Company vide 
their communication dated 20 June, 2007 has issued instructions to the CGMs of 
all the telecom circles to constantly moni tor the levy of prescribed LD charges on 
the defaulting suppliers to pr otect the financial interest of BSNL. To increase the 
capacity utilisation in the urban areas the Company has taken a number of steps 
such as upgradation of existing technology  and providing a number of additional 
value added services to make the WLL Services more attractive. As regards 
achievement of planned targets of prov iding WLL Telephone Service to all the 
villages in the country, the Company has  stated that BSNL has already provided 
telephone facility to 50520 villages by  the end of 30.09.2007 and the remaining 

 4 
 
villages are to be covered by satellite te chnology which has been delayed due to 
delay in allocation of Transponder as a re sult of failure of INSAT-4C. On the 
issue of prevention of accumulation of revenue arrear s on account of 
short/delayed billing, the Company has taken a slew of measures including 
issuance of instructions to all the tele com circles and also by way of upgradation 
of the technology for automatic detecti on of defaulting areas. The Company has 
also taken a number of remedial measures for improving the quality of WLL 
Telecom Services vide instructions issued by them to all the telecom circles on 
13.8.2007. Regarding recommendation of the Committee for establishment of an 
exclusive division for monitoring of WL L Services, the Company vide their 
communication dated 21.8.2007 has decided  to post one joint DDG with two 
executives under DDG (SW) for monitoring  of WLL projects. It has also been 
stated in the action taken reply that t he performance of BSNL in implementation 
of USOF assisted activities is being reviewed by the government on regular basis 
and seven meetings were held during the period 01 .03.2006 to 31.03.2007. The 
government has also noted the Committees recommendati ons regarding use of 
solar energy for rural telephony and stat ed that with changes in technology, use 
of non-conventional energy may become possible and such avenues will 
definitely be explored. 
 
 The Committee are happy to note th at the government /BSNL has 
either implemented or agreed to im plement all the recommendations made 
by the Committee in their original re port. The Committee further note that 
the C&AG while vetting the action taken  replies of the government on the 
recommendations of the Committee have  also expressed their satisfaction 
on the replies. The Committee, howeve r, desire that the Company must 
follow sound business principles and prudent commercial practices in 
future so as to leave minimum scope fo r deficiencies/shortcomings. On the 
recommendations which have been acc epted in principle and necessary 
action has been initiated, the Commi ttee desire that the action when 
completed may be intimated.    

 5 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 1) 
 
NON-INTRODUCTION OF LATEST TECHNOLOGY 
 
 The Committee note that in purs uance of the National Telecom Policy 
(NTP-99), the Government mandated BSNL for replacement of existing MARR 
based VPTs and providing telephone connectivity in the rural areas as well as 
technically non-feasible and far-flung ar eas. For this purpose Committee headed 
by the Minister of State for Comm unications recommended wireless in Local 
Loop (WLL) as the most appropriate te chnology for achieving the targets 
envisaged in NTP-99. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee note t hat audit in their Report has observed 
that BSNL procured WLL S ystems based on obsolete tec hnologies like IS 95A, 
V-5.2 as well as CorDect Valued at Rs.1479.87 crores during the period from 
October, 2000 to March 2005 though the la test CDMA 2000-IX technology was 
available since October, 2000. The audit has further pointed out that the 
Company went for such obsolete technologies despite the observations made by 
the Management Committee of t he Board of Directors in March, 2002  that V.5.2 
CDMA technology was an outdated one.   
 
 The Committee, however, note that BSN L has justified their procurement 
of technology on the grounds such as - (i) the directive from PMO that only 
proven technology should be deployed but CDMA 2000 IX was not a proven 
technology at that time as it was not co mmercially deployed world wide; (ii) the 
DoT policy conveyed to BSNL in Sept ember 2001 that the wireless access 
system has to be planned on V.5.2 interfac e; (iii) the Telecom Engineering 
Centre (TEC) released the specificat ions for CDMA 2000 IX in February, 2004 
only; (iv) it would have taken another 2 years for deployment if CDMA IX was 
chosen. 
 
 Analysing the position explained above, the Committee observe that 
insofar providing telephone coverage to ru ral and far-flung areas is concerned, 
the prime objective was to provide tele phone connectivity and not the mobility. 
From this point of view and also taking into consideration the opinion given by the 
experts, the Committee feel that V.5.2  technology was adequate with that limited 
objective in mind.  However, at the same time, the Committee find that BSNL 
started launching WLL Service in urban ar eas of the country also primarily to 
counter threat from private basic oper ators who had already commenced their 
operations in urban areas. From this angle the Committee find that BSNL has 
definitely lagged behind in in duction of latest techno logies. While the private 

 6 
 
service operators like Reliance, Tata as well as the Government owned PSU 
MTNL rolled out their  WLL networks based on CDMA IX 2000 technology during 
late 2002 or beginning of 2003, the BSNL continued to purchase WLL equipment 
based on obsolete technologies even upto t he year 2004. In view of these facts 
the Committee do not agree with the justif ication offered by BSNL that CDMA 
2000 IX was not a proven technology at that time and Telecom Engineering 
Centre (TEC) released the specifications for it only in February, 2004.  It is on 
record that even the management Co mmittee of the Board of BSNL had 
observed in March 2002 itself that V.5.2 CDMA Technology was an outdated one 
and the MSC based solution using Internat ional Operating Standards (IOS) was 
the latest  technology for CDMA WLL Systems which could be easily upgraded to 
CDMA IX 2000 version. The Committee therefore deprecate the failure on the 
part of BSNL to get the Generic Recommendation (GR) of MSC based 
equipment only in 2004 i.e. after around 3 years since this latest technology was 
approved by International Telecom Un ion (ITU) before October 2000 and 
inducted by other operators during 2002- 03. AS a result, besides losing the 
business to other service operators, t he BSNL now has to spend hefty amounts 
on upgradation of obsolete technology.  In the opinion of the Committee, BSNL 
should have provided the WLL Services particularly to their urban customers 
based on latest technologies irrespective of certain bottlenecks faced by them.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that in future BSNL should ensure to their 
customers better technically equipped se rvices setting a bench-mark for the 
other service providers to follow.  
 
 Reply of the Government 
  
1.  Comment of BSN L on the observations of the Committee. 
 
BSNL has accepted the observations of the committee that in so far 
providing telecom facility in rural and far-flung areas where prime objective was 
to provide telephone connectivity and not t he mobility, the V5.2 technology was 
adequate with the limited obj ective in mind. However introduction of WLL 
services in urban areas based on V5.2 / R2 technology was rolled out in 
accordance with DOT policy -conveyed to BSNL in Sept. 2001 vide letter No.1 0-
2/2000-BS.II dt. 12.9.200I which mandated to provide wireless access system 
based on \/5.2 protocol. Moreover BSN L kept provision for Upgradation of 
technology from IS 95 to CDMA 2000 IX.  
 
Similar condition and quotation for upgradation was also envisaged while 
procuring 5 lakh lines CDM A WLL based on V5.2 technology for which tender 
was issued on 07.05.2002 vide MM/SW/052002/000242. It is worthwhile to 
mention here that these equipment V52 based CDMA WLL equipment of ZTE 
make are already under upgradation to CDMA 2000 IX technology with Value 
Added Services.  
 

 7 
 
Some of the equipment initially pr ocured which are not upgradeable/ not 
commercially viable to upgrade are being depl oyed to isolated / far flung rural 
areas where main objective is to provide voice telephony and not the mobility. 
 IS 95 - CDMA WLL equipment in urban area has already been ordered to 
be replaced by CDMA 2000 IX WLL equipment with value added services. It is 
expected that the roll out of the new equipment will be completed during the year 
2007-08. Recovered IS 95 equipment hav e been ordered to be redeployed in 
remote / far flung areas.  
 
As regards Committees observation about  failure on part of BSNL, to get 
the generic requirement (GR) of MSC based equipment through Telecom 
Engineering Centre (TEC) only in 2004, it is submitted that BSNL on its own was 
prepared technical specifications No. BSNL/SW-OI/OI May. 2002 for MSC based 
CDMA 2000 IX equipment during May, 2002.  Based on this specifications, a 
tender for procurement of MSC based CDMA2000 IX WLL was floated in July, 
2002 itself. However due to technical quer ies raised by prospective bidders, 
tender opening was delayed  and finally the tender was opened on 10.l0.2002 
(Commercial) & 17.09.2003 (Financial) and POs were placed on different 
vendors on 09.03.2004, 29.03. 2004 & 18.08.2004. Even a fter finalization of the 
tender, equipment had undergone through validation and field trial which took 
almost one year, to give clearance for st arting the commercial supply to the field 
units. The roll out of CDMA 2000 IX equipment commenced from March 2005.  
During the period from inviting tender fo r CDMA 2000 IX equipment to finally 
giving the clearance for starting commercia l supply, additional orders were also 
placed for CDMA WLL based on IS 95 technology which was already field proven 
so as to fulfill the imm ediate requirement of provid ing WLL DELs, for clearing 
waiting list and completing the USO target. 
 
2. Action taken by BSNL on recommendations of the Committee: 
 
As recommended by the committee to ensure better technically equipped 
services to customer and setting a bench mark for other service providers to 
follow, in this regard following action has already been taken. 
 
BSNL has procured and deployed CDMA WLL equipment based on 
CDMA 2000 IX technology as per the purchase orders mentioned below: 
 
1.  10.26 lakh lines procurement 
 
PO No. CE/PO/021/03-04 dated 04.03.2004 
PO No. CE/PO/024/03-04 dated 29.03.2004 
PO No. CE/PO/011/04-05 dated 18.08.2004 
PO No. CE/PO/012/04-05 dated 23.08.2004 
 
2.  4.5 lakh lines procurement 
 

 8 
 
PO No CE/PO/024/04-05 dated 07.03.2005 
 
 
3.  5.13 lakh lines procurement 
 
PO No.CE/PO/003/2005-06 dated 29.08.2006 
PO No.CE/PO/004/2005-06 dated 29.08.2006 
PO No.CE/PO/005/2005-06 dated 30.08.2006 
 
4.  6.3 lakh lines procurement 
 
PO No.CE/PO/008/2005-06 dated 28.12.2005 
 
Most of the above MSC based CDMA 2000 IX equipment has already 
been rolled out and working. 
 
In addition BSNL has placed orders for 30.2 lakh lines of MSC based 
CDMA 2000 IX WLL system vide following purchase orders. 
 
POs. CE/PO/O12/2006-07 dated 18.12.2006. 
PO No CE/PO/031 /2006-07 dated 20.12.2006 
 
The supply .of equipment against above POs has started and installation 
and commissioning of the same has commenced.  
 
The above purchase orders also contai n equipment for providing various 
Value Added Services to WLL customers as given below.  
 
1.  Wireless intelligent Network (WIN) 
 
It will be possible to offer IN based services like pre-paid service, VPN etc. 
to WLL customers with the help of WIN.  
 
2. Short Message Service Centre (SMSC) 
 
It will be possible to offer SMS and content based SMS service to WLL 
customers with the help of SMSC.  
 
3.  Packet Core Network (PCN) 
 
It will be possible to offer high speed packet data (upto 144 Kbps) to WLL 
customers with the help of PCN 
 
4.  Unified Mess aging System:(UMS) 
 

 9 
 
It will be possible to offer voice mail, fax service etc. to WLL customers 
with the help of UMS.  
 
It is expected that the above Value Added Services will commence during 
last quarter of this financial year.  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 2) 
NON-ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL VIABI LITY AND PROFITABILITY AND 
SEPARATE COSTING RECORDS 
 
 The Committee note that BSNL while planning for launching and expansion 
of WLL Telephone Service did not carry out financial viability and profitability 
analysis of WLL Projects during t he years 2000-01, 2001- 02 and 2003-04 on the 
ground that the projects had -been undertaken on the basis of a cabinet decision 
which reflected a social commitment of the government. Also, no separate year-
wise details of total revenue billed and co llected and the profit  and loss account 
were compiled by the Company from 2000-01 to 2004-05. The Committee further 
observe that inspite of the instructions issued by the Corporate Office to all its 
Circles in 2003 and 2 004 to prepare separate costing records, 13 Circles and two 
metro districts did not prepare these records. Further, many Circles did not prepare 
the required revenue projections also. Th e BSNL has tried to justify the above-
mentioned deficiencies pointed out by the audit on the gr ounds that – profit and 
loss account is prepared as a whole and not the product/service-wise in 
accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.; the WLL Services are 
provided under the Basic Service Licence only which include wire-line services 
also; WLL Service has never contributed to revenue by more than 1.5% of the 
Companys total revenue in any financial year and as such even product wise 
segmental reporting which is required for products having more than 10% of the 
total revenue of the Company was not required in this case. 
 
The Committee feel dismayed at such  a lackadaisical response of the 
Company in justifying their imprudent act of not maintaining any separate costing 
records for WLL Service.  The Committee find it unbelievable that profit/loss 
records in respect of WLL Services provided in rural areas are not readily available 
with the Company. Even the Corporate office on their part did not compile the year-
wise details of total revenue billed and co llected and the profit and loss account 
taking the excuse that this was not re quired in terms of the provisions of 
Companies Act, 1956. The Committee while observing that the Company is getting 
a financial support from t he government in the form of Universal Service 
Obligations Fund (USOF) since the year 2002 onwards for providing connectivity in 
the rural areas, feel that it was absolutely necessary for the Company to accurately 
carry out the financial viabil ity and profitabilit y analysis of the WLL Projects and 
preparation of separate costing records.   This would have indeed helped the 
Company to accurately assess the quantum of losses suffered/ likely to be suffered 
while carrying out this uneconomical but socially desirable commitment of the 

 10 
 
Government so that the same could be appropriately subsidized from the USOF 
besides helping the Company in accurate ly assessing the remunerativeness of its 
WLL Services. The Committee, theref ore, strongly recommend that the 
Government issue appropriate directions to the BSNL for preparation of separate 
costing records pertaining to WLL Service by each Circle so as to ascertain the 
Circle-wise operational and financial viab ility besides ensurin g that the subsidy 
released under USOF has bee n properly accounted for. This would enable the 
Company to assess the returns on original  investments which is presently not 
possible for the Company.  The Compan y on its part needs to strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism over its Circles fo r ensuring adherence to such directions. 
Any failures by the Circles in compliance with such directions need to be dealt with 
sternly.  
 
 Coming to the issue of financial viability of  providing WLL Services in rural 
areas, the Committee note that  presently these servic es are uneconomical though 
socially desirable. In this context, the Committee feel that there is a huge scope for 
bringing a financial turn around in the situation. The Committee has been informed 
by representatives of the Ministry during their oral evidence that the Government 
has the plans to achieve a rural tele-dens ity of 25 percent from  the presently low 
tele-density of 2 percent by the year 2012.  As such, in the coming years there is 
going to be a huge demand for telecom in t he rural areas.  With all the necessary 
infrastructure and expertise already in plac e, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that the BSNL should be able to  capture the majority share of this 
expansion with very little incremental costs when com pared to private service 
providers who have just stepped in to commence their operations in rural areas. 
The Committee, therefore,  desire that the Company should immediately start 
chalking out appropriate turnaround strategi es and ensure their implementation in 
a time bound manner so as to convert this loss making propositio n into a profitable 
venture. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(1)  Preparation of separate co st records for WLL service 
 
From the financial year 2003-04 all the territorial Telecom Circles and 
Metro Districts have been maintaining the co st records for all types of services 
including WLL service provided by BSN L as per the Cost Accounting Records 
Rules 2002.  It is ensured that concerned Circles will continue to prepare the cost 
records pertaining to WLL service in future.  
 
2)  Revenue billed and revenue coll ected in respect of WLL service 
 
Corporate Office has issued instructions  to concerned circles to maintain 
separate sub-ledger statement  for WLL (Fixed) and WL L (Mobile) in order to 
arrive at (i) revenue billed, (ii) revenue co llected, (iii) outstanding dues etc. in 
respect of WLL service. 

 11 
 
 
As per the instructions mentioned above Circles have compiled the details 
of total revenue billed, revenue collected and outstanding for WLL service for the 
financial year 2000-01 to 2004-05. The pos ition of outstanding for the period 
ending 31.03.2005 as on 30.11.06, percent age of recovery and outstanding for 
period ending 2006-07 up to 30.11.2006 have also been compiled.  
3)  Projection of revenue in respec t of WLL service by the Circle.  
 
Corporate Office has already taken action to fix the revenue target for 
WLL service from the Revised Estimate  of 2006-07 and Budget Estimate of 
2007- 08.  
 
4)  To carry out the financial viability and profitability analysis of the WLL 
Projects by preparation of Profit & Loss account of WLL service  
 
BSNL has been compiling the Cost Records and Accounting Separation 
Financial Reports in respect of all the services including WLL service provided by 
BSNL since 2003-04. These records/reports depict the profit/loss of individual 
services including WLL Service provided by BSNL. These reports/records help in 
assessing the financial viabilit y and profitability of WLL se rvice as well as taking 
various managerial decisions . From these reports/records the return on 
investment on WLL service can also be ascertained.  
 
5)  To capture majority share of new subscriber on account of increase of 
tele-density in rural areas and chalking out turnaround strategies for WLL service 
 
BSNL has taken up the following steps:  
 
(a) BSNL has expanded the WLL network in rural areas for providing full 
coverage so that telephone connecti on can be given on demand. For this 
purpose 3 BTS per SDCA have been pr ocured and are under installation 
and commissioning in the SDCA area.  
 
(b) In addition to basic voice service the value added services like pre-paid 
service, SMS, UMS, high speed inte rnet are being rolled out so that 
additional revenue stream  are generated from W LL service. The SMS 
facility is being provided to all WLL subscribers by default in order to 
popularize the WLL service.  
 
(c) Wireless Internet services are al so being launched using CDMA data card 
in rural areas to promote e-governanc e, e-education, e -medicine etc. in 
rural areas. Instructions have already been issued to the field units for 
connections on WLL.  
 
(d) In order to popularize the WLL se rvice and generate demands for WLL in 
rural areas BSNL has taken various marketing strategies. 

 12 
 
 
(i)  to arrange special marketing camps in the areas of BTSs (specially 
in the haats / marriage functions / local functions / gatherings etc. 
within the BTS area) taking into account the present population, 
number of existing households, income / occupational pattern of the 
inhabitants of the targeted area.  
(ii) to get such marketing camps inaugurated by the village Sarpanch 
or by local important persons who can create additional impact and 
acceptability of the marketing acti vities/process of giving new WLL 
connections.  
(iii) to print pamphlets/materials in local language for wide publicity,  
(iv)  to involve local persons / em ployees pf BSNL belonging to those 
areas in the process of publicity/organizing camps. 
(v)  to introduce Mobile Customer  Service Centers (CSC) equipped with 
all necessary facilities e.g. simplified forms, records, booklets, 
desired stationery items, receipt books etc. and having facility to 
take photographs of the subscriber s by instant photo cameras, in 
order to complete the formalities for giving a new WLL connection.  
(vi) to give rewards / prizes for early subscribers  
(vii) to reduce the registration fee 
(viii) to provide WLL connection at the camp itself. 
 
Above-mentioned steps will enable BSNL  to capture the major chunk of 
the subscribers in rural areas and boos t the revenue of WLL service and make 
WLL service financially viable.  
 
6) To strengthen the monitoring mechan ism over the circles for ensuring 
adherence to directions issued by Corporate Office  
 
BSNL has introduced Balance Busines s Score card system. Under this 
system the Circle-wise monthly/quarterly/ yearly targets for all the items of 
business are fixed and intimated to the ci rcles.  The circles furnish achievements 
against such targets and Corporate o ffice reviews and reconcile such 
achievements.  In this way Corporate office does monitoring so that directives 
issued by the Corporate office are properly implemented by the Circles. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
NON-FORMULATION OF MARKETING STRATEGIES 
 
The Committee note that the BSNL did not formulate any strategies for 
launching and marketing of the WLL Services  either at its initial launching or 
subsequent expansion. No budget was exclusively made for this purpose.  While 
the Company had spent an amount of Rs.14. 25 crore for promotion of its cellular 
Mobile Telephone Service, a meager amount  only of Rs.22.05 lakh was spent 
during 2002-03 to 2004-05 on  promotion and marketing of WLL Service though 

 13 
 
similar investments have been made in these projects.  The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the Company even did not care to conduct any market 
survey through some reputed agency to assess the likely demand and customers 
response to the WLL Service though the approval for such survey was given by 
the CMD of the Company. Further, as admitted by the Company, no study has 
ever been undertaken by the Company regarding marketing/promotion strategies 
in respect of WLL Services.  In addition to this, the Company procured terminals 
worth Rs.229 crore without k eeping customers preferences  in view resulting in 
their lying idle as ther e was no demand for them. The Company has tried to 
justify their failure by stating that ma rket survey was not required as the WLL 
Service was initially launched for prov iding Village Public  Telephones and to 
meet the scattered demands of telephones in the rural areas.  As such, not much 
marketing expenditure incurred in the promotion of  WLL system as compared to 
mobile services which is the fastest growing service of BSNL.  As regards 
ascertaining of customers preferences  during procurement of WLL terminals 
worth Rs.229 crore, the Company has come  out with the reply that their further 
procurement has since been stopped and presently, latest State of art technology 
terminals at par with terminals provided by other private operators are being 
procured. The Company is making all out e fforts to utilize the terminals procured 
earlier by progressively deploying them in rural areas. 
  
The Committee strongly deplore the  non-professional approach of the 
Company in handling the ma rketing and promotional as pects  of WLL services. 
Though, there was no competit ion involved in respect of rural areas, the private 
players were very much there in the urban areas providing WLL Services.  As 
such, the Committee feel that there was a strong need for the Company to chalk 
out appropriate marketing strategies for atleast urban areas.  Now, as the private 
players have started making their presence in  the rural areas also, it is high time 
for the Company to evolve suitable market ing strategies so as to ensure that the 
present status of being a major service pr ovider of WLL services in the rural 
areas is retained by it and t he Company do not lose it to  the private players. For 
this purpose, the Company must put in  place a system of conducting market 
surveys through reputed agencies to as certain the customers response in 
respect of quality of service as well as ch oice of instruments etc. vis-à-vis those 
being offered by private operators.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding the observation of the Commi ttee on Public Undertakings that 
there is no strategy in mark eting of WLL services in t he urban areas, it is stated 
that most of the WLL capacity of BSNL is available in the rural areas for providing 
Village Public Telephones (VPTs) and Rural DELs. 
 
As on 31.3.07 out of total WLL c apacity of 53 lakh, 35 lakh WLL 
connections are working. Out of the total capacity of 53 lakh, 33 lakh are CDMA 
2000 IX MSC based systems 15 lakh IS95 CDMA & balance 6 lakh are of Cor-

 14 
 
DECT technology. In addition 30 lakh lines of CDMA 2000 IX MSC based 
systems are under installation out of which 5 lakh lines  are in urban areas where 
the existing IS95 CDMA WLL are being re placed. This project is planned to be 
completed in the current financial year. The IS95 (old Technology) WLL system 
are being upgraded to 2000 IX MSC bas ed (new technology) in a phased 
manner. 
 
The company shall launch a promoti onal scheme in urban areas wherein 
landline customers giving revenue of more than Rs. 1000 p.m. be given rent free 
FWT (with no registration/installation charges).  
 
A campaign is also proposed to be l aunched Circle wise, wherever there 
is upgradation of IS 95 to CDMA 2000 IX MSC based systems, to offer Value 
Added Services such as Hi-speed inte rnet up to 144kbps, SMS (with BSNL & 
Other Operators GSM + CDMA Platforms),  Attractive Prepaid packages, CUG- 
VPN packages, EVDO Data cards and feature rich subscriber terminals. 
 
Presently data available primarily depicts the number of connections circle 
wise. The comprehensive data giving det ails of location where the upgraded 
system are being installed and their technologies is being collated.  
 
Periodic market survey is very essential to be aware of the market 
dynamics and this is being conducted by respective BSNL circles. The Company 
has procured FWTs with the latest state- of-the-art technology which are at par 
with terminals being provided by other private operators. The Quality of service is 
satisfactory in urban areas equally com parable with private operators. But due to 
electricity problems the service is not so  good in rural areas as battery back up 
gets exhausted resulting in disruption of services. These handsets support value 
added services like CLl, color handset. mu sic. SMS etc which the customers 
demand. Also High speed internet upto 144 kbps will be available to customers in 
areas with CDMA 2000 IX MSC based systems.  In addition prepaid service will 
be available from December 2007. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
EXCESS PAYMENT DUE TO DELAY IN FINALISATION OF RATES 
 
The Committee note that as per the ex isting procurement  procedure, the 
Company places the purchase orders for WLL equipment and terminals and the 
respective Circles that receive the deliver y, release the payment to suppliers. In 
this regard, the Committee observe t hat Company placed purchase orders for 
supply of FIXed Wall Terminals (FWTs)  on two suppliers namely, M/s ARM 
Limited and M/s United Telecom Limit ed, in September and November 2002 
respectively on provisional rates. Thes e rates were firmed up by the Corporate 
Office in December, 2002. However, in No vember 2004 i.e. after two years from 
the date of placement of purchase or ders, the Corporate office made a 

 15 
 
downward revision of the firm rates in respect of the supplies made after the 
scheduled delivery period. T he audit has pointed out that  due to this delayed 
finalisation of rates by the Corporate Office, excess payments to the tune of 
Rs.5.59 crore were made to these two s uppliers by the respective circles. 
Presently, the issue of recovery of the excess payments is under arbitration as 
per the direction of the High Court. The Committee ar e not convinced with the 
explanation of the Company that most of the Purchase orders are issued at firm 
prices but in many cases, the provisional price is given if these are issued at the 
time of forthcoming budget so that reducti on in taxes/levies may be incorporated 
while finalizing the prices. 
 
Taking a holistic view, the Committee ar e of the opinion that the prevalent 
procurement practice is ambiguous in respect of the price settlement mechanism. 
Also, there appears to be a lack of coordination between the Corporate Office 
and the Circles in releasing payments to the suppliers. No definite time-limits 
exist within which, the provisional prices are required to be firmed up in the cases 
of purchase orders placed on provisional ra tes. As a result, the Company has to 
waste their time and energy for recovery of excess payments by way of 
avoidable litigations in courts and arbi tration proceedings. Towards this end, the 
Committee note that now the Company has introduced a “Fall Clause” applicable 
to the supplies made during the ext ended delivery period in the Procurement 
Manual to strengthen the posit ion of BSNL in the cases of litigations. The 
Committee feel that this step should have been taken  by the Company much 
earlier. The Committee, therefore, re commend that BSNL should undertake a 
comprehensive review of its procurement manual to streamline their procurement 
procedure with a view to remove deficiencies in the purchase system.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As recommended by the Committee, BSNL has already reviewed its 
Procurement Manual.  Suggestions from fi eld units and other  concerned bodies 
were invited and based on various inputs, the price clause, Fa ll Clause, L.D. 
Clause etc. have already been updated to remove deficiency in the purchase 
system  
 
Recommendation No. 5 
FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERFORMANCE BANK GUARANTEES 
 
The Committee note that as per the Procurement manual of the Company, 
there is a provision for obtaining from the suppliers  an Addi tional Performance 
Bank Guarantee (PBGs) @ 5% of the va lue of the remaining quantity to be 
supplied during the extended delivery period. In this regard the Audit has pointed 
out that such additional PBGs amounting to Rs.2.49 cr ores were short realized 
from two suppliers namely M/s Tera Com and M/s HFCL.  Similarly, in respect of 
one purchase order placed on M/s ITI, the audit has observed that the Company 

 16 
 
neither recovered the initial corporate guarantee nor the additional PBGs before 
granting extensions to the original schedu le. In addition to this, the Company in 
the case of Orissa Circle, released prematurely the additiona l Bank Guarantee of 
Rs.4.11 Crore after sIX months instead of  the prescribed requ irement of seven 
months. The audit has, therefore, conclud ed that this failure on the part of the 
Company to obtain PBGs and premature re lease of PBGs has resulted in undue 
financial benefits of Rs.26.40 crore to the suppliers. 
  
In the above context, the Committee obs erve that the main purpose of 
obtaining the PBG is to safeguard the in terests of the buyer by way of a 
compensation for any loss resulting from the suppliers failure to complete its 
obligations under the contract.  This purpose gets defeated if PBGs are released 
without ensuring that the equipment supplied is fault-free and no claim is pending 
against the supplier. The extant case not only casts a reflection on the monitoring 
role of the Corporate Office over its vari ous Circles in their adherence to various 
prescribed procedures in th e procurement manual but also does not absolve the 
Circle authorities from their responsibilit ies of safeguarding the financial interests 
of the Company.  The Committee, therefor e, strongly recommend that in order to 
safeguard its financial intere sts, the Company must strengthen its monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that procedures re lating to performance Bank Guarantees 
as prescribed in the procurement manual are strictly adhered to by all the Circles 
and accountability must be fIXed wherev er the lapses are detected. The 
Corporate Office must keep it self apprised of the status of obtaining/releasing of 
PBGs as well as the extensions, if any, granted to the suppliers by the Circles 
and make necessary interventions wherever necessary.  
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) With regard to committees observa tion regarding short realization of 
additional BG amounting to Rs.2.49 crores from M/s. Teracom and 
M/s. HFCL, it is submitted that t here is a difference between PBG and 
additional BG. The PBG equal to 5% of PO value of both these 
vendors are still in custody of BSNL. The additional BG is taken at the 
time of granting DP extension and is  in addition to PBG. Recently, the 
requirement of additional BG at the time of extension of Delivery 
Period was reviewed by the Managem ent of BSNL and it has been 
decided that henceforth this additional BG will not be required for 
Delivery Period extension upto 20 weeks. Only in case the extension is 
granted beyond 20 weeks then this addi tional BG will be asked from 
the vendors.  
 
(ii) The observation of the Audit regard ing ITI is also not  correct. M/s ITI, 
as per rule, is exempted from submission of PBG, so no PBG was 
taken at the time of APO. However, the additi onal 5% BG for Rs.9, 
15,10,9511-dated 22-04-2005 was taken while extending the delivery 
period. The POs placed on M/s. ITI fo r IFWTs were later short closed 

 17 
 
and the PBG(5%) and additional BG(5%) have already been recovered 
from their bills. 
 
(iii) It is further submitted that PBGs  are strictly released as per the 
provision of Procurem ent manual.  It is submitted that the PBGs 
obtained by corporate office are monitored regularly and the PBGs 
obtained by circles/field units are monitored at circle level.  Further 
instructions have been sent to circle for taking full care in this regard.  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
ABSENCE OF PENALTY PROVISION IN THE PROCUREMENT MANUAL 
 
The Committee note with concern that, the Companys manual for 
procurement of telecom equipment and stores  did not specify any specific terms 
and conditions for levy of penalty on s uppliers for delays in installation, 
acceptance/testing and commissioning of t he WLL projects to be executed on 
turnkey basis. The audit scrutiny has reve aled that absence of any such penalty 
provisions has resulted in blocking of capital of Rs 134.97 crore.  As per the Audit 
the Company has failed to levy appropr iate penalties on the concerned 
Companies namely, M/s LG  Electronics, M/s ARM, M/s UTL and M/s ITI in 
respect of deficiencies in the equipment supplied by them on various counts like 
delays in installation, acceptance and testing and commissioning of WLL 
equipment, coverage and other defects.  The Committee have been apprised 
that the BSNL Board has constituted a High Power Committee (HPC) which has 
recommended different penalties to be imposed on the defaulting companies for 
different activities and the Circles have been recently provided with the 
recommendations of the HPC with instructio ns to take suitable action against the 
defaulting suppliers. 
  
The Committee note with concern that  absence of any penalty provision 
either in the tender document or in the procurement manual has led to the failure 
of the Company in imposing the r equired penalties on the suppliers. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Company should invariably 
ensure that suitable penalty clause is  included in the tender document/ other 
legal documents so that no party can take undue advantage of the provision.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The requirement of penalty clause for delay in installation & 
commissioning activities is di fferent for different proj ects, such as CDMA WLL, 
DLC, Broad Band, GSM etc.  Accordingly the management of BSNL has decided 
that generalization of this clause would not be possible and has to be modified on 
case to case basis.  Accordingly, it has  been decided that the penalty clause for 
delay in installation & commissioning wo uld be a part of special conditions, 

 18 
 
Section IV.  For each tender relating to Turnkey projects this clause would be 
customized and got approved by the Planning Wing before issue of NIT.   
 
Recommendation No. 7 
DELAY IN FINALISATION OF ANNUAL MAINTENANCE CONTRACT  
 
The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Bid documents, 
Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMCs) for the maintenance of WLL Terminals 
were to be signed by the Circles with the concerned s uppliers at the end of the 
warranty period.  The audit scrutiny has revealed that 55475 defective WLL 
terminals were lying in 16 Circles due to non execution of AMCs with the 
suppliers, resulting in unrem unerative investment of Rs 47.95 crore.  According 
to the Company, the AMC guidelines were prepared in time. However, as the 
Company decided to renegotiate the prices  of the AMC which were finalized in 
the earlier Purchase Orders, it  took some time to fina lise the new rates. Also 
there were some delay due to negotiations with the s uppliers for implementation 
of the new AMC guidelines so finaliz ed.  The Company has further been 
informed that now onwards, detailed AMCs has been m ade as part of the tender 
thus obviating the need to issue further  guidelines at a later date.  The 
Committee has also been informed that a ll the defective WLL terminals have 
since been got repaired by t he concerned suppliers as per  the provisions of the 
finalized AMC agreement. 
 
 Taking into view the af oresaid position, the Committee feel that there has 
been a definite avoidable delay on the part of the Company in finalizing the AMC 
guidelines resulting in not only the delayed  rectific ation of the faulty WLL 
terminals but also  the consequential re venue loss due to no n-deployment of the 
defective  equipment. The Committee feel that the bid-document itself should 
have contained the details of the AMCs . The Committee has not been provided 
with any information justifying as to why t he AMC guidelines were not finalized at 
the purchase order stage itsel f. This type of imprudent practice followed by the 
Company for AMCs is bound to create bitterness between the Company and the 
suppliers. The Committee recommend that the AMC guidelines should be made 
a part and parcel of the procur ement manual so as to serve as a reference point 
for future procurements and the provisio ns of the procurement manual should 
strictly be followed in all the bid documents.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the committee, for inclusion of AMC guidelines as a 
part and parcel of the procurement manual , MM cell has already submitted the 
memo for the same for the considerati on of BSNL Board.  The necessary AMC 
clauses will be incorporated by MM cell in the Procurement Manual after 
obtaining the approval of BSNL Board.  
 

 19 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES 
 
The Committee note that Purchase order s for WLL projects issued by the 
corporate office specifically provided for levy of liquidated damage (LD) charges 
on the suppliers in cases of delays in de livery of WLL equipment. The  Audit has  
pointed out that in 34 case s in nine circles and the Chennai Telephones District, 
LD charges were either not levied or  short levied on the defaulting suppliers 
despite non delivery and delayed delivery of WLL eq uipment and terminals by 
them. Consequently, the Company had to in cur a loss of Rs 11.97 crore due to 
non-levy and short levy of LD charges on th e defaulting suppliers. In response to 
this audit observation the Company has subm itted that LD was levied as per the 
procedure and only a meager amount of Rs.11,80,313 is to be recovered which 
is held up due to stay on recoveries as th e case is sub-judice  with an arbitrator. 
The Committee would, however, like to recommend that the Corporate Office 
should constantly monitor the levy of prescribed liquidated damage charges by 
the Circles on the defaulting suppliers to  protect its financial interests and 
avoidance of entering into unnecessary litigations against the suppliers for 
recoveries.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the committee that corporate office should 
constantly monitor the levy of prescribed liquidated damage charges (LD 
Charges) by the circle is well taken but considering the enormous quantum of 
work and distributed nature of payment it would not be practically possible to 
monitor the action taken by the field units in this regard.  However, instructions 
have been issued to all CGMs to constant ly monitor the levy of prescribed LD 
charges on the defaulting suppliers to protect the financial interest of BSNL  
 
Recommendation No 9 
UTILISATION OF EQUIPPED CAPACITY 
 
The Committee note that In order to ensure proper returns on the 
investment made in a proj ect, it is imperative that  the equipped capacity of the 
project is optimally utilised and all pre scribed targets for c apacity utilisation are 
met. The Audit has pointed out that the capacity utilisation was 60.53 per cent 
against the total equipped capacity of 26. 89 lakh lines of WLL systems as of 
March 2005 mainly on account of defici encies in planning, procurements, 
network coverage and poor quality of service.  The Company formulated the 
plans for launching of the WLL telephone service and its subsequent expansion 
with inadequate assessment of demand and requirement and did not consider 
identification of area s based on population and trade statistics, unutilised 
capacity, presence of priv ate operators and the envis aged growth of its other 

 20 
 
telephone services. Expansion of the ca pacity during 2002-03  to 2004-05 in 
seven circles despite underutilisation of t he existing capacity, led to injudicious 
expenditure of Rs 108.64 crore on expansion. 
 
 The Company on the above-mentioned audit observations has submitted 
that the planning of WLL in urban areas was prim arily to counter the threat from 
existing private operators and in rural areas the stress was mainly to provide 
VPTs, replacement of MARR VPTs, clear the waiting list and to meet scattered 
demands in remote areas. Regarding the further expansion of the WLL service 
inspite of the existence of untilised capac ity, the Company has stated that this 
has been done mainly for providing coverage in very large geographical area 
needed to be covered to meet the scatt ered demands in rural areas. The 
expansion of the capacity was also  done to meet the time-bound programmes 
set by USOF.  Regarding the latest position of the capacity utilization, the 
Committee has been informed that for rural areas the present loading has 
already crossed 76% and for Urban areas it is 42%. The Company has also 
justified the expansion on the ground that the existing unutilized capacity is being 
progressively utilized for future programmes.   
 
 The Committee observe that although the capacity utilization for WLL 
service in the rural areas is almost 76%, it is very low for urban areas which is 
only about 42%.  The Committee therefor e recommend that the Company must 
adopt appropriate measures like upgrading t he existing technology and providing 
value-added services like SMS, High-spee d internet, pre-paid services etc. to 
make WLL services more attractive so as to increase its capacity utilization in the 
urban areas also.  This whole exercise  must be conducted in a time-bound 
manner. The Committee further recommend that the Company should consider 
unutilized capacities, pres ence of other private operators and envisaged growth 
of its own landline and cellu lar mobile telephone services while forecasting 
demand and requirements in the future . The Company should also prepare 
appropriate strategies for ensuring optim um utilisation of the equipped capacity 
of its WLL systems 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL is in agreement with the committ ee that the capacit y utilisation in 
rural area is better and the same is poor in urban areas and in order to increase 
the capacity utilisation in urban areas, it  is required to upgrade the existing 
technology and provide Value Added Serv ices like SMS, High  Speed internet, 
prepaid services etc. to make WLL services more attractive.  
  
BSNL has taken following actions in this regard. 
 
Upgradation of Technology in urban area 
 
1. BSNL Management Committee vi de item No. 50.07, approved 
procurement of 5 lakh lines MSC based.  CDMA WLL for replac ement of 5 lakh 

 21 
 
lines IS 95 Urban WLL by invoking 25% ad d order clause in present 25.2 lakh 
lines CDMA WLL Tender.   Accordingly purchase orders were placed for 30.2 
lakh lines CDMA WLL based on latest  technology (CDMA 2000 IX/IX EVDO). 
Instructions were issued to  field units on 15.2.2007 gi ving detailed guidelines 
regarding redeployment of commissioned IS 95 V5.2/R2 based WLL in general 
including urban WLL redeployment.  
 
2. In additions circles have been gi ven guidelines vide 69-15/2002-ESP/ 
VoI.V dated 19.2.07 for planning of W LL in urban areas and project additional 
requirement of CDMA WLL 
 
Provision of Value added Services in Urban areas 
 
BSNL has already procured equipment for providing various Value Added 
Services as detailed below: 
 
1. Wireless Intelligent Network (WIN) 
 
It will be possible to offer WIN based services like pre-paid service, VPN 
etc. to WLL customers with the help of WIN.  
 
2.  Short Message Service Centre (SMSC) 
 
It will be possible to offer SMS and co ntent based SNS service to WLL 
customers with the help of SMSC.  
 
3. Packet Core Network (PCN) 
 
It will be possible to offer high speed packet data (up to 144 Kbps) to WLL 
customers with the help of PCN.  
 
Unified Messaging System (UMS) 
 
It will be possible to offer voice mail, fax service etc. to WLL customers 
with the help of UMS.  
 
It is expected that all the above Va lue Added Services shall commence 
during the last quarter of this financial year.  
 
Proper projection of requirement/demand of WLL Equipment 
 
The Chief General Manager s of all the circle s have been instructed 
individually vide 70-7/2006- ESP/para 1.9.1.32 to 1.9.1.4/C&AG dated 21 st July, 
2006 (Copy enclosed as Annexure-E) to  project requirem ent of CDMA WLL 
equipment considering presence of other  private operator and envisaged growth 
of own landline and CMTS.  

 22 
 
Strategies to optimally utilise the equipped capacity BSNL 
 
1. BSNL has decided to prom ote WLL in urban areas.  
2. The data capability of CDM A 2000 IX WLL services are being exploited to 
generate additional demand of WLL.  The circles have been given target 
for internet connection also vide 69-15/2002-ESP/Vol.VI dated 15.06.2007  
3. The utilisation of capacities are being monitored through monthly MIS.  
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
ACHIEVEMENT OF PLANNED TARGETS 
 
 The Committee note that the Universal Service Obligations (USO) under 
New Telecom Policy (NTP- 99) envis aged providing tel ephones on demand, 
besides telephone coverage of all the villages in the c ountry by the end of the 
Ninth Five Year Plan i.e. 2002.  Ba sed on these obligations, Department of 
Telecommunications decided in August 20 00 to replace all faulty VPTs working 
on the Multi Access Radio Relay (MARR) System by the WLL System by the end 
of 2002 and to provide new VPTs only through WLL.  In pursuance of this 
objective, the BSNL had set out a target of providing one Wire less-in-Local Loop 
(WLL) system in each of the 2,642 Shor t Distance Charging Areas (SDCAs) in 
the country till 2001-02.  However, the audit scrutiny has revealed that the targets 
so set out had not been achieved and the Company has failed to achieve the 
annual plan targets fIXed for replacement of faulty MARR based  VPTs for the 
years 2003-04 and 2004- 05 and for installation of new VPTs for the years 2001-
02, 2002-03 and 2003-04.  In this regar d, the Committee note from the latest 
information furnished by the Company that out of the the total replacement of 
1,41,223 MARR VPTs, 1,11,221 MARR VPTs have been replaced by 31.07.2006 
and the balance 30,002 MARR VPTs are planned to be replaced in the current 
financial year itself.  As  regards providing new VPT s based on WLL Technology, 
the Committee note that as on 31 July, 2006, the Company has provided VPTs in 
5,39,278 villages and the remaining villa ges are planned to be provided with 
telephone facilities by November, 2007.  Even in the year 2007,  there is a huge 
waiting list of 7.37 lakh for tel ephone connections includ ing WLL telephone 
services in various rural areas of the country and the Company is planning to 
clear it by the year 2007-08.  The Co mpany has tried to justify their under-
performance by stating that  - there was delayed supp ly of the WLL equipment; 
the MARR VPTs were scattered throughout the length and breadth of the country 
including remote and far-flung areas; problem of insurgencies in certain areas 
etc.  
 
Analyzing the reasons for non-achiev ement of the planned targets, the 
Committee feel that primarily, the Company failed to fIX realistic targets for year-
wise achievement due to deficiencies in planning, creation of  infrastructure, 
procurement, capacity utilization, operational performance.  It was imperative on 

 23 
 
the part of the Company to plan the l aunch of WLL telephone service and its 
future expansions very carefully and t hese issues should have been addressed 
prior to the setting up of t he targets.  However this did not happen to be the case 
and targets for the years 2001-  02 to 2003-04 could not be fully achieved in one 
respect or the other. No information has been brought to the notice of the 
Committee which may indicate that any se rious efforts were made either by the 
Government or by the Company for achievement of the planne d targets.  The 
Committee observe that while some circle s managed to over perform, a majority 
of Circles have under performed. This  indicates that there was lack of 
coordination and monitoring on the part of t he Corporate Office.  Another factor 
which has contributed to the non-achievem ent of targets envisaged in NTP-99 is 
the under-performance of private service pr oviders in fulfilling their part of the 
social commitment of government of providing 97806 VPTs in th e rural areas by 
the year 2002.  This condition was stipulat ed by the DoT at the time of issue of 
license agreement to private basic servic e operators who could actually provide 
only 846 VPTs by March, 2002 and 10698  VPTs by May, 2003.  This happened 
because these Basic Service Operators were  subsequently allowed to migrate to 
a new license namely, Unified Access ( basic and cellular) Service License in 
November 2003 which did not carry the requirement of m andatory coverage of 
rural areas.  The Committee attribute the failure of achievement of targets on 
both  the Government as well as the BS NL and  recommend that all out efforts 
must be made by the BSNL to achieve the targets of complete replacement of 
faulty MARR VPTs, installation of new VPTs and clearance of the existing waiting 
list in the rural areas within the spec ified schedule fIXed by them i.e. by 
November 2007.  The Committee further recommend that the Government on 
their part instead of remaining a mute spectato r, also see to it that this issue of 
national importance is fully achieved in a time bound manner by playing an active 
monitoring role over the implementing agencies.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Installation of new Village Public Telephones (VPTs): BSNL has entered 
into an agreement on 10.11.2004 with USOF , Dot to provide facility to 66822 
accessible, undisputed and undisturbed villages inhabit ed with population more 
than 100 including 14183 village to be co vered by Digital Satellite Phone 
Terminals (DSPTs) located in remote and far-flung areas which cannot otherwise 
be covered by any terrestrial technology; progressively by November, 2007.  Out 
of the awarded work, BSNL has already provided telephone facility to 50520 
villages by the end of 30.09. 2007.  The remaining vill ages are primarily to be 
covered by satellite technology (DSPT) whose equipment is presently under 
validation and testing trials.  The remain ing villages are primarily to be covered 
by satellite technology (DSPT) whose equipment is presently under validation 
and testing trials.  The DSPT project has been delayed due to delay in allocation 
of Transponder as a result of  failure of INSAT-4C.  Wi th allotment an alternative 
transponder by ISRO in August 2007, the installation of VPT on DSPT is likely to 

 24 
 
start from December 07.  Remaining VPTs on terrestri al media are likely to be 
installed by November, 2007. 
 
Complete replacement of faulty MARR VPTs: BSNL has already replaced 
132642 MARR VPTs in its network upto 30. 9.2007.  Thus there are 8581 MARR 
VPTs pending for replacement as per the agreement in which 3266 MARR VPTs 
have been replaced upto 30. 9.2007.  Further some of the MARR VPTs on 
account of being located in remote and far flung areas shall require satellite 
(DSPT) equipment for replacement.  BSNL has accordingly planned to replace all 
the existing balance MARR VPTs by March 08. 
 
Clearance of the existing waiting list in the rural areas by November, 2007: 
Generation of waiting list is a continuous process, BSNL has a waiting list of 6.29 
lakhs (wired + WLL) as on 1.10.2007.  BSNL has added 6.87 lakhs on fixed/WLL/ 
GSM network during 1.4.2007 to 30.9.2007. 
 
BSNL proposes to achieve target of 10.00 lakhs rural connections in the 
year 07-08.  Thus it c an be seen that waiting list continue to be created and 
BSNL will be putting al out efforts to provide maximum possible connections 
subject to technical feasibility. 
Monitoring of the USOF targets: The monitoring of the activities mentioned 
above is being done by the Mini stry at the level of Secretary, Telecom on regular 
basis wherein the BSNLs plans, including the material s upplies etc. pertaining to 
the above activities are reviewed. 
 
As per the terms and conditions of the Agreements signed between 
Universal Service Obligat ion Fund (USO(F)) Administ ration and BSNL, monthly 
progress reports for the replacement of  MARR based VPTs, installation of new 
VPTs and rural lines are taken.  These figur es are being sent regularly as in inut 
for various Prliament Committees and the PMO/Planning Co mmission, who are 
monitoring the Bharat Nirman Programme.  Regular review meetings are being 
held under the chairmanship of Secretar y, DOT and Administrator USOF with 
CMD BSNL to monitor the status of ongoing  USF activities.  A representative of 
M/s ITI which is supplying equipment to M/s BSNL is also invited to the meetings.  
Seven numbers of meetings have been held during the period 1.3.06 to 
31.3.2007.  Instructions Record of discussions of the meeting are issued and the 
implementation status is reviewed. 
  
Recommendation No. 11 
ACCUMULATION OF REVENUE ARREARS ON ACCOUNT OF 
SHORT/DELAYED BILLING 
 
The Committee note that accordi ng to Audit, there were many 
inadequacies in the billing, collecti on and accounting of revenue practices 
followed by the BSNL with respect to WLL connections. These deficiencies 

 25 
 
include accumulation of revenue a rrears due to delays in submission of 
completed advice notes; short billing of WLL connections ; delayed billing of WLL 
connections; non-monitoring of bills of he avy callers; heavy outstanding against 
WLL customers; non-closing of WLL connections after their disconnection and 
non-availability of automatic disconnection facilities etc. According to the Audit, 
due to these short-comings, the percentage  of outstanding revenue has showed 
an increasing trend and at the end of March, 2005, the total outstanding against 
WLL customers was Rs.113.88 crore.  In this regard, the Committee note that as 
per the procedure followed in the Company, Telephone Revenue Accounting 
(TRA) unit of a Secondary Switching Area (SSA) is mainly  responsible for billing 
and Collection.  The main functions of TRA unit is issue of bills, collection-
monitoring, billing complaint handling, issue of reminder for payment, preparation 
of disconnection list and dispatch to each exchange for implementing 
disconnections, preparation of defaulter list and pursuit thereafter, preparation of 
revenue sub-ledger and reporting to circ le office. The performance of TRA 
branch of each SSA is monitored by the Circle concerned in the form of 
performance parameters like - collection e fficiency, total amount billed for, 
revenue per user, outstanding etc. The Cor porate office of BSNL is monitoring 
revenue performance of each Circle and in case of any shortcomings necessary 
instructions are issued by it. As per  the information furnished by the Company, 
the total outstanding against WLL connec tions is approximately Rs.111 crore on 
account of short billing/delayed billing, non-receipt of  completed advice note in 
TRA Branch, non-receipt of meter-readi ng, failing of billing hardware and 
software etc. Regarding non-receipt of time ly intimation to the TRA Branch, the 
Company has stated that in about 80% of areas served by WLL Technology, 
Circles fall in rural areas and are locate d very far from TRA office. As such the 
delivery of message/dak takes time. 
  
The Committee note that the Company has taken a number of remedial 
measures to do away with the short-co mings/deficiencies pointed out by the 
Audit so as to ensure minimum revenue arrears due to short/delayed billing in the 
future. All the SSAs have been instructed by the Company to issue bills before 
14
th of next month and in ca se of non-payment, disconnection within 35 days is 
to be carried out. Instructions have been issued to the Circles to educate the 
concerned staff to ensure prompt billing and the need of monitoring of billing and 
collection of heavy callers .The Commi ttee has also been informed that an 
automatic billing software is already in pipeline and auto disconnection facility 
would be made available all over India. 
 
 The Committee take a serious note of huge outstanding arrears to the 
tune of Rs.111 crore in the BSNL on a ccount of deficiencies in the billing 
process. The Committee feel that various justifications furnished by the Company 
for accumulation of these arrears ar e of routine nature and reflects a non-
professional approach in the matter.  Th is fact is further strengthened by the 
admission of the Company t hat no separate accounts ar e available to segregate 
the various outstandings.  Even no separate records relating to recovery of 

 26 
 
outstanding arrears are available in t he Company. The Company has failed to 
devise any method to ensure that advice notes are timely received in the TRA 
Branch from the far-flung rural areas  and have continued to depend upon the 
manual message/dak delivery system. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Company should fu rther strengthen its coordination 
mechanism amongst its various wings for ensuring complete billing and revenue 
realization. The Company should ensure a fool-proof mechanism in respect of 
timely receipt of advice notes from the commercial wing after completion of 
activities relating to opening, shifting and closure of connections, so that bills are 
issued immediately; prompt receipt of meter readings from exchanges and billing 
of the  same without delay; immediate st opping of billing afte r disconnection and 
closure of connections; proper monito ring of outstanding revenue etc. The 
Company should ensure effective monitoring of outstanding revenue to avoid the 
risk of accumulation of revenue arrears. The TRA br anch should prepare 
separate details of the revenue billed, co llected and outstanding in respect of 
their WLL telephone service to monitor the return on investment on this service.  
The Company may also ensure that automatic billing software should be 
deployed at the earliest. The Committee furt her emphasize that all out efforts 
must be made for recovery of outstanding a rrears from the defaulting parties. In 
order to avoid recurrence of such lapses in the future, the Committee 
recommend that a system be put in place for fIXing responsibility on the persons 
found guilty of dereliction of duties assigned to them.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As WLL Service is a part of FIXed Li nes, several instructions are issued 
regularly to all the Heads  of BSNL Circles for prompt and correct billing and 
realization of billed revenue for all services including WLL.  All the head of Circles 
are impressed upon to ensure that relate d instructions on complete billing and 
revenue realization of tel ephone revenue are strictly  implemented.  Necessary 
instructions are being issued from time to time and the same are also recently 
reiterated in Para 1(billing) of letter No. 2-108/2007-BSNL/TR dated 14-8-2007. 
 
(i) Process of integration of billing system consisting of commercial and TR 
packages is in vogue in all the Circles and has been strengthened and 
streamlined, therefore maximum number  of advice notes generated are 
updated online instantaneously into the billing Database.  
(ii) Number of online counters has  been increased at customer service 
centers in all the Circles to facili tate online updating and reducing manual 
updating of bills received in Post Offices and Banks. 
(iii) Timely disconnection and prompt  reconnection after payment is being 
monitored on. 
(iv) Periodic reviews of unaddressed bills are being watched and corrective 
measures are taken to avoid the same. 
(v) Specialized pursuit cells are avail able to ensure that wherever necessary, 
legal action is initiated well in time.  

 27 
 
(vi) All the Circles have been directed to pursue dues on par  with arrears of 
land revenue and State Revenue Recovery Act vide letter no. 2-33/2002- 
TR(BSNL) dated 12.4.2007. 
(vii) Various schemes like waival of in tervening periods rent  from the date of 
disconnection, discount scheme etc. are introduced from time to time. 
(viii) Specific time bound Circle -wise ta rgets are prescribed for each segment 
maintained in the level of SSA,  Circle & Corporate Officer and are 
reviewed on a monthly basis. 
 
 Out of the 26 Circles (Including C hennai and Kolkata Telecom Districts) 
DOTSOFT - an in-house billing and accoun ting software has been introduce~ in 
17 Circles. In Chennai and Kolkata Teleco m Districts; similar software are in 
place. 
 
With the introduction of these billing software, functions of Commercial, 
indoor Outdoor have been fully integrat ed with the Telephone Revenue Billing & 
branch.  This ensures movement of Advice notes issued by the commercial Wing 
to the Indoor, Outdoors, and units electronically. Once the line is physically put 
then all required data flows into the database used for b illing of subscribers. As 
such, billing of all connec tions are ensured and there is no time lag between 
provision of connections and updating of database for billing. 
 
As regards disconnections and cl osure also, database gets updated 
automatically once inputs are made by the Indoor/Outdoor units. 
 
In cases of shifts, the Customer identity is retained and bills are generated 
to new shifting addresses. 
 
As such, possibilities of delays in re ceipt of advice notes, in Telephone 
Revenue wing leading to delayed billing, non-billing etc. are avoided. 
 
In respect of the remaining Circles also, strict instructions have been 
issued to ensure that advice notes for opening,  shifting, closure etc. to reach the 
Telephone Revenue wing on time [vide letter no. 2-11/2004-BSNL/TR dated 26. 
12.2005. 
 
 With the introduction of  DOTS OFT and other Billing software packages, 
meter readings are being received from the exchanges online through FTP(File 
Transfer Protocol) immediately after t he date of conventional closing meter 
reading dates. As such, any delay in re ceipt of meter readings from the 
exchanges is ruled out. 
 
 In case of non-payment of dues, firs t outgoing facility is barred after 35th 
day from bill date. Then, if  payment is not received even after 15 days of such 
outgoing facility barring, then incoming facility is also barred. All these functions 
have been automated on introduction of DOTSOFT package. Once incoming 

 28 
 
facility is also barred, then the billing software stops issue of rent bills for period 
beyond the date of disconnection. As such, ra ising of rent bills after the date of 
disconnection is stopped by the system itself. 
 
The Company has prescribed targets for Collection Efficiency for all circles 
as below:- 
I month Collection efficiency:- 90% of amount billed. 
II month Collection efficiency:- 97% of amount billed. 
III month Collection efficiency:- 99.5% of amount billed. 
 
Actual collection efficiency achieved by each Circle is being closely 
monitored by the Corporate office thr ough review of. Monthly Subledger Review 
statement received from all Circles, this office. Actual Target s achieved by each 
Circle for the month of May 2007 is detail ed.  The Corporate office is thus 
monitoring collection efficiency from the fi rst month of issue of  bills onwards with 
a view to ensuring prompt collection revenue billed and thereby checking on 
accumulation of arrears. 
 
 Besides, every Circle is furnishing year wise and category wise breakup 
for their closing balance for each month as prescribed in the format (Annexure-
IV). Corporate office is fixing Quarterl y Targets for liquidatio n of arrears for each 
Circle and monitoring progress made by each Circle. Break up for closing 
balance year wise and Circle wise for the month of May 2007 is furnished  
 
 The company has issued instructions for appointment of Private Recovery 
Agents also on commission basis to recove r dues from defaulters to supplement 
the efforts taken by the company officials. 
 
As narrated in the action taken for the Recommendation No. 2(iii) above, 
Collection efficiency of each Circle is bei ng monitored by the Corporate Office 
from the first month of issue of bills by prescribing targets.  
 
The company has prescribed a separate section in the Monthly Sub ledger 
statement to monitor realization of dues against WLL connections. 
 
Instructions and guidelines to ensure prompt realization of revenue billed 
are being issued by the Corporate Office at periodical intervals.  
 
Over last three years, despite high rate of churning due to multi-operator 
environment, BSNL is still maintaining 98% collection efficiency, which is perhaps 
the highest in the Government of India in cluding the State Electricity Boards and 
other Departments. As compared to Global Telecom Industry average of 
outstanding (5% of total bi lling), performance of BSNL (about 1.59% of total 
billing) is far better than other operators. 
 

 29 
 
The Company has prescribed separate sections in the Monthly Sub ledger 
statement to depict information of revenue billed, revenue realized and 
outstanding dues in respect of WLL conn ections separately for WLL (Fixed) and 
WLL (Mobile) connections. Year wise outst anding dues are also being furnished 
by each Circle and realization of dues is being monitored by the Corporate office. 
ARPU for, WLL (Fixed) and WLL (Mobile) c onnections is also calculated by each 
circle and this will facilitate to monitor return on investment on this service.  
 
It has been decided to deploy Billing and Customer Care System for MSC 
based CDMA WLL on Zonal basis. In this  regard, the ex isting Billing and 
Customer Care System for CMTS (Cellular Mobile. Telephone System) are-being 
augmented and integrated with all the Network Elements of MSC based CDMA 
WLL System. It is likely that most of the ,Network Elements shall be integrated 
progressively by March 2008. 
 
After integration of MSC based CDMA WLL system with CMTS billing and 
customer care system, it will be possible to  minimize delay in providing the new 
connections, prompt issue of bills, online collection of billing data from MSC etc, 
automatic disconnection on non-paym ent, automatic di sconnection on non-
payment, proper monitoring of collection and outstanding revenue and monitoring 
the return on investment etc. 
 
All out efforts are being made for reco very of outstanding arrears from the 
defaulting parties along with  the fixed lines including t hat of WLL lines, the steps 
that have been taken to realize the outstanding dues which are also applicable to 
WLL services as well. Heads of Circles have been asked to ensure: - 
 
(i) Wherever justified, legal action is initiated to recover, the outstanding 
arrears. 
(ii) High power Committee / Liquidation Board meet regularly and review the 
defaulter cases and give necessary directions for recovery of outstanding 
arrears. 
(iii) Private recovery agents scheme and discount scheme for old outstanding 
arrears are utilized by the SSAs to optimum level  
 
With the introduction of DOTSOFT and other billing packages, preparation 
of Disconnection lists is automated. Issue of disconnection lists by the Telephone 
Revenue Accounting wing is online and the system captures the date and time at 
which such lists are issued by the tele phone Revenue section. Action taken by 
the, Indoor unit for disconnection is also fed into the system. As such, the entire 
flow of work regarding timely disconnection is recorded online and any delay at 
any point can be detected from the system. 
 
As duties and responsibilities of eac h functionary have been laid down, 
any deliberate disregard of instructions to, adhere to the timeframe of such 
activities can be monitored. With such an online system in place, chances of 

 30 
 
deliberate dereliction of duty are minimized. However, necessary instructions 
have been issued to all Heads of Circle to review and fix responsibility.  
 
Recommendation No. 12 
QUALITY OF WLL SERVICE 
The Committee note that quality of serv ice is the main indicator of the 
performance of a telephone service as well as  of the degree to which the service 
conforms to the stipulated norms.  The Committee observe that the norms 
prescribed by TRAI for the quality of  service performed by basic service 
operators were applicable for the WLL se rvice of the Company also. In this 
regard a survey conducted by Audit has re vealed that the Company had failed to 
achieve the quality of service norms prescr ibed by TRAI pertaining to release of 
connections, incidence of faults and their rectification, voic e quality, getting 
connections to desired telephone numbers and provision of additional facilities 
like STD and ISD etc. The Committee note that in order to do away with these 
short-comings, the Company has taken a number of remedial measures to 
improve the quality of service. The Company has planned to increase the 
number of Base Transceiver  Station(BTS) per Short Distance Charging Area 
(SDCA) to improve the network coverage besides upgrading the existing V.5.2 
based CDMA technology to MSC based CDMA 2000 IX.  Further value added 
services like pre-paid,  SMS, high-speed packet data, MMS etc. are being 
introduced progressively. The Circles ha ve also been instructed to provide 
charging facilities in telephone exchanges for WLL terminals to the customers in 
rural areas where there is lack of electricity. 
  
The Committee while appreciating the various measures so undertaken by 
the Company to improve the quality of se rvice by the Company are of the view 
that these steps were required to be taken much earlier.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that the Company has never conducted any market surveys 
exclusively for WLL Service to obtain feedbacks from its customers to ascertain 
the ground realities regarding the quality of WLL service and take immediate 
corrective action on the same.  The Committee feel that this exercise should be 
undertaken by the Company from time to time to enable it to provide a better 
operational performance besides also competing with the private players in the 
field.  The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Company should 
strengthen its monitoring mechanism by ob taining monthly reports from all the 
circles on customer care. The Company  must ensure implementation of the 
various remedial measures suggested by them to improve the quality of service 
at the earliest possible.  The Committee further reco mmend that   the Company 
should ensure adherence to t he quality of service norms fIXed by TRAI to avoid 
the risk of migration of the customers to other oper ators. The Company should 
ensure proper coordinatio n among its customer care, commercial and 
operational wings for minimizing the delays in attending to customers complaints 

 31 
 
and requests for additional facilities to avoid the risks of losing them to their 
competitors. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the committee to ens ure better quality of service to 
the customer and setting a bench mark for ot her service providers to follow, in 
this regard following action has already been taken. 
 
Remedial Measures:  BSNL Corporate Offi ce has issued a no. of instructions 
from time to time to the Circles to keep the WLL services in   good conditions. 
Some of these are given below: 
 
(i) Dos and Donts for the subscribers hav ing WLL connections (FWTs) vide 
letter No.24-1/2003-WLLdated 17/19-12-2003. 
(ii) Review of Insurance Policy for FWTs and HHTs vide letter no 55-5/2002-
ML (WLL)/AMC VoL- II dated 27/30-7-2004.  
(iii) Deployment of IFWTs supplied wit h SMPSs in rural areas vide letter no. 
14-1/2004-WLL dated 01.09.2005. 
(iv) Maintenance of in-built -batte ries of IFWTs/HHTs/SMPSs: Refreshening 
charge regarding vide letter no. 3-6/2006-WLUFWTs dated 21.6.2006. 
(v) Replacement of faulty FWTs vide letter no. 24-4/2004-WLUFWTs dated 
14.8.2006.  
(vi) Review monthly meeting with suppliers of WLL equipment for their 
performance vide letter no. 25-1/2007-WII/General dated 21.6.2007. 
(vii) Monitoring of quality of WLL services and taking preventive/corrective 
steps in this regard: Q uality of service and O&M reporting vide letter no. 
18-1/2006-WLL/TRAI Report dated 13.8.2007.  
 
The letter mentioned at sl. no (v ii) is a monitoring report on QOS 
parameters put in place to review operat ional aspect of WLL services in the 
network. 
 
TRAI regulation on Quality of Service (QoS) of Basic services Wireless I.e. 
WLL services: Quarterly report regarding:  NM branch is looking after 
operation and maintenance aspect of WLL network and accordingly Circles have 
been asked to send the quarterly report on QOS parameters as prescribed under 
para A(i) to A(viii) by TR AI vide their letter no. 305-2/ 2005 (QoS) Vol.-II dated 1-
7-2005.  
 
Further the committee has recommended for monitoring of QOS norms on 
monthly basis, as compared to TRAI norms  for its monitoring on Quarterly basis. 
In this regard it is submitted that collecting data on QOS parameters by field units 
across different types of CDMA WLL eq uipment is a cumbersome and time 
consuming activity because of which mont hly reporting will be very difficult to 
implement. Hence, it is suggested to cont inue with the quarterly report instead of 

 32 
 
monthly report. The norms prescribed by TRAI are also averaged over a three 
months period 
 
BSNL has reviewed the coordinat ion between custom er care and 
operational wings and has ta ken following steps to put in place improvement to 
minimize delays, In attending to customer complaints and requests for additional 
facilities:- 
 
i) Area based restriction for customer s to get any service have been 
removed and the customer can now avail services at any of the 
customer service center within t he secondary switching area (SSA) 
irrespective of the exchange from which he is served. 
ii) In cases where the payment of bi lls for telephone lying disconnected 
(due to non payment) is made by the subscriber in cash or through a 
demand draft, advice note for restoration of telephone is sent to DE[ID] 
automatically by the system as soon as an entry regar ding payment is 
made by the CSC staff without any human intervention thus minimizing 
the delays that used to occur earlier. 
iii) Earlier work order/advice note for pr ovision or withdraw al of additional 
facility used to be issued by the Commercial Officer after submission of 
the application by the subscriber at  the CSC counter which used to 
result in delays. The CSC staff has now been authorized to issue 
advice note/ work order for provision/ withdrawal of additional facilities 
on the spot as soon as an application is received by him. 
iv) The instructions have been issued for issue of 08 for shift of telephone 
immediately on receipt of request by the CSC staff even if any amount 
is outstanding against the tel ephones. Any outstandings of the 
telephone at old station is settled subsequently. 
 
v) Instructions have been issued for issue of work order for change of 
tariff plan by the counter clerk hims elf immediately on receipt of an 
application from the customer on plain paper. 
 
vi) Instructions have also been issued for immediate provision/withdrawal 
of Centrex facility by the counter cl erk himself on receipt of application 
from the customer without insisting on any pre-payment. Charges for 
the facility may be raised in the subsequent bill. 
 
vii) In case a Junior Accounts officer is posted at a customer service 
center, the JAO has been authorized to split the bill and order 
reconnection of telephone disconnect ed due to non-payment for less 
than three months cases. These power s were earlier vested in the AO 
[TR]. The rent for the intervening period has also been totally waived 
off in case of teleph6nes discon nected due to non-payment and the 
telephones is restored immediately on payment of outstanding bills.  
 

 33 
 
viii) CSC staff has been authorized to iss ue reconnection OB in case of 
telephones disconnected due to non-pay ment even in case of part 
payment by the subscriber provided the outstanding is less than twice. 
the normal fixed monthly charges or Rs. 500/-,which ever is less. 
 
ix) Instruction have been issued to al l the CGMs to procure the Scanner 
for each Commercial officer in the SSA so that signatures of all the 
applicants are captured and made available to the customer service 
centre staff for enabling him to attend to customers request on the 
spot.  
 
This procedure has already been impl emented in areas where integrated 
packages have been implemen ted. In other areas this procedure is being 
implemented gradually along with implementation of Integrated commercial & 
TRF package.  
 
Recommendation No. 13 
MONITORING BY CORPORATE OFFICE 
The Committee note that as per the organizational set-up of BSNL, the 
administrative and overall functional contro l is vested in the Board of Directors 
headed by the Chairman and Managing Direc tor. The telecommunication 
operations of the Company are managed by its 24 telecom Circles located in 
various States of the country and two telecom districts (Chennai and Kolkata) 
under the overall monitoring of  the Corporate office. Ea ch Circle contains many 
secondary switching areas ( SSAs) whose monitoring is done by the respective 
circles.  The audit in their report has pointed out many shortcomings and 
deficiencies concerning the monitoring role  of the Corporate Office. The Audit 
has observed that despite instructions, 13 circles and the two Metro districts did 
not prepare separate costing records for t he WLL telephone service. Most of the 
circles failed to make timely arrangements for sites, towers, power supply, etc, 
which led to delays in installation and commissioning of the WLL telephone 
systems.  The corporate offices failure to  monitor receipt of frequency allocations 
from the WPC Wing of the DoT resulted in operation of CorDect WLL telephone 
service in five circles and two Metro districts without mandat ory Agreements in 
Principle.  Even the detailed records in respect of Circle-wise and site-wise 
frequency allocations from WPC for t he years 2000-01 to 2004-05 were not 
maintained at the Corporate Office. The Management failed to ensure the terms 
and conditions of the purchase orders by some Circles while releasing payments 
to the suppliers. Excess payments were rel eased by some Circles in respect of 
Sales tax and subsequent re vision of tender rates etc.  The Audit has concluded 
that the Company failed to formulate prope r strategies and detailed plans at the 
time of launching the WLL telephone se rvice in 2000-01 and its subsequent 
expansions. The capacity remained grossly under-utilized both in rural and urban 
areas mainly on account of deficient planning; mismatches in the procurement of 

 34 
 
WLL systems and terminals; poor  network coverage and poor  quality of service. 
The Company suffered financial losses due to inaccurate assessments of 
demand and requirement and selection of obsolete technologies. 
  
The Committee observe that accordi ng to BSNL Circles were instructed 
from time to time to strictly follow t he instructions and guidelines issued by the 
Corporate Office. The Company has also  submitted that since the WLL was 
being deployed as a new technology for t he first time in the rural areas, the 
Company realized the import ance of monitoring of the whole process and due 
consideration was given to its whole implementation. It has been claimed by the 
Company that constant monitoring is being  done at the highest level in the field 
units and at BSNL Corporate Office on monthly basis and the Circles are 
persuaded constantly to achieve the target s.  Monthly reports are called for to 
monitor the achievement of each circle regarding provision of new connections in 
areas on demand including the WLL connection.   
 
The Committee are not inclined to agree with this submission of the 
Company.  The Committee note that the WLL Project was of huge magnitude 
involving large investments. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that 
as admitted by the Company there is no exclusive division in the Company to 
monitor its implementation. Despite the tall claims  made by the Corporate Office 
regarding their strict monitoring of implementation of WLL Project, the Committee 
fail to understand as to why so many  shortcomings and deficiencies were 
committed by the Circles as pointed out by the Audit in their findings. The 
Committee feel that there has  been laxity on the part of  the Corporate Office in 
enforcement of instructions issued by it from time to time by the Circles.  It 
reflects that there is a lack of c oordination between forward planning and 
demand assessment.  The justification that  BSNL follows function based and not 
product based organizational structure thus  cannot be accepted.  Keeping in 
view the fact that the W LL Project in the rural areas  is being implemented by the 
Company by way of a social commitment of the Government and also since the 
Company is getting financial support from the Government in the form of USOF, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Company should form an exclusive 
division at the level of Cor porate Office to monitor it.  In addition to this, the 
Committee recommend that  the following actions are required to be taken by the 
Company: -   
 
(i) The Company should monitor the performance of the suppliers in 
carrying out their responsibility towards providing adequate and 
uninterrupted network coverage to avoid the risk of poor quality of 
service and losing its customer base.  
(ii) The Company should prescribe in  advance the time schedules for the 
various activities to be undertaken by  Circles for creation of necessary 
infrastructure.   
(iii) The Company should devise a monitoring mechanism for ensuring 
timely receipt of Agreements in Principle from the WPC wing for use of 

 35 
 
allotted frequencies and clearances of SACFA for sites for installation 
of wireless equipment.  
(iv) The Company should monitor the compliance of the terms and 
conditions of the purchase orders by its circles to avoid the risk of 
irregular payments. 
(v)  The Company should monitor the levy of prescribed liquidated 
damage charges by the circles on the suppliers to protect its financial 
interests. 
(vi)  The Company should ensure e ffective monitoring  of outstanding 
revenue to avoid the risk of accumulation of revenue arrears.  
(vii) There is an urgent need for the Company to improve planning and 
monitoring mechanism in respec t of the WLL telephone service, 
besides improving procurement practices.  
(viii) The system for billing, collectio n and accounting of revenue from the 
WLL telephone requires stricter monitoring. 
(ix) The quality of service being pr ovided needs furt her improvement 
through better network coverage and customer care. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action taken by BSNL on recommendations of the committee 
 
In accordance with recommendations of  the committee following actions have 
been taken. 
 
Exclusive Division for Monitoring the WLL Projects 
 
In accordance with recommendati ons of the committee, BSNL has 
decided to post, one Joint DOG with two executives under DOG (SW) for 
monitoring of the WLL Projects. The copy of letter NO.12-8/2007-TE-1 dated 
21.08.2007 issued by   Establishment Sect ion of BSNL in this regard. Point wise 
action taken on the additional points are given below. 
 
(i) BSNL is now carrying out the WLL network design using RF planning 
on its own for providing :proper ne twork coverage and better quality of 
services. The suppliers are requir ed to supply, install and commission 
the equipment as per BSNL network planning. 
 
ii)      The circles have been instructed to create the infrastructure in time. 
The monitoring of these activities  have been strengt hened. The circles 
have been instructed to have weekly meetings with suppliers and circle 
team for better co- ordination and monitor the progress. The corporate 
office has also / started weekly m eeting with suppliers of ongoing WLL 
projects for smooth rollout and better co-ordination. 
 

 36 
 
iii)      All the BSNL circles have already been allotted 2 CDMA carriers for 
each circle. The WPC has intimated that once a CDMA carrier 
frequency of the band is earmarked to a telecom service provider for a 
defined area, no further site Wise  frequency assignment within a 
service area is necessary. Only site wise deployment plan are required 
to be submitted to WPC.  
 
The WPC has also simplified SAFCA clearance procedure to improve the 
SACFA clearance. The copy of the latest guidelines are enclosed as Annexure -3 
The SACFA clearance is also being monitored at corporate office. 
 
(iv) & (v) : All the purchase orders issued from MM Cell of BSNL Corporate office 
have clear payment terms and provisio n of L.O. charges. The necessary 
instruction have been issued to all C.G.Ms. to constantly monitor the levy 
charges on defaulting supplie s and release of PBGs to protect financial interest 
of BSNL. 
 
(vi) As WLL Service is a part of FIXed lines, several instructions are issued 
regularly to all the Heads of BSNL circles for pr ompt and correct billing 
and realization of billed revenue which is also applicable to WLL 
services.In addition MSC based CDMA WLL systems are being 
integrated with zonal Billing and Customer care system. This will 
enable BSNL to effectively monitor the outstanding revenue.  
 
(vii) In accordance with the recommendations of the committee, it has been 
decided that one Jt. DDG (WLL-Monitoring) and two executives of 
JTO/SDE/DET level be posted under DDG(SW) for monitoring of WLL 
projects. This will improve the monitoring of WLL Projects at corporate 
level. 
(viii) The company has prescribed a separat e, format in monthly sub-ledger 
compilation programs for WLL (Fix ed and mobile) separately for its 
age-wise details. As 334 SSAs in the entire BSNL and now necessary 
modifications in DOT Soft and Trichur Billing software have been made 
and being implemented in the circles /SSAs.  Most of the circle have 
started giving information in the revi sed format.  The ci rcles are being 
pursued regularly to send the sub-l edger in the revised format for WLL 
services.  Necessary modifications in the Sub-ledger complication 
programme have also been made.  
 
(ix) To improve the quality of service, more nos. of BTSs are being added 
to improve the network coverage. On an average 3 BTSs per SDCAs 
are being installed for this purpos e. In addition, IS 95 based WLL 
equipments are being upgraded to MSC based CDMA, 2000 IX  
equipment. The MSC based CDMA WLL equipment is being integrated 
with Zonal Billing and Customer care system which will further improve 
quality of service and customer care.  

 37 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN IMPLEMENTATION OF WLL PROJECT 
 
The Committee understand that the New Telecom Policy (NTP-99) 
envisaged telephones on dem and and covering all uncov ered villages in the 
country with telephone by the end of the year 2002. In pursuance of NTP-99, the 
Government corporatised the Service Provision Functi on of DoT to set up BSNL 
on 1st October, 2000. To ensure that  viability of BSNL is not impaired on account 
of carrying out this social commitment of the Government in providing services 
which are uneconomical but socially desirable , the BSNL is getting a package of 
relief measures including financial support from the government  in the form of 
Universal Service Obligation Fund(USOF).  In view of this, the Committee are of 
the opinion that though the BSN L is a Corporate body, it is answerable to the 
Government in respect of carrying its social commitment.  Similarly, it was 
expected of the Government to ensure t hat the social commitment as envisaged 
in NTP-99 is being adequately carried out by the Company.  
 
 The Committee are, however, constr ained to observe that the government 
has miserably failed in its monitoring role  in ensuring that the goals set out in 
NTP-99 are achieved by the BSNL in a time bound manner. The targets required 
to be achieved by the end of the year 2002  have not been fully met even as on 
date and also the service provided is not upto the mark.   Providing telephone 
connectivity in the rural areas and far-flung areas of the country is an issue of 
national importance. As su ch, a duty was cast upon the government to seriously 
monitor its implementation by the implementing agency namely the BSNL. 
Unfortunately, no information has been brought by the government to the notice 
of the Committee which may indicate that any serious efforts were made by them  
to ensure that the targets were achieved  by the BSNL within the stipulated time. 
Instead, the government has chosen to absol ve itself of its responsibility by 
taking the stand that BSNL being a Boar d managed Company, it frames its own 
guidelines and execution stra tegy in such matters. T hough this stand might be 
true for the other commercial ac tivities of the BSNL, it  is not at all acceptable to 
the Committee as far as this social commitment is concerned. The Committee 
therefore strongly recomm end that the government must evolve a suitable 
monitoring mechanism to ensure  implem entation of the objectives set out in 
NTP-99 by the BSNL in a ti me bound manner and also fIXing their accountability 
in the case of lapses by suitably penalizing the agencies concerned.  The 
government must review t he progress of BSNL at the highest level with respect 
to the rural telephony on monthly basis and issue the appropriate directives 
wherever needed.  Besides verifying that th e quality of service in rural areas is 
upto the mark, the Government must also  ensure that the f unds being given to 
BSNL under USOF are properly utilized and case of losses on Infructuous 
accounts, responsibility must be fIXed on the officials concerned.  The committee 
also find that inadequacy of electricity s upply in a number of rural areas is also 
adversely affecting the operation of WLL based telephony. The Committee desire 

 38 
 
that this issue be adequately addressed by the Government in a realistic manner 
by coming out with plans like using solar energy or some other non-conventional 
sources of energy in consultation wit h the agencies concerned.  The Committee 
stress that the  important issue of pr oviding telephone co verage to the entire 
country particularly in rural and far-flung ar eas should take precedence over the 
other  commercial interests of service pr oviders by implementing this project of 
national importance on top priority.  In  a liberalized environment of fierce 
competition in the Telecom Sector the prime goal of private operators is to earn 
profit and not to fulfil the social obligation of rural connectivity. In such a scenario, 
the Committee feel that government intervention is absolutely necessary. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Go vernment should adequately support the 
public sector telecom Companies to fulf il this social obligation of telephone 
connectivity in rural areas.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) The performance of BSNL in implem entation USOF assisted activities 
is being reviewed on a regular basis by the Secretary Telecom.  During 
the period 1.3.06 to 31. 3.07, seven numbers of meetings have been 
held.  The decisions taken in t he meetings are reviewed.  The 
Committee’s recommendations regarding use of solar energy for rural 
telephony have been noted.  The requi rement of power for the rural 
infrastructure site is of such magni tude that use of solar power is ruled 
out.  With changes in technology, us e of non-conventional energy may 
become possible and such avenues will definitely be explored. 
(ii) Under USOF, disbursement of funds to the eligible service providers is 
through a multi-layered bidding proce ss on the basis of least quoted 
subsidy.  The benchmark for this purpose is determined on the basis of 
fully associated current costs for providing access for the facilities 
covered under the Rules.  The ex isting Basic Service Operators 
(BSOs), Cellular Mobile Service Operators (CMSPs) and Universal 
Access Service Licensees (UASLs ) including both PSUs and private 
service operators are eligible to  get subsidy support from the USO 
fund. 
(iii) Bids have been invited for all th e activities undertaken by USO fund 
except for rural lines in stalled prior to 1.4.02.  Incidentally, BSNL has 
emerged as the sole or one of the successful bidders in all the USF 
activities undertaken by USO fund so far.  The amount disbursed from 
USO fund to various phone companies dur ing the last five years as on 
31.3.07 is given below which clearly indicates that more than 90% of 
the amount disbursed from USO fund has gone to BSNL as a result of 
them being successful service provider in the bidding process: 
 
Name of Universal Service Provider Subsidy disbursed 
(Rs. In crores) 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 4649.825 

 39 
 
Reliance Infocomm Ltd. 212.36 
Tata Tele Services Ltd. 146.84 
Tata Teleservices (Maharashtra) Ltd. 71.26 
Bharti Infotel Ltd 0.44 
HFCL 0.16 
Shyam Telelink Ltd. 0.55 
Total 5081.435 
 
(iv) However, a trend can be discer ned in which private companies are 
now showing greater interest in rural telephony schemes.  It will be the 
endeavour to meet the needs of t he rural areas with the active 
participation of all service providers. 
 
 
Department of Telecommunications 
O.M. No. 58-159/2006-SU-IV dated 28.03.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL, 
24 April, 2008      Chairman, 
4 Vaishakha, 1930(S)          Committee on Public Undertakings 

 40 
 
MINUTES OF THE 22 nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 24th APRIL, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1630 hours to 1730 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
  
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N. S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
   Shri J.N. Gupta    Director General of Audit 
 
2.  XXXXXXX  XXXXXXX  XXXXXXX.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the two other draft reports on the 
following subjects and adopted the same without modifications: 
 
(i) XXXXXXX  XXXXXXX  XXXXXXX 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Twentie th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2006-07) on Performance Audit 
of WLL Services prov ided by BS NL based on C&AG Report No.  9 
(Commercial) of 2006. 

 41 
 
  
4.  The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalize the Report for 
presentation. 
 
5. The Committee thereafter, took up for consideration the issue of 
discontinuing the practice of laying of Study Tour Reports of COPU in Parliament 
and passed the following Resolution: 
 
“The Committee on Public Undertakings  (2007-08) do hereby resolve to 
discontinue the practice of laying of study tour r eports in Parliament which 
was initiated during 13 th Lok Sabha (2000-01) as per procedure adopted 
under Rule 281 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha.  However, the Committee, lik e other Parliamentary Committees 
will continue to prepare the tour notes  and utilize the same in preparation 
of their main reports.” 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned.  

 42 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Performance 
Audit of WLL Services provided by BSNL”. 
 
 
I Total number of recommendations  14 
 
 
lI  Recommendations that  have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 to 14 
 
Percentage of total  
 
 
 
 
 
100 % 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Governments replies [vide 
recommendation.  
 
 
-Nil- 
 
IV Recommendations in respec t of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendations).  
 
 
-Nil- 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 