 
 
 
 
 
C.P.U. NO. 887 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2004  -  2005) 
 
( FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA ) 
 
 
 
OIL  EXPLORATION – DOMESTIC AND 
OVERSEAS PROJECTS 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
2 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2004 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2004 
 
 
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW  DELHI 
 
December 2004/Agrahayana 1926 (S) 
 

 2
CONTENTS 
             Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05)            iii) 
INTRODUCTION                (v) 
 
PART – I 
Chapter-I  
A) Introduction        1 
B)  Hydrocarbon Reserves—World major sources of   5 
      oil and natural gas 
C)  Energy Security Policy      8 
 
Chapter-II  
A)  Historical background of oil exploration in India.    10 
  B)  Agencies  involved in crude oil exploration                         11 
  C)  Role of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas             13 
D)  Directorate  General of Hydrocarbons              13 
 
Chapter-III  
A)  New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP)   40 
B)  Sedimentary Basins      51 
C)  Hydrocarbon Vision –2025     56 
 
Chapter-IV  
A)  Seismic Survey and Drilling — ONGC / OIL   58 
B)  Production of crude oil—ONGC/OIL    66 
  C)  Augmentation of hydrocarbon reserves    72 
D)  Short, Medium and Long Term Strategy    79 
E) Improved oil recovery(IOR)/Enhanced.    
Oil Recovery(EOR) Programs of ONGC/OIL   87  
F)   Deep water exploration       94 
G)  Recovery percentage      97 
H)  Review /reassessment of in-place reserves of oil.  99 
I)   Adoption of latest technology     100 
J)   R& D Activities       105 
K)  Experience / expertise in adequacy of technology.  109 
 
Chapter-V 
A)   Exploration by private operators     111 
B)   Cost of production      115 
C)   Autonomy        118 
D)   Other public sector undertakings     123 
E)   Operatorship Issue      137 

 3
 
Chapter-VI  
A)   ONGC Videsh Limited      140 
B)   OVL’s share in world reserves.     142 
C)   OVL production       145 
D)   Assessment of production of oil     148 
E)   Merger and Acquisition      153 
F)   Merger of Oil Companies      155 
 
Chapter-VII   
       Alternate sources of energy     159 
 
PART-II 
  
Recommendations / Observations of the Committee                  161 – 209 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2004-05)       210 
 

 4
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2004 – 2005 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Kashiram Rana  
10. Shri Mohan Rawale  
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
13. Shri Rajesh Verma  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri Jibon Roy  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Smt. Ambika Soni  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri John Joseph  Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri S. Bal Shekar  Director 
 3. Shri N C Gupta  Under Secretary 
 4. Shri H. Ram Prakash Committee Officer 
 

 5
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Un dertakings having been authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present  this Second Report 
on Oil Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Projects. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Ltd., ONGC Videsh  Ltd., Oil India Ltd. on 30 th September, 2004 and 
22nd November, 2004.  The Committee took ev idence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas also on 22 nd November, 2004.  Above all the 
Committee held informal discussions with the officials of Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. at Hyderabad on 16th October, 2004, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., at 
Chennai on 18th October, 2004 and Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. at Kolkata on 
19th October, 2004. The Committee also sought a note from GAIL (India) Limited on 
the subject. 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2004-05) considered and adopted 
the Report at their sitting held on 20th December, 2004. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd., ONGC  Videsh Ltd., Oil India 
Ltd., Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd ., Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. and GAIL (India) Ltd.  for placing before them the 
material and information they wanted in connection with examination of the subject.  
They also wish to thank in particular the representatives of the Mi nistry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, Oil & Natural Gas Corpor ation Ltd., ONGC Videsh Ltd. and Oil 
India Limited who gave evidence and plac ed their considered views before the 
Committee. 
5. They would also like to place on re cord their sense of deep appreciation for 
the invaluable assistance rendered to them  by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi                        RUPCHAND PAL  
20 December, 2004                         CHAIRMAN 
29 Agrahayana, 1926(S)                  COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(v) 
 

 6
PART  I 
CHAPTER  I 
INTRODUCTION 
Economic development has bee n associated the wor ld over with increased use of  
energy and consequent increas e in  productivity. The current le vels of per capita energy  
consumption in India are extrem ely low as  compared to rest of  the world, as  can be seen  
from the chart given below:- 
PER  CAPITA  ENERGY  CONSUMPTION 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
USA
RUSSIA
EUROPE
CHINA
INDIA
WORLD
AVG
COUNTRIES 
(In MMTOE)

 7
1.2 Per capita consumption of primary energy and Hydrocar bon reveals that India is 
among the lowest in consumption of hydrocarbon in terms of kilogram of oil equivalent as is 
evident from the following figures :- 
 
Per capita consumption of Energy vis-à-vis Hydrocarbons 
 
        (in Kg of oil equivalent) 
Country / Region Primary Energy Hydro-carbons 
World 1454 927 
India 285 113 
China 688 169 
Pakistan 264 231 
Bangaladesh 81 80 
Japan 3962 2520 
U.K. 3856 2719 
Germany 4102 2539 
(Source : British Petroleum Statistics – 1998) 
 
1.3 As India’s giant economy re vs up, its thirst for oil is ex pected to grow 4% every year 
for the next 20 odd years compar ed to about 2% for rest of t he world. This will make us 
along with China, US and Japan one of the largest energy consumers globally. Meanwhile, 
imported oil is expected to jump  to 85% of total consumption from today’s 70%. So India’s 
role and clout is likely to increase dramatically in global energy markets. 
 
1.4 As per Hydrocarbon Vision 2025, the estimated energy supply mix in India for a 
period up to 2025 would be as under :- 

 8
Share of future energy supply in India (%) 
ar 
98 55 35 7 2 1 
02 50 32 15 2 1 
07 50 32 15 2 1 
11 53 30 14 2 1 
25 50 25 20 2 3 
 
 
1.5 From the above it is clear that by 2024-25, 25% of tota l energy needs of the country 
would be met by oil sector. Viewed in this  cont ext, it is imperative that production of  oil 
should keep pace with oil consumption. The situation is however, just reverse. 
1.6 Though, consumption of oil is increasing year after y ear, crude oil production has  
not kept pace with increasing demand as Indi a is only meeting 30% of its total dema nd. 
The gap between production and consumption of crude oil is  also likely to widen in the  
years to come, as can be seen from the chart given below:- 
 
 
 


 9
 
1.7 The widening gap between demand and supply of  crude oil and soaring international 
oil prices have been casting a huge burden on the country’s scarce foreign exchange 
reserves, as is evident from the figures given as under :- 
 
The amount spent on import of crude oil during the period of    1999-00 to 
2003-04 :- 
Value Year Quantity 
(TMT) Rs.(Crore) US$ (Million) 
2003-04 
(Prov) 
90434 83528 18268 
2002-03 81989 76195 15759 
2001-02 78706 60379 12635 
2000-01 74097 65932 14403 
1999-2000 57803 40028 9210 
 
1.8 In view of country’s rising need of o il demand,  its adverse impact on foreign 
exchange reserves and resultant slowdown in economic growth of  the country, the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) dec ided to undertake examination of the 
subject – Oil Exploration – Domestic and Over seas Projects to ascertain as to what 
strategy has been chalked out by Government to meet the burgeoning oi l requirements of 
the country. For this purpose, the Committee held discussions with the representatives of 
various oil companies, the Ministry of Pe troleum & Natural Gas and the Directorate 
General of Hydrocarbon (DGH). 

 10
1.9 At present, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, ONGC Vides h Limited, Oil India Ltd., 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Hindustan Petrol eum Corporation Ltd.  Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. and GAIL (Indi a) Limited are the 7 PSUs invo lved in the business of oil 
exploration in India and abroad  coming under the purview of the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas which is the nodal administrative agency of the Government. 
B. HYDROCARBON  RESERVES 
World major sources of oil and natural gas 
1.10 The major sources of oil and natural gas in the world are the Persian Gulf Region, 
Siberia, Central Asia, Northern Indian Ocean. In  these regions, the oil rich countries like 
Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, UAE, Kuwait ar e in the Gulf Region which constitute around 65% 
of world oil reserves. There ar e many countries in CIS region  and African continent which 
have significant hydrocarbon reserves. 
1.11 World oil reserves at the end of 2003 were 158.8 btoe (oil). T hough global reserve of 
oil are significant to meet ener gy requirements for quite some time in foreseeable future, 
the distribution of reserves across the worl d is quite uneven, as can be seen from the 
details given below :- 

 11
WORLD  OIL  :  PROVED  RESERVES 
  At end 2003 
 Thousand million tonnes Share of World Total 
USA 
Canada 
Mexico 
4.2 
2.3 
2.2 
2.70% 
1.50% 
1.40% 
Total North America 8.8 5.50% 
 
Venezuela 
Other S. & Cent. America 
10.8 
3.3 
6.80% 
2.10% 
Total S. & Cent. America 14.1 8.90% 
Kazakhstan 
Norway 
Russian Federation 
Other Europe & Eurasia 
1.2 
1.4 
9.6 
2.4 
0.80% 
0.90% 
6.00% 
1.50% 
Total Europe & Eurasia 14.6 9.20% 
 
Iran 
Iraq 
Kuwait 
Oman 
Qatar 
Saudi Arabia 
Syria 
United Arab Emirates 
Other Middle East 
18.1 
15.9 
13.3 
0.8 
2.1 
36.3 
0.3 
13.5 
0.1 
11.40% 
10.00% 
8.40% 
0.50% 
1.30% 
22.90% 
0.20% 
8.50% 
0.10% 

 12
Total Middle East 100.5 63.30% 
 
Algeria 
Angola 
Libya 
Nigeria 
Sudan 
Other Africa 
1.6 
1.2 
5.0 
4.7 
0.1 
1.5 
1.00% 
0.80% 
3.10% 
3.00% 
0.10% 
0.90% 
Total Africa 14.1 8.90% 
 
Australia 
China 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Vietnam 
Other Asia Pacific 
0.6 
3.3 
0.8 
0.6 
0.6 
0.3 
0.4 
0.40% 
2.10% 
0.50% 
0.40% 
0.30% 
0.20% 
0.30% 
Total Asia Pacific 6.6 4.20% 
 
Total World 158.8 100.00% 
 

 13
 
 
C. Energy Security Policy 
1.12 The Primary Energy require ment of the country (Data S ource: BP Statistical Review 
of World Energy / June, 2004) during the last five years was as under:- 
 
                 (Million tonnes of equivalent {mtoe}) 
 
Year Primary energy requirement 
2003 345.3 
2002 338.0 
2001 324.2 
2000 320.4 
1999 304.0 
 
1.13 Also, the energy demand is expected to grow at the rate of 4.1% over next two 
decades. As per the note furnished by the Mi nistry, the primary energy demand will be 780 
mtoe in 2020 from 345.3 mtoe in 2003. 
 
1.14 On supply side, India’s energy requirement is  mainly met by fossil fuels i.e. oil, gas 
and coal. As per a note furnished by Ministry of  Petroleum and Natural Gas, India will be 
required to get 730 mtoe of energy by 2020 from the fossil fuels. 
 
1.15 Asked as to what steps were contemplat ed to meet the future energy requirements 
of country, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in their note stated that the way to fulfill 

 14
the shortage is mainly the import of oil and gas, as is practiced currently.  However, 
initiatives in the following direction will improve energy security and self sufficiency. 
 
1. Getting piped gas from Middle East as we ll as from the East  and displace oil 
by gas wherever possible. 
 
2. Establishing CBM as a source of energy. 
 
3. The high efficiency technologies lik e IGCC preferably with UCG should be 
adopted to cleaner and envir onmentally friendly gree n and efficient energy 
generation. 
 
4. Crash program for using thorium based nuclear energy.  Research and 
development activities on HTTR are cu rrently undertaken.  India has huge 
Thorium reserves.  (About 300,000 t onnes).  One tonne of thorium is 
equivalent to 3 mtoe of oil in energy terms. 
 
1.16 To a question as to whether Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has framed any 
Energy Security Policy for improving self su fficiency and taking care the energy security 
needs of the country, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their reply stated as under: 
“The issue of energy security poli cy – an integrated approach is under 
discussions and is being coordinated by Planning Commission.  Also a 
Standing Committee of Group of Ministers Chaired by Minister of Power has 
been constituted to study and formulate energy policy including 
implementation aspect.” 

 15
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
A. Historical background of oil explo ration in India – Present and Future 
Scenario 
 
2.1 The exploration of hydr ocarbon in India commenced in the 1860s. Sub surface oil 
exploration activities started in the dense jungl es of Assam in North-East India. The first 
commercial discovery of crude oil in the country  was, however, made in  1889 at Digboi by 
Assam Railways & Trading Company Limited (A R&T Co. Ltd.), a registered company of 
London in 1881, with objectives to explore the rich natural re sources of Upper Assam. A 
new company known as Assam Oil Company (AOC) was formed in 1899 with a capital of 
pound 310,000 to take over `the petroleum interests of the AR&T Co. Ltd.’ 
 
2.2 By arrangement with the AR&T Co. Ltd., the Burmah Oil Company (BOC) of U.K. 
who was at that time operating in Burma acro ss the Patkai Hills took over the operation of 
AOC in 1921. BOC/AOC cont inued development of Digboi oi l field and intensified 
exploration activities. In 1953,  the first oil discovery of independent India was made at 
Nahorkatiya near Digboi and then at Moran in 1956. 
 
2.3 In 1955, Oil and Natural Gas Division of th e Ministry of Natural Resources, came 
into existence and the divisi on became a Directorate and la ter a Commission in 1956 set 
up by an Act of Parliament to  explore and exploit the hydr ocarbon reserves in Indian 
sedimentary basins. 
 
 
 

 16
2.4 Oil India Private Ltd. was incorpor ated on February 18, 1959 for the purpose of 
development and production of the discovered pr ospects of Nahorkatiya and Moran and to 
increase the pace of exploration in the North-East India. By a subsequent agreement on 27 
July, 1961, the Government of India and BOC transformed OIL to a Joint Venture 
Company (JVC) with equal partnership. 
 
2.5 On 14 October 1981, OIL became a wholly owned GOI enterprise by taking over 
BOC’s 50% equity and the m anagement of Digboi oilfield s changed hands from the 
erstwhile AOC to OIL. 
B. Agencies involved in exploration and production of crude oil in India 
and abroad 
 
 
2.6 Besides ONGC and OIL, the following Ce ntral and State PSUs w ho were hitherto 
engaged in Gas distribution and downstream acti vities viz. refining and marketing have 
also made forays into production and exploration activities:- 
a) GAIL (India) Ltd. 
b) IOC 
c) Gujarat State Petroleum Corporati on Ltd. (Gujarat State Government 
Undertaking) 
d) Hindustan Petroleum  Corporation Ltd. 
e) Bharat Petroleum  Corporation Ltd. 
 
2.7 Following Indian and fore ign private companies are engaged in the work of 
exploration and production of crude oil :- 
 

 17
1. Private Companies : 
 
(a) Indian Companies : 
 
i) Videocon Petroleum Ltd. 
ii) Reliance Industries Ltd. 
iii) Hindustan Oil Exploration Company 
iv) Selan Exploration Technologies 
v) Geo Enpro Ltd. 
vi) Assam Company Ltd. 
vii) Tata Petrodyne Ltd. 
viii) Essar Oil Ltd. 
ix) Hydrocarbon Resources Development Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. 
x) Interlink Petroleum 
xi) Jubilant Enpro Pvt. Ltd. 
xii) Phoenix Overseas Ltd. 
xiii) Enpro Finance Ltd. 
xiv) Prize Petroleum Company Ltd. 
 
(b) Foreign Companies 
i) British Gas Explorat ion & Production India Ltd. (subsidiary of 
BG Energy Holdings Ltd. U.K.) 
ii) Cairn Energy Cambay B.V. Ne therlands (subsidiary of Cairn 
Energy Plc., U.K.) 
iii) Cairn Energy Gujarat B.V. Ne therlands (subsidiary of Cairn 
Energy Plc., U.K.) 
iv) Cairn Energy West Bengal B. V. Netherlands (subsidiary of 
Cairn Energy Plc., U.K.) 
v) Cairn Energy India Pty. Ltd. (subsidiary of Cairn Energy Plc., 
U.K.) 
vi) Canoro Resources Ltd. Canada 
vii) Premier Oil (Eastern India) B.V. 
viii) Energy Equity India Pty. Lt d. (subsidiary of Energy Equity 
Resources Ltd., Australia) 
ix) Geo Global Resources Inc. Canada 
x) Geo-Petrol International Inc. France 
xi) Hardy Exploration & Production India Inc. (subsidiary of Hardy 
Oil & Gas Ltd., U.K.) 
xii) Heramec Ltd. 
xiii) Joshi Technologies Inc. USA 
xiv) Mosbacher India LLC 
xv) Niko Resources Limited, Canada 
xvi) OAO, Gazprom, Russia 
xvii) Okland International LDC, USA 
 
 

 18
xviii) Ravva Oil (Singapore) Pte.  Ltd. (subsidiary of Marubeni 
Corporation, Japan) 
xix) Tullow India Operat ions Ltd. (subsidiary of Tullow Oil Plc. 
Ireland) 
 
 
 Indian companies operating in  overseas E&P activities are :- 
 
a) ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL) 
b) OIL 
c) IOC 
d) GAIL 
Private Company 
RIL 
 
C. ROLE OF MINISTRY OF  PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
2.8 The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is inter-alia concerned with exploration and 
production of oil. 
 
2.9 Exploration Division headed by Joint Secretary (Explora tion) in the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas inter-alia supervises and coordinates the work of organisations 
concerned with exploration and production of crude oil. 
 
D. DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF HYDROCARBONS (DGH) 
2.10 The Government by Resolution in 1993 established, Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons under the administr ative control of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
with the objective to promot e sound management of the Indi an petroleum and Natural gas 
resources having a balanced regard for the environment, safety and technological and 

 19
economic aspects of the petroleum activities. DGH has been assigned following functions 
and responsibilities :- 
• To provide technical advice to the Mini stry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 
issues relevant to the exploration and opt imal exploitation of hydrocarbons in 
the country and on the strategy of taking up exploration and exploitation of oil 
and gas reserves abroad by the national companies;  
 
• To review the exploration progra mmes of companies operating under 
Petroleum Exploration Licenses grant ed under the Oilfields (Regulation and 
Development) Act, 1948 and the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 
with a view to advising government on the adequacy of these programmes;  
 
• To reassess the hydrocarbon reserves  discovered and estimated by the 
operating companies in discussion with them; 
 
• To advise the Government on offering of acreage for exploration to 
companies as well as matters relati ng to relinquishment of acreage by 
companies 
 
• To review the development plans for commercial discoveries of hydrocarbon 
reserves proposed by the operating comp anies and advise government on 
the adequacy of such plans and the ex ploitation rates proposed and matters 
relating thereto;  
 
 
 
 

 20
• To review and audit concurrently the management of petroleum reservoirs by 
operating companies and advise on any mi d course correction required to 
ensure sound reservoir management pr actices in line with the optimal 
exploitation of reserves and the conservation of petroleum resources;  
 
• To regulate the preservation, upk eep and storage of data and samples 
pertaining to petroleum exploration, drilling, production of reservoirs, etc. and 
to cause the preparation of data packages for acreage on offer to companies.  
 
• To advise Government on the laying down of safety norms and framing 
regulations on safety in oilfield oper ations, prescribe pollution control 
measures and assist in inspection and periodic safety audit    
 
• All other matters incidental thereto and such other functions as may be 
assigned by Government from time to time. 
 
Organisational set up of DGH 
 
2.11 Directorate General of Hydrocar bons is headed by Director General of 
Hydrocarbons. It has various Groups/Departm ents which are headed by the respective 
Department Heads. The main Departments in DGH are : 
 
1. Geology and Geophysics Studies Group 
2. Geophysical Operations Group 
3. Data Management Group 
4. New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) and CBM Group 
5. Contract Finance Group 

 21
6. Legal Matters Group 
7. Reservoir Engineering Group 
8. Production Engineering Group 
9. Gas Hydrates Group 
10. Safety Group 
11.  Environment Group 
12. Drilling Engineering Group 
13. Support services Like Administra tion, Finance & Accounts, Material 
Management, Essentiality Certificates 
 
2.12 The manpower for DGH is drawn from the various PSUs , mainly ONGC and OIL, on 
deputation. The manpower is experienced and expert in their respective fields. 
 
2.13 Administrative aspects of functioning of DGH are taken care of by an Administrative 
Council set up by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The Ad ministrative Council 
decides about the establishm ent and budget matters of DG H and also takes periodical 
review of the functioning of DGH. The Administrative Council is headed by the Secretary 
(PNG) and has the following composition: 
1. Secretary, MOP&NG                                      Chairman 
2. Additional Secretary, MOP&NG                      Member 
3. JS&FA, MOP&NG                                           Member 
4. JS(E), MOP&NG                                              Member 
5. DG, DGH                                                         Member-Convener 
 
2.14 There is an Advisory Council for DG H established as per the Government 
Resolution. The Council advises on the technica l matters / scientific projects to be carried 

 22
out by DGH within the terms of Government  resolution and also advises on technical 
issues and related work programme of co mpanies including JV partners.  Council 
examines the annual budg ets, major technical studies and  annual work programme of 
DGH.  The advisory Council has the following members at present : 
1. Dr. A.B. Das Gupta                       Chairman 
2. Dr. Hari Naryan                            Member 
3. D.R. Gadekar                                Member 
4. Dr. Ravi Shankar                           Member 
5. Sh. V.K. Sibal-DG(DGH)             Member Secretary 
 
 
2.15 On the activities undertaken / being undertak en by DGH, the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas in their note stated as under :- 
DGH is carrying out its functions and responsibility as per the terms of resolution 
and as assigned by the Ministry from time to time.  The main activities include evaluation 
process of various exploration and field development bidding rounds and recommendations 
to Government, implementation of NELP , opening up new / unexplored areas for 
exploration, review of reservoir performance of major fields, contract management of 
various exploration blocks and discovered field awarded to private / J.V. companies review 
of exploitation and exploration activities of  operating companies, monitoring of safety and 
environment aspect and other related activities. Details of various activities carried out by 
DGH are as under : 
 
i) OPENING UP OF AREAS 
 Almost 2/3 of the country’s sedimentary area still remains either unexplored or 
poorly explored. In order to open up these areas for future exploration, DGH has 
undertaken several projects  to cove r these areas through Reconnaitory 

 23
Geoscientific Surveys in or der to upgrade the geoscientifi c knowledge base so that 
these areas could be taken up for explorat ion in future.  During the last several 
years, DGH has covered the entire Indi an offshore areas through Satellite Gravity 
Surveys.  DGH has also covered large parts of eastern offshore and Andaman 
offshore areas including deep water areas through Joint Venture Speculative 
Seismic and Gravity Magnetic Surveys.  
 
ii) MONITORING OF ALL THE PET ROLEUM EXPLORATION LICENSES IN 
THE COUNTRY 
 
 DGH monitors the technical and geolo gical progress of work in each PEL 
block of the country on a quarterly basis , both for ONGC and OIL.  Currently, 235 
PELs are under review.  This also consists of reviewing the ex ploration strategy 
being used, its modification due to results obtained, changes in inputs required, 
optimal use of facilities available with NOCs for work etc.  
 
iii) CONTRACT MONITORING 
 
 Government of India has  signed contracts for 29 discovered fields and 118 
exploration blocks for exploration and development by Private/Joint sector. DGH is 
monitoring the execution and management  of all these  Production Sharing 
Contracts on behalf of Government of India. DGH personnel ar e the Government 
nominees as Chairman / Management Committee Members/Alternat ive Members in 
the management committee of eac h of these contracts. The task involves in-depth 
review of annual work programmes and budgets/ costs, project monitoring, 
independent reserve estimation, deciding the rate of flow of gas and oil from wells 
based on reservoir data, deciding commerciality of projects and review & approval of 
development plans and budgets. The main  objective behind the financial and 

 24
technical monitoring is to maximize the value of assets and profit oil/gas of GOI 
arising from the operations. 
 
iv) RESERVOIR MONITORING & RELATED ACTIVITIES 
  
 DGH is continuously monitoring the performance of petroleum reservoirs 
operated by the companies. DGH also adv ises on any mid course correction 
required to ensure sound reserv oir management practices in  line with the optimal 
exploitation of reserves. Review of hydrocarbon reserves estimated by the operating 
companies is being done by DGH. If required, DGH spons ors & carries out joint 
studies with R&D institutes to arrive at realistic assessments.    
 
 Bombay High Review 
 
 Government of India constitut ed a High Powered Co mmittee headed by Dr. 
K. Narayanan and Director General, DGH as its Member Secretary to look into the 
reasons for shortfall in oil production incl uding Western offshore fields and North 
Eastern Region.  
 The Report of the Committee covering Bombay High Field was submitted in 
which a number of recommendations we re contained to further improve the 
reservoir management aspects.  Another committee also under the chairmanship of 
Dr. Narayanan, was set up for prepari ng the monitorable action plan for 
implementing the recommendations of t he High Powered Commi ttee with Director 
General, DGH as the convener. The monitor able action plan, as submitted by the 
Committee, is being implemented by ONGC.  The action plan of ONGC is monitored 
by DGH and a Quarterly Report is submitted to the Ministry on a regular basis. 

 25
 The redevelopment plans of Mumbai  High North & South are under 
implementation by ONGC. DGH is constantly monitoring the implementation of the 
redevelopment plans and progress of G&G and other studies suggested by DGH. 
 
v) PRODUCTION MONITORING AND RELATED STUDIES 
 
 Production Group of DGH is monitoring th e production activities of private / 
JV operated oil and gas producing fields a nd also associated in the evaluation of 
development plans from produc tion engineering angle.  The Group also evaluates 
the work programmes, production plans a nd budgets of production related activities 
including work-over jobs.   
 vi) GEOCHEMISTRY  
 DGH carries out studies in the area of petroleum geochemistry related to 
reservoir engineering and volumetric estima tes of hydrocarbon resources. Some of 
the studies are : 
a. Application of Reservoir Geochemistry in Panna Field,  
b. Thermal Maturity Modeling to a ssess the thermal maturity of the 
source rocks in the deep water areas of the east coast , southern 
tip of India , Kerala Konkan and Cauvery basin. 
c. Volumetric Estimates of Hydrocarbons Generated off the east 
coast of India and  deepwater blocks offered under NELP. 
d. Surface geochemical surveys for hydrocarbon exploration in 
Chambal Valley area of Vindhy an Basin. The sudy involved 
collection, analysis and interpretation of 350 soil samples.  

 26
vii) SAFETY & ENVI RONMENT MONITORING  
 DGH is responsible for monitoring of operations of all the Pvt/JV operators 
with regard to compliance with the statut ory regulations and PSC terms for safe & 
environment friendly operations.  
 In terms of its assigned task, DGH ca rries out periodic safety & environment 
audits of the production insta llations, drilling rigs and bases from time to time. The 
recommendations made in the report are continuously monitored for compliance.  
 
viii) METERING VALIDATION 
 
 DGH also attends periodic metering calibration & validation at various 
production installations from time to time as and when warranted. 
 
ix) LOGGING  
 
 Well logs of all the exploration blocks are re-evaluated/re-assessed by 
DGH logging group for reserves estimati on, presence of hydrocarbons in 
various zones etc. DGH advises contra ctor about model logs to be run for 
proper reserves estimation and developm ent of the fields. During production 
phase, DGH advises operator  about the need for special cased hole logs for 
reservoir depletion, water phase movement, oil/gas water contact etc. 
 
x) Development of the first National E&P Database 
 
 The data pertaining to blocks offered in  the previous Exploration Rounds and 
NELP Rounds is already maintained in the DGH. 
 DGH obtained an ADB grant of US$ 6.00 lakhs for providing consultancy on 
establishment of National E& P Database and Archive in I ndia.  Under the grant, a 
feasibility study was carried out to establish a National E&P Database and Archive.   

 27
 A grant of US $ 3.00 lakhs from United States Tr ade & Development Agency 
was obtained for design of information flow system, modern data packages and 
suitable legal framework for India in the field of data management.   
xi) LEGAL MATTERS AND ARBITRATION CASES 
  DGH handles the legal matters, disputes  and arbitration matters arising out of 
Production Sharing Contracts. 
xii) IMPLEMENTATION OF NELP 
 Carving of Blocks, Preparation of Data Packages, Basin Dockets and Bid 
Evaluation Work. DGH identified and carved out 124 blocks for offer under four 
rounds  of NELP held so far. As already mentioned all the 12-deepwater blocks 
offered under NELP were identified as a result of DGH surveys detailed above. 
Other blocks were carved out after incorpor ating additional inputs in the form of 
either new data or reprocessing  & reinterpretation of old data & its integration. DGH 
also prepared dockets and data packages.  
 After the bid closing dates all the bids were technically & financially evaluated 
by DGH and recommendations submitted to Ministry. 
 After the finalisation of awards by Go vernment of India DG H was involved in 
contract negotiations with successful bidders.  
xiii) Scanning and Digitization of data and material for an international Web 
Site 
 
 DGH digitized the entire informati on contained in dat a packages of all 
the Blocks offered under NELP-II, NELP-III and NELP-IV and information 
dockets of relevant basins.  The entire data was made  available on CD 
Roms / Exabyte tapes.  A web site was operated with data prepared by DGH 
for all the blocks under NELP. 

 28
 
xiv) Presentation of oil and gas data at national and international forums 
 
 DGH keeps the oil companies in formed about the new geological 
prospects emerging in the country .  For this, DGH makes regular 
presentations in India at all the import ant conferences / meetings.  Moreover, 
DGH has been regularly presen ting the prospectivity of the Indian basins at 
several international forums like AAPS, SEG, WPC etc  
xv) EVALUATION OF BIDS PRIOR TO NELP 
 DGH made the technical and financial evaluation of all the bids received 
under VI & VII exploration bidding rounds, JV speculative surveys rounds and 
second rounds of discovered fields. Reco mmendations for award of blocks were 
made to MOP&NG.  
xvi) TECHNICAL GUIDELINES 
 DGH has prepared detailed technical guidelines for the upstream sector 
operations in the following areas in line with international practices.  The guidelines 
were meant for private / JV companies for their follow up.  The areas were : 
(i) Exploratory Driling 
(ii) Storage of course 
(iii) Geophysical surveys 
(iv) Reservoir Management of fields 
(v) Storage of field and pr ocessed seismic tapes 
 
xvii) PEL AND ML MAP OF INDIA  
 
 A complete map indicating all t he Petroleum Exploration Licences 
(PELs) and Mining Leases (MLs) has prepared in DGH along with details of all 
the existing PELs and MLs.  This in formation was not available earlier in a 
consolidated form anywhere.  This in formation is being published in the book 
on Petroleum Exploration and Production Activities in India brought out by 

 29
DGH beginning 1996-97.  The book prin ted by DGH contai ned all the other 
relevant information concerning upstream  activities of all the companies 
operating in India.  
 
xviii) INSTITUTIONAL CO-OPERATION  
 
 The Directorate General of Hydr ocarbons (DGH) obtained an outright 
grant (outside the normal aid progra mme of Norwegian Govt.) and entered 
into an Institutional Co -operation Programme with the Norwegian Petroleum 
Directorate (NPD) for exchange of ex pertise in the field of petroleum 
exploration and production needed by a regulatory body.  This project was 
established through a bilateral agreement, between DGH and NPD. 
 
 A grant of NOK 3 milli on (Rs. 1.8 crore) was obtained from NORAD for 
the programme.  First phase of the programme was completed in April, 1996.  
Phase-II of the programme began in September, 1996.  Under this 
programme, two of the Director Generals of  NPD visited India.  Also, several 
NPD experts visited India for 3 years to impart training to DGH officers.  
Several DGH officers visited Norwegian  offshore for hands-on training on 
resource management, regulatory framew ork and other technical and safety 
aspects.   
xix) ALTERNATE HYDROCARBON ENERGY SOURCES 
 DGH has identified the followin g unconventional sources of 
hydrocarbon energy for development : 
 Coal Bed Methane 
 Gas Hydrates 
 
 

 30
Coal Bed Methane 
 DGH has been involved in frami ng CBM policy in India. The 
policy was got approved from  the Cabinet in 1997. 
Subsequently, DGH in consul tation with CMPDI identified 
several blocks (23 so far) in va rious coal bearing areas in 
Gondwana & tertiary coal belts for CBM exploration & 
exploitation. Of these,  3 blocks were awarded by the Govt. on 
nomination basis and the remaining 7 blocks were  offered 
under CBM-I global bi dding round and 9 blocks were offered 
under CBM II round DGH has also estimated CBM resources of 
these blocks. Data packages & information dockets have also 
been prepared for these blocks.  
GAS  HYDRATES 
In order to keep up with technological development, with an 
ultimate objective to harness methane gas from gas hydrates at 
commercial scale, National Gas Hydrate Programme was 
constituted in 1997 and subseq uently on the recommendations 
of DGH it was decided by the Government to reconstitute the 
implementing mechanism. As a re sult Steering and Technical 
Committees of NGHP were reconstituted in October 2000. 
Based upon the review of se ismic data by the Technical 
Committee, two areas in Indian waters, one along East Coast & 
another on West Coast have been identified as “ Model 
Laboratory Areas” for further R&D work. Road Map has been 

 31
prepared for the two areas. Tec hnical Committee of NGHP is 
headed by DG (H) and all the technical activities of all the 
scientific projects under Nati onal Gas Hydrate Programme 
(NGHP) are coordinated by DGH. 
Meetings of the NGHP Technica l Committee are held every quarter 
and Agenda Notes for Steering Committee are submitted as indicated by 
Ministry. The NGHP is functioning as per the Road Map prepared by DGH 
and approved by the Steering Commi ttee headed by Secretary (P&NG). 
During 2004-05 about 10 sites are to  be drilled /cored in East and West 
Coasts and Andaman deep waters. Onboard ana lysis of the core data will be 
done, followed by analysis in detail by various national international agencies. 
Resource estimation for these areas wil l be followed. Tendering process for 
hiring a ship for coring the gas hydrate locations is in progress. 
 
xx) ESSENTIALLY CERTIFICATES (EC) 
 DGH issues Essentiality Certific ates, which enable the Pvt. / JV 
contractor to import goods at zero customs  duty required for petroleum 
operations in India under PSCs and al so in connection with petroleum 
operations under PELs & MLs issued or renewed after 1 st April 1999 for the 
National Oil Companies. This work wa s transferred to DGH from OIDB in 
1994. The work involves a lot of time & effort as each & every item is required 
to be examined and its inventory / record  is maintained in DGH, so that, 
customs authorities and DGH can check as to where these items were used.  
 
 
 

 32
xxi) REVIEW OF ORD ACT & PNG RULES 
 DGH was involved in the review exercise of P&NG Rules 1959. In 
addition , DGH  actively contributes  in amendments to the Mines Act,1952 
and the Oil Mines regulation Act, 1984 etc. 
 
xxii) WORKSHOPS / SEMINARS 
 
  One of the functions  of DGH is to introduce new technologies / 
work studies in the country and disseminate information to the oil industry.  In 
this context, DGH has organised  / conducted about 16 International / 
national Workshops and Seminars duri ng the last several years on the 
following aspects : International petrol eum contracts ,Draft for improved PSC 
Terms for India, Safety Management System in Upstream Petroleum Sector, 
Monitoring of Exploration Activities, Petroleum Res ource Data Management, 
Monitoring of Development Planning and Operation Activities, Management 
of Petroleum Reservoirs, CRINE Cost Reduction Initiative, Role of Regulatory 
Bodies and E&P companies in Data Management, International Conference 
on Deep Water Technology, Offshore Sa fety Legislation – The HSE, UK 
Perspective ,Negotiations, Coal Bed Methane 
 These workshops/seminars were organized in cooperation with 
Commonwealth Secretariat London, Norwegian Experts from NPD, PETRAD, 
Norway DTI, UK, US Department of Energy 
 
 Following activities are planned to be carried out by DGH :  
 
1. The surveys planned by DGH for opening up hitherto 
unexplored/poorly explored the sedimentary basins of India  

 33
2. About 20 exploration blocks ar e planned to be offered under forth 
coming fifth round of NELP 
3. About 7 CBM blocks have been identified for o ffer under CBM III 
bidding 
4. About 10 locations ar e planned to be drilled/cored for establishing 
the Gas Hydrate resources in East and West Coast and Andman 
deep waters. 
5. All other activities related with administration/monitoring of 
Production Sharing Contracts 
 
 

 34
 
DISPUTES PERTAINING TO PSC OF OIL FIELDS 
2.16 DGH handles the legal matters, disputes  and arbitration matters arising out of 
Production Sharing Contracts (PSC). Asked as to how m any cases of dispute amongst 
Union Government / National / Private / International oil companies pertaining to PSC of oil 
fields have been filed in courts / arbitration Tribunal in India and abroad and their status, 
the Ministry of Petroleum & natural Gas in  their note furnished to Committee stated as 
under :- 
 
2.17 As of now, 6 arbitration and 5 court cases are in progress due to various disputes 
related with Production Sharing Contracts. The details of the cases is given below:  
 
A. ARBITRATION CASES 
(i) HOEC, MIL v/s. ON GC, Union of India 
 Arbitration Case between Hindustan Oil Explor ation Company (HOEC) & Maftlal 
Industries Limited (MIL) Vs. Union of India (U OI) & Oil & Natural Ga s Corporation (ONGC) 
under PSC for exploration block GN-ON-90/3 regarding claim of the contractor for Force 
Mejure condition in the block and encashment of Bank Guarantee by ONGC. 
Present Status: Oral evidence of the witnesses of claimants is being recorded.  Next 
hearing in the case is fixed for 2nd & 3rd Feb. 2005. 
(ii) Niko Resources Ltd. & GSPC v/s. Union of India 
 Arbitration case between NIKO Resources Ltd. (NRL), Gujarat State Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd.(GSPC) Vs Unio n of India under Hazira PSC re garding  cost recovery of 
36” pipeline of 14km length from Hazira to Mora village. 
Present Status: Oral evidence of the witnesses of claimants and Respondent has been 
completed. Now case is scheduled for final arguments on 18th & 19 Dec 2004. 

 35
 
(iii)Videocon Petroleum Ltd. v/s. Union of India (Case No.1) 
Arbitration Case No.1 betw een Videocon Petroleum Ltd.  (VPL) against Union of 
India under Ravva PSC regarding due date of payment of prof it petroleum to GOI and 
interest on delayed payments. 
Present Status: The case was finally argued and Arbitral Tr ibunal has passed the 
interim award which is in favour  of UOI rejecting the claim of VPL that there is no due date 
for payment of Profit Petroleum of GOI. Arbitral Tribunal has ora lly clarified that this award 
is final but called as interim award because one of the issue of payment of interest is linked 
with case no. 3 of VPL.  
 
(iv) Videocon Petroleum Ltd. v/s. Union of India (Case No.2) 
 Arbitration Case No.2 bet ween Videocon Petroleum Ltd.  (VPL) against Union of 
India (UOI) under Ravva PSC regarding Debanture Trust Deed (DTD) entered into 
between VPL and IDBI & other Fi nancial Institutions for rais ing a loan of Rs. 990 Crore 
under Ravva PSC by mortgaing entire Ravva oil and gas field. 
Present Status:  The case has been argued by both t he Parties before the Arbitral 
Tribunal. Written submissions to  be filed by the parties. T hereafter Arbitral Tribunal will 
publish the Award. 
(v) Videocon Petroleum Ltd. v/s. Union of India (Case No.3) 
 Arbitration Case No.3 betw een Videocon Petroleum Ltd. ( VPL) against Union of India 
(UOI) under Ravva PSC regarding calculation of Post Tax Rate of Return (PTRR) w.r.t. 
ONGC carry, sinking fund, dividend, tax, inventory, advance and deposits etc. 
Present Status:  Arguments from both the sides ar e over. Written submissions have 
been filed by the parties. The award by the Tribunal is awaited. 

 36
 
(vi) Cairn Energy (India) Pty. Ltd. v/s. Union of India 
 Arbitration Case between Cairn Energy (I ndia) Pty. Ltd. (CEIL) and Ravva Oil 
(Singapore) Pte Ltd. (ROS) and Union of India under  Ravva PSC regardin g calculation of 
Post Tax Rate of Return (PTRR) w.r.t. ONGC  carry, sinking fund, PTRR calculation on 
single or aggregate basis, dividend tax, inventory, advance and deposits etc. 
Present Status:  Arbitral Tribunal has published the Award on 12.10.2004 and out of six 
issues four have been decided in favour of GOI. The issues t hat have been decided  
against GOI are ‘ONGC Carry’ and ‘Advances & Deposits’.   
 
B. COURT CASES 
(i) HOEC v/s. MIL, UOI & ONGC  
 Arbitration petition No.44 of 2002 filed by M/s HOEC against Mafatlal Industry Ltd. 
(MIL), UOI and ONGC before Gujarat High Court praying to appoint Mr. Justice B.J. Divan 
(Retd.) as arbitrator or any ot her arbitrator as may be sugges ted by leave of this Hon’ble 
court by the counsel of the petit ioner i.e. HOEC at the time of hearing to enter upon and 
decide the dispute between the HOEC & MIL fo r a claim made by HOEC against MIL for a 
sum of Rs. 50,00,903.20 arising out from the paid PSC dt. 29.3.93 & JOA dt. 15.3.96 in 
respect to Exploration Block GN-ON-90/3. 
 In this petition no relief has been sought against ONGC and UOI.  
Present Status: The case is pending for final hearing. 
(ii) BGEPIL v/s. UOI AND GOVT. OF GUJARAT 
 The contractor of Panna-Mukta was not  paying sale tax on gas produced from 
Panna-Mukta field and sold to GAIL with a plea t hat as per PSC definiti on, ‘Delivery Point’ 
means the upstream weld at the underwate r connection between se ller’s pipeline and 

 37
ONGC’s underwater gas transmissi on line which transports gas from the Bassein field to 
Hazira. The upstream weld is in offshore, out side Gujarat state. However, before gas is 
sold, it is processed by ONGC at its sweeteni ng facility at Hazira and then gas is received 
by GAIL at Hazira, Gujarat. As  per GOI the ‘Delivery Point’ is  at Hazira, because as per 
PSC, contractor parties had agreed that GAIL shall receive the gas from Panna-Mukta at 
Hazira. Gujarat Govt. issued a show caus e notice to BGEPIL, ONGC and RIL, the 
constituents of contractor and Directorate General of Hydroc arbons (DGH) regarding sale 
tax liability on natural gas from Panna- Mukta field sold to GAIL. 
 BGEPIL filed a special civil application in Ahmedabad High Court against the 
recovery proceedings initiated by Sale Tax Authorities of Gujarat and made Government of 
India as one of the respondent. Later on ONGC and RIL also joined in the petition.  
Present Status: Case is pending for hearing before Gujarat High Court.  
 
(iii) Cyanides & Chemicals Co mpany v/s. Union of India 
 M/s Cyanides and Chemicals Company file d write petition in Ahmedabad High Court 
for restraining Niko Resources Ltd. from expl oring gas from well Bheema, and to further 
ensure that the petitioners gas resources in ONGC well at Olpad is not depleted or affected 
or siphoned off by the digging of wells at B heema. The petitioner further prays that during 
the pendency of this petition, it is necessary to do justice in the matter to the petitioner and 
therefore, Niko be directed to discontinue further exploration at Bheema or near about 
area, and be further directed to supply additional gas to the pet itioner of 3000 cu. mts. of 
gas per day at the prices payable to the ONGC or GAIL by the petitioner of their existing 
supplies when required. 
Present Status Case is pending for hearing 
 

 38
(iv) Mulla & Mulla, Craigic Blunt & Ca roe  v/s. EEIPL & Union of India 
 A Production Sharing Contract (PSC) d t. 6.10.1995 was signed between Government 
of India, Mosbacher India Ltd., Hindustan Oil Exploration Co. and Petrodyne Inc. Following 
defaults by Petrodyne Inc., Government of India forfeited the Participat ing Interest (PI) of 
PDI and transferred its interest to Energy Equity India Pty. Ltd. (EEIPL).  
 Later on, due to default in  cash calls by EEIPL, certai n disputes arose amongst the 
JV partners and MIL referred the matter to ar bitration under Joint Operating Contract, 
wherein Government of India was not a party. 
 Pursuant to the award under JOA, MIL and HOEC requested t he Government of 
India for assigning the PI of EEIPL to MIL and HOEC, which is pending for approval by the 
Govt. 
 Meanwhile Government of India receiv ed notice from the Bombay High Court 
restraining GOI from giving appr oval for the said assignment of  PI under a suit filed by a 
law firm Mulla and Mulla against EEIPL for non- payment of their fees for earlier rendered 
professional services. After hearing argument s the Single Bench of  Bombay High Court 
vacated the restraint order. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner preferred appeal; before 
the Division Bench which was also dismissed by the Division Bench. 
 The petitioner filed Special Leave Petition before the Hon’ble Supreme Court wherein 
Govt. was again restrained from  assigning PI of EEIPL to MIL & HOEC. However, during 
arguments MIL agreed to pay Rs. 25 lacs to Mulla & Mulla and the Hon’ble Court was 
pleased to vacate the stay order against the Govt. and Government of  India, MIL & HOEC 
have been deleted from the array of defendants vide order dt. 15.10.2004. 
Present Status  Case will continue only against EEIPL.  
 

 39
(v) M Dr. Fereidum Fesharaki v/ s. Union of India and DGH  
M Dr. Fereidum Fesharaki has f iled a civil suit no. 10 of 200 2 which is renumberd as suit 
no. 152 of 2002 before the Distt. Court,Delhi agai nst Union of India and DGH for recovery 
of Rs.1,97,718.66 .Dr Fesharaki was appointed as  an arbitrator by M/ s Cairn Energy in 
Ravva crude price determination case who was lato r disqulified to act as an arbitrator by 
the Arbitral Tribunal in  amajorty decision.Thereafter,Dr Fe sharaki has sent his bill to DGH 
for remaining amount of US Doller 2206.40 after adjusting the initial deposit of US Doller 10 
thousand made by the UOI with DR. Fesharakhi. The bill of Dr. Fesharaki for remaining 
amount could not be paid as th e same was found exorbitant and  also was not in line with 
agreed terms of the appointment of  the Abitrators.Being aggrived,Dr. Fesharaki has filed 
the present suit praying interalia that a decree for a sum of Rs.1,97,718.66 be passed in 
favour of the plaintiff alongw ith pendentelite and future intere st at the rate of 24% Per 
Annum. 
Present Status  The Union Of India has filed its Wr itten Statement and now the case is 
fixed for hearing. 

 40
CHAPTER - III 
 
New Exploration Licensing Policy  (NELP) 
3.1 India today remains one of the least explored regions with well density per thousand 
sq. kms being among the lowest. To boost the level of exploration activity in the country so 
that new finds can be made and level of crude oi l and gas produced may be increased, 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) was formulated by the Government of India in 
1997 to boost the level of exploration activity  both in on land and offshore including deep 
water in the country. NELP was operationalised in 19 99. Salient features of NELP are as 
under :- 
HIGHLIGHTS OF NELP 
• Fiscal stability provision in the contract 
• Finalisation of contract on the basis of Model Production Sharing Contract   (MPSC)  
• Petroleum tax guide is in place to facilitate investors 
• Possibility of seismic option in the first phase of the exploration period 
• NOC’s to compete for acreages 
• No payment of signature, discovery or production bonus  
• No customs duty on imports required for petroleum operations 
• No minimum expenditure commitment during the exploration period 
• No mandatory state participation/carried interest by NOCs. 
• Freedom to sell crude oil and natural gas in domestic market at market related    prices 
• Biddable cost recovery limit up to 100% 
• Sharing of profit petroleum based on pre-tax investment multiple achieved and is 
biddable 
• No cess on crude oil production 

 41
 
• Royalty payment on ad-valorem basis: 
 
for crude oil : 
- 12.5% for onland areas 
- 10% for offshore areas 
for natural gas : 
- 10% for onland areas 
- 10% for offshore areas 
• Royalty for oil & gas in deep water areas (beyond 400m bathymetry) 
 
- 5% for first seven years after co mmencement of commercial production 
 
• Option to amortise exploration and drilling expenditures over a peri od of 10 years from 
first commercial production 
 
• Contribution to site restoration fund fully  deductible in same ye ar for income tax 
purposes in accordance with Income-tax Act. 
 
• Liberal depreciation and set off provisions for tax computation purposes. 
 
• 7 years tax holiday from commencement of production 
• Conciliation and Arbitration Act, 1996, which is based on UNCITRAL model is 
applicable. 
 
i) BID TERMS  
 Companies would be required to bid for : 
• Work programme commitment 
• Profit petroleum share expec ted by the contractor at various levels of pre-tax 
multiple of investments 
• Percentage of annual production sought to be allocated towards cost recovery 
 

 42
ii) BID EVALUATION CRITERIA  
For NELP-IV the following evaluation criteria  was adopted (which was made public in bid 
documents) 
  Criteria Weightages on a scale of 100 points 
             Shallow Offshore & Onland Areas Deepwater blocks 
a. Technical capability   6              9 
b. Financial strength   4              6 
c. Work programme  60            55 
d. Fiscal package  30            30 
To a question as how far the objectives under NELP had been achieved, the 
Ministry in their note stated as under :- 
Considerable achievement have been made during NELP regime. Some of 
the salient achievements are summarized as under :- 
 
• The total area under exploration in t he country as on 1.8.2004 is about 0.99 
million sq. km., of which 77% is under NELP (0.76 million sq. km.), 16% 
under nomination  (0.16 million sq. km.)  and 7% is under pre-NELP (0.07 
million sq. km.).  Of the 77% area under  NELP, 63% of the area covers the 
deep waters through the innovative surveys of DGH. 
• Thus NELP has tremendously increased t he exploration coverage of Indian 
sedimentary basins. 
• In the last four years, 90 PSC’s we re signed under the NELP regime as 
against 28 in the pre-NELP rounds in 10 years. 

 43
• There have been 19 new oil and gas discov eries by private / JV companies. 
Of these, 3 in Cambay, 12 in K.G. basin and 4 in shallow Mahanadi-North 
East Coast (NEC) offshore.  The Mahanadi-NEC discoveries have helped 
raise its basinal status from Category-III to Category-II. 
• Exploratory efforts have increased significantly under NELP. A total of 92048 
LKM of 2D and 44732 Sq.K m. of 3D seismic surv ey has been carried out 
under NELP as compared to 24131 LKM of 2D and 3117 Sq. Km. of 3D 
under pre-NELP exploration blocks. 
 
• So far four rounds of NELP have bee n undertaken. Details of Committed 
work progamme and achievement in eac h of the exploration blocks under 
NELP was stated to be as under :- 
COMMITTED ACTUAL  
2D 
(GLK) 
3D 
(Sq.Km) 
Exploratory 
Wells(No) 
2D 
(GLK) 
3D 
(Sq.Km) 
Exploratory 
Wells(No) 
NELP-I 28334 11807 20 28030 18169 25 
NELP-II 25315 10415 52 28253 11752 34 
NELP-III 27590 16320 57 30165 8072 1 
NELP-IV 16040 12655 45 5620 - - 
 
• The fifth round of NELP is likely to  be announced by December, 2004. About 
20 blocks have been carved out for offe r under fifth round for NELP. The 
Blocks are identified based on re-interpretation of available geo-scientific data 
or by acquiring new / additional data by DGH in unexplored / poorly explored 
areas / basin and by evolving new geological models. 

 44
3.2 Asked to state the difficulties, if any being faced by ONGC and OIL in carrying out 
E&P activities due to present NELP and remedial measures to overcome them, ONGC in 
their note submitted following suggestions :- 
a) More incentives for frontier basins. 
b) More approving power to Managem ent committee related to Phase 
extension, assignments etc. 
c) Marginal fields require special inc entives at post discovery stage to make 
them economically viable.  Such incentives may be offered by the 
Government on its own initiative when th e contractor is not able to declare a 
discovery as commercial discovery with the existing fiscal package. 
 
3.3 The Committee also sought the views of ot her oil companies viz. IOC, BPCL, HPCL 
and GAIL who have also recently made forays into E&P activities on the preüsent NELP. 
Two companies viz. Indian Oi l Corporation and GAIL pointed out the constraints being 
faced by them to pursue E&P activities and also suggested remedial measures as under :- 

 47
 
 
3.4 After the introduction of NELP offe ring improved terms and level playing 
opportunities to private companies at par with NOCs, the exploration activity in the country 
has increased. Few large/m edium size discoveries have also been made recently. 
However, the desired level of participationy foreign companies is yet to be materialized. 
Hence, there is a need to undertake specific measures, which may result in attracting 
global companies to participate aggr essively in future exploratio n in India. As one of the 
measures in this regard, Govt may consi der offering blocks with greater hydrocarbon 
prospectivity in the forthcoming NELP rounds.  
 
3.5 Some of the constraints experienced under previous NELP rounds and their 
remedial measures are enumerated below: 
• Non-availability of the data of adjoining blocks at the time of data viewing of a 
particular block on offer by the Govt. for bidding.  
Efforts should be to make available at least t he key technical data of adjoining blocks in 
order to enable the interested bidder to have a better estimation of the hydrocarbon 
prospectivity of the block on offer. 
• Non-availability or delay in availability of the technical data of  the awarded block, 
which is not present in the data package of  that block purchased by the company 
prior to bidding. 
Almost all the blocks offer ed under previous NELP rounds  were previously under 
ONGC/OIL. The data package of a particular block ma y not always contain the 
entire technical data availabl e with earlier operator. Ther efore, to enable the new 

 48
entrant for better technical assessment of a block, it should be made mandatory for 
the previous operator to readily make avail able all the technical data of the block, 
not present in the data package, in a given timeframe. 
• The requirement for Defense clearance for data processing abroad, particularly of 
offshore blocks, should be reduced to minimum.  
• The Contractor should have the option to reli nquish any part of the original contract 
area prior to the commencement of each contract year, during any of the Exploration 
Phases. This will save the C ontractor from paying the license fee for that part of the 
contract area, which, in his opinion, is not of hydrocarbon interest, and such 
relinquished part will be back with the Government at the end of every contract year. 
• The Government should have the option to take its entitlement to Profit Petroleum 
either in cash or in kind,  and once the Government exer cises its option, the same 
should continue  for the entire period of the PSC. The right of the Government to 
vary its option every year may prevent the Contractor from realizing best value by 
sale of the petroleum as the availabl e quantities may be undeterminable for long 
term sale and purchase contracts. Particular ly in the case of natural gas, such 
flexible option may not be workable. 
• As of now, E&P activities, though qualify fo r 7-year tax holiday from the date of 
commercial production, do not qualify for in frastructure project/industry status. 
Under Income Tax Act, 1961, infrastructure projects qualify for tax holiday u/s 80 IA 
and also have the option to choose the bloc k of 10-year tax holi day out of 15 years, 
which is not necessarily linked to commenc ement of commercial production. In E&P 
projects, if 7-year tax holiday necessar ily starts from commercial production, the 
advantage of tax holiday may be lost because of carried forward losses of the 

 49
previous years on account of large invest ment. Therefore, the Government should 
allow E&P projects to c hoose the block of 7-year tax holiday in line with 
infrastructure industry status. 
• The price of natural gas, either  in case of arms length sales or sales to an affiliate, 
should be market-determinable. 
• The time period required for various Government/Management Committee 
approvals may be further reduced to expedite the whole process. 
 
 
 
GAS  AUTHORITY  OF  INDIA  LTD  (GAIL) 
3.6 GAIL stated following lim itation of NELP and remedy to remove them  :- 
Securing the statutory permissions from various government departments like 
Defence, Environment, Explosives are time c onsuming which sometimes result in time as 
well as cost overrun of projects.  This constr aint may be overcome if  such applications are 
processed expeditiously by the concerned authorities.  
 
Limitation: The effective date of a block awarded during bidding is considered from the 
grant of PEL. In grant of PEL for onland blocks, State Go vernments are involved. The 
process sometimes takes considerable time. Many expenses incurred before effective date 
are not cost recoverable. As a result substant ial time is lost before the actual start of 
exploration work.   
Remedy: Such constraints can be ov ercome if the NOC of PE L with respective State 
Government is taken during offer of NELP and PEL is granted in shortest possible time.  

 50
Limitation: The initial data pr ovided by the government of Indi a of a particular block to a 
particular operator is not shared to other operating parties in adj acent blocks even on 
payment basis. Some times such data becomes of critical importanc e and is required for 
operational reasons.  
Remedy: Initial data is the property of the government of India and if the operating 
party of the block has not done any value addition to it, the data of critical importance 
should be shared. 
3.7 Relevant provisions of Petroleum Regu lation Board Bill and Gas Pipeline policy may 
also be included in future NELP rounds. 
 
3.8 During evidence the Committee asked the representatives of National Oil 
Companies viz. ONGC and OIL to state as to whether the present provision of NELP were 
satisfactory or required any modification, in reply a repr esentative of ONGC stated as 
under :- 
“We have represented to the Government  that NELP awar ds are made on 
something called Minimum Work Progra mme (MWP).  For ONGC, except where 
there has been environmental clearance delay or Defence Ministry clearance delay, 
we are hundred per cent plus on every block t hat we have taken.  Someone else is 
not.  We have represented to the Governm ent that if blocks ar e awarded on MWP, 
and if MWP is not complied with, then the sanctity of award process itself is 
questioned.  And then if we say that MWP is  adjusted from this block to that, this 
goes against the basic principl e of tendering or bi dding.  That is one thing which we 
have submitted to the Government. It is unfair.  If we have bid three wells and 
somebody else have bid four wells, by all means four is more than three and they 

 51
should get the award.  I have nothing to co mplain about.  But having bid for four 
wells, not even one well is done and extensions are being given.” 
3.9 The Committee drew the att ention of representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas towards block allotment policy under NELP and asked the reasons for not 
imposing same conditions on private operators as applicable to public sector undertaking in 
awarding of blocks under NELP. In reply a representative of the Ministry of P&NG stated :- 
“…………..pre NELP there were cert ain conditions which have been 
incorporated to make it attractive to private money . But with NELP, all these 
anomalies have been rectified. Today, as  far as we know, there are no 
anomalies tilted in favour of private sect or at the cost of  the public sector. 
Today, all those imbalances  and anomalies have been fully rectified. We will 
go through it again in the li ght of the observations of the Members of the 
Committee………………….” 
 
3.10 When the question pertaini ng to the terms and condit ions of NELP was put to 
representative of OIL, they stated that :- 
“We are pretty comfortable with the latest terms that have come in the NELP.  But 
then we have seen one thing.  Since we ha ve been a party to different interactions 
of the Government with the industry on some of these i ssues, there are times that 
having got a block to start ex ploration, there are envir onmental issues because of 
which quite a bit to time gets lost.  We can give you a specific example, though this 
is not on NELP Block.  In Assam, near Digbo i, there is a place ca lled Jaipur.  There 
is an exploration block which has been ta ken up by a particular company called 
Premier Oil Company, which is a British company.  They are the operators and we 
are the partners.  As luck would have it, after the block has been awarded to this 
consortium, where we are one of the partner, the Government of Assam in its 
wisdom decided that some por tion within the block to be announced as what is 
called "Reserved Forest Area".  Therefore,  we are not allowed to operate there.  
That has created a lot of pr oblems.  We are taking it up with the Government of 
Assam, we have taken it up with the Ministry of Petroleum. 
 
We are hopeful that some  solution would come thr ough.  If these kind of 
issues are sorted out earlier, that would help in getting the work done in as fast a 
manner as possible.  Otherwise, I think,  the Company feels comfortable with the 
NELP terms.” 

 52
 
B SEDIMENTARY  BASINS 
3.11 Hydrocarbons (Oil & Gas)  are generated and usually accumulated in sedimentary 
rocks. These are rocks that have been deposited in large water mass like lakes and seas, 
which form Sedimentary Basins. These sediment ary basins are therefor e target areas for 
exploration in India. 
3.12 On the total number of sedimentary bas ins in the country, the potential of hydro 
carbon generation and accumula tion in different sedimentar y basins and their present 
status of exploration, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in a note furnished to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
India has an endowment of twenty-six sedi mentary basins, stretc hing over an area 
of 1.39 million sq. km. on land and 1.75 million sq. km. o ffshore, including the vast 
stretch of sediment laden area measuring 1.35 million sq. km. in deep water areas. 
3.13 All these basinal areas in cluding the deep water are prognosticated to hold about 28 
billion tonnes of hydrocarbon resources. With the exploratory efforts expended in the on 
land and shallow water areas so far about 8 billion tonnes of the hydrocarbon resources 
have been proved to be geological in-place hydrocarbon volume. 
3.14 These 26 basins are divided into four categories based on prospectivity perception. 
The four categories are :- 
a) Cat. I  Proved petroliferous basins with commercial production. 
b) Cat. II  Basins with known occurr ence of hydro carbon but no commercial 
production 
c) Cat. III  Basins with no signific ant hydro carbon shows but assured 
prospective on geological consideration 
d) Cat. IV  Frontier basin s with uncertain prospects 

 53
3.15 ONGC has carried out surface geological mapping of all these basins in last five 
decades followed by different cam paigns of seismic survey in 19 basins. These 19 of the 
26 sedimentary basins of India have been taken up for systematic  exploration so far, with 
acquisition of seismic data and carrying out exploratory drilling.   OIL has carried out 
exploration of hydrocarbons in the Mahanadi Offshore and Onshor e areas in Orissa, North 
East Coast Offshore areas of Orissa, Anda man Offshore, Jaisalmer and Bikaner Nagaur 
Basins in Rajasthan, Ganga Va lley Basin, U.P., and Saurasht ra Offshore in addition to 
continuing its exploration for hydrocarbons in Upper Assam Basin. 
3.16 Seven of these basins (Category I) viz. Cambay, Upper Assam, Assam Arakan Fold 
belt, Mumbai offshore, Krisna-Godavari, Ca uvery and Jaisalmer hav e been upgraded to 
producing basins, which have witnessed intensification of exploratory activities with the aim 
of realising the basin potential and establis hing additional play syst em which can yield 
substantial hydrocarbon accretion at less time and reduced cost. Currently these basins 
are being commercially exploited. These basins covering 16% of the total basinal area hold 
about 66% of the prognosticated resources of the country and account for almost entire 
hydrocarbon discovered so far. The explorator y efforts in proved petroliferous basins are 
being renewed with detailed prospectivity/play analysis for more resource conversion.   
3.17 The non-producing basins which have receiv ed exploratory input thus far, include 
the teaser basins without co mmercial discovery viz., Andaman, Kutch and Bengal, and the 
basins without a hydrocarbon find viz. G anga, Himalayan Foothills, Kerala-Konkan, 
Satpura, Vindhyan, Pranhita-Godavari, Karewa, Mahanadi and Saurashtra. These basins 
together are covering 28% of the total s edimentary area and holdi ng about 9% of the 
Geological Resources of the c ountry. Eluding success/ noncommercial finds have resulted 
in chequered exploration activities in these bas ins. The pause in ex ploration activities 

 54
between two cycles has bee n utilised for understanding basin potential and fine-tuning of 
model of exploration.   
3.18 The basins like Bhima-Kaladgi, Cud dapah, Chattisgarh, Deccan Syneclise, 
Narmada and Spiti-Zanskar covering about 13% of the basinal area remain in the realm of 
knowledge building eit her due to the age of the sedi ments and/or due to geological 
complexity. Understanding of geotectonic evolution and associated attributes culminating in 
the Generation, Migrati on and Entrapment (GME) cycle in each of these basins is critical, 
prior to initiation of systematic exploratory input planning. 
3.19 The deep-water areas of India accounting for about 43% of the total basinal area of 
the country is a frontier sector in terms of knowledge base. Preliminary estimates based on 
indirect means suggest Geologica l Resources of this sector to  be of the order of about 7 
billion tonnes i.e. about 25% of the total resources of the country.   
 
3.20 Elaborating the efforts made and future strategy to explore hitherto unexplored 
basins, a representative of ONGC during his evidence bef ore the Committee stated as 
under:- 
 “We have totally categorized all the sedi mentary basins which are 26 in numbers 
and four categories. There was only one basi n in India which was on the oil map of 
the world.    But today with the explorat ion strategy and the ex ploration which have 
been done by the ONGC, seven basins today are coming in the commercial 
production stage.    Categor y-II basins are basins with the known occurrence of 
hydrocarbons, but non-commercial production. It means that we have carried out the 
exploration there.   We have got the hy drocarbons there but the hydrocarbon finds 
are not in the commercial stage. Further ex ploration and the assessments in these 
basins are going on.  They ar e mainly the Kutch and another  area which fall in this 
category is the Andaman sector where we have discovered the gas.  In the Kutch 
sector we have discovered the oil as well as gas.  But today from the economic point 
of view those discoveries are not commercia l.   But the exploration in these two 
areas is going on and we env isage with the better interpretation and revisiting the 
data, we should be in a position to estab lish commercial production and bring these 
two basins also into the category-I. 
 

 55
 Category-III are the basins with no si gnificant hydrocarbon shows but assumed 
prospective on geological considerations.   These are like the Himalayan foothills, 
Ganga Valley, Saushrashtra etc.   We got  non-commercial gas flows in Vindhyachal 
in Madhya Pradesh.   It gave us about 3,000 cubic metres of  gas but that was non- 
commercial.  Similarly, in the Jawalamu khi, we got the gas, but that was non- 
commercial.   Such basins are seven in numbers. In the Category IV, we have ten 
basins.  Basically, some of these ten bas ins are, what we call in the geological 
parlance, made up of very old rocks equival ent to about 400 to 500 million years or 
even older.  Today, in the country we hav e not yet found any hydrocarbon in these 
areas and a good number of these basins have not yet been visited from the point of 
view of geological analysis.   But out of these ten basins, we have carried out the 
work in the six basins for the geological and potential evaluation.” 
 
 
3.21 Committee asked from Minist ry of Petroleum and Natural Gas as to what steps were 
contemplated to appraise all sedimentary basins, and locate additional Hydrocarbon 
reserves. In reply, Ministry in their note stated as under:- 
To assess and locate additi onal potential resources main ly in category III and IV 
basins and Deepwater areas, DGH is carrying out  number of Geoscientif ic surveys either 
alone or in collaborati on with reputed national / international companies.  Government of 
India is awarding exploration blocks through NE LP to accelerate the exploration in the 
country. As per India Hydrocar bon vision –2025, entire area i. e. about 3.14 m illion sq. km. 
of sedimentary basins is to be appraised by 2025 and 35% of the sedimentary area is to be 
appraised by the end of X Five year plan. 
C HYDROCARBON VISION – 2025 
3.22 Government of India formulated the `India Hydrocarbon Vision – 2025’ which 
envisages total appraisal of the sedimentary basins of India by the year 2025. 
3.23 Asked as to what steps were being ta ken to achieve the objective of Indian 
Hydrocarbon vision 2025, ONGC in their note stated as under:- 
In order to fulfill the objec tives of the Vision-2025, action plans have been drawn so 
as to achieve the following appraisal programme: 

 56
• 25% by 2005 
• 50% by 2015 
• 100% by 2025 
3.24 Currently, more than 20% of the totally sedimentary basinal area of the Country has 
been appraised.  With the im plementation of the X-plan exploration programme (2002-07) 
by the various operators including ONGC , the exploration coverage will improve 
significantly and about 35% of the basinal areas are expected to be appraised. 
3.25 ONGC has drawn its short, medium, an d long term Exploration and Production 
strategy by envisaging expl oration programme up to 2020.  The X-plan exploration 
programme (2002-07) forms the short term strategy. 
3.26 Knowledge building efforts are envisaged in the frontier basins/sectors so as to 
prepare them for risk investment, after understanding the GME cycle in these basins. 
3.27 With the award of more number of blocks of NELP to the various companies, in the 
less explored areas including the vast deep wa ter areas, the basin appraisal scenario is 
expected to improve significantly and the target as set in Vi sion-2025 document is 
expected to be achieved. 
3.28 On the possibility of 100% appraisal of Indian sedimentary basins, by 2025 as 
envisaged in the Hydrocarbon Vision-2025, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
stated as under:- 
…………For realising the vision Government of India has formulated an accelerated 
action plan for the next 5 years, which include opening up of unexplored and poorly 
explored sedimentary areas including deep water areas. 

 57
CHAPTER – IV 
SEISMIC SURVEY AND DRILLING DURING IX PLAN 
ONGC 
4.1 The Committee wanted to know about IX Plan State/Basi n wise exploration 
programme of ONGC in seismic survey and drilling and actual achievements made vis-à-
vis the targets laid.  In reply, ONGC furnished following information :- 
Statewise  wise/ Basin wise Physical Inputs Expended During IX Plan 
Planned Physical  
Inputs (PCR) 
Physical Inputs 
Actuals 
State/Basin 2D  
(GLK
/LK) 
3D  
(sq 
km) 
Wells
2D  
(GLK/
LK) 
3D  
(sq 
km) 
Wells 
Producing Basins 
Gujarat/Cambay 
4000 383 219 5731 1692 247 
Rajasthan/ 
Jaisalmer 1750   5 1362   7 
Assam 2364 1158 91 
Nagaland 
2505 440 130 
      
Tripura 1010   22 635   19 
Meghalaya       204     
Tamil Nadu   300 63 1535 777 104 
Cauvery Offshore       2815     
Andhra Pradesh 
1775 319 90 2043 790 106 
 
Krishna Godavari 
Offshore 
925   8 3461 458 4 
 
Mumbai Off 3000 4878 112 18173 9051 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 58
Planned Physical  
Inputs (PCR) 
Physical Inputs 
Actuals 
State/Basin 
2D  
(GLK/
LK) 
3D  
(sq km) Wells  
2D  
(GLK/
LK) 
3D  
(sq km) Wells 
Non Producing Basins 
Bihar 
West Bengal (Onland) 
W Bengal (Offshore) 
Mahanadi (Offshore) 
Kutch  
Saurashtra 
Kerala-Konkan-
Lakshadweep 
  
 
  
9084 
  
  
 
  
  
  
365 
  
  
   
  
18 
 
  
 
 
4703 
 
  
  
 
393 
 
  
   
  
  
6 
  
Deepwater             
Cauvery Deep Offshore       989   1 
Krishna Godavari Deep 
Offshore 
    2 3135 1358 5 
Mahanadi       1460     
Kutch        685   
Saurashtra       3023   
Mumbai     
7 
5592 3981   
 
Kerala-Konkan-
Lakshadweep 
     9054 670 2
Frontier Basins             
Jammu& Kashmir    280     
Himachal Pradesh  6686   402     
Uttar Pradesh     231     
Madhya Pradesh    
16 
 
2873   2 
 
 
 

 59
4.2 From the above it was noted that there were variations in actual achievements vis-à-
vis targets fixed for seismic survey and drilling.   Asked to give reasons for variation in 
targets fixed and actual achievements, ONGC in their note stated as under :- 
 In seismic acquisition there has been ov er achievement in 3D seismic data 
acquisition. In 2D seismic acquisition the tar gets were overachieved in the state of Gujarat 
(Cambay Basin), Meghalaya, Tam ilnadu and in Mumbai offshore, Kerala Konkan offshore,  
KG and Cauvery offshore and in deepwater areas. Increase in 3D seismic acquisition is 
mainly due to i) changed prospectivity perc eption ii) quick  delineat ion and pursuance of 
the leads obtained iii) to fa cilitate improved geological model as in  Mumbai High 
redevelopment plan and iv) advancement of acquisition electronics. Additional 2D 
acquisition was done to intensify exploration in  geologically favor able areas, to fulfill 
committed work programme in NELP blocks  and  to facilitate better understanding for 
improved exploration model. 
4.3 The shortfall was mainly in the states of  Assam, Nagaland,  Tripura and in the 
Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan. In Assam stat e greater emphasis was laid on covering 
the entire area with a blanket 3D seismic survey. Th is resulted in the compromising of     
2D-seismic survey planned targets for the period,  leading to a shortfall in  the actual.   In 
Nagaland envisaged  programme could not be implemented due to non availability of PEL. 
The planned contractual seismic survey could not be implemented in Tripura owing to the 
non finalization of the contrac t.  In Himachal Pradesh, the per formance of shothole drilling 
in Himalayan Foothills  was slow due to reva mping of departmental ri gs, experimenting in 
Hamirpur area,    Shothole drilling problem in hard fo rmation,  farmer’s agitation in 
Kumhari-Pateria area and delay of PEL grant in Ganga NELP block.  
 

 60
4.4 The over achievement of dr illing in the state of Rajast han, Gujarat, Tamilnadu and 
Andhra Pradesh and Krishna Godavari Deepwater was mainly fo r consolidation  of leads 
obtained and fast track delineati on. However, there was a shortfall in drilling  in the North 
Eastern state and in the Himachal Pradesh, mainly due to de lays in the Exploration plan 
implementation in environmenta lly sensitive and logistically difficult areas, drilling of 
increasingly deeper well s which developed downhole problems resulting in the delay of 
timely completion of drilling targets and pr olonged Production Testing  of wells, often 
spilled over beyond the time lim its. Short fall in offshore dr illing target was due to less rig 
availability and  downhole complications while  drilling , settling of rig  Matdrill and 
deployment of additional rigs for work-over operations. 
4.5 Asked to indicate the status of Hydroc arbon finds / lead made during IX Plan, ONGC 
gave the following information :- 
(AS ON 01-10-2004 
SN Find Status 
CAMBAY 
1 Vatrak Two wells drilled subsequent to find in Vatrak-1, both are oil wells. 
Field on production. 
2 Anklav Two wells drilled subsequent to find in Anklav-3, both are dry and 
abandoned. Field is on production. 
3 North Sarbhan 3D data acquired, six wells drilled  including one development well 
subsequent to oil find in NS-1, three are oil wells and three dry 
and abandoned. Field is on production. 
 
4 Sadra Five exploratory wells drilled  subsequent to oil find in Sadra-1 
and all are oil wells. Sixth well is under drilling. Field is on 
production. 
5 Akholjuni 3D data acquired. Eleven wells drilled including four development 
wells subsequent to oil find in Akholjuni-5. Six are oil wells and 
five are dry and abandoned.Field is on production. 
6 Katpur Well Katpur-1 has been put on production. 
Acquired 2D seismic data in 2002-03 FS. Data interpretation 
completed and delineation location identified recently. Field is on 
trial production. 

 61
7 Chaklasi Two wells have been drilled, one CK-6 was gas bearing and 
another CK-7 was dry. 3D data acquired during 2003-04.Under 
delineation, prospects to be identified based on new 3D data 
acquired recently.  
Not put on production  because of remote location, lack of 
infrastructure and poor techno-economics. 
 
Western Offshore 
8 TP 3D seismic API in progress. 
9 ED-4 Isolated accumulation. 3D API planned during 2005-06  
10 Vasai East 3D seismic API in progress.Development plan of the field being 
finalised 
11 B-23A Development of the field being planned in cluster 
12 D-31 Delineation in progress. 
13 BRC Small isolated pool 
14 WO-24 Development of the field being planned in cluster 
15 B-105 Studies being carried out for cluster development 
16 GK-39  3D API in progress. 
 
CAUVERY ONLAND BASIN: 
17 Periyapattinam Drilled 9 exploratory and one development well. Four 
exploratory & one development well gas bearing. Area 
fully covered with 3D seismic surveys. Field on 
production. 
18 Neyveli Drilled two exploratory wells. One well gas bearing. Area 
being covered by additional 2D seismic surveys to 
enhance the coverage density. 
 
19 Kali Six exploratory wells drilled. Three wells Hydrocarbon 
bearing.  Area fully covered with 3D seismic surveys. 
Field on production. 
20 PBS-1 Two exploratory wells drilled. One well gas bearing. Area 
is covered only with 2D surveys. 3D coverage is difficult 
due to logistics. Field not on production. 
21 Ramanavalsai Four exploratory wells drilled. Two wells gas bearing. 
Area fully covered with 3D seismic surveys. Field not on 
production. 
22 Kanjirangudi Six exploratory wells drilled. Three wells hydrocarbon 
bearing. Area fully covered with 3D seismic surveys. Field 
not on production. 
KRISHNA GODAVARI ONLAND BASIN: 
23 Gokarnapuram One exploratory well drilled. Gas bearing. Area covered 
with 3D surveys.  
24 Suryaraopetta Two exploratory wells drilled. One oil bearing. Area 
covered with 3D surveys. Third well under drilling. Field 
on production. Produces intermittently. 
 

 62
25 Lakshamaneswaram Two exploratory wells drilled. One gas bearing. Area 
planned to be covered with 3D surveys. Field on 
production.  
26 Sanarudravaram One exploratory well drilled. Gas Indication. Geoscintific 
data being reviewed for aseessment of the area. 
27 Penduru Two exploratory wells drilled. One well gas bearing. 
Geoscintific data being reviewed for aseessment of the 
area. 
28 Magatapalli Four exploratory exploratory wells drilled.   Area covered 
with 3D surveys. Field on production. 
29 Sirikatapalli One well drilled. Gas bearing. Area covered with 3D 
surveys. 
Field on production. 
 
30 Kesavadasupalem Six exploratory and one devel opment well drilled. Six 
wells gas bearing. Area planned  for 3D coverage. Field 
on production. 
31 Gopavaram Six exploratory wells drilled.  All wells are HC bearing. 
Area covered by 3D surveys. Field on production. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KRISHNA GODAVARI DEEP OFFSHORE BASIN: 
32 KD-1 Two wells drilled. One well gas bear ing. Two more wells drilled in the 
area. Proved dry. One location av ailable. One more location being 
firmed up. Entire PEL area covered with 3D surveys. Merged volume of 
3D data under interpretation to bring out the total picture. 
33 GD-1 Two wells drilled on the prospect. One well gas bearing. Two more 
wells drilled in t he area. Proved dry.  One more well is under drilling in 
the area. One location av ailable. Entire PEL area covered with 3D 
surveys. Merged volume of 3D data under interpretation. 
ASSAM & ASSAM  ARAKAN BASIN 
34 Nambar Drilled 4 explor atory and 2 development well s. 1 more development 
well is under drilling. Field is under development and on production. 
35 Safrai Drilled 2 exploratory and 2 development wells. Field is on production. 
36 Panidihing Drilled 5 exploratory wells. Field is on trial production and assessment. 
37 Nazira Drilled 2 exploratory wells. Field is under trial production and 
assessment. 
38 Tichna Drilled 7 explorator y  wells. Field is yet to be delineated. Activity 
stopped as the area falls under wild life sanctuary. 
 
OIL INDIA LIMTIED 
4.6 Targets fixed, actual achievements and reasons for shortfall in achievements of 
target laid for seismic Survey and drilling by OIL during 9th plan was stated to be as under:- 

 63
IX Plan 
Activity Target Achiev
ement 
(Excess) 
/ 
Shortfall 
Reasons for Shortfall 
2D Seismic 
Survey  
 
In- house 
(SLKM) 
 
Contract (GLKM) 
Offshore (LKM) 
 
 
 
5,312 
 
 
1,460 
1,000 
7,351
730
-
(2,039)
730
1,000
 
- Survey for 
Brahmaputra River Bed 
was deferred due to 
inability to finalise contract 
for reasons beyond the 
control of the Company. 
- Seismic data 
requirement of Saurashtra 
offshore was reviewed 
and deferred. 
3D Seismic 
Survey (SQKM) 766 1,005 (239)  
Drilling (000 M) 712 483 229
- Drilling activities 
affected by repetitive 
environmental problems, 
bundhs, blockades etc. 
- Acute land acquisition 
problems leading to rig 
idling. 
- Poor state 
infrastructure affecting 
movement / resulting in 
delays. 
- Pause in drilling 
programme in Rajasthan 
to undertake basin 
modeling study. 
- Unprecedented flood 
led to deferment of drilling 
of two wells under 
Brahmaputra Valley 
Exploration Project. 
- Exploratory drilling in 
Ganga valley rescheduled 
pending acquisition of 
additional seismic data 
and integration of 
available data. 
- Planned drilling in 
Saurashtra could not be 
undertaken pending 
acquisition of requisite 
seismic data. 
 

 64
B PRODUCTION OF CRUDE OIL 
ONGC 
4.7 Actual production of crude o il by ONGC vis-à-vis the targets fixed during last 5 years 
were as under :- 
(`000 tonnes) YEAR 
TARGET PRODUCTION 
1999-00 29180 24648 
2000-01 29871 25057 
2001-02 30018 24708 
2002-03 25897 26005 
2003-04 25995 26057 
 
4.8 From the above it was not ed that actual production during the years 1999-00, 2000-
01 and 2001-02 were much below the targets laid .  Giving the reasons for shortfall in 
production targets, ONGC in th eir note stated that shortfall  in production target during 9 th 
plan  was due to delay in commissioning of EO R schemes in Balol and Santhal, less than 
anticipated potential of  Heera and Neelam field and adver se environmental situation in 
North Eastern region.  Asked as to why th e above bottlenecks were not anticipated while 
fixing the targets, ONGC in their subsequent note stated as under:- 
 The ninth five-year plan of ONGC wa s formulated in early 1996 based on 
exploitation status of the different fields and schedules of additional input implementation of 
following major projects envisaged at that time. 
• Additional development of  the Bombay High North a nd Bombay High South to 
enhance the production level during ninth plan. 
• Implementation of Heera P hase-III and additional devel opment for maintaining 
plateau production from main Heera and South Heera. 

 65
• Performance review of Neelam Field including redevelopment plan. 
• Development of Marginal Offshore Oil & Ga s Fields (B-55, C-24, BS-12 & 13, WO-
I5&I6). 
• Quantum jump in oil producti on from EOR projects of H eavy Oil Belt of Northern 
Cambay Basin. 
• Additional inputs to maintain and enhanc e oil production from ageing fields of 
Cambay Basin. 
• Enhancing production level from ERBC fields by mobilizing input resources. 
• Maintaining Oil Production from Onshore fields of KG and Cauvery basins and 
initiating production from KG Offshore field. 
• Enhancing gas production levels from most of the fields of the ONGC. 
 
4.9 As noted by the committee the major deviations came in from: 
• Major revision of producible reserves of Neelam field, 
• Delay in commissioning of EOR schem es in heavy oil belt of North 
Gujarat, 
• Insignificant contribution from new discoveries, and 
• Continued environmental problems in the North East. 
 
 
 
4.10 It may be noted that the expected production potential of  a field is based on the 
current field behaviour, underst anding of the sub-surface fluid flow character and 
identification of inputs based on the same. The detailed production forecast is necessarily 
dependent on the projected schedule for placement of these inputs.  
4.11 The knowledge gained from new wells dr illed and their production behavior helps in 
further refining the understanding of the reservoir. The same can lead to both negative and 
positive variations in expected production.   

 66
4.12 The tendering procedure r equirements sometimes result in delays in anticipated 
time schedules of installation of inputs needed, which necessarily affect the planned 
production.   
4.13 These conditions are difficult to foresee in advance.  However, the plans are 
reviewed on a regular basis and the subsequent annual plans reflect the ground reality.  
4.14 Asked by the Committee to give reas ons for production of crude oil by ONGC 
remaining static, the Company in their note furnished to the Committee stated as under :- 
Development of oil fields is normally carri ed out in many stages . After the initial 
prospect evaluation, a feasibility study is carried out. With availability of additional 
geological and production data fr om delineation wells a conceptual development plan is 
drawn. With regular monitoring and additional data av ailability, the field development takes 
place in many phases. After the completion of major development the field reaches the 
plateau production which in due c ourse starts declining. Several corrective measures are 
then incorporated to arrest the decline which in turn leads to improved oil recovery from the 
field. 
4.15 This philosophy has been followed in devel opment of all the fields in ONGC. The 
continuing efforts by ONGC have led to reaching a peak oil production of 31.99 MMt during 
1989-90.  
4.16 As already stated, all the producing fi elds are in matured stage of development. 
Typically, without any effort s, the production would have declined by about 6-8% per 
annum. Thus effectively even sustaining of production at 26 MMt/annum is equivalent to 
adding about 1.8 MMt/ annum. This is achieved through the new drilling program and other 
reservoir management strategies on work over & pressure maintenance etc.  
 
 

 67
OIL INDIA LIMITED 
4.17 Targets fixed, actual achievements made and reasons for shortfall for crude oil 
production during 9th plan and first two years of X Plan by OIL were as under:- 
IX  PLAN 
Crude Oil 
Production 
(MMT) 
16.47 16.14 0.33
- Environmental problems such 
as bundhs / blockades affected 
field operations. 
- Operation of K hagorijan oilfield 
suspended due to administrative 
problems beyond the control of 
the Company. 
- Suspension of production for 
10 days from Kumchai oilfield due 
to militant threat. 
 X  PLAN 
Crude Oil 
Production 
(MMT) 
7.10 5.95 1.15
- Unexpected and premature 
breakthrough of water in a few 
wells in Shalmari field. 
- Higher than anticipated decline 
in one of the major producing 
oilfields. 
- Inability to start operation of 
Khagorijan oilfield for reasons 
beyond the control of the 
Company. 
- Environmental problems in the 
North East. 
 
LIMITED HORIZON OF OIL 
4.18 The Committee noted that al though OIL was pioneer in upstr eam sector in India, it 
continued to be primarily a North-East based company. 
4.19 When asked to specify the reasons for failure on OIL’s part to grow beyond North-
East, the Committee were informed that :- 
OIL was incorporated as a joint vent ure company between Government of 
India and Burmah Oil Company (BOC) with equal share holding in the year 1959. 
Initially, as per the then prevailing Government policies, exploration blocks within the 
country were offered to the two E&P co mpanies – OIL and t he other national oil 
company, ONGC on a nomination basis. Since BOC, fifty percent owner of OIL, was 

 68
already operating in the North East, new exploration acreages contiguous to BOC’s 
areas of operation in the region were awarded to OIL. However all other new 
exploration acreages within the country in cluding a few in the North East were 
awarded to ONGC. 
 
4.20 OIL was finally nationalized in the year 1981 and only when the process of 
nationalization was started, OIL, for the first time, was awarded an exploration block 
outside the North East in the North East Coast and in Mahanadi onshore basin in late 
seventies and early eighties. These were the blocks whic h had been relinquished by 
ONGC after initial exploration for lack of commercial prospectivity. OIL’s exploration 
activities in these blocks did not yield commercial success. The Company was next 
awarded exploration blocks in the deserts of Rajasthan where it has successfully explored 
and discovered natural gas on commercial scale . The Company was also awarded a few 
exploration blocks (relinquished ear lier for lack of prospectivity by ONGC after preliminary 
exploration activities) in Ganga Valley basin, Andaman offshore and Saurastra Offshore 
basin and the exploration activiti es taken up by OIL in these areas have not led to any 
commercial find. 
4.21 Only after the policy of award of exploration blocks to the national oil companies on 
nomination basis was amended a nd the New Exploration Lic ensing Policy was adopted by 
the government (under which exploration blocks are awar ded on competitive bidding 
amongst all players in the i ndustry), OIL has su ccessfully bid and acquired thirteen 
exploration blocks in different parts of the country. Planned exploration activities in all these 
blocks are in progress and expected success in these blocks will transform OIL to a truly 
national company with its presence in all parts of the country. 
 
 

 69
4.22 Elaborating further in this regard, the Chairman, Oil India Limited during his 
evidence stated as under :- 
“Originally, we were a joint venture company  of the Government of India formed in 
the year 1959. So, uptill 1981, we  were a company who had the original licence just 
in the Dibrugarh district of Assam. We had not been given any additional licence for 
exploration. So, we remain confined to  the North-East. It is only after 14.10.1981 
that some small adjoining ar eas were given in the North-East. Some blocks were 
given in the mid-80s and some other blocks were given in the late-80s in Rajasthan, 
Mahanadi and the Ganga Basin areas . But those are not basically any blocks of our 
choice. We had no option at that time. We were by-passed by the bigger brother, the 
ONGC, which had already established as a company. So, our first choice really 
came along with the private companies. We had to bid under the New Exploration 
and Licensing Policy which really started in 1999-2000.” 
 
C. AUGMENTATION OF HYDROCARBON RESERVES 
4.23 On the steps taken/proposed to be taken by ONGC to identify more hydrocarbon 
reserves and to augment production of crude oil.  ONGC in their note stated as under:- 
 Within the broad policy guidelines for the E&P upstream sector, as brought out in 
the ‘India Hydrocarbon Vision-2025’,  ONGC has formulated its exploration programme 
which is being pursued with concomitant technology upgradation, best-in-class global 
consultancy, human and financial resources mobilization for a focussed approach.  
4.24 Currently, ONGC’s X-plan exploration programme is in progress which envisages 
acquisition of 35286 LK of 2D Se ismic data, 34834 Sq Km of 3D Seismic data and drilling 
of 561 exploratory wells in S hallow offshore, Deepwater o ffshore and Onshore areas in 
ONGC operated acreages.  As on 1.10.2004,  ONGC has already acquired 42645 GLK/LK 
of 2D seismic data, 36825 sq.km of 3D seis mic data and drilled 332 exploratory wells in 
onland, shallow offshore and  deep offshore areas. 
 
4.25 ONGC’s current explorati on efforts are targeted at:- 

 70
• Producing basins for potential r ealisation in the less ex plored sectors, subtle 
traps and deeper objectives and for field growth opportunities. 
• Enhancing the tempo of deepwater exploration 
• Knowledge building in less explored sectors of produc ing as well as frontier 
basins.  
• Exploration in non-producing basins to consolidate the lead s obtained/establish 
breakthrough. 
4.26 With the above objectives, the X-Plan exploration is continuing in the acreages held 
by ONGC in onland areas of Cambay, Assa m & Assam Arakan, Krishna-Godavari basin, 
Cauvery basin, Rajasthan, Himalayan Foreland, Ganga Valley, Bengal, Vindhyan, Satpura, 
South – Rewa and offshore areas  of Kutch-Saurashtra, Mumbai, Kerala Konkan, Krishna 
Godavari, Cauvery, Mahanadi, Andaman and Bengal Offshore basins.  
4.27 The X plan exploration programme enc ompasses the carrying out of exploratory 
activities on a time bound manner as env isaged in the committed Minimum Work 
Programme (MWP) both in the pre-NELP acreages and the exploration blocks acquired 
during the four rounds of the NELP.  Exploration activities are currently in progress in these 
blocks. 
4.28 The deepwater domain has  been considered as the be drock for achieving the 
enhanced level of accretion.  The growing demand for hydrocarbons in the country has 
turned the deep-waters into focu s areas of exploration for enhancing the reserves growth 
and production in addition to continuance of exploration & exploitation efforts in onland and 
shallow water offshore areas.  To accelerate deepwater exploration activities, ONGC has 
launched a mega campaign ‘Sagar Sammriddhi’ in August, 2003 for exploration of oil and 
natural gas in deepwater areas off east and westcoasts of  India.  “Sagar Sammriddhi” is a 

 71
step towards realizing the potential of hydrocarbons in deepwater acreages held by ONGC 
off the east and west coasts of India. 
4.29 The exploration inputs put in place dur ing the first two years of the X-Plan have 
resulted in 12 new hydrocarbon finds.  In the onland areas, the new hydrocarbon finds are 
Banmali, Laiplingaon, East Lakhibari in Assam Shelf, Sonamura in Tripura Fold Belt, 
Chinnewala Tibba in Rajasthan, Degam in Cambay and Sitaram apuram in KG Basin.  In 
the offshore areas, the new hydrocarbon finds are Vasai West, NMT in Mumbai offshore 
and G-4, GS-49, GS-KW in KG offshore. 
4.30 The above new finds hav e opened up new sect ors for further exploration and a 
potential for accretion of new hydrocarbon reserv es.  These sectors are South Kharatar in 
Rajasthan, North & Northeast of Lakwa, Southewest of Borholla, South of Rokhia in Assam 
and Assam Arakan basin. 
4.31 ONGC continues to discover new pools of oi l & gas as well as extensions of earlier 
discovered reservoirs.  These discoveries add up to the reserve accretion. 
Efforts to Increase/Augment Production of Crude Oil 
4.32 ONGC has drawn up plans for redev elopment of Mumbai High field and 
implementation of Improved Oil Recovery (IOR/E OR) in 14 other majo r fields through 19 
schemes. Out of these 19 schemes, 16 hav e already been approved and are under 
various stages of implementation. 
4.33 In other fields also continuous effo rts are in progress to optimise production 
through better reservoir management, infill drilling, pressure maintenance, optimisation of 
artificial lift systems, multilate ral completion, online simulation,  well stimulation, induction 
of new drilling & completion techniques etc. 

 72
4.34 The following specific m easures are being made/planned for maintaining/enhancing 
oil and gas production in the fields being operated by ONGC: 
o In an effort to reduce cost of offshore we ll servicing, work-over with modular rig 
was conceived and Rig S undowner –VI has commenc ed operations from 
8.6.2003 at IK Platform. The work-over oper ations by this concept are not only 
cost effective but also independent of pugmark of jack-up rigs and seabed 
survey. Also no docking constraints are envisaged with this concept. 
o Solid Expandable Tubular (SET) is a ne w technology being adopted in Mumbai 
Offshore for cost effective sidetracking of wells in L-III middle layer. This will save 
time taken to drill/ sidetrack in L-III middle layer. 
o Self Diverting Acid (SDA) li ke Visco-elastic Diverting Acid (VDA), In-situ Cross-
linking Acid Development Agent (ISCADA) etc. jobs are being taken up as a pilot 
introductory technology in wells of Mumbai High field to improve oil production. 
o Application of gel/polymer technology to control production of excess water and 
gas.  
o Specialized drilling techniques like horiz ontal drilling, dr ainhole drilling, 
sidetracking, Extended Reach Drilling (ERD ) and multilateral drilling are being 
adopted to improve well productivity. 
o Polymer flooding in Sanand field of Ahmedabad Asset. 
o Alkali-Surfactant EOR pilot in Kalol field of Ahmedabad Asset. 
o Alkali-Surfactant-Polymer (ASP) EOR pilot in Jhalora and Viraj field of 
Ahmedabad Asset, Lakwa field of Assa m Asset and in S3-1 and S4-3 of 
Ankleshwar Asset. 

 73
o Rigless workover jobs through Coiled Tubing Unit (CTU). 
o Workover jobs without killing pay zones (using clean plug). 
o Laboratory studies for EOR processes like SWAG, WAG, ASP, Air injection, 
MEOR as pilots have been completed fo r a number of fields and feasibility 
studies are in progress. 
o Miscible gas injection in GS-12 sand of Gandhar field. 
o Water Alternating Gas (WAG) injection p ilot project at GS-4, GS-9, GS-11 sand 
at Gandhar field of Ankleshwar Asset. 
o Putting newer fields on stream as quickly  as possible by drawing technological 
schemes of development and their implem entation. Three-pronged strategy is 
being adopted for small/marginal field development as under: - 
o In-house development . Schemes are finalized for in -house development of its 
three marginal fields namely G-1/GS-15, D-1 and Vasai East 
o Alliance for profit sharing with other E&P companies. 
o Through service contract . ONGC identified 18 onland marginal fields for 
outsourcing to private Indian Companies.  Out of these, six fields namely West 
Becharaji, Khambel, Hir apur, Laxmijan, Bihubar, Barsila, have been awarded on 
service contract to private companies . ONGC has also initiated action for 
outsourcing offshore marginal fields.  
 
4.35 On being enquired about the steps take n / proposed to be taken by OIL to 
enhance hydrocarbon reserves and to augment  production of crude oil, the Committee 
were informed that :- 

 74
All exploratory activities are undertaken by  the Company with the basic objective of 
additional reserves accretion and augmentation of production. Initiatives currently in 
hand focus on:  
a. Intensification of explorat ion and development activities  in its areas of operation 
through additional 2D and 3D surveys and drilling. 
b. Undertaking exploration activities in far-flung logistically  difficult and geologically 
complex areas such as Brahmaputra rive r bed, Belt of Schuppen, Manabum and 
Pasighat areas in the North East. 
c. Acquisition of NELP blocks on offer. 
d. Intensification of drilling activi ties, both exploratory and development. 
e. Geoscientific studies of producing oilfields by internat ionally reputed Consultants 
to reassess prospects, carry out reserves assessment and optimistic field 
development. 
4.36 Additional reserves lead to augmentation of hydrocarbon production. In addition to 
above other initiatives in hand to augment production include : 
a. Revitalisation of old and depleted fields 
b. Development of marginal oilfields 
c. Induction of new technologies in  the areas of optimal reservoir 
management, artificial lifting and IOR (Improved Oil Recovery) etc. 
4.37 These steps have helped the Company in continuously enhancing its reserve base 
and augmenting hydrocarbon production. 
 
D SHORT, MEDIUM AND LONG TERM STRATEGY 
 
4.38 ONGC has formulated short, medium and long term exploration strategy for the next 
20 years.  Asked by the Committee to give details of short term, medium term and long 

 75
term strategy formulated, the benefits ex pected to accrue therefore, and steps 
taken/proposed to be taken is implement the strategies, ONGC in their note stated as 
under. 
 ONGC has formulated its short, medium and long term strategy, which addresses 
doubling of in-place volume of hydrocarbons fr om 6 BT to 12 BT, improving the recovery 
factor and augmentation of production. The gist of the strategy is as follows :- 
 
• PREAMBLE: 
 Formulation of the Short & Medium-Long term E&P strategy of ONGC for the next 
twenty years is a step forward towards actualiz ing the Corporate Vision which reflects its 
resolve to maintain its position as the flags hip for the domestic hydrocarbon E&P activities. 
The strategy formulation is based on the evaluation of hydroc arbon potential of 
sedimentary basins of India of varied risk-rewa rd perception, tailored to the economic and 
commercial requirements of business for the Company. The strategy thus evolved has 
been further grouped into Short and Medium-Long term with milestones for both. The 
programme for the X-plan period constitutes the short term objective, where as the 
programme beyond forms the part of mediu m-long term strategy. The outline of the 
exploration and production strategy is as follows: 
 
• SHORT TERM EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION STRATEGY(2002-
2007): 
• Exploration strategy- Short term (2002-2007): 
4.39 Out of the twenty six basins, only seven have been upgraded to producing category. 
Within the producing basins also, certain se ctors remain in the realm of knowledge 
building, whereas the yet-to-produce basins  need sustained efforts for achieving a 
breakthrough, consolidation of the leads and establishment of commercial hydrocarbons. 

 76
The concept of exploration stages/cycles ha s therefore been invoked which when viewed 
with the  exploration input exp ended in the different sectors so  far and the results obtained 
bring out the future potential from the domesti c acreages leading to c oncretizing the future 
strategy. The short term exploration strategy is based on: 
 Acreage wise Prospectivity analysis with t he integration of available G&G data 
for sector prioritization and exploration programme formulation. 
 Time scheduled G&G activities for prospect recognition and drilling. 
 Prioritization of exploration activities and implementation as fast track projects for 
enhancing results. 
 Pre-drill 3D seismics in deep water. 
 Blanket 3D in key growth sectors viz.  Upper Assam and North Cambay etc. for 
exploring deeper objectives and new hydrocarbon plays. 
 Knowledge building in less explored sectors of produc ing as well as frontier 
basins. 
 
4.40 The exploration programme for X-plan period has been worked out based on this 
strategy which envisages API of 45800 LK/GLK of 2D & 38100 sq.km. of 3D seismic data 
and drilling of 594 wells with projected in -place hydrocarbon a ccretion of 565-585 MMt 
(+500MMt indicative accretion envisaged mo stly in deep water areas). The short term 
exploration programme lays emphasis on deep water areas for a break through and also 
the frontier onland basins for long term benefits. 
 
o Development  strategy- Short term (2002-2007): 
 
 

 77
4.41 The production scenario for the X-plan  has been worked out based on the current 
position of reserves, production profile, explor ation strategy outlined and the anticipated 
accretion scenario from the field growth ar eas. For formulating the oil and gas production 
scenario, the following components have been considered: 
¾ Improved Reservoir management for optimization of production and recovery. 
¾ Application of the IOR in Existing 12 major fields  and EOR in 3  fields, 
¾ Feasibility studies for improved recovery in  other fields,   
¾ Initiation of Laboratory studies for EOR in the remaining 12 major fields and 
pilots in case of success.  
¾ Small and marginal fields and  
¾ New reserves in field growth areas. 
 
4.42 The above efforts are envisag ed to yield cumulative production of 130.56 MMt of oil 
and 112.4 BCM of gas during X-plan period. 
 
o MEDIUM TO LONG TERM EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION 
STRATEGY (2008-2020): 
 
o Exploration strategy- Medium to long term : 
4.43 Based on the understanding of hydrocarbon plays/prospectivity, likely upgradation of 
basins/sectors based on explorat ion cycle concept, analysis of  learning curves in the 
established basins and projecting them to non-producing basins based on the concept of 
exploration cycles and curve fitti ng, in-place hydrocarbons accretion level of about 6 billion 
tones i.e., 3 BT from the pr oducing and yet to produce basins and 3 to 4 BT from deep 
water sectors envisaged in medium-long term.  

 78
4.44 In order to achieve the envisaged accr etion level, basin wise physical input 
requirement up to the end of XII-plan peri od was worked out based on assessment of 
prospectivity, leads and results obtained and hydrocarbon plays perceived.  
4.45 Technology is considered to play a key ro le in actualizing the adopted strategy. A 
low case of 60 % is also in built, in case  of a lower acreage holding scenario. The above 
strategy will be reviewed periodically for ne cessary course correction depending on the 
results. 
• Development strategy- Medium-long term: 
4.46 The following compon ents have been considered: 
¾ Improved management of existing major fields. 
¾ Fast track production from deep water areas. 
¾ Bringing all major and other fields on IOR & EOR, 
¾ Envisaged improvement in Global Recovery Factor from the present level of 
28-29% to 35% and to 40% over a cycle of 10 years and 15-20 years 
respectively. 
¾ Field specific cutting edge technology to put marginal/small fields on 
production. 
 
4.47 These efforts are envisaged to maintain the current level of produ ction in medium to 
long term at the rate of about 25 MMt per annum with possible enhancement upto 20%. 
Intensive exploration is planned in the deep water acreages, with likely accretion of about 3 
to 4 BT of in place hydrocarbons. In case of establishing large fi elds in the deep water 
areas, additional build up in the production level to the tune of 20 MMt per annum in low 
case and 33 MMt per annum as high case is envisaged by 2016-17. 
 

 79
• IMPERATIVES: 
• Level of up-gradation of Resource potential based on geoscientific evaluation 
at current state of knowledge and probabilities worked out. 
• Considering the contiguity  of petroliferous basins t he deep water territory is 
rated as high risk with a probability of 20-25%. The resource potential is likely 
to grow with more subsurface information. 
• Major investment in domestic E&P activities envisaged from mid / late X-plan 
for deep-water field development and EOR projects. 
• The exploration efforts are projected to account for 30-35% of budget i.e.15-
20% in domestic field growth areas and extension/new & frontier areas, 10-
15% in deep waters, about 5% for ov erseas exploration ventures. The 
overseas as well as domestic frontier basin components, specifically deep 
water exploration expenditure will be enhanced in case of better opportunities 
and success. 
• Sensitivity analysis required to assess av ailability of surplus funds vis-a-vis 
short and long term business and growth  opportunities in E&P sector and 
associated energy related growth sectors. 
• Any oil price fluctuation would need to be acc ounted in exploration cycle with 
due neutralization over longer time spread. 
 
4.48 The short term strategy has been do vetailed with X Plan and is under 
implementation. 
 
 

 80
4.49 Oil has also taken measures for enhanc ing Hydrocarbon Produc tion with a goal of 
more than doubling the production level within ten years time by formulating strategic and 
corporate pan and initia ting implementation of various modules proposed in the strategic 
and corporate plan including restructuring of the organization  
4.50 Details of strategic and co rporate plan formulated and m easures initiated for their 
implementation were given as under: 
4.51 OIL has recently embarked upon a new visionary path and has drawn up a Strategic 
Plan with the following business focus: 
o Strategic focus on E&P activities in t he North East, Rest of the Country and 
Rest of the World (global operations) 
o Strategic focus on E&P service busines s and Pipeline business in the North 
East and Rest of the Country and selective focus in Rest of the World  
o Selective focus in Refining, Retailing and Marketing of products including 
LPG and other downstream business in the North East and Rest of India. 
4.52 The plan aims at more t han doubling its present level of production in the immediate 
future and bringing about a multifold increase over a longer time horizon, through two 
distinct sets of initiatives. The first relates to physical activities in the following three major 
focus areas: 
o Maintaining and improving production from the existing acreages in the North 
East through intensive exploration and development initiatives, 
o Enlarging the Company’s production base in the rest of the country through 
aggressive activities in the NELP blocks available with the company, 
acquisition of new blocks under future  NELP rounds and acquisition of 
producing properties available in the market and 

 81
o Acquiring prospective exploration and producing acreages abroad.  
4.53 The second set of initiatives relate s to transformation of OIL to a learning 
organization with inherent flexibility to adapt to changes. This is being achieved by focusing 
on enhancing employees’ capabilities and competencies to rea lize a shared vision through 
the process of continuous lear ning in teams. The philosophy of mutually accountable team 
activities aims at quantum improvement in performance and achievements.  
4.54 The plan also calls for a diversifi ed business portfolio for the Company through 
selective presence in the o il and gas value chain covering amongst others refining, 
marketing / retailing, gas monetisation through cracker / power generation and extension of 
existing business of pipeline services and E&P services as a service provider. 
4.55 The plan is being implemented through six distinct modules: 
o Business and Organisation Restruct uring and Creation of a New 
Performance Management System  
 
o Change Management and Creation of a new HR Policy to meet the 
requirements of the new and emerging competitive business environment 
o Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)  
o Performance Improvement and Cost Reduction  
o Manpower Redeployment 
o Corporate Governance Framework 
 
E IOR/EOR PROGRAMME OF ONGC/OIL 
ONGC 
4.56 ONGC has drawn up a time bound ac tion plan for implementation of IOR 
programme and field development for 41 other fields of different Assets/Basins. 
4.57 Time bound action plan for implementation of IOR programme and field 
development for 41 other fields of differ ent Assets/Basins. These fields include 

 82
Ahmedabad, Ankleshwar, Limbodra, Nandej, Nawagam, Wadu-Paliyad, Wasna, Jhalora, S 
Kadi, Bechraji, Linch, Nandasan, Nada, SW Motwan, Kathana, Demulgaon, Charali, 
Borholla, Champang, Changmaigao n, D-1, D-18, B-173A, B- 192, R-7, R-9, Ratna, 
Adiyakkamangalam, Kovikalappal, Tiruvarur, Narimanam, Kamlapuram, Nannilam, Lingala, 
Kesanapalli, Mori, GS-23, Gopavaram, G-1 & G-15 and Suryaraopeta.  
4.58 Asked to give details of action plan  drawn up for implementation of IOR/EOR 
programme and field development of 41 fields together with physical and financial laid and 
achieved, ONGC in their statement note stated as under :- 
In April 2002, 41 fields were screened for implementation of IOR / EOR scheme the 
schedule was also prepared for laboratory studies , conceptual designing and pilot 
implementation. These fields were studied during last two years and inputs were suggested 
wherever feasible. However, major inputs for these fields are yet to be firmed up. For fields 
like Linch, Nandasan inputs have been firmed up and FR has been prepared. 
4.59 Statement showing IOR/EOR  studies in Progress/completed is placed below.  From 
statement it is noted that study in respect of many fields is yet to be planned. Even as case 
of some fields study has been completed but  further steps have not  been initiated for 
exploration and their development.. 
 
IOR/EOR Studies in progress/ Completed 
S.No. Field Process Remarks 
 B-173A IOR 
Study completed in April’02. Drilling of 1 oil 
producer (drilled). Oil/ Gas Rec. = 0.28 MMt/ 0.04 
BCM by 2010. FR by Sept’02. 
 B-192 IOR 
Study completed in Mar’02.  Drilling of 5 producers 
and 2 injectors from light-w eight platform. Oil rec = 
2.49 MMm 3 (19.2%) in 12 year s. Presently not 
economically viable as communicated by Offshore 
Basin – Field earmarked for  OUTSOURCING. 
 

 83
 D-1 IOR 
Study completed .Drilling of 3P + 3I each in first 
and second phase. Installation of 1 light weight 
platform. Deployment of Sagar Laxmi. Capex = 
310.32 Crore. Oil rec = 4.57 MMt (24%) in 10 
years. FR approved on 25th Sept’02. Under 
implementation. Oil prodn from 2005/2006. 
 D-18 IOR 
Production profile using new geological model 
worked out. Discussed with IOGPT, IOT, Basin & 
Marginal field group in Mar’03. – Field earmarked 
for  OUTSOURCING. 
    
 Ahmedab
ad 
Chem. 
Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in K-IX+X 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation 
 Ahmedab
ad 
IOR IRS study completed, to be presented in ASSET. 
 Bechraji IOR Study completed in May’02. No IOR proposed.  
 Bechraji MEOR Study completed and not recommended for 
implementation 
 Jhalora IOR IRS study under completion 
 Kathana IOR Study for Eocene Pay-1  
 Limbodra Air Inj 
Pilot area identified & Conceptual design prepared 
Study under review by Asset 
 
 Nada WAG Laboratory and Simulation study completed. WAG 
not suitable for field. 
 Nada IOR Study completed. 
 Nada Chem. 
Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in Main sand 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation. 
 Nandasa
n 
Chem. 
Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in K-III 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation 
 
 Nandej IOR 
Study completed. Out of recommended 20 
locations, 18 vertical wells have been drilled and 
remaining 2 horizontal wells have been planned for 
drilling in 2004-05. 
 Nandej Chem. 
Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in K-IX+X 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation  
 Nawaga
m 
Chem. 
Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in Upper Pay 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation 
 
 Nawaga
m 
Air inj Study planned  
 Nawaga
m 
IOR Study in 2004-05 

 84
 S W 
Motwan IOR Study for S2 under progress.  
 S W 
Motwan 
Polymer Study will be taken up after development of high 
temperature polymer 
 Wadu-
Paliyad 
IOR Study completed in Feb’04, presented in 2nd ADB 
in May 2004. 7 OP has been agreed for release. 
 Wasna Chem Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in K-IX+X 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation 
    
 Amguri IOR Field handed over to Canaro Consortium 
 
Borholla 
– 
Changpa
ng 
IOR Study completed and presented in ADB. 
 Changma
igaon 
IOR Study planned by March’05. 
 Charali Chem Flood Feasibility of Chem Flood process in TS evaluated. 
Not recommended for implementation 
 Charali IOR IRS study completed. Development wells are being 
drilled as per IRS recommendation.  
 Demulga
on 
Chem Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in BMS 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation. 
    
 Adikkyam
anglam 
IOR 
Study completed by Mar’04. No infill location 
suggested. Recommended WSO jobs in three 
wells. 
 Adikkyam
anglam MEOR 
In place of Narimanam, MEOR study for 
Adikyamanglam and/or Vijyapuram is being carried 
out. 
 
 Gopavara
m IOR Repeat study completed. Drilling of 1 development 
location recommended.  
 GS-23 IOR Study to be planned. 
 Kamalap
uram 
IOR  Study completed in June’03. No input envisaged. 
 Kesanap
alli-W 
IOR 
Study completed in Sept’02. Envisaged 
development wells drilled. Geol model is being 
reviewed to study the feasibility of water injection. 
 
 Kovilkala
ppal 
IOR 
Study completed in Aug’02. Inputs: Drilling of 2 
producers & 3 injectors and conversion of 1 
existing well to injector. No gas cap gas production. 
Expected incremental oil rec 0.35 MMt (12.2%). 
Scheme under implementation. 
 Lingala IOR 
Study completed. Inputs: Drilling of 3 producers (1 
to be dually completed) & 1 injector, conversion of 
2 existin
g wells to injectors. Expected incremental 

 85
oil rec = 0.13 MMt (10%). Study discussed in RDB. 
All the 4 wells drilled.  
 Mori IOR Study to be planned. 
 Nannilam IOR 
Study completed. Inputs: 1 producer drilled. 
Conversion of 1 well to water injector deferred 
based on the drilling results.  
 Narimana
m IOR 
Study completed. 5 producers drilled, 1 Z/T from 
OS-II to OS-VI and 2 WSOJ. Expected incremental 
oil recovery for different sands 5-10%. Inc oil = 
0.367 MMt. FR implemented.  
 Suryarao
peta 
IOR Study to be planned. 
 Tiruvarur IOR Study completed in Sept’04. No input envisaged. 
    
    
 Gamij Chem Flood 
Feasibility of Chem Flood process in K-IV 
evaluated. Not recommended for 
implementation 
 G-1 IOR 
Study completed .Drilling of 2 locations for sand-8, 
Smart completion in 1 well for sand-6, 10 & 12. 
Envisaged oil production 0.702 MMt & gas 
production of 5.576 BCM over 15 years. FR 
approved in Apr’03 for module-1 and revised FR on 
26-03-04. Project under implementation 
 GS-15 IOR 
Study completed. Drilling of 2 locations (1 dual). 
Z/T of 1 well. Revival of 1 well. Oil rec 10-15%. Oil 
= 0.28 MMt. Gas = 0.345 BCM. 
    
 
 
 
R-7 
Ratna 
R-9 
IOR 
 
In house study has been done. However field is 
covered under offer of Medium & Small Size fields- 
second round . 
Action will be taken if field revert back to ONGC  
 
4.60 IOR / EOR initiatives undertaken by Oil India Limited and their impact in increasing 
recovery of hydrocarbons was stated to be as under:- 
OIL has been undertaking IOR / EOR initiatives in t he form of water injection, gas injection, 
polymer flooding etc in its different oilfields from very early production phase. A polymer 
flood project was concluded successfully which has resulted in an increased recovery of 
about 5 percent of in place reserves of the re servoir apart from resulting in a significant 
reduction of formation water production. This has led to significant economic benefits in 

 86
artificial lifting and water handling facilities. Currently, water injection is being carried out in 
13 reservoirs (spread over 6 fields) through 39 water injection wells at an average rate of 
around 8,100 klpd (compared to ar ound 6,500 klpd during 2002-03). The target laid out for 
the next few years (upto end of X Plan) is as follows: 
 
Year Injection Target 
(klpd) 
Financial Outlay 
(Rs. Crores) 
Total No. of wells 
2004 –05 9,500 6.00 50 
2005 –06 11,200 18.00 64 
2006 –07 13,000 8.38 77 
 
4.61 The other EOR / IOR initia tives in hand include infill dr illing in developed fields and 
drilling of a few horizontal wells (estimated financial outla y of around Rs. 600 Crores), 
development drilling (around Rs . 800 Crores annually), work-over operations (around Rs. 
50 Crores annually), steam  pilot in Baghewala, de-bottlenecking of production facilities 
through creation of additional infrastructure, etc.  
 
F DEEP WATER EXPLORATION 
 
4.62 The vast area under the cover of 400 m or more of water column surrounding the 
Indian landmass, both in eas tern and western offshore is commonly defined as deep-
waters.  The deep-water basinal area constitutes about 43% of the sedimentary area of the 
country (1,350,000 Sq Km out of the total sedimentary ar ea of 3,134,700 Sq.Km)  About 
seven billion tonnes of hydrocarbon reso urces have been assessed in the deep-water 
sectors of India based on preliminary analys is.  The growing demand for hydrocarbons in 
the country to cater to the needs of the fast developing economy has turned the deep-
water into focus areas of exploration. 

 87
 
4.63 Observing that Deep Water hold a large potential for hy drocarbons, Committee 
asked as to what steps being taken by ONGC to explore hydrocarbon from deep waters.  
In reply ONGC stated as under:- 
 
 “ONGC started its Deep-wa ter exploration during seventies with seismic data 
acquisition.  In the East Coast deepwater, two prospects viz. G-I & G-2 drilled during 
early eighties proved to be hydrocarbon bea ring.  These prospects extend from the 
deep-water regime to the shallower water (<400 m) also.” 
 
4.64 On the anticipated in plac e and recoverable  reserves in Deep water ONGC stated 
as under:- 
“The deep water and the Frontier sectors are at present under the knowledge 
building and exploration stage and it is not feasible to categorize the hydrocarbon in 
terms of inplace and recoverable reserves.  The prognosis done by DGH shows that 
the prognosticated resources in the deep water sector are of the order of 7 BT.  In  
the Frontier and non producing sectors, cove ring basins viz.  Kutch-Saurashtra, 
Andaman-Nicobar, Kerala-Konkan, Ganga Va lley, Bengal, Himalaya Foreland and 
Mahanadi the prognosticated resources are of the order of 2.6 BT.” 
4.65 Asked about the outcome of the efforts made for deep wa ter exploration during IX 
plan and first two years of X plan,  ONGC in their note further stated as under:- 
IXth  PLAN  
During the IX-Plan, ONGC continued the deep-water exploration and acquired 
20233 LK of 2D and 9717 Sq.Km of 3D seis mic data and drilled 8 wells in deep-
water regime with it’s own upgraded drill-ship.  The well  KD-1-1 on KD-1 prospect 
and GD-1-1 on GD-1 prospect flowed gas during production testing. 
 
Xth Plan 
Deep water sector received a quantum jump  in X Plan exploration programme with 
twin objective: 
 
• To intensify the exploration in the sectors with successful outcome arising 
out of short-term strategy. 
 
• To expand the activities to new sect ors simultaneously making foray into 
the super and ultra deep waters. 
 
The deepwater component of the total X-plan programme includes acquiring 14000 LK 
of 2D, 17900 sq km of 3D and drilling of 34 exploratory wells. 
 

 88
During first two years of X-plan (2002-04) , ONGC has acquired 8485 LK of 2D and 
9684 sq km of 3D seismic data and drilled 5 wells .  Of these, wells G-4-2, G-1-10 and 
G-1-11 drilled in Krishna-Godavari Basin proved to be hydrocarbon bearing. 
 
To give impetus to deepwater exploration, project ‘Sagar Sammriddhi’ was launched in 
August, 2003.  This project, the biggest ever deepwater ex ploration campaign by a 
single operator any where in the world is progressing with 3 drill ships, Belford Dolphin, 
Discoverer Seven Seas and ONGC’s own rig Sagar Vijay. 
 
Under the campaign ‘Sagar Sammriddhi’, ONGC, as on 1.4.2004 drilled two wells 
namely G-4-2 (water depth-430 m) in the East Coast through in-house drill ship ”Sagar 
Vijay”, and GK-DW-A-1 (water depth-1860 m) in  the Arabian Sea wit h chartered hire 
rig Belford Dolphin. 
 
The well G-4-2 proved to be ga s bearing and the estimated initial in-place volume of 
gas is about 22 BCM. 
 
 
 
Three more wells namely, DWRO-1-A in the West Coast at a water depth of 1090m by 
Belford Dolphin and KD-2-1 by Discoverer Seven Seas at a water depth of 1463m and 
GD-2-1 by in-house drill ship “Sagar Vijay” at a water depth of 650m in East Coast 
were under drilling on 1.04.2004. 
 
ONGC has completed the Minimum Work Programme (MWP) under phase-I in three 
deepwater blocks namely KG-DWN-98/4,  KG-DWN-98/5, MN-DWN-98/3 awarded 
under NELP-I and has entered the phase-II of exploration in these blocks.  ONGC has 
completed the seismic data acquisition in the six deepwater blocks awarded under 
NELP-II within the timeframe as per the phase-I committed MWP. 
 
Being a cost and technology intensive activity , for risk mitigation pre drill 3D seismic 
and process/interpretation validation through internationally reputed consultants were 
carried out.” 
 
4.66 To a question about the steps taken/propo sed to be taken for exploration in deep 
water, a representative of ONGC during evidence stated as under:- 
“We  are going into deepwater in a big way.   As I shared with you, we have already 
made one discovery.  In the deepwater se ctor, we have launched what we call 
Sagar Sammriddhi.  This is one of the biggest campaign which any national oil 
company or international oil company is taking up in the world.  This is covering from 
Kutch deepwater to Mumbai offshore, Ke rala-Konkan, Cauvery, Krishna-Godavari, 
Mahanadi and Andaman and Nicob ar Islands.  We are covering total Indian 
deepwaters in the Tenth Pl an period.  After launch Sagar Sammriddhi, we have 
drilled two wells (till 31.3.2004) and we  have already made one hydrocarbon 
discovery. 
 

 89
4.67 Exuding confidence over the outcome of exploration efforts in deep water, Chairman 
ONGC during evidence stated: 
“In 45 years from 1956 to 2001 we have disco vered about 6 billion tonnes of in-
place oil and gas.  Our first  corporate st rategic goal was to double the in-place oil 
and gas in 20 years.  we hav e got the experience, and t he confidence to double the 
quantity of in-place oil and gas in the next 20 yeas’ time’ and we are working on it. 
Out of 6 billion tonnes, we expect to find 2/3rd of it from the deep water.” 
 
 
OIL INDIA LIMITED 
 
4.68 On being asked as to how many projects for deep wa ter exploration have been 
launched by OIL and what was their out come.  OIL in their note furnished to the 
Committee stated as under:- 
OIL has so far bid and acquired, as mem ber of consortium with other players, 
interest in five deep water blocks (K G-DWN-98/4, MB-DWN-2000/2, CY-DWN-
2001/1, KG-DWN-2002/1, MN-DWN-2002/1) under four rounds of NELP.  
 
4.69 When questioned as to whether OIL was equipped with required experience and 
expertise for exploration and production in deeper offshore.  OIL replied as under :- 
OIL currently does not have adequate exper ience and expertise for exploration and 
production in deeper offshore. 
 
 
G RECOVERY  PERCENTAGE 
4.70 The current average recovery from the producing fields of ONGC is about 28% of 
the total production of crude oil. As per a note furnished by ONGC 
Recovery factor is dependent on several parameters. Some of the key ones’ are: 
• Reservoir rock, its property, heterogeneity etc. 
• Properties of resident fluids (Oil, Gas & Water) 
• Energy system operating in the reservoir whic h is responsible in expulsion of the oil 
• Depth, logistics 
• Techno-economic consideration 
 

 90
The recovery expectations vary from field to field from 5 to 70% with an average of 
30%. ONGC is working on the possibilities of application of new technologies and 
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) with an objective of improving the average recovery to 
35% and then to 40%.” 
 
4.71 Asked as to what was the world wide aver age recovery factor of some of advanced 
companies in the world engaged in  the work of oil exploration.  A representative of ONGC 
during his evidence stated :- 
“World over, in the U.S. which is supposed to be very technologically advanced the 
average recovery factor is of the order of 32 to 33 per cent.  In USSR, which had 
been in the oil business for a long time, the average recovery factor is about 28 per 
cent.  I am coming to the best part also.  In China, the recovery factor is of the order 
of 28 per cent.  I am leaving aside the Midd le East.  The best recovery factor which 
has been achieved is by the No rwegian companies which is of  the order of 45 to 55 
per cent. 
 
In the international scenario, today in th e world, the fields which they have in 
Norwegian sector, mainly the offshore their recovery factor is of the order of 45 to 55 
percent.” 
 
 
4.72 When asked to explain as to how Norwegian recovery factor was so high and what 
steps were contemplated by ONGC to achieve similar recovery factor, representatives of 
ONGC added :- 
“They went from the beginning based on a field life cycle concept.  It means that 
they start as a process that  considers, okay, I am having this as an investment 
scenario, inputs and physical  inputs today, but over t he field life cycle of 20-30 
years, this is going to be my  input and this will be my stra tegy to develop it and this 
will be my investment  scenario and I will  be able to reach in the 30 years cycle a 
recovery factor of 50 per cent.  They have made some of the investments today and 
they will make tomorrow some of the in vestments, but they  are taking global 
recovery factor, by this particular approach,  of the order of 45 to 55 per cent.  We 
have also started adopting a similar approac h in out field life cycle concept.  We 
have started practicing a field life cycle conc ept in which we examine, in spite of the 
economics, what best recovery it can give me. Then, I can come back to the 
economics and see the total investment scenario.” 
 
 
 
 

 91
4.73 Elaborating further on the availability of latest technology for carrying out the 
exploration and production activities, the ONGC Chairman stated the following :- 
“Our average recovery was about 28 per c ent.  So, the second strategic goal was 
that by 2020 we sha ll increase this averag e figure from 28 per cent to 40 per cent, 
which itself means discovering another Mum bai High.  It is because you are taking 
out more from the same reserve.  We ha ve made about 320 discoveries in India.  
Out of that about 100 fields are in producti on, and out of those 100 fields, 15 fields 
give us 75 per cent of the production, and 85 fields give the balance 25 per cent of 
the production.  For these 100 fields, our  average recovery has been 28 per cent, 
and we also have fields where recovery is 55 per cent, and we have fields where 
recovery is 5 per cent.” 
 
H REVIEW / REASSESSMENT OF IN PLACE RESERVES OF OIL 
4.74 The Committee desired to be appraised of as to whether any review / re-
assessment in-place reserves of oil fields  of ONGC / OIL has been made and if such a 
review had been made, what were the extent of  variations. In reply ONGC and OIL stated 
as under :- 
 ONGC 
 
ONGC in its course of action, reviews/ reassess the in-place hydrocarbons every 
year as on 1 st April, based on the production performance, newly drilled wells and 
newly acquired / interpretation of G&G data. 
 
The detail scrutiny is carried out at Asset/Basin and at Headquarters.  The reserve 
estimates accepted by Reserve Estimate Committee are finally put up to the ONGC 
Board for adoption. 
 
The positions of in-place hydrocarbons of ONGC operated areas during the last five 
years are as follows, which shows the growth in the quantum of in-place 
Hydrocarbons. 
 
Year  O+OEG 
As on MMt 
1.4.2000 5488.36 
1.4.2001 5624.79 
1.4.2002 5767.77 
1.4.2003 5894.73 
1.4.2004 5988.64 
 
M/s DeGolyer & MacNaughton, USA carried out auditing of estimates of major fields 
of Western onshore and Assam in 1972-73. 

 92
 
At the time of corporatization the valuation of hydrocarbon reserves of 23 major 
fields of ONGC was carried out by M/S DeGolyer & MacN aughton in 1993-94.  The 
variations in the reserves were insignificant. 
 
In 1994, International Petroleum Engineering Consultants (IPEC) U.K., also 
independently studied and estimated hydroc arbon reserve of 23 Major fields for 
ONGC.  The variations in reserves were insignificant.   
 
The fair market value of Neelam Field was done by D&M in 1998. 
 
GCA evaluated Bombay High field in 2001 dur ing the process of redevelopment of 
the field. 
 
As a policy of good corporate governance, the ONGC Board has decided to have 
the reserve base of ONGC audited by an internationally reputed independent 
external agency once in every five years.  In the first such exercise M/S DeGolyer & 
MacNaughton of USA were engaged for auditing the reserves of 38 major fields of 
ONGC.  The audit, conducted on the reserv e base as on 1.4.2002, confirmed that 
the reserve base of ONGC was in conformity  with the audit results.  The variations 
in the reserve base were insignificant.  
 
In the opinion of M/S D & M, the differences in the reserves estimate were found to 
be both positive and negative fo r individual field and the differences appeared to be 
compensating to a great extent resulting in the overall difference not being 
substantial.  Essentially, the reserves assessed by ONGC do not differ materially 
from the assessment carried out under this audit. 
 
 
 OIL 
 
OIL carries out an annual review of its reserves  internally in the month of April every 
year. At different points of time t he Company has undertaken a number of 
Geoscientific studies thr ough internationally reputed C onsulting organisations for 
optimal field development and reservoir management in di fferent oilfields. The 
starting point for all such st udies is reassessment of reserves. It has been seen that 
the variation between the reserves estima tes made in-house and that made by the 
external agencies in such studies is in the rang e of 10 to 15 percent. 
Notwithstanding the above OIL  is currently in the process of commissioning the 
services of an internationally reputed C onsulting firm to undertake an audit of its 
reserves.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 93
I ADOPTION OF LATEST TECHNOLOGY 
 ONGC 
4.75 As per a note furnished to the Commi ttee ONGC employs the best in class 
technology for pursuing its E&P objectives. It has been keeping pace with the latest 
technology and the state-of-the art solutions through appropriate technology mapping and 
induction strategy through identification / categorization / prioritizati on of E&P technology 
gaps proactively and then pursuing its induction through key technology centres (Institutes 
and Services) in the form of eight R&D centres.  The latest technologies identified by this 
process are being inducted / developed through work  association / contractual services or 
through outright purchase. 
4.76 Latest high end technology products in E&P business belong to a very specialist 
domain and are mostly proprieta ry items of various service providers. In such cases, 
ONGC is availing new technology through service from the companies. 
4.77 On the adequacy and acquisition of state- of-the art technology, a representative of 
ONGC during his evidence before the Committee stated as under :- 
“………..I would like to menti on that we are keeping pace with all that is happening 
around the world.  I would not  say that we are immediately getting it, but within a 
gap of a couple of years we  are keeping pace with the technologies that are 
presently available around the world for se ismic data interpretation, processing, 
acquisition, etc.  We have a Technology Scou ting Cell to know all that is happening 
today in the field of technology around the world, and what is likely to happen  in two 
years henceforth,  so that we can get pr epared to catch up with it.  These are some 
of the technologies about which we hav e already enumerated in detail in the 
presentation.  So, I am skipping this portion as well.” 
 
4.78 Asked as to whether ONGC was at par  with other technologies available in the 
world; in reply representative of ONGC further stated :- 
“Sir, if I say that we were four year s behind for acquiring the technology 10 years 
back, then today I can say that we are only two years back.  I am not saying that we 
are at par with the technolog ies available in the world because acquisition of 
technology takes time.” 

 94
 
4.79 Elaborating further on the availability of latest technology for carrying out the 
exploration and production activities, the ONGC Chairman stated the following :- 
“Today, we can assure the hon. Members of this Committee that we have the 
technology, equipment, and skills at par with  anybody else.  Perhaps, five years 
back we could not say so.  We constantly analyse the technological gaps in the 
company.  In the latest review, we have analysed some 248 technologies, and have 
prioritized them into immediate, mid-term , and long-term plans.  Some technologies 
are being developed, some are available from the market, and some need to be 
customized for our specific use.  We hav e specific plans for its, and every six 
months the Board reviews it.” 
 
 Representative of OI L stated as under :- 
 
“Upgradation of technology comes in two wa ys.  One is we would like to acquire 
certain technology and make it a part of our  in-house strength.  Second is, there are 
certain areas where technology changes very  rapidly in the world.  May be do not 
need that all the time, but we need it for a s pecific work only.  So, at that time we 
outsource it from wherever it be, from any  part of the world.  For example, seismic 
data equation processing and interpretation, in  all the three phases, whatever is the 
best technology available in the world today, we have it  in-house.  In Assam we 
have seismic data acquisition capability, se ismic processing capability as well as 
interpretation capability.  In spite of having these capabilities, we still go and 
outsource the need-based things for two r easons.  One, to do exploration in the 
shortest possible time, we have to supplement  the effort whatever is available with 
us.  For example, we have two seismic crews.   We want to do more seismic quickly.  
Therefore, we go a nd outsource it with the help of  best technology available.  
Similarly, in seismic processing whatever  data we acquire, we have in-house state 
of the art technology facilit y available and experienced geo-physicists to do seismic 
processing.  In terms interpretation capabilit ies, we do our own interpretation.  But 
then geo scientific interpretation is one thing where we really have to integrate data 
from geology, geo-physics, geo-chemistry etc.  At many a point of time, this is 
subjective.  While we think that we are qu ite good in what we do, the fact remains 
that our experience is limited to certain areas only.” 
 
 
4.80 Some of the technology planned to be introduced by ONGC were stated to as 
under:- 
Well Services 
 
Many new technology solutions for well se rvices have been introduced/planned to 
be introduced , these include: 
a. Squeeze Crete technology for remedial cement jobs. 

 95
b. Rigless Cementation with coil tubing unit 
c. Thru’ tubing intervention by In flatable Packer/Bridge plug for zone 
isolation:  
d. Rigless Mechanical Wate r Shutoff       
e. Filter Cake Removal for improvi ng the productivity of the horizontal 
wells      
Engineering Services 
Many technological improvement have been initiated in design which includes: 
• Multi Phase flow meter with no test separator / two phase te st separator with 
water cut meter and auto down load data logger in place of conventional 
three phase test separator. 
• Adopted Clamp-On Structure on existing platforms for creating additional well 
slots in the same platform. 
• Use of Marine growth preventor for miti gation/ removal of marine growth on 
the jacket structure. 
• Use of Multiphase Pumps included under  ‘Addl. Development of Bassein’ 
Well Platform Project (Power Import through Sub Sea Electrical Cables) 
• Use of Flexible Pipelines for Water Injection lines already started. 
• Use of composite materials 
 
4.81 Some of the new technologies are also  planned for induction, based on project 
feasibility reports are: 
• Grid Interconnectivity of all the pl atforms in western offshore through 
submarine composite cable (power cable plus fiber optic) is being 
considered. By doing this, approximately 92 MW power can be transported to 
onshore point. 
• Offshore power generation by using gas from C series marginal field and 
other nearby marginal fields is bein g considered and pow er thus generated 
shall be transported through submarine composite cable to land fall point 
where it will be distributed through national / state grid. 
 
 

 96
OIL 
 
4.82 When desired to know about the acquisition of state-of -art technology by OIL for 
carrying out its E&P activities and the technol ogical inadequacy, it any felt by the 
Company, the Committee were informed that: 
Induction of new and appropriate  technology on a continuous basis is the guiding 
philosophy for all operations of the Company. Over the years the Company has been 
upgrading its existing technologies and acquiring state-of-the-art technology to 
improve efficiencies in the areas of exploration and production.  
 
For its  Geoscientific activities, the Co mpany has acquired all necessary latest 
software available in the industry related to geophysical data processing, 
interpretation, subsurface log interpretati on, reservoir characterization, reservoir 
simulation, pressure transient data acquisition and interpretation etc. 
 
In the areas of Reservoi r management and Production optimization, the Company 
has inducted suitable IOR technologies availa ble in the market and also, is in the 
process of undertaking / examining field tr ials for a few state - of - the - art 
technologies such as Microbial Enhanced Oil Recovery (MEOR), Alkaline Surfactant 
Polymer (ASP) etc. 
 
In the area of drilling, OIL has resorted to cluster drilling, drilling of deviated wells, 
horizontal wells, use of innovative fluid loss control system fo r deep wells etc. On 
the production front, the Com pany deploys the latest modes  of artificial lifting, 
undertakes rigless workover operations, and uses downhole heat tracing and 
magnetic conditioners to mitigate paraffin problems
. 
 
 
The Company is also in the process of  implementing ERP (Enterprise Resource 
Planning) and E&P (Exploration and Production) Data Base Systems for efficiency 

 97
enhancement. Thus exploration and production is not hampered by technological 

 98

 99
 
 

 100

 101
S 
4.83 The Committee were informed that both ONGC and OIL have an elaborate set up to 
carry on R&D activities. Asked by the Committee to give details on R&D activities of the 
companies and their impact in augmenting cr ude oil exploration and in reducing 
expenditure incurred in operations pertaining to explorat ion and production of crude oil, 
ONGC and OIL in their reply stated as under :- 

 102
- 

 103

 104
 
 
ONGC has captive Research Institutes in  all the major areas of exploration and 
production activities like exploration, seismic data processing, reservoir engineering, 
drilling technology and production technol ogy.  These institutes are aware of 
technical challenges faced in the areas wher e ONGC is operating.  These institutes 
ensure that ONGC has advantageous technologies for its operatio.   
 
On continuous basis the progress and break through in different technologies world 
over is tracked.  Whenever necessary the suitable technolog ies are tailored for 
ONGC is needed and are adopted.   
 
The Institutes work in close association with the assets and basins and continuously 
update the methods for its operations with the impact of R&D activity.  
 
In house efforts in EOR techniques like in-situ combustion have already been field 
implemented.  
 
R&D efforts over the last 20 years in the area of Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) are 
yielding results. Successful  testing of In-Situ Combusti on (ISC) pilot in Balol field 
has put the country and ONGC in particula r on the world map of  EOR. Commercial 
application of this process is underway in harsh reservoir environment prevailing in 
both Balol and Santhal fields. The process is  envisaged to enhance recovery from 
these fields by 30%.  
 
ISC pilot is in progress in Bechraji field.  The process is also being planned to be 
tested on a pilot scale in Lanwa and North Kadi fields.  
 
The successful pilot testing of polymer flooding proce ss resulted in the ongoing 
commercial application of polymer floodi ng process in Sanand field which is 
expected to increase recovery by about 15%.  
 
Moving with the current worl dwide trend, R&D was focus ed in the area of Alkali-
Surfactant-Polymer (ASP) process so as to make the chemical processes cost 
effective. ASP process has been found to be viable for fields like Viraj, Kalol, 
Sobhasan, Ankleshwar. The process is bei ng tested on a pilot scale in Viraj and 
Lakwa to ascertain its efficacy. The enhancement of recovery with the application of 
the process is in the range of 10-15%. 
 
In addition to these, following collaborat ive R&D projects are in progress with 
various Institutes/ Universities: 
 
*  Projects entitled "Development of Thermophillic, Microaerophillic and paraffin 
degrading bacterial consortium" and "Development of bio-catalyst to enhance 
the growth of degrading bacterial consortium" are in progress with TERI, New 
Delhi. MEOR field trials using S-2 bacte rial consortium conducted in wells of 
Kalol, Sobhasan and North K adi have shown oil gain and reduction in water 
cut.  

 105
 
*  Collaborative R&D project with TERI for development of suitable consortium 
for MEOR application in various o il fields with te mperature upto 90 °C will be 
of immense value in high temperature reservoirs like Gandhar. 
 
*  Under a collaborative project agreement  signed with NCL, Pune the study on 
techno-economic feasibility of manufacturing the AMPS based water-soluble 
polymers for water shut off applications in oil fields has been completed. A 
new collaborative project with NCL, P une for development of polymers for 
polymer flooding & water shutoff for fi elds with high tem perature and high 
salinity is in progress.  
 
*  An MOU has been signed between  IIT-Bombay, Mumbai and IRS. 
Agreement for "Physical and Numerica l models for unconventional flood 
pattern" has also been signed and work is in progress. 
 
*  Agreement on "Development of biosystem producing microbial metabolites as 
feedstock for MEOR" has been signed with MS University, Vadodra. 
 
In addition, an MOU has been finalized with School of  Petroleum Engineering, 
University of New South Wales, Austra lia, for five years for collaboration on 
Reservoir Characterization & Engineering, Strategies for production of gas from tight 
gas sands & coal seams, EOR technologies and Pore scale reservoir studies.  
 
In order to cope up with the changing technol ogy, joint collaborative studies have 
been undertaken with University of Calgary, Canada in asce rtaining the viability of 
air injection process for light oil reservoirs. 
 
R&D ACTIVITIES OF OIL INDIA LIMITED 
 
The major operations of Oil India Limited cover a wide range of activities such as 
exploration, drilling, produc tion and transportation of hydrocarbons. All these 
operations call for appropriate and sophi sticated technology that must be 
continuously refined, upgraded and replaced through continuous R&D efforts. Since 
inception of the Company, OIL has accord ed considerable importance to in-house 
research and development for so lving the multifarious field problems in its activities 
in the areas of petro leum exploration, dr illing, production and transportation. This 
had yielded rich dividends.  
 
Keeping in mind the twin objectives of accomplishing the company's goal of 
petroleum exploration, drilli ng, production and transportation of hydrocarbons and 
meeting the technological challenges in a fast changing global scenario, a separate, 
full-fledged R & D Center wa s set up in the year 1985 with a core cell of 20 
scientists and supporting staff. A modern bui lding replete with state of the art 
research equipments houses this research center.  
 

 106
In a short span of two decades, OIL's R & D Center has grown from its humble 
beginning to a place of excellence and has gained recognition as an in-house R & D 
unit from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi.  
 
Main focus of OIL’s R&D activities is to create solutions to operational problems in 
the major areas of the Com pany’s operations - exploration, drilling, production and 
transportation of hydrocarbons. In addition c onsiderable activities are undertaken in 
the areas of enhanced oil recovery, pollu tion control and alternate sources of 
energy. The process generally starts with survey of literature on the specific problem 
areas, undertaking laboratory ex periments related to identif ied solutions and finally 
taking up field implementation. The experience acquired from field implementation is 
used in continually improving the process. In the area of alternate fuel one of the 
major research project currently undertaken by the R&D centre is conversion of coal 
to liquid using Assam coal.  
 
The table below provides some of the ma jor R&D efforts in different operational 
areas of the Company.  
 
    Areas of Operation    R&D Initiatives    
Exploration 
 
Development and applicat ion of Geochemical 
techniques and integrated basin modeling as a 
supplementary tool for hydrocarbon exploration 
 
Drilling 
 
Development of suitable drillin g fluid and cement slurry 
compositions for the va ried underground formation 
conditions encountered whil e drilling for hydrocarbon 
with particular thrust on t he development of chemicals 
required for these formulations within the country. 
 
Enhanced Oil 
Recovery 
 
To develop and implement t he most suitable methods 
for improving ultimate recove ry of crude oil from the 
ageing fields of the company. 
 
Transportation 
 
Studies on flow behavior, wax depositio nal tendencies 
of crude oil, thermal c onditioning and chemical 
treatment of crude oil to ma ke it amenable to pipeline 
transportation in severe winter conditions 
 
Pollution Control 
 
Studies to prevent the su rface and ground water from 
pollution by the polluting effluents generated from 
drilling, work over and produ ction operations.  Also to 
prevent air pollution by vented/flared natural gases. 
 
 
Alternative Sources 
of Energy. 
 
Coal-Oil Co-processing, Coal liquefaction studies. 
 
 
 

 107
Some of the major benefits derived from R& D activities undertaken can be summarized as 
under: 
 
1. Development of an advanced geochemical  technique for crude oil analysis using 
sophisticated gcm spectrometer. Data genera ted through this technique helps in oil 
to oil and oil – source correlation critical for basin modeling studies. 
 
2. Development and field implementation of a modified technique of crude oil treatment 
with low dosage of flow improver. This has helped the Company in avoiding the use 
of Crude Oil Conditioning Pl ant (COCP) for thermal treatment of crude prior to 
transportation to refineries. Capital cost of setting up a COCP is of the order of Rs. 
22.00 Crores with an annual running expense of around Rs. 1.00 Crore. 
 
3. Development of a fluid loss arrest system  using Xenvis for undertaking productive 
workover in sub hydrostatic wells. This has  brought in very significant improvement 
in success ratio of workover operations in such wells. The benefits are both in terms 
of saving in number of days of operations and also the ti me required to bring the 
well back into oil production. 
 
4.  Projects taken up in the area of  oil and gas production have resulted in: 
 
• Reduction in water oil ratio through polymeric gel treatment. 
• Reduction in wax deposition problem through PPD treatment. 
• Improvement in injectivity of disposal water wells. 
• Arrest of decline in water injection in Tipam wells in Jorajan field 
through modified acidisation technique 
 
5. Enhanced Recovery Project viz. MEOR and ASP flooding (in trial stage) will result in 
increase in ultimate oil recovery. 
 
K EXPERIENCE / EXPERTISE AND ADEQUACY OF TECHNOLOGY 
4.84 The Committee noted that OIL  is in partnership with ON GC and other PSUs in most 
of the blocks awarded it u nder NELP. Asked as to wh y Oil had not bid for blocks 
independently, OIL in their note stated as under:- 
Out of the 13 nos. NELP blocks OIL holds with one block (RJ-ONN-2000/1) 
independently, another NELP block (CY- OSN-97/2) in Cauvery basin held 
independently by the Company had to be recently relinquished due to non 
availability of Government’s permission fo r undertaking exploration activities (on 
considerations related to the country’s defence). 
 
Of the remaining 12 nos. blocks, there are six nos. offshore / deep water blocks. OIL 
of its own does not have extensive experie nce in undertaking offshore exploration 

 108
and development activities. In view of this, the Company had bidden for these 
blocks as member of consortiums. 
 
4.85 Committee noted that Baghewa la heavy oil reserve were discovered about a decade 
ago. However, the same has not been developed so far by OIL. OIL is now taking help of a 
`Venezuelan Company’ for its ex ploitation. Asked by the Committee as to why help of 
Venezuelan oil company was being taken for exploitation of Baghewala heavy oil  reserves 
OIL in their note stated as under :- 
Since discovery of heavy oil in Rajasthan, the Company has been making efforts for 
commercial exploitation of the same. Since in-house expertise for production of such 
type of heavy oil was not av ailable, M/s Alberta Resear ch Council (ARC), Canada 
was engaged as consultant in November, 1992 to study and recommend suitable 
recovery methods for commercial exploi tation of Baghewala heavy oil reserves. 
Based on recommendations of M/s ARC, Canada, two wells were was put on 
production. However production from the wells  on a sustainable basis could not be 
achieved. 
 
In order to speed up the process of commercial exploitation of the reserves, the 
block was then offered for Joint Venture bidding round (for Production Sharing 
Contract) in 1995 by Government of India. However no contract was finalized and 
the area was returned to OIL in December, 1998. Under the Indo-Venezuelan Joint 
Working Group, MoP&NG, Govt.of India, advised OIL to seek technical assistance 
from M/s PDVSA, the Nati onal oil company of Venezuela with experience and 
expertise in production of heavy oil and Bitumen, for exploi tation of Baghewala 
heavy oil and Bitumen reserves. 
 
Venezuela is one of the la rgest producers of heavy oil in the international E&P 
industry and has developed technology to successfully produce heavy crude of 
extremely poor quality wit h API gravity as low as 8 de grees. OIL has entered into a 
contract with a Venezuelan company, PDVSA, Intevep, Venezuela to undertake a 
comprehensive study to ident ify the most suitable technol ogy for production of its 
heavy oil reserves in Rajasthan (in phase 1) and then help OIL to acquire and 
implement the selected technology on a p ilot scale in the second phase. Work 
related to the first phase has been successfully completed and a suitable technology 
has been identified.  
 
Actions are currently in hand for pilot sc ale application of the technology under 
expert supervision of the Venezuelan company. If the in itiative is successful, the 
tested technology will be used for regular production of heavy oil in OIL’s Baghewala 
field in Rajasthan. 
 

 109
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
A . EXPLORATION BY PRIVATE OPERATORS 
 
5.1 The Committee noted that Private Operators discovered oil and gas from  some 
blocks which could not be earlier discovered by ONGC and OIL.  Citing the example of OIL 
who was present in Mahanadi ba sins since 1979 but could not find any oil / gas whereas 
Reliance discovered gas from there within few years of starting operations, Committee 
asked OIL to give their comments in this regards.  In reply OIL in their note stated as 
under:- 
“Areas like Ganga Valley, S aurashtra basin, Andaman offs hore etc. awarded to OIL 
on a nomination basis are known to be Hig h Risk exploration ventures in areas 
already relinquished by ONGCL. 
 
The NELP blocks acquired by OIL during the last few years against competitive 
bidding are in initial phase of explorat ion. On completion of committed work 
programme, the Company is confident of ma king new oil / gas discoveries in these 
NELP blocks.” 
 
 
5.2 On the issue of exploration in Mahanadi Ba sin by OIL, discovery of gas by Reliance 
and reasons due to which OIL could not discover gas in Mahanadi Basin. Union Minister of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas in reply to a Pa rliamentary Unstarred question  No. 325 
answered as on stated:- 
“Oil India Ltd. (OIL) had started exploration activities in the Mahanadi Basin in 1978.  
OIL have carried out 14,248 Line Kilometer (LKM) of 2D seismic survey and 3393 
Square Kilometer of 3D seismic survey and drilled 15 exploratory wells in Mahanadi 
basin.  No commercial discovery was made by OIL in the drilled wells. 
 
In the Mahanadi North East Coast area M/s Reliance India Ltd. have recently made 
four gas discoveries in block NEC-OSN-97/2.  The reserves of these discoveries are 
under appraisal. 
 
Oil and gas exploration is an activi ty beset with many imponderables and 
uncertainties.  OIL did not encounter any commercial hydrocarbon prospects in all 
the 15 wells drilled in Mahanadi onshore (4 ), Mahanadi offshore (7) and in North-
East Coast (4) prior to relinquishing its Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) areas.” 

 110
 
 
5.3 The Committee expressed similar views during their interaction with ONGC. On  
being asked  as to how private companies had been successful in discovering hydrocarbon 
from the fields / basins whereas ONGC faile d to discover any hydrocarbons from those 
fields earlier, ONGC in their note furnished stated as under: 
Exploration for oil and gas remains one of the riskiest business ventures primarily 
because there is no direct scientific method of discovering the same. Data 
interpretation and geological model bu ilding to better understand hydrocarbon 
habitat remain intrinsic to creation of work  flows to infer oil and gas accumulations. 
All companies whether private or pub lic undertakings like ONGC have taken 
recourse to these methods with varying de grees of success.  To put matters into a 
perspective, Bombay High, the largest field (Private or public) with the country so far 
was also discovered in the first well itself, while this part of the country was declared 
non prospective in earlier times. Thus the models, methodologies and technology go 
on evolving to revisit again. 
It must be reiterated that throughout t he exploration history of KG Basin 
multinational and domestic private oper ators have been actively engaged in 
exploring for oil and gas acr eages awarded to them (whi ch includes multinational 
companies like M/s Chevron, Amoco). T hey however walked away after initial 
efforts, leaving discoveries to be made by ONGC in same areas held by AMOCO.  
ONGC initiated exploratory activities in the state of Rajasthan in late nineteen fifties 
and with the find of gas in Ma nhera Tibba established hy drocarbon in the state in 
1967, in the Jaisalmer basin. Since 1982 its activities have been confined only to 
this basin. However  ONGC had earlier carri ed out some exploratory activities in the 
southern portion of the Barmer basin. These activities were confined to the southern 
portion which was also pursued by the Ru ssians under the Int ensive Integrated 
Exploration Project (IIEP), during which some hydrocarbon was discovered in the 
South Patan area of Gujarat. During the Pr e NELP Exploration bidding round , the 
block RJ-ON-90/1 was won by  one of the largest multi national companies in the 
world i.e. M/s Shell , through its Indian coun ter part M/s Shell India. M/s Shell India 
drilled in the central part of the basin and in one of the wells established the 
presence of oil. However in the subsequent well no  success could be met and they 
relinquished the block, which was taken ov er by M/s Cairn. M/s Cairn focused its 
activities in the Northern portion of the block which led to significant success.  
As can be seen success in hydrocarbon find is not only dependent on the 
exploratory intensity alone but is also gov erned by an element of serendipity.  In 
such an existent situation it is difficult  to judge on the G&G studies and operational 
activities carried out by any company. 
In the Mahanadi area ONGC has never been a major player in the past. During the 
late nineteen sixties ONGC had carried out  some survey work in the onland part. 
Subsequently GOI awarded the PEL to OIL to  under take exploration in the basin. 

 111
Under the NELP rounds  ONGC on stand alone or in consortium has won a number 
of blocks, which are spread from onland to  the deep waters. It has an aggressive 
committed work program, which is being pursued actively. 
It is a common phenomenon in the upstream Petroleum industry that an operator 
makes use of the knowledge base generated by the earlier operators (ONGC) in the 
same sector to move ahead and register a breakthrough.  
It is to be submitted that ONGC has put  6 out of the 7 producing basins of the 
country on the hydrocarbon map. In case of KG basin, the hydrocarbon finds made 
by the Private players are in the trends established by ONGC earlier. These finds 
fall in NELP blocks for which ONGC had also put in its bids but was out bid by the 
present operators. In the same vicinity, in its acreage, ONGC has also made a 
significant gas discovery viz. G-4. 
It would not be out of place to mention that exploration is pursued based on 
strategy, which in turn is governed by su ccess/ failure, knowledge building, revisits, 
etc.. M/s Reliance under the four NELP rounds have been awarded 26 blocks in 
different basins of the country. Their succ ess , as met in one block in the KG 
offshore , is a furtherance of the hydrocarb on trends established earlier. As a follow 
up of this success as a strategy the ar ea was explored extensively leading to 
success after success within the block. Th is approach had been adopted by ONGC 
in and around many of its finds in the past, t he recent one being Vasai  East find  in 
Mumbai Offshore. 
Of the 26 blocks , it is understood that  no significant exploratory efforts & success 
has been reported by M/s Relia nce from the other sector s. ONGC as a NOC has 
been focusing through out the country and es tablishing hydrocarbons in different 
basins. In some areas where initial success could not be met, in a cyclic exploratory 
strategy hydrocarbons could be estab lished on subsequent visit after a drilling 
holiday, like in Cauvery basin.     
There are other basins which inspite of tremendous efforts has been teasers and the 
hydrocarbon success eluded, like the Bengal basin. 
 
5.4 Elaborating further on the causes for non- discovery for oil / gas by public sector 
companies from oil fields which were succe ssfully discovered by private companies, 
Chairman, ONGC during oral evidence stated as under:- 
“If we take the example of Cairn Energy making a discovery in Rajasthan, then it 
should be noted that Shell tried there before Cairn Energy, and ONGC had tried 
before Shell.  We did not find any oil in Barmer, Shell could not find it there, but 
Cairn Energy found it.  Hence, it is not an issue of a public co mpany or a private 
company.  To put it in real life term, it is like a proper medical diagnostic.  A doctor 
may be working in AIIMS or MAX or Apollo, etc., but what really counts is the fact 
that the person at a laboratory had projected the thinking that such and such is the 
place where oil or gas might be found.  T here are times when he is right, and there 
are times when he is wrong.  The person could be working in a public sector or 

 112
working in a private sector.  The point to be taken into  account is whether he has 
access to adequate facilities, equipment, and technological support at his disposal. 
Today, we can assure the hon. Members of this Committee that we have the 
technology, equipment, and skills at par with  anybody else.  Perhaps, five years 
back we could not say so.  We constant ly analyse the technological gaps in the 
company.  In the latest review, we have analysed some 248 technologies, and have 
prioritised them into immediate mid-te rm, and long-term plans.  Some technologies 
are being developed, some are available fr om the market, and some need to be 
customised for our specific use.  We have specific plans for it, and every six months 
the Board reviews it. 
There are cases like the Ca veri Basin, where we had to do three campaigns for 
almost 25 years before we actually found oi l and gas.  In the 40 years we have not 
been able to find anything in West Bengal .  When we began in 1956, we had only 
small fields, that is, Digboi fields in Assam.  Stanvac had said that  there is no oil or 
gas in the rest of India.  This was the official report, which Stanvac had given to the 
Government of India in 195 2-1953.  Then, the Russians came to India, and they 
gave a different opinion on this issue. They said that there is oil and gas India. 
I can assure this hon.  Committee that  with the technologies, skills, equipment, 
which we have, we are conf ident that we will be havi ng more successes in the 
future.  In terms of the example that I have of diagnostics, we have as a good 
surgeons as anybody else in the world. 
Let us take the example of Reliance.  People trained by ONGC carry out the 
exploratory efforts done by Reliance.  Th ey have consultants, and we are also 
having our consultants.  In most of t he public sector companies, anyone who is 
anyone in exploration and pr oduction business in India has been trained and 
nurtured by ONGC.  They might have left ON GC or they might have retired from 
ONGC, but they are trained by ONGC in whatever skills they have learnt.” 
 
B COST  OF  PRODUCTION 
5.5 To a question regarding cost of producti on of crude oil and gas by ONGC the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas was stated to be as under :- 
The cost of production of crude oil includes Operating cost, the appropriate statutory 
duties, relevant Recouped Co sts and Financing Costs. Si nce, surveys are normally 
done to locate hydrocarbons (irrespective of  crude oil or gas) and the fields also 
normally contain both oil and gas, it requires a lot of allocation, to arrive at separate 
average costs for oil and gas. Thus it is more  relevant to deduce the cost of oil and 
oil equivalent of gas (OEG ) together. The cost of produc tion of oil and OEG for 
ONGC (excluding Joint Ventures) for the five years period ending 2003-04 is Rs. 
3233 per MT (provisional). 
 

 113
5.6 Asked as to how the cost of crude oil production by ONGC and OIL compared with 
the cost of production of crude oil and gas by private Joint Venture. In reply, the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas in thei r note further stated that the co st of crude oil production of 
private companies / JVs is not  comparable to cost of produc tion of NOCs due to following 
reasons :- 
The cost of production of crude oil generally consists of the following heads:  
- Operating costs  
- Depreciation, Depletion, Amortization (DDA) costs  
- Financial costs  
a) Exchange loss/gain  
b) Interest charges  
- Statutory levies  
 
i) In case of NOC’s the oper ating costs consists of production costs, project & Hqrs 
overheads, R&D costs, donations, publicity , write offs, provisions for DD’s 
/claims abandonment and idle ri gs and impairment costs. However, in case of 
private JV’s these consists of only production costs, allocated G&A costs and 1% 
of overheads.  
ii) DDA costs are not charged in JV acc ounts whereas, there are accounted in 
NOC’s.  
iii) Financing cost are also not account ed in JV accounts, whereas these are 
charged in NOC’s.  
iv) NOC’s are subjected to royalty and cess as per the prevailing rates, whereas in 
case of JV’s , these are freezed at pr edetermined rate ( In most PSC’s royalty 
and cess rates are Rs. 481/- and Rs. 900 per MT.) 
 
5.7 On the cost of production of ONGC vis a vis private / international companies and 
steps proposed to be taken by ONGC to reduce it, ONGC in their note stated as under :- 
The finding costs of different oil majors as reported by Deustche Bank in their report 
‘Major Oils 2003’ were com pared by ONGC with its own co sts for a five-year period 
average (of 1998-2002). As per this analysis, the finding cost of ONGC was found to 
be quite comparable to international standards. 
 

 114
Again, from some of the research reports , it is gathered that most international 
companies use the term ‘lifting cost’ per barre l of oil equivalent instead of reporting 
and analyzing ‘cost of production’. It is noted that the major diff erence between the 
two terms is that the ‘lifting cost’ does not  include cost of depletion, dry wells and 
statutory levies (like Royalty, Cess, National Calamity Contingency Duty) and 
Financing Costs, which go into the calculation of cost of production.  
 
The average ‘lifting cost’ per barrel of oil equivalent  of major international 
companies, as worked out by ONGC from the report titled ‘Maj or Oils 2003’of 
Deustche Bank vis-à-vis ONGC, for the 5-years period 1998 to 2002 places ONGC 
as one of the lowest. 
 
5.8 Following steps are mainly  being taken, amongst others,  to reduce the cost of 
production by ONGC: 
1. Improvement in production through Improv ed Oil Recovery/ Enhanced Oil Recovery 
scheme 
2. Operational de-bottlene cking, systems optimization and efficiency enhancement 
through R&D support from ONGC’s R&D institutes, technical audits and safety audit 
Optimization of cost at all stage Proper upkeep and maintenance of rigs, 
equipments etcAppropriate treasury management; 
3. Appropriate treasury management; 
4. Induction of new technologies; 
5. Continuous thrust on Research & Development; 
6. Optimization of human resources 
 
5.9 The OIL informed the Committee that they  had taken following steps for reducing its 
cost of production of oil :- 
(a) Revitalization of old oilfields to augment production and thereby ensure better 
utilization of availabl e infrastructure in these oil fields. This will help in better 
spread of the fixed overheads and lower fixed cost per unit of production. 
(b) Technology induction for production augmen tation to improve productivity per 
employee 
(c) Outsourcing of operational services for water injection stations, scraping of 
wells. 
(d) Switching over from road transportation mode to pipe line mode in remote areas 
for crude transportation. 
(e) Periodic preventive maintenance / health check up of equipment and 
machineries etc. for loss prevention.  
(f) Improved and focused vigilance to minimize miscreant activities in fields that 
lead to significant unproductive expenditures 
(g) Acceleration of exploration to find bigger oil fields.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 115
SHORTAGE OF FUNDS 
 
5.9A Asked by the Committee as to whether funds at disposal of ONGC were enough to 
carryout its exploration and production activities.  In reply ONGC:- 
“As far as ONGC is concerned, its Plan expenditure during first two years of 10 th 
Plan is Rs 12,915.37  cr which works out to 39% of 10 th Plan allocation of Rs 
33418.95cr. Considering the trend of utilization during t he first two years, Plan 
allocation for ONGC during 10th Plan is likely to be fully utilized. Rigs for Deep water 
drilling campaign under Sagar Samridhi and exploratory and development drilling in 
shallow water offshore, are in place to  achieve the physical target in the 10 th Plan. 
As regards the major schem es envisaged, Improved O il Recovery projects are 
already under execution. As such  the funds earmarked in the 10 th Plan are likely to 
be fully utilised. In fact, ONGC proposes to raise 10 th Plan Outlays as the funds 
initially provided (STP) are likely to fall shor t of the more intensified Plan activities 
likely to be undertaken. The additional funds shall be proposed during Mid-Term 
Review of the Plan by the Government/ Planning Commission.”  
 
DIFFICULTIES EXPERIENCED BY ONGC 
5.10 ONGC informed the Committee that they were facing difficulty in carrying on with 
their smooth operations on account of lack of autonomy, price preference to domestic 
bidders.  These issues have been dealt in details below: 
 
C AUTONOMY 
5.11 Committee desired to know the extent of  autonomy available to ONGC and whether 
the present autonomy was adequate for carrying out its functions in a satisfactory manner. 
In reply Chairman, ONGC during his evidence before the Committee stated :- 
“There is nothing called autonomy in pub lic sector.  We have been given certain 
empowerment, which is for awarding contra cts, etc.  That is given to the 
management.  But the way a company is to be run, is not decided by the Board of 
the company, and that is the bare truth.  We have spent hours discussing this.  
Navratna policy actually means  that we can award contract up to any value which 
saves two to three years of  delay in project decisions .  That certainly is a 
tremendous improvement.  Barring that, there is nothing really called autonomy of 
the Board as of today.  Abroad there are different structures for State enterprises but 
we do not have that.   
 
I can award contract up to any value.   If I have an independent merchant banker 
evaluation I can give the contract.  But whether I can do a particular business, I have 
no authority.  I can propose but somebody else would tell me that I can or cannot do 
it.” 

 116
 
5.12 Asked as to whether i ssue of autonomy with regard to doing a particular business 
had been taken up with the Government. In reply, Chairman, ONGC further stated: 
“Yes, Sir.  We have voluminous discussions.  Many solutions to go through all these.  
At the end of the day as I said, Navrat na power was a very important devolution 
because PIB was taken off.  But if you ta ke the MoU system the report says very 
clearly the MoU is an Itali an model where the Governm ent and the Company sign a 
contract.  After the first round of MoUs, the page where the Ministry is to make 
commitment, is  left blank.  For 14 years,  no Ministry has made any commitment to 
any PSU except to say t hat the Ministry will provide necessary guidance and 
assistance.  Therefore, it is  no longer a contract.  If it is not a contract, while  go 
through the exercise.  I go to my own Board for setting my own Budget and Targets.  
I have to go to the Planning Commission although it is not gi ving me a single paisa.  
I have to go through the MoU drill.  The bottom line is, if you ask why should I spend 
time in doing something which is of no benefit, no use to the company, whether I 
meet MOU target or not, frankly speaking does not make difference of one rupee to 
the share price.  Investor s are not bothered.  If I get Excellent rating, the Prime 
Minister may issue a certificate after three years, but share market investors are not 
bothered.   
 
This is the major change.  Today we are all listed companies.  Government have 
disinvested equity globally.  There is credi bility of the Government as well as the 
company is at stake.” 
 
5.13 On the autonomy in respect of technology and other things, ONGC, Chairman 
stated-: 
“Yes, we have no problem on  buying equipment or use of  advanced technology.  I 
must say that the Government has usually been supportive whenever we needed 
support.  Our usual contract values are anything between hundreds to thousands of 
Crore.  I must confirm that the Government has been supportive in this area. 
 
There is the basic issue of ho w the company is to be run.  At the end of the day if 
you hold me as accountable for the company then you must give me the authority to 
structure it.  I cannot carry on for three years waiting for approvals.” 
 
 
PRICE PREFERENCE TO DOMESTIC BIDDERS 
 
5.14 ONGC drew the attention of the Commi ttee on the problems being faced by them 
due to system of price / purchase preference to PSUs in procurement. In their note, ONGC 

 117
gave following justification / reasons to do aw ay with modify the pres ent system of price / 
purchase preference to PSUs. 
(A) Price Preference to domestic bidders (including PSUs):  
 
Price Preference policy was fo rmulated by the Govt. of India in May, 1984 to award 
business to the domestic bidders (including  PSUs) in ICB tenders for supply of 
goods and services to Oil Sector.  The said  policy has been in fo rce in one or the 
other form, though the criter ion and the extent of pr ice preference has been 
changed from time to time.  Thus the pric e preference has already been available to 
the Indian domestic industry for nearly 20 years. Under the New Exploration 
Licensing Policy (NELP) in force, ONGC has to compete with other E&P companies, 
to secure the blocks for exploration purpos es.  In the new competitive environment, 
it will not be possible for ONGC to compete effectively with ot her E&P companies in 
the bidding process under NELP, if it cont inues to provide price preference to 
domestic bidders (including PSUs).  
 
ONGC is not currently extending pric e preference to domestic companies in 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) tenders for supply of Materials and 
Equipments, as the validity of  price preference facility for supply of goods has since 
expired on 25.08.2003. The pr ice preference, however, is  currently applicable in 
respect of ICB tenders for Service / Lump sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts. 
 
ONGC is a commercial organization and it would not be fair in asking ONGC to bear 
the burden of price preference to the dome stic bidders, in today’s liberalized and 
global competitive environment as it has to compete bot h within India and overseas 
to get acreages.  Moreover, due to the po licy of price preference to domestic 
bidders, it has been experienc ed that participation by foreign bidders in ONGC’s 
tenders has reduced considerab ly and in some cases, depr iving ONGC even of the 
foreign bidder’s reference price for com parison with the prices quoted by domestic 
bidders.     
 
In view of the position as explained above,  it is suggested that  price preference to 
domestic bidders against ICB tenders may not be extended for procurement of 
materials and equipments. It is further suggested to discontinue the price preference 
in respect of Service / LSTK tenders. 
 
(B) Purchase Preference to Central PSUs. 
 
As per the policy of Govt. of India to gr ant Purchase Preference to Central PSUs for 
supply of Products and Services,  the C entral PSUs have been granted the 
Purchase Preference for suppl y of their products and services to other Central 
PSUs, in all tenders exceeding value of Rs . 5 Crores, subject to a minimum value 
addition of 20%.  This purchase preference was extended provided however that the 
price quoted by the Central PSUs is within 10% of the lowest price in a tender, other 
things being equal.       
 

 118
ONGC has in the past, experienced difficultie s resulting from the policy of granting 
Purchase Preference to Central PSUs.  In  the cases of highly critical Offshore 
equipment such as compressors etc., the PSU supplier delayed the supply unduly 
causing great hardship in its Gas Compressi on / Gas Flaring reduction processes.   
ONGC has been indicating its reservations  in extending the Purchase Preference 
policy to the Central PSUs against ICB t enders, bringing out the misuse of this 
policy by Central PSUs and the resultant lack of interest among Foreign / Private 
Indian bidders to participate in the tenders.     
 
Revival of the Purchase Pr eference Scheme for Central PSUs shall bring forward 
the following inappropriate commercial climate:  
 
i) In the purchase preference scheme, c ontract is to be awarded to Central 
PSUs if their rates are within 10% of the lowest offer received in the tender and if the 
Central PSUs agree to match their rates wi th those of the lowest bidder.  Thus 
foreign/private Indian bidder inspite of emerging L-1 in  the tender does not become 
eligible for award of contract.  Due to this reason, both foreign and Indian private 
bidders have reduced their direct participati on in ONGC’s tenders, thereby severely 
restricting competition.  In lieu of this , some of the bidder s are preferring to 
participate through Central PSUs, using them as frontal companies.  
 
ii) Misuse of this provision has also  been severely commented by CVC, 
whüich has also observed that Centra l PSUs are not following established 
procedure in sub-contracting the work to other companies, after bagging the award 
of contract.  
 
 
iii) In the past couple of years, it has been noted that in the tenders being floated 
by ONGC, Central PSUs who are partici pating in the bidding process are mis-
utilizing the provisions of this scheme.  The Central PSUs have started participating 
in the tendering process withou t having to play any significant role in execution of 
the project.  Basically the foreign and pr ivate Indian firms involve the Central PSUs 
in thbidding process merely as a front  so as to get the benefits of purchase 
preference. 
 
iv) Under NELP, ONGC has to bid and co mpete against other private players for 
securing acreage for exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons.  As other bidders 
under NELP are under no obligat ion to give purchase prefer ence, it is unfair to ask 
ONGC to give purchase preference.  
 
v) Under the post-APM scenario, it would not be fair to expose commercial 
Navaratna organization like ONGC to bear the burden of a policy of protectionism 
like purchase preference.    
 
Under the circumstances, it is felt t hat ONGC should be exempted from granting 
purchase preference in its ICB tenders relati ng to award of orders/contracts for Oil 
Field  products/equipment and services.  
 

 119
 In their note ONGC further submitted as under :- 
 
(II)  ONGC to be treated as High Tec hnology Cost Intensive Company and the 
need to dispense with normal procurement procedure need not be applicable. 
 
The cutting edge technology is required for certain goods and services and 
hardware / software.    It is  not feasible to source the best in class technology by 
following the normal procurement procedure,  because of the implicit incremental 
costs. 
 
In the ‘Strategy Review’ hel d in July-2002 at Behror, Secretary P&NG suggested 
that ONGC should continuously scout fo r cutting edge technology and suitable 
mechanism (purchase process) be developed for sourcing best-in-class technology 
which can not be made available to present bidding process.   
 
The issue was taken up by ONGC with CVC and a team of senior officers from 
ONGC had discussed the above issue with t he CVC.  During the deliberations, it 
was clarified by the CVC t hat basically tender terms and conditions should be 
transparent, equitable and fair so that decision of award of contract / supply order is 
taken strictly according to terms and c onditions of tender.  The management can 
also frame rules and regulations for procur ement keeping in view the philosophy of 
transparency, fairness and equitability.   It wa s also clarified by the CVC that if the 
normal procedure can not be followed for proc urement of cutting edge technology, it 
should be properly justified in writing. 
 
In view of the foregoing, it may be seen that CVC has emphasized on the 
transparency, equity and fairne ss in framing policies and effecting procurement.   
Accordingly, ONGC is considering evolving  a special mechanism in light of CVC’s 
above guideline for procuring goods and services involving cutting edge technology.  
 
The need for Government Fiscal policy to be announced before the beginning of the 
year and no major deviations during the year. 
 
ONGC fully supports the view that the Fiscal Policy should be announced before the 
beginning of the year. Further, once a fiscal policy is announced by the Government, 
there should not be any major deviations in the policy. 
 
While it is generally adhered to by the Government in respect of taxes and duties 
applicable on crude oil and natural gas, during the ye ar 2003-04, Government has 
been taking ad-hoc view (contrary to ONGC’s  interest) on the sharing of subsidies 
on LPG and Kerosene. The issue was also raised by the prospective investors 
during road shows of the IPO of  ONGC in March, 2004. It wa s clarified at that stage 
that the subsidy sharing was not part of policy of the Government and the same was 
applicable only for FY ’04. 
 
The subsidy sharing was resorted to by the Government because the fiscal policy 
decisions on gradual withdrawal of the subsidy of LPG and Kerosene and linking the 
retail prices of MS and HSD to the market price levels could not be implemented by 

 120
the Government. The Government has again conveyed that during first and second 
quarters of 2004-05, ONGC, GAIL and OIL would share the under-recoveries of 
OMCs. 
 
The major deviations in the fiscal policy not  only bring un-certainty but cash flow 
planning and investment decisions are also significantly affected. 
 
It would, therefore, be appropriate that fiscal pol icy once announced, in the 
beginning of the year should remain st able. Moreover, E&P industry needs long-
term investment and therefore fiscal policy should remain stable over long period. 
 
 
D OTHER PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
5.15 Besides  ONGC and OIL who have been under taking Oil exploration and production 
activities for more than half a century, following PSUs who were hitherto performing , 
activities pertaining to refini ng and marketing  of   crude oil and supply of gas, have also 
made forays into the Exploration and Production activities. 
1. GAIL (India) Ltd. 
2. Indian Oil Corpor ation Ltd. (IOC) 
3. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) 
4. Hindustan Petroleum Co rporation Ltd. (HPCL) 
 
5.16 The Committee held discussion with re presentatives of HPCL, IOC and BPCL 
during their study visit to Hyderabad, Chennai and Kolkata to ascertai n the causes due to 
which these companies have made forays into E&P activities, the number  of  exploration 
blocks acquired by them in India / abroad, t he expenditure incurred thereon and the actual 
work done so far in respect of each of the bl ocks.  In reply various companies in their 
written note submitted to the Committee during study visits  stated as under: 
BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED (BPCL) 
Internationally the trend in the Oil Industry has been towards integration; 
downstream companies going upstream and vice versa.  With deregulation of the oil 
market in India, the same trend of integration is  emerging in the industry.  The entry 
into the upstream sector will provide hedge to our future margins.  
 
BPCL is sourcing crude for its Mumbai and Ko chi refineries from indigenous source-
ONGC’s Bombay High and from imports.  At present, the import components in tune 

 121
of 63% and is expected to rise in future.  In order to have reasonable supply 
security, hedging and benefits of integrated suppl y chain in the volatile oil market, it 
has become necessary for us to explore avenues for securing our own equity crude 
by entering the upstream sect or in the liberalized market.  We have to plan for 
reasonable supply security for our refinerie s with a mechanism for mitigating price 
risk in the volatile international oil market.  Also, in view of the recent trend of natural 
gas increasingly displacing our fuel products , it has become imperative to enter the 
gas business to maintain our share in the energy market in the country.  The entry 
into the upstream sector thus relates both to oil as well as gas. 
 
The growth potential of the downstream oil business be ing moderate, BPCL also 
proposes to seek avenues for supplementar y growth in some other business having 
synergies with the downstream business. In  view of the success rate of recent 
discoveries, the upstream sector in India promises high growth potential.  Similar 
prospective areas are also available abroad. 
 
II Exploration blocks acquired by BPCL in India: 
 
BPCL was  successful in the following NELP IV blocks: 
 
Block Name  
 
Block 
Number  
Block type  Location  Consortium  BPCL’ 
participating 
interest  
KG-DWN-
2002/1 
D5 Offshore (deep 
water) 
Krishna-
Godavari 
basin 
ONGC, OIL 
and BPCL 
10% 
MN-DWN-
2002/1 
D6 Offshore (deep 
water) 
Mahanadi 
basin 
ONGC, OIL 
and BPCL 
10% 
CY-ONN-
2002/02 
12 Onland  Cauvery 
basin 
ONGC and 
BPCL 
40% 
Target completion dated and position of works done: 
 
Block Name  Consortium  Effective date (date of 
getting PEL) 
Exploration 
phase (in 
years) 
Present work status 
MN-DWN-
2002/1 
ONGC, OIL 
and BPCL 
17th March, 2004 8 Seismic data collection / 
interpretation in 
progress 
KG-DWN 
2002/1 
ONGC, OIL 
and BPCL 
17th March, 2004 8 Seismic data collection / 
interpretation in 
progress 
 
 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) 
 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) owns and operates  two refineries, one on the 
east coast in Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh with a 7.5 Million tonnes per year (MMTPA) crude 
oil processing capacity and the other on the west coast in Mumbai, with a 5.5 MMTPA capacity.    
HPCL has a share of 15% in the refining capacity under the Public Sector and plays a vital role in 
meeting the country’s demand for petroleum products. 
 
Of the 13 MMTPA of crude oil required by HPCL to maintain its refining operations in both its 
refineries, a major portion is imported directly fr om the oil producing countries.  Only a smaller 
portion of the crude oil feed is met from the indigenous sources viz.  Mumbai High and Ravva oil 

 122
fields.  The cost of crude oil feed contributes approximately 90% of the operating cost of a refinery 
and thus, has a direct influence on its profitability. 
 
The world crude oil market is highly volatile and is frequently impacted by supply crunch, demand 
swings, geo-political influences, exchanges rate variations etc. The price of oil remains volatile due 
to these  factors and often moves very sharply upwards, causing severe erosion in profitability.  
Raising oil prices also shrink the availability of crude oil.  The Refineries not only find it difficult to 
maintain the operations at optimum levels under these circumstances, but also are forced to invest 
in upgrading the processing facilities to accommodate cheaper and heavier crudes.  As the share of 
the imported crude oil is higher, the volatility of the oil market in terms of prices and limited 
availability, adversely impacts the refineries.  
 
In order to ensure adequate supply and to soften the impact of crude oil prices on refinery 
operations, HPCL planned to go in for securing equity oil by acquiring interests in oil fields in India 
and overseas. The equity oil, thus acquired, may either be directly used in the refineries or 
swapped in the oil market with suitable and cheaper crudes. 
 
This will facilitate optimum capacity utilization in the refineries and safeguard the revenues.  As the 
margins in the production of crude oil are generally  higher, the earnings from such E&P initiatives 
may add to the overall profitability of the Corporation. 
 
INITIATIVES: 
Government of India (GOI) offered 24 exploration blocks under the New Exploration Policy         
(NELP-V) programme.  HPCL took the initiative of forming a consortium with the other major 
players in the E&P sector to bid for these blocks .  Accordingly, HPCL entered into a Memorandum 
of Understanding with Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) for co-operation in the sector and 
submitted bids for two deep water offshore blocks in the Kerala-Konkan coast and one onshore 
block in the Cauvery basin under NELP-IV.  HPCL is also reviewing various farming in opportunities 
with a view to acquire interests in producing fields.  Prize Petroleum Company Limited, a Joint 
Venture company formed in association with the financ ial institutions provides technical assistance 
to HPCL in this regard.  
 
E&P BLOCKS ACQUIRED 
The HPCL –ONGC consortium  has been awarded two deep wa ter offshore exploration 
blocks in the Kerala-Konkan coast (KK- DWN-2002/2 and KK-DWN-200 2/3) under NELP-
IV.  HPC-hold 20% participating interest in  each of these blocks, while ONGC holds the 
remaining 80%.  The details of the individual blocks are given below: 
 
 
KK-DWN-2002/3 
 
The block is spread over 20,910 sq.km in t he Kerala-Konkan basin approximately 300 kms 
off the coastal city Kochi on the west coast.  The water depth in the block varies from 400 
to 2700 metres.  The earlier geophysical surv eys carried out in the block collected about 
1000 LKM of 2D seismic data. 
 
 
 
 

 123
 
 
CONTRACTS / AGREEMENTS / COMMITTEES : 
 
Production Sharing Contract (PSC): 
 
A Production Sharing Contract (PSC) has been si gned for each of these two exploration 
blocks by the HPCL – ONGC consortium with the Government of India on February 6, 
2004.  The PSC defines the exploration period as eight consecutive years starting from the 
effective date i.e. March 17, 2004.  The exploration period shall be in three phases of three, 
three and two years each.  The PSC also defines the compos ition and the role of the 
Management Committee and the Operating Committe e.  The measurement of Petroleum, 
recovery of cost, production  sharing, payment of  taxes & levies, sale of produce etc. have 
been spelt out in detail.  The procedures for maintaining the accounts & records, reports to 
be submitted, auditing and verification etc.  have also been defined.  Procedures to be 
followed for reassigning of participating interest by the consorti um members are laid out in 
detail in the contract. 
 
Operating Agreement (OA):
 
 
The HPCL-ONGC consortium has nominated ON GC as the Operator  for each of these 
exploration blocks.  In accordance with the PSC, an Operating Agreem ent (OA) has been 
entered into between HP CL and ONGC on June 9, 2004.  This OA defines the role and 
responsibilities of the Operator in carrying out the explorati on work in line with the PSC.  It 
also specifies the procedures for budgeting,  accounting for the costs and expenses, 
relinquishment of the areas, disposal of production etc.  The procedures for sale, transfer 
or assignment of interest, insurance and indemnification are also clearly spelt out. 
 
Committees 
 
An Operating Committee (OC), comprising of representatives from the each member of the 
HPCL-ONGC consortium was formed for the in dividual blocks.  The Committee conducted 
its first meeting on June 15, 2004 and finalized the work programme as well as the budgets 
for the financial years 2004-05 & 2005-06. 
 
A management Committee (MC), comprising of r epresentatives from the each member of 
the HPCL –ONGC consor tium and the Directorate General  of Hydrocarbons (DGH) was 
formed for the individual blocks.  The Commi ttee conducted its first meeting on August 5, 
2004 and approved the work programme as well  as the budgets for the financial years 
2004-05 & 2005-06. 
 
 
KK-DWN-2002/2 & KK-DWN-2002/3 
 
The Petroleum Exploration License for the individual blocks has been obtained from the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natura l Gas, Government of India.  The work programme and the 
Budget for the financial year have been prepared and the approval of the Management 
Committee obtained.  Approximately 1500 LKM of digitized 2D seismic lines has been 

 124
taken up.  The job of co-relating the seis mic horizons representing trap top and Early 
Eocene top is in progress. 
 
The work in both these exploration blocks is  progressing as per the schedule and no cost 
over run is anticipated at this juncture.  No area has been relinqui shed / abandoned as of 
now.” 
 
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LIMITED (IOC) 
 
IOC with dominance in the core business of refining & marketing has emerged as a leading 
company in downstream hydrocarbon sector. To maintain its national leadership position, 
sustain adequate growth and to cons olidate its resources strategica lly, it is imperative to 
integrate core business with related areas along the hydrocarbon value chain. Such a need 
has been recognized and incorporated in IOC’s visi on of becoming “a major, diversified, 
transnational, integrated energy company...”.  
 
Vertical integration along the hydrocarbon value chain has also been the key strategy for 
growth for all oil and gas majors  worldwide as this provides op portunities for higher returns 
and flexibilities for resource utilization. T he global oil majors, which are integrated 
companies, derive significant portion of t heir profit/revenue from upstream business. 
Therefore, vertical integrat ion into upstream hydrocarbon sector through E&P initiatives 
has been considered necessary for IOC, to have its own equity oil so as to safeguard its 
business interest against the highly volatile oil market and to achieve greater stability of 
revenues/profits, thereby protecting stakeholders interest.  
 
The Government of India has also been encouraging downstream oil PSUs to participate in 
domestic exploration activity and to step up indigenous pr oduction as well as to go 
overseas for securing equity oil.  
 
IOC made a foray into E&P sector in the year 1996. A humble begi nning was made by 
securing two exploration blocks, along with ONGC, under New Exploration Licensing Policy 
(NELP) – I round. Subsequently, IOC has been awarded 8 blocks under NELP-II and 1 
block under NELP-III in consortium with ONGC/OIL/GSPC/GAIL. Besi des two Coal Bed 
Methane (CBM) blocks were awarded under Fi rst CBM Licensing round to IOC-ONGC 
consortium. Farm-in opportunities in Indi a are also being pursued. IOC acquired 
participating interest in a block in Assam-A runachal Pradesh, where Premier Oil is the 
operator. IOC also entered in overseas E&P arena when it was awarded an Exploration 
Service Contract in Iran alongwith ONGC and OIL.  
 
In addition, IOC has signed ‘farm-in’ agreement for 35% participating interest in Exploration 
Block CR-ON-90/1 with Premier O il (49% & Operator). The Government approval for farm-
in is awaited. IOC management has also appr oved farm-in in PY-1 field with 50% stake 
(HOEC – 50% & Operator) and CY-OSN-97/1 exploration block with 40% stake (HOEC – 
40% & Operator), the farm-in agreements for which will be signed shortly.  
 
Besides, with a view to further expand an d strengthen its E&P business, IOC management 
has accorded “In-Principle” approval for acquisition of a su itable overseas mid-size E&P 
company, which is being pursued. 

 125
 
Exploration blocks awarded / acquired in India and abroad. 
So far, all the exploration blocks have been awarded to IOC  in consortium with partners 
like ONGC/OVL, OIL, GAIL and GSPC. In addition, IOC has also farmed-in in one 
exploration block and is in the process of  farm-in in 2 exploration blocks and one 
discovered field. The following table gives the details thereof: 
 
Consortium (%) 
Block Name ONGC OIL IO
C 
GAIL GSPC 
DOMESTIC 
NELP-I      
MB-OSN-97/4 70* --- 30 --- --- 
GV-ONN-97/1 70* --- 30 --- --- 
NELP-II      
MB-DWN-2000/1 85* --- 15 --- --- 
MB-DWN-2000/2 50* 10 15 15 10 
MB-OSN-2000/1 75* --- 15 --- 10 
MN-OSN-2000/2 40* 20 20 20 --- 
WB-OSN-2000/1 85* --- 15 --- --- 
WB-ONN-2000/1 85* --- 15 --- --- 
GV-ONN-2000/1 85* --- 15 --- --- 
MN-ONN-2000/1 20 40* 20 20 --- 
NELP-III      
AA-ONN-2001/2 80* --- 20 --- --- 
CBM-I      
BK-CBM-2001/1 80* --- 20 --- --- 
NK-CBM-2001/1 80* --- 20 --- --- 
Farm-in      
Premier Oil OIL IOC HOEC  AAP-ON-94/1 
38* 10 27 25  
Premier Oil  IOC Essar Oil CR-ON-90/1** 
49*  35 16 
HOEC  IOC   PY-1*** 
50*  50   
HOEC  IOC Mosbacher CY-OSN-97/1*** 
40*  40 20 
OVERSEAS 
OVL OIL IOC   Farsi Offshore 
Exploration Block, Iran 
40* 20 40   
* Operator 
** Govt. approval for assignment awaited 
*** Board approved; Farm-in Agreement to be signed 

 126
 
The Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) have been signed  by IOC, along with the 
consortium partners, with Govt. of India for 11 blocks awarded under NELP-I, II & III 
rounds. IOC-ONGC consortium has signed 2 Contracts with Govt. for 2 CBM blocks 
under CBM-I round. Besides, IOC has farmed- in in Block AAP-ON-94/1, which was 
initially awarded under VIII round. IOC-OVL-OIL consortium has also entered into an 
‘Exploration Service Contract’ for ‘Farsi’ Block in Iran. 
 
5.17 IOC is participating as a ‘Non-Operator’ in all the bloc ks awarded/acquired so far. 
The cost estimates have been revised in case of NELP-I & II blocks only. 
 
The broad reasons for cost overrun were stated to be as under:  
- Technical evaluation of the data package of each bl ock before bid submission 
was carried out and the Minimum Work Programme (MWP) was prepared by 
respective Operators alongwith estimated expenditure based on the then-
prevalent rates for bid submission. 
 
- After award of the blocks, detailed studies revealed that technical data was 
inadequate in some of the blocks. This data gap was required to be filled up by 
more data acquisition and/or reprocessing/s pecial processing of existing data at 
an additional cost. 
 
- Further, conceptual plan of data acqui sition technique, drilling methodology, 
water depth, vessel configuration, hiring  charges, etc. also needed to be re-
looked and re-worked to achieve the bes t results, which contributed to further 
increase in exploration expenditure. 
 
- Besides above, all the cost elements such as seismic data acquisition, 
processing & interpretation (API); drilli ng cost, site/current/geochemical surveys, 
etc. are market driven and hen ce are prone to fluctuat ions. Therefore, precise 
estimation of the total exploration costs is not possible. A better estimate for a 
particular year is obtained only after the Operator prepares the annual budget. 
 
- Costs towards General & Administra tive (G&A) Charges, annual Petroleum 
Exploration License (PEL) Fees, En vironmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
studies, technical manpower, computing services (workstation usage charges), 
etc., which were not considered by the Operator at the time of bidding, have also 
contributed towards upward revision of costs.” 
 
Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) 
 
5.18 Committee got written note from GAIL on their Exploration and Production activities. 
Giving reasons for GAIL entering the E&P activities, details of blocks acquired in India and 

 127
abroad, and actual achievements so  far, GAIL in their note furnished to Committee stated 
as under: 
GAIL entered the E&P sector when national exploration acreages were opened under the 
New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) as a non-operator and has since taken part in 
four bidding rounds announced by the Government of India.  
 
GAIL has primarily focused on relatively gas prone blocks with clea r understanding, in few 
cases, that in case of commercial discovery, gas marketing will be undertaken by GAIL. 
 
Summarizing, the business scenario for GAIL post NELP and other policies of Government 
of India was –  
 
i) Projected decline in gas supplies from existing fields; 
ii) Freedom to operator of NELP blocks to market gas  directly and create the 
marketing facilities. 
iii) Gas/LNG imports under OGL and entry of  global majors like Shell, Enron, 
Totalfina Elf, BG and BP etc.  to set up gas imports projects and pipeline to 
market gas. 
 
The above scenario created following implications for GAIL : 
 
i) Gas volumes will shrink with time. 
ii) Additional gas volumes would not be available automatically to serve the 
existing markets/loss of market as we ll as develop new markets (access to 
new markets) 
iii) There will be no significant  opportunities for new gas processing facilities as 
well as gas pipelines under the new producers of gas/importers of gas decide 
to give gas to GAIL 
iv) There could be serious inadequacy of projects in GAIL, area of core 
competence. 
v) Gas supplies are thus critical to survive and grow and only gas volume 
growth will create logical investment plans for the company. 
vi) Gas Sourcing and integration in supply sources is become a business 
necessity. 
vii) Supply side integrat ion become business requirement s in view of emerging 
competition in the gas sector. 
viii) To play in competetive marke t, supply dependency will be inadequate and 
hence self supplies would be critical.  

 128
5.19 The target dates for completion and actual  position of work done  in respect of the 
each of the blocks alongwith time and cost overrun are given below:-  
“The twelve exploration blocks (including tw o blocks under NELP-IV) are in different 
stages of Exploration phases in which implementation of  work programme by the 
respective Operator is in progress, except in block KK- DWN-2000/2 which is 
relinquished.  Seismic wor ks are completed for the respective phases in seven 
blocks and in three blocks seismic works are in advanced stage of completion and 
balance two blocks are recently awarded in NELP-IV where exploration activities are 
in the stage of start. On the basis of seismic and other geo-technical works, 
estimated potential hydrocarbon resources have been revised from the initial stages, 
after acquisition, processing and interpretati on of additional seismi c data. Drilling of 
one exploratory well each in “Farm-in” bl ocks CY-OS/2 and A-1, Myanmar has been 
completed. Drilling of six wells in NELP-II bl ock CB-ONN-2000/1 has been 
completed. One well each has been drilled in two deepwater blocks.  As a result of 
drilling in above blocks, gas discovery in  block A-1, Myanmar and oil discovery in 
block CB-ONN-2000/1 have been made.  
 
The activities under Minimum Work Progra mme (MWP) of the PSCs are all time 
bound programmes and there is no time over run in current exploration phase of any 
exploration block , except in case of pre-NELP block CY-OS/2. In this block, the 
consortium of Hardy and GAIL have plann ed additional work programme over and 
above MWP. The Consortium of block CY -OS/2 has requested the Government of 
India for 22 months time extension due to delay on account of seismic data archival 
from ONGC and non-availability of seismic vessel for 3D seismic data acquisition..  
The extent of additional ex penditure involved will be known once the process is 
completed and jobs executed.” 
 
5.20 A brief status of work programme in ongoing exploration blo cks progressed in last 
quarter ending September 2004 is narrated below: 
 
1 MN-OSN-97/3 (Mahanadi Offshore) (Phase-II : 19.5.2002 to 18.5.2005): 
• Exploration Phase-I completed successf ully and consortium has entered next 
exploration phase. 
• Acquisition, Processing and Interpretation (API) of 3D Seismic Data, 400Km 2 – It 
is an additional work over Minimu m Work Programme. Acquisition and 
Processing is completed and Interpretation is in progress. In the last quarter, 
three prospects have been mapped based on special processing of 3D seismic 
data.  
• Exploratory well drilling, 1 well: Rele ase of location shall be firmed up after 
prospects are prioritized and drilling is planned in 1st quarter of 2005. 

 129
2 NEC-OSN-97/1 (Bengal Offshore) (Phase-II : 13.8.2003 to 13.11.2005): 
• Exploration Phase-I completed successf ully and consortium has entered next 
exploration phase. 
• API of seismic data(3D 530 Km 2 and 2D 40 LKM)  – Acquisition and processing 
of 246 Km2 3D (47%of total volume) and 40 LKM 2D seismic data is completed.  
Interpretation is in progress. Acquisition of balance 3D seismic data planned in 
Nov, 2004 after monsoon.  
• Exploratory well drilling, 1 well :  Modified drilling pr ogramme finalized in 
September, 2004 for drilling 2 wells.  1 st well location is identified in the most 
promising prospect in shallow depth for dr illing in 2004-05.  Tenders for drilling 
rig and its associated services have been invited. Simultaneously, tendering for 
Geo-hazard and site survey is in progr ess. Pre-drill EIA study by NEERI 
completed and applied for Environmental clearance from Ministry of Environment 
and Forest (MOEF). 
 
3 GS-DWN-2000/2 (Gujarat Saurashtra Offshore) (Phase-I : 16.8.2001 to 15.8.2005): 
• Reprocessing of 2D seismic data, 1500 LKM – Completed 
• API of 2D seismic and Gravity Magnetic data, 2000 LKM and 3D, 1500 Km 2 – 
Completed. Additional API of long offset  2D seismic data, 230 LKM planned to 
map Mesozoic level (deeper level). 
• Exploratory well drilling, 3 wells – Firs t well drilled in Aug’04 upto a depth of 
3,838m in water depth of 2,545m and f ound dry (no hydrocarbon shows). Lab 
analysis of samples and review of well data is in progress. 
 
4 MB-DWN-2000/2 (Mumbai Offshore) (Phase-I : 16.8.2001 to 15.8.2005): 
• Reprocessing of 2D seismic data, 1500 LKM – completed 
• API of 2D seismic and GM data, 2000 LKM and 3D, 1500 Km 2 – Completed. 
Additional API of long offset 2D data, 1598 LKM planned to map Mesozoic level 
(deeper level). 
• Exploratory well drilling, 3 wells  - First well drilled in July-Aug’04 upto a depth of 
3,250m in water depth of 2,378m and f ound dry (no hydrocarbon shows). Lab 
analysis of samples and review of well data is in progress. 

 130
5  KK-DWN-2000/2 (Kerala Konkan Offshore) (Phase-I : 16.08.2001 to 15.08.2004) : 
• The block has been relinquished on 30.7.2004, as prospectivity was downgraded 
after exploration activities of Explor ation Phase-I.  Minimum Work commitment 
has been fulfilled. 
6 MN-OSN-2000/2 (Mahanadi Offshore) (Phase-II : 02.08.2003 to 01.08.2006): 
• Exploration Phase-I completed successf ully and consortium has entered next 
exploration phase. 
• Additional API of 3D  seismic data, 625 Km 2 – 285 Km 2 data acquired and 
processing of 3D data acqu ired is in progress.. Acquisition of balance seismic 
data planned in Nov-Dec’ 04.   
• Exploratory well drilling, 2 wells – Planned in  2005-06 after API of 3D seismic 
data. 
7 CB-ONN-2000/1 (Cambay Onland) (Phase-I : 7.1.2002 to 7.1.2005 with 6 months 
extension): 
• Reprocessing of 2D seismic data, 2000 GLK -  Completed 
• API of 3D seismic data, 120 Km2 – Completed 
• Exploratory well drilling, 7 wells – 6 wells drilled.  Location for 7 th well being 
finalized.  6th well was drilled in Aug’04 at PK#2 location and oil was discovered 
with a flow rate of 800 BO PD from 4mm bean size.  2 nd production test in PK#2 
carried out in September, 2004 and produced  oil @1654 BOPD from 6mm bean 
size.  
 
8 MN-ONN-2000/1 (Mahanadi Onland) (Phase-I : 22.4.2002 to 21.4.2005): 
• Reprocessing of 2D seismic data, 760 GLK – Completed 
• API of 2D seismic data, 460 GLK –  Basic Interpretation of 2D seismic data is 
undertaken. Further data proces sing is required for better 
interpretation/modeling. Broad scope of work for processing and interpretation of 
2D seismic data by an independent E&P consultant is firmed up. 
9 AA-ONN-2002/1 (Tripura Onland) (Phase-I : 7.4.2004 to 6.4.2007): 
• 2D seismic data reprocessing, 368 LKM,  Geological mapping  and Geochemical 
analysis : Tendering in progress.  

 131
• API of 2D seismic data, 250 LKM - EIA st udy for 2D seismic data acquisition 
completed and report received on 23.09.2004. 
• Exploratory well drilling, 3 wells – Planned in early 2006 
10 CY-ONN-2002/1 (Cauvery Onland) (Petrol eum Exploration Licence (PEL) to be 
granted): 
• 2D seismic data reprocessing, 1000 LKM – Effective date yet to start.  
• API of 2D seismic data, 300 LKM - Effective date yet to start.  
• Exploratory well drilling, 3 wells – Effective date yet to start.  
11 “Farm-in” Block – A-1 (Myanmar) (Appraisal 1.7.2004 to 30.6.2005): 
• 1st and 2 nd Exploration Period and 1 st One Year Extension were completed 
successfully. Gas discovery was made in  first prospect called SHWE from 1 st 
exploratory drilling in January 2004 with an estimated reserve size is 5 TCF. The  
consortium has entered 2nd One Year Extension for appraisal of the discovery 
• 3D seismic data of 1200 Km2 acquired and processed. From interpretation 
of SHWE prospect, location of 1st and 2nd appraisal wells is firmed up. 
• Drilling of 5 firm and 3 conditional wells (6 appraisal + 2 exploratory) – Hiring 
of drilling rigs and related servic es are at finalization stage. 1 st Drill ship 
mobilization planned in 4th week of October, 2004. 
12 “Farm-in” Block –CY- OS/2 (Cauvery Offshore  (Applied for Phase-III time extension 
of 22 months): 
• Exploration Phase-I and Phase-II hav e been completed successfully and 
consortium has entered next exploration phase. 
• Exploration Phase-III has come to an end on 15.1.2004 and Consortium has 
applied for 22 months time extension to  complete the work programme.  In 
addition to Minimum Work Pr ogramme of 1 well drilling in Exploration Phase-III, 
the Consortium has planned to underta ke API of 3D seismic data (250 Km 2) and 
drilling of one more well.  
 
Expenditure of 12 exploration blocks with GAIL has been revised due to dynamic 
nature of exploratory work, as per annual work programme and budget of respective 
block. Reasons for increase in initial esti mated expenditure (bid costs) are due to 
three major factors, as explained below: 

 132
 
i. Revised cost estimates of work programme based on tendering or 
budgetary quotes/actuals. 
 
ii. Revised work programme for additi onal exploration activities/quantum 
as per need basis, resulting in additional expenditure. 
 
iii. PEL fees, EIA Study, Operator’s G&G/G&A costs, Computing charges, 
Capital equipment, Overheads : These items were not the part of the 
initial estimates pertaining to minimum work programme in the bid and  
were not reflected  in the initial cost estimates: 
 
b) PEL fees: The fees has been revised in 2003 to Rs. 50, 100, 500, 700, 1000 
against Rs. 8, 40, 200, 400, 600 per Km 2 for 1 st, 2nd,3rd, 4th and subsequent 
years respectively. EIA study is must for compliance with Environmental and 
regulatory norms before carrying out any exploration activities in block areas. 
 
c) G&G/G&A costs & Computing charges: Expenditure incurred by Operator  
towards G&G personnel and General and administrative charges for carrying 
out the activities outlined in Minimu m Work Programme and as agreed in 
work programme by Operating Co mmittee and Management Committee from 
time to time. The Computing charge im plies expenditures incurred towards 
hiring/utilization charges of workstation for G&G study. Besides that the 
charges under Capital equipment includes co st of software purchase, office 
furniture & equipment cost etc. 
 
d) Operator’s Overheads: As applicable under Production sharing Contract for 
the cost of general assistance, advice and support provided to Operator by its 
head office which is about 4% of total expenditure. 
 
 

 133
5.21 Revised project cost (GAI L’s share of expenditure) fo r completed, ongoing and next 
phase which is conditional upon entry depending on outcome of preceding phase for these 
12 exploration blocks are as below:  
(All figures in MMUS$) 
Cost Estimate of   
GAIL’s share Status of Expl. 
Phase 
No. of 
Block Initial  Revised   
Expenditure incurred/ 
 basis of cost estimation 
Completed Phase 5 3.97 5.20 As per actuals 
Ph-I 7 21.43 49.38 
Ph-II 3 10.46 22.82 Ongoing 
Phase Ph-III 2   2.55  5.57 
Total 12 34.43 77.77 
As per actual work programme & 
budget & inputs from  respective 
Operator 
Next Phase 
(Subject to entry) 11 42.05 91.26 
As per present trend of cost estimate 
for similar work programme and is 
subject to further revisions. 
Total 80.45 174.23  
 
E OPERATORSHIP ISSUE 
5.22 The Committee drew the att ention of ONGC to the problems being faced by some of 
the downstream companies on account of t heir being non operators in exploration and 
production activities and asked as to why other PSUs who have forayed into upstream 
activities should not be offered operatorship in joint deals. In reply, Chairman ONGC during 
his evidence before the Committee stated as under :- 
“It took us 48 years to be recognised as an  operator by Saudi Ar abia.  I was  very 
pleasantly surprised when one day last year  I got a letter from the His Excellency 
the Oil Minister of Saudi Arabia saying: I am pleased to recognize ONGC as an 
operator.  That means, as fa r as Saudi Arabia is concer ned, ONGC can bid directly 
along with Shell, Exxon and everybody else.  It took us 48 years to reach that stage. 
In Kuwait, we do not have operator status.  We are bidding with Occidental and 
other bidders.  In Iran, we  are operators and in Sudan we are joint operators and so 
on.  Capability to become  an operator takes a huge investment.  I have been in 
downstream also.  Thirty years,  I was in IOC.  I am now in ONGC. IOC had ensured 
cooperation  with ONGC. to go in for NELP and things li ke that.  Developing the 
capability for NELP, etc. just  cannot be done like you c an do in any factory.  You 
want to manufacture a car or cycle, you build a factory. You have to hire people who 
get into production and you get into business. 
 

 134
Reliance wanted to do this, they took our people  and they also hired people directly 
in USA, Europe and other places.  They m ade the investments.  People trained by 
us for 20 years might have gone to Reliance for getting 10 times or 15 times of their 
salaries.  Why should any one  go to another PSU for the same salary?  My point on 
what has been told to the Committee  on operatorship, is  that the operatorship in 
exploration business does not come cheap.  Something which has to be developed 
over 10 or 15 or 20 years or a company has to go to hiri ng people from all over the 
world at international salaries, not on PSU salaries.” 
 
 
5.23 The Committee pointed out some of those PSUs had expressed th e opinion that as 
a non-operator they were at the receiving end. In reply the Chairman, ONGC further stated 
as under : 
“We submit that it is the other way round.  ONGC does not need funding.  So, it 
does not need a financial partner.  If so mebody does not have the capability, he 
cannot give me technology.  So, I have no need, as ONGC, to take anyone in 
exploration effort.  But it is a fact t hat we have taken IOC, BPCL, HPCL and GAIL 
with us.  It is essentially because, to be very honest, IOC had taken the initiative.  As 
regards, BPC and HPC – when they came to us last year, we said okay, we take 
you provided you give us supply and distribution chain access to the whole country. 
It is because it does not make any sens e for us to build another chain for 
distribution.  So, it was a commercial deal between two sets of companies.  It is an 
opportunity cost. Because for them, to get into exploration business will take 20 
years.  And for us, to build a national distribution chain will take 20 years.  That does 
not make any sense.  So, it is a busi ness deal.  But, when we go abroad as ONGC 
Videsh, partnership is something which is preferred.” 
 

 135
CHAPTER – VI  
 
A ONGC VIDESH LIMITED  
 
6.1 ONGC Videsh Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of ONGC, is engaged in overseas 
exploration and production of oil and gas to supplement the reserves of the parent 
company ONGC and to augment the national e nergy security. It was incorporated on 5 th 
March 1965 as Hydrocarbon India Pvt. Ltd. with its Re gistered Office at New Delhi, while 
formalizing the contracts to explore for pet roleum in Iran and was re-named as “ONGC 
Videsh Limited” (OVL) in 1989. 
 
Mission/Vision/Objectives of the company are as below: 
 
VISION  
“To be a world class E&P company having an Organization & Culture committed towards 
Sustainable Growth & Superior Profitability thr ough pursuit of International Opportunities & 
Excellence in Execution.”  
 
MISSION 
 
“By 2025 contribute 60MMTPA of Equity Oil and Gas” 
 
OBJECTIVES 
 
To support India’s oil and gas security. 
To get at par with international oil and gas companies. 
Build investment confidence and financial position. 
Be the strongest Indian player in the international E&P. 
Build excellent relations. 
 
6.2 On Exploration and production – activities  undertaken by OVL since inception and 
their outcome OVL in their note stated as under:- 
The company made two discoveries “Rustam & Raksh” in Iran, but the contract was 
terminated in 1979, during the nationalization drive of the oil and gas assets in Iran. 
In 1975 company performed a service contract in Iraq, which led to discoveries but 
the same did not meet the minimum thres hold limit set out by the authorities and 
therefore, further development could not be carried out.  
 

 136
The company also carried out small services  contracts in Tanzania (1975-77), Iraq 
(1982-84), Sri Lanka (1987-90), Abu Dhabi (1987-90), Malaysia (1988-91), Thailand 
(1989-90) & Bhutan (1988-90).   
 
OVL carried out Exploration in Egypt in 1993, Tunisia in 199 5 and Yemen in 1996, 
where the company participated in these projects in Joint Venture with international 
companies. Exploratory wells were drill ed in these projects but no commercial 
discoveries could be made. 
 
The Production Sharing Contract (PSC) fo r exploration in Vi etnam Offshore Blocks 
was signed by OVL on 19 May 1988 with PetroVietnam (PV), the national petroleum 
company of Vietnam. Subsequently in 1992,  OVL farmed-out 30% and 15% of its 
participating interest in the Block to BP and State Oil respectively. Contractor Parties 
had further concluded the assignment of 15% participating in terest in the project to 
PetroVietnam. OVL also assigned its shar e of 10% participating interest to 
PetroVietnam w.e.f. 1998. As a result of the exploration and appr aisal work done in 
the Contract Area, natural gas reserves in commercial quantities were discovered in 
two gas fields known as Lan Tay a nd Lan Do in 1992/19 93. All the major 
commercial agreements for exploitation of gas were concluded. The development of 
the Lan Tay gas field had been taken up in Phase 1 as per approved development 
plan. Lan Tay / Lan Do field is the firs t non-associated offshore gas development in 
Vietnam and there, the development of reserves required simultaneous construction 
of Gas transportation and processing facilities and end use facilities. The 
commercial production of Gas from the Vietnam project started in January, 2003.  
 
It is evident from above that OVL had low prof ile till 2000. In the year 2000, special 
empowerment was granted to OVL which pushed up the activities of OVL. In the 
year 2001, OVL acquired 20% stake in discove red Sakhalin-1 project in Russia. In 
2003, OVL acquired 25% stake in oil produc ing Greater Nile Oil Project in Sudan. 
Besides this, OVL also acquired stakes in  exploration projects in Iran, Iraq, 
Myanmar, Sudan, Libya, Syria,  Australia and Ivory Coas t. At present OVL has two 
producing assets i.e. Vietnam and GNOP  Sudan and One devel opment asset i.e. 
Sakhalin-1 and 10 exploration blocks. No w the company has E&P interest in 10 
countries.   

 137
6.3 The expenditure incurred by OVL durin g the last 10 years on exploration and 
development and production activities was stated to be as under  
(Rs. in Crores) 
Year Expenditure on Exploration 
and Development 
Expenditure on Production 
1994-95 (0.13)* -
1995-96 44.12 -
1996-97 57.06 -
1997-98 33.11 -
1998-99 10.61 -
1999-00 38.81 -
2000-01 79.42 -
2001-02 2360.82** -
2002-03 4919.99** 105.16
2003-04 2165.77** 1983.89
 
* Minor figure adjustment towards operati on expenditure in Vietnam operation. 
 
**  upto 2000-01 expenditure was mainly on exploration activities.  From 2001-02, 
expenditure include cost of development and acquisition of projects including carry finance 
for Sakhalin-1 project. 
 
B OVL’S SHARE IN WORLD RESERVES 
6.4 Details of oil and gas reserves of various companies and OVL’s share in those 
reserve are given below:- 
Oil:  Proved reserves 
  At end 2003 
  
Thousand 
million 
tonnes 
Share of 
World 
Total 
OVL's  Share at 31 st  
March, 2004 
 USA  4.2 2.70% 0.0
 Canada  2.3 1.50% 0.0
 Mexico  2.2 1.40% 0.0
 Total North America  8.8 5.50% 0.0
 Venezuela  10.8 6.80% 0.0

 138
 Other S. & Cent. America  3.3 2.10% 0.0
 Total S. & Cent. America  14.1 8.90% 0.0
 Kazakhstan  1.2 0.80% 0.0
 Norway  1.4 0.90% 0.0
 Russian Federation  9.6 6.00% 0.0614
 Other Europe & Eurasia  2.4 1.50% 0.0
 Total Europe & Eurasia  14.6 9.20% 0.0614
 Iran  18.1 11.40% 0.0
 Iraq  15.9 10.00% 0.0
 Kuwait  13.3 8.40% 0.0
 Oman  0.8 0.50% 0.0
 Qatar  2.1 1.30% 0.0
 Saudi Arabia  36.3 22.90% 0.0
 Syria  0.3 0.20% 0.0
 United Arab Emirates  13.5 8.50% 0.0
 Other Middle East  0.1 0.10% 0.0
 Total Middle East  100.5 63.30% 0.0
 Algeria  1.6 1.00% 0.0
 Angola  1.2 0.80% 0.0
 Libya  5.0 3.10% 0.0
 Nigeria  4.7 3.00% 0.0
 Sudan  0.1 0.10% 0.0204
 Other Africa  1.5 0.90% 0.0
 Total Africa  14.1 8.90% 0.0204
 Australia  0.6 0.40% 0.0
 China  3.3 2.10% 0.0
 India  0.8 0.50% 0.0
 Indonesia  0.6 0.40% 0.0
 Malaysia  0.6 0.30% 0.0
 Vietnam  0.3 0.20% 0.0007
 Other Asia Pacific  0.4 0.30% 0.0
 Total Asia Pacific  6.6 4.20% 0.0007
 
 TOTAL WORLD  158.8 100.00% 0.0825
 

 139
 From the above it is noted that OVL’s share in world’s oil reserves was a minuscule 
o.0825% only. 
 
6.5 Asked as to what efforts were being made by OVL to acquire more and more 
overseas equity. In reply, Chairman ONGC  during his evidence before the Committee 
stated as under :- 
 “we go abroad as ONGC Videsh  partnersh ip is something which is preferred.  
Today, we have invested about three billion dollars in o il and gas abroad.  Our 
acquisition cost for the properties, that we have taken, is barely one dollar per 
barrel.  Now, if you produce in India or in  Sudan, the production cost is well below 
ten dollars per barrel.  Fr eight from Sudan or Middle-Ea st to India would be 2-4 
dollar per barrel depending upon the freight market situation.  Now the reason for 
taking equity overseas is that we can get o il and gas to India at a cost of about 15 
dollars per barrel whereas the market pric e of the same oil today is around 50 
dollars.  Now, everyone knows that game.  That is why when we go and negotiate, 
they want us to buy their reserves.  There are models based on which the net 
present value is calculated.  We can buy any  amount of oil at market price.  But, 
once we make a capital investment, we c an get an arbitrage of 20-25 dollars for the 
life of the field.  This is the real benefit.  This is why, all over the world, the majors – 
mostly the American companies plus Sh ell and B.P. from Europe – have been 
operating in 80-100 countries.  We are nowhere.  This is the market today.  If today 
anything is offered for sale, we can buy it. But, somebody has to first offer its 
reserves for sale. We cannot buy at our  choice.  ONGC is fighting out every 
opportunity.  We win some; we lose some.   
 
 At this point, I must acknowledge that  our present Minister has taken some 
very serious initiatives to commercial and diplomatic efforts in overseas/ 
investments.  Last week itself, he had a meeting with the Foreign Minister, and 
some of our former Ambassadors, who have worked in major capitals, and they 
have worked out a certain road-map.   In my experience, it is  for the first time that I 
have seen the Minister of External Affairs and the Mini ster for Petroleum Natural 
Gas sitting together to work out as to how to go about it. They considered a number 
of suggestions, including some of the sugges tions that you have made, that there 
should a permanent placement of a foreign service officer, the Ambassadors should 
be regularly briefed and all that.” 
 
6.6 To a question by Committee on the procedure adopted by OVL in carrying out its 
overseas exploration/production activities, OVL stated:- 
A company operating alone in the international E&P business is unitarily exposed to 
risks, where as the risk in a consortium get proportionately reduced and mitigated in 

 140
cases where strong partners are the members. It is always beneficial to have multi-
partner consortia both for the host country and for the investors in the opportunity. 
 
Due to the complex nature of the overseas E&P operations, in the past the company 
has deliberately followed the po licy of working in the mult i partner consortium under 
the operator-ship of strong internationally reputed E&P companies.  The company 
followed this model of operation for Vietnam , Sakhalin, Myanmar and other project. 
Now with the confidenc e built through encouraging part icipation in International 
Consortiums like in Vietnam, Sakhalin, USA, Myanmar, other countries with BP, 
Exxon, Daewoo etc, OVL intends to take more of independent operator-ship projects 
in the focus countries. The company has ta ken up the operator-ship in Iran for Farsi 
block in which OVL is the lead partner in the consortium of Indian PSUs (OIL & 
IOC).  It also has 100% stake in Block 8 in Iraq with operator ship position. The 
company is also a joint operator in the Greater Nile Oil Projec t in Sudan, where 
approx 50 secondees on OVL are working. 
 
 
C OVL’s PRODUCTION 
6.7 OVL’s production of oil and gas from the ov erseas fields started from January, 2003. 
Actual production vis-à-vis target fixed during 2002-03 and 2003-04 was as under :- 
 2002-03 2003-04 
 Plan Actual Plan Actual 
OIL (MMT) 
(Including 
Condensate) 
- 0.183 - 3.345 
GAS (BCM) 0.23 0.07 0.60 0.523 
TOTAL (O+OEG) 0.23 0.253 0.60 3.868 
 
6.8 When asked to give reasons for shortfall in  achieving the targets, OVL in their note 
stated that:- 
The actual gas production from Block 06.1,  Vietnam during 2002-03 was 0.07 BCM 
as compared to the plan target of 0.23 BCM. The actual production was lower as the 
commercial production of gas started fr om January, 2003 as a gainst planned in 
November, 2002 as the buyer  PetroVietnam was not ready with the downstream 
facilities. Moreover, the initial nomination of gas quantity by the buyer was less than 
planned quantity. 
 

 141
Further, the difference in production of  gas during 2003-04 i.e. 0.523 BCM as 
against plan of 0.60 BCM is marginally lower due to lower nomination of gas 
quantity by the buyer. 
 
6.9 Explaining in detail the per formance of OVL so far, its future plans to acquire oil 
acreage and augment production, a representative of OVL durin g his evidence before the 
Committee stated as under :- 
“Coming to performance, we have just got 600 staff in Delhi. Whenever we have a 
requirement, we take people from ONGC. We  were earlier making losses and there 
was a case for us to be taken to the BIFR  because of the losses. In 2004, we have 
emerged as the second largest oil producer in terms of oil and gas reserves. We are 
second only to ONGC and we expect to be amongst th e 50 largest companies in 
terms of revenues and profits. As per t he ET-500 list, although we are not a listed 
company, our position should be around 40 th or 42 nd at present in terms of gross 
revenues. 
 
As I mentioned, we have just two produc ing fields in Vietnam and Sudan. The 
production in Vietnam has started in January 2003. We just had a limited production 
last year. This is a full year operation when we had oil production of 3.345 MT and 
523 MMCM of gas. ONGC has the largest reserve, with a reserve of 699 million 
tonnes. OVL had 199 million tonnes of re serve as on March 31, 2004 and Oil India 
had 178 million tonnes. So, we have been  able to emerge as the second largest, 
after our parent company ONGC, in terms of our distribution. 
 
Our expenditure at present should conti nue on our exploration projects. It is less 
than one per cent. We think that we can increase the exploration commitment to a 
reasonably good level so that we  are able to have a balanced portfolio in terms of 
our investment distribution and commitments in terms of gross revenue. 
 
As I mentioned, we start ed producing only in January, 2003. We had very small 
revenues prior to that. It was Rs. 39 crore in 2001-02, Rs. 233 crore in 2003-04. The 
same is also reflected in terms of prof its. We had started ear ning profits only in 
1996-97. Last year, we had a profit of Rs. 59 crore but in 2003-04, as a result of 
acquisition of the Sudan oil block, we we re able to increase our revenues and our 
profit up to Rs. 428 crore. 
 
In terms of earning per share, our earning per share has again shown a significant 
jump.   As far as debt equity ratio is c oncerned, we take our entire finance from 
ONGC which is our parent company in terms of the finances, technical and 
manpower support.  Despite that we have b een able to improve our profits and we 
have been able to reduce our debt equity rati o which went up to 14:1 last year to 
10:1. 
 
In terms of future, I as mentioned, if we are to maintain 30 per cent self-sufficiency 
and considering the projects for oil consumption by 2025, we will have to have 60 to 
66 million tonnes by 2025.   Currently, we just have four million tonnes and 

 142
approximately three million ton nes from Sudan oil project - one billion cubic metre 
which is equivalent to one mi llion tonne of oil e quivalent gas - from Vietnam four 
million tonnes and by the time Sakhalim project goes in full production from 2006 
onwards, that should give us on peak production basis, entit lement for 2-1/2 million 
tonnes of oil which makes to 6 ½ million t onnes.  So, we have a large gap to fill. 
That is why we are trying to get an explor ation position as well as position in good 
assets in many other regions of the world. 
 
Now, this is just in terms of the chart that we stand here and we have to reach here, 
maybe after Sakhalim we should be able to  reach around 6-1/2 to 7 million tonnes, 
but the ultimate goal is here for which we are striving.” 
 
6.10 On being asked as to whether OVL had su fficient trained manpower and state-of-the 
art technology to take care of its exploration activities abroad, extent of inadequacy and the 
steps taken/proposed to be taken to overcome them, representatives   of OVL stated as 
under:- 
However, with the expa nsion of its activities, the Company needs to add to its 
manpower strength by inducting more exper ts from ONGC besides expanding its 
functional directors on Board.  In order to cross fertilis e the talent, Company also 
proposes to hire experts including expats on contractual terms. 
 
 
D ASSESSMENT OF PERFORMANCE OF OVL 
 
6.11 To a question put by the Committee as to whether any asse ssment with regard to 
the performance of OVL vis-à-vis other majors in other countries had been made.  OVL in 
their note stated as under:- 
In most of the projects OVL is working in the multi partner consortium with the 
operator-ship of strong internationally  reputed E&P companies.  The company 
followed this model of operation for Viet nam, Sakhalin, Myanmar, and other project. 
In Vietnam project OVL is partner with British Petroleum as the Operator and 
PetroVietnam, a Vietnamese Government-ow ned entity. In Sakhalin-1 project, OVL 
is partner with Exxon-NefteGas Ltd., a subs idiary of Exxon-Mobil as the operator, 
Sodeco, a consortium of Japanese companies and balance SMNG-S and RN Astra, 
two Russian Government controlled entities.  In GNOP project, OVL is jointly 
operating with China National Petroleum Company, Petronas Carigali Overseas Sdn 
Berhad, a subsidiary of the Malaysian National Oil Co mpany Petronas and Sudan 
National Oil Company (Sudapet). Similarly in  Myanmar project OVL is partner with 
Daewoo International Corporation (DIC) as the Operator; KOGAS, Korea  and GAIL 
(India) Ltd..  
 
Though no comparative analysi s of OVL performance with international majors has 
been done, the performance of the company has been quite good in the past few 

 143
years. OVL’s  equity share in oil and oil equivalent gas production from Vietnam and 
Sudan project increased from just 0. 252 MMT in 2002-03 to 3.868 MMT during 
2003-04. The balance proved reserves of the company stood at 199 MMT (O+OEG) 
as on 31st March, 2004. OVL earned a co nsolidated gross revenue of Rs. 3502 
crores during 2003-04, up 1404% from Rs. 233 crores in 2002-03 and earned a 
consolidated net profit of Rs. 428 crores during 2003-04, up 626% from Rs. 59 
crores in 2002-03. 
 
6.12 When asked as to whether OVL was facing competition from international 
companies and if so, how it  proposed  to deal with them.  OVL in their note stated that :- 
“The international oil and gas assets acquisition environment  is very competitive. 
Companies from oil and gas deficit nations  such as China pose serious competition 
to OVL.  Similarly companies from developed world such as USA, Canada & Europe 
also pose competiton to OVL.   
 
OVL competes with these companies in the open offerings of oil and gas blocks, 
however it also partners some  of the companies in the existing portfolio of assets. 
The competition and partici pation is on case to case basis.  The strongest 
competition is being posed by the majo r oil companies and by Chinese and 
Malaysian companies.”  
 
6.13 Asked to indicate the details the deals lo st by OVL in the re cent past and reasons 
for losing the deal, OVL in their note stated:- 
(i) In the recent past, OVL has lost  and/or has been put at a disadvantageous 
position in respect of the following two good oil & gas acquisition opportunities: 
 
Block 3&7:  OVL had proposed to acquire 11% Partic ipating Interest (P.I.) in Block 
3&7, in Sudan.  6% interest from one party and 5% interest with another party in the 
project. OVL reached at an agreem ent with the seller of 5% PI. It was expected that 
the seller of 6% PI would also sell his share on same terms.  As per the agreement, 
seller granted exclusivity to OVL, which was valid till 31st January 2004 before 
which OVL was to seek all necessary ap provals and sign the agreement.  The 
Empowered Committee of Secretaries (E CS) considered the proposal on 19th 
December, 2003 and recommended the same for approval of CCEA.  The proposal 
for acquisition of 11% of Participating Inte rest (P.I.) in Project 3&7 was considered 
by the CCEA in its meeting held on 20 th January 2004, however, CCEA desired 
some details. 
 
As the decision of CCEA could not be obta ined in time and exclusivity with seller 
expired on 31st January 2004, the opportuni ty slipped out of OVL’s hands. In the 
meantime, the seller of 5% PI  also informed OVL that the other 6% holder of PI has 
sold its share to a Chines e Company at a high er price than w hat was agreed with 
OVL and the deal was no more available at same terms.   
 
(ii) Block 18, Angola:  With the approval of CCEA, OVL entered into a 
Sale and Purchase Agreement (SPA) with S hell for acquisition of its 50% stake in 

 144
Block 18, Angola on 7th April, 2004.  For cl osure of the transaction, waiver of pre-
emption rights and consent of BP as the ot her partner and Sonangol that of as the 
National Oil Company of Angola and Govt. of Angola were required. It is understood 
that in view of its undisclosed commitment  to Chinese, the Sonangol, the National 
Oil Company of Angola has pre-empted the deal. 
 
6.14 Explaining in deta il the reasons due to which OVL lost Angola deal.  Chairman, 
ONGC during evidence stated as under: 
“Angola is a small country with huge reserves o ff-shore.  In fact, western Africa is a 
major area.  BP and Shell had fifty-fifty propriety but Shell wanted to sell it share. 
 
CNPC and ONGC were negotiating with Shel l.  On commercial negotiations, we 
beat CNPC and signed with Shell for the property of 5 million tonne of crude per 
year.  This is a very, very attractive pr oposition.  While we won commercially, India 
lost diplomatically.  Alleged ly, Chinese have offered them 2 billion dollar credit line 
over five years whereas the best we did 500  million and so on, so forth.  Reasons 
can be anything but the bottom line is, thes e are the countries where the President 
has the last word and we are now going to have to cope up with them. 
 
This is one of the reasons why today effort is being made to combine diplomacy and 
the point which I had made in that meeting was that it is not only diplomacy, also our 
aid efforts, we must take a total view, we need to l ook at the balance of trade, 
prospectivity of oil and gas, that kind of ai d we are giving to wh ich country and then 
make a composite effort, which is what Ch ina is obviously doing.  The point which 
was appreciated by both the Ministers and also  senior diplomats  who were present 
that we need to take these five things into one; oil and gas negotiations, aid that we 
give, diplomatic effort per se and the fourth thing is, in certain situations defence 
sales, which  would be an important issue in many of these negotiations.  Finally, 
there are situations where today the President of France personally travels to 
negotiate the deal from China.  We need to take it at that level.  In Angola itself on a 
commercial contract dispute, President  personally intervened to get the issue 
resolved for the French company.  At the end of the day, we need to put in the 
whole weight of the country to get some of these deals.   
 
We have one major bottleneck.  Many of t hese deals in many co untries involve pay 
off.  As a Government company, there is no way we can do that.  But that is the 
handicap which has to be resolved by other means. With the new initiative, I would 
hope for better.” 
 
6.15 Asked by the Committee as to whether any  difficulties were being faced by OVL in 
carrying out exploration activities. In reply,  OVL in their note stated that they were facing 
following constraints: 
 
a) Enhancement of the Board of  Directors; OVL currently has two full time Director, 
Managing Director and Direct or (Finance). Two additional posts of Directors 
have been requested, which needs expedi tous creation. The DPE is currently 
examining the matter.  

 145
b) Enhancement of Empowerment of OVL;  The matter was discussed in the COS, 
which recommends the enhancement of the empowerment to Rs 300 crore from 
Rs 200 crore. DPE has to present the note before the Cabinet on this matter. 
c) Confidentiality of the acquisitions; The sharing of  the information with various 
agencies in the approval process results in the spread of the information of the 
possible acquisition of OVL, which causes loss of faith in OVL in the seller and 
also leads to embarrassments to the OVL. In some cases the stocks of the seller 
get effected due the leakage of the information on the divestment. The existing 
process does not warrant confidentiality and excessiv e interests of agencies 
unconcerned in the decision making impacts international image of OVL. 
d) Diplomatic support in overseas acquisitions; In view of the fierce competition 
from other multinational companies in acquisition of oil and gas fields abroad, the 
diplomatic support is very essential for successful acquisitions abroad. 
e) Increase in Authorized and Paid-up Share Capital: the Board of Directors of OVL 
in their 277th Board Meeting held on 28 th April, 2004 decided to take approval of 
the Government for increase in the authorized share capital of OVL from Rs. 500 
crore to Rs. 5000 crore and paid-up share capital from Rs. 300 crore to Rs. 1000 
crore. The matter is currently under consideration of administrative ministry. 
 
6.16 The representatives of IOC during thei r discussion with t he Committee drew the 
attention of the Committee towards the problems being faced by them in not being able to 
pursue  E&P activities in India and abroad in dependently. Elaborating further IOC in its 
note submitted to the Committee stated as under :- 
Due to limited resources and expertise in  E&P business, IOC opted the route of 
collaborative participation with experienc ed companies like ONGC/OVL, OIL, GAIL, 
GSPC, Premier Oil, etc and has been continuing this approach for 
domestic/overseas E&P opportunities for quit e some time now. Howe ver, in view of 
other companies’ own business interests and strategies, IOC’s E&P aspirations are 
not being fully met.  
 
For the overseas E&P business activiti es, from the very beginning IOC has been 
working with OVL. However, the current  participation is not  commensurate with 
IOC’s upstream business aspirations. OVL has been designated as the nodal 
agency by MOP&NG for overseas upstream  opportunities. IOC has been pursuing 
its greater participation as an equity partner in all the overseas ventures of OVL with 
MOP&NG. Despite continued efforts in this  direction, no significant progress has 
been made so far. Therefore, IOC shoul d be allowed to pursue overseas E&P 
opportunities independently while  avoiding any competition/c onflict of interests with 
other PSUs. Such a freedom will ensure greater overseas participation by IOC, 
thereby contributing in nation’s efforts for enhancing oil security. 
 
IOC possesses adequate financial and manager ial capabilities for carrying out E&P 
business. As regards devel opment of specific skil l set, the corporation has 
embarked upon the strategy of  inorganic growth through acquisition of a suitable 
overseas E&P company. The acquisition of  an overseas E&P company, which will 
become the E&P arm of IOC, will not only deliver required skill set and expertise but 

 146
also generate international a cceptance for IOC’s role of operatorship. Such a move 
will provide IOC the platform for pursuing all E&P activities and expand its E&P 
business portfolio. 
 
6.17 Pointing out that in case IOC pursues E&P activities independently a conflict may 
arise with OVL particularly if both were pursuing the same opportunity abroad, which will be 
detrimental to interest of both IOC & OV L. The Committee asked IOC to give their 
comment in reply, IOC in their note further stated as under :- 
To avoid conflict/competition with OVL, the regions/countri es where the two entities 
will pursue opportunities may be divided based on geographical boundaries. With 
such an approach OVL and IOC can focu s on emerging opportunities in their 
respective regions. The regions where IOC is better placed and would derive greater 
values from the upstream ventures should be allocated to IOC. All other regions of 
the world may be demarcated as OVL’s r egions for pursuing upstream business. 
OVL already has established its presence in Russia, Vietnam  and Sudan and has 
recently been pursuing an acqu isition deal in Angola. T herefore, OVL can continue 
to explore further opportunities in t hese countries. The geographical regions 
suggested for OVL and IOC are summarized below: 
 
IOC 
 
South and South East countries includin g Australiasia (e.g Nepal, Bangladesh, 
Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines, Brunei, Papua New 
Guinea, Australia and New Zealand), Middle East and African regions. 
 
 
OVL 
 
Far East countries viz Japan, Korea, China and Vietnam; North America (USA, 
Canada, Mexico), Central & Latin America; Europe (i ncluding North Sea); Russia 
and CIS countries; and Sudan & Angola (Africa) etc. 
 
E MERGER AND ACQUISITION 
6.18 During their discussion wit h Committee the representative s of IOC submitted that 
their proposal for merger and acquisition deals pertaining to domestic as well as overseas 
upstream projects were required to be clear ed at appropriate level in Government. 
Therefore, a fast track dispensation mechanism on the lines of ECS (Empowered 

 147
Committee of Secretaries) r oute, presently available to OVL, should also be made 
available to IOC. Giving justification, IOC in their note stated as under :- 
IOC has been granted Navratna status under  which its Board can decide on 
establishment of financial joint ventures a nd wholly owned subsid iaries in India or 
abroad with equity investment limited to Rs. 200 crores or 5% of net worth in any 
one project and up to 15 percent of the net  worth of the company in all joint 
ventures/subsidiaries put together. In regard to merger with and/or acquisition of any 
other business entities or ma jor business activities, prio r approval of the Govt. is 
required to be obtained. Further, prevaili ng DPE guidelines necessitate prior Govt. 
approval for executing any Merger and Acquisition (M&A) deal. 
 
It is noteworthy that overseas upstream opportunities require large capital 
investments (generally exceedi ng the limits of power of Navratna Board) and often 
involve acquisitions of assets of/interests in foreign entities in whole or in part. 
Hence, IOC’s proposals for M&A investment s pertaining to domestic as well as 
overseas upstream projects are required to  be cleared at appropriate levels in Govt. 
The existing process sometimes leads to situations where some prospective 
opportunities may be lost on account of procedural limitations. 
 
In view of the fact that bidding and participation decisio ns with respect to upstream 
opportunities are required to be taken in  a narrow time window and to circumvent 
the above procedural lim itations, a provision has been made by the Govt. which 
provides a single window clearance  to OVL  through ECS for overseas upstream 
projects irrespective of investments involved. 
 
Therefore, it is imperative that a fast track dispensatio n mechanism similar to one 
presently available to OVL, should also be made available to IOC. Such a process 
would also avoid situations where some pr ospective opportunities  may be lost on 
account of existing procedural limitations. 
 
Alternatively, IOC Board should be empower ed to take decision in all matters of 
acquisition of overseas E&P assets as well as for establishment of joint ventures 
and wholly owned subsidiaries in India or abroad with no ceil ing on individual 
projects. Also in the case of merger & acquisition (M&A), IOC Board should be given 
absolute power. Such decisions shall be taken considering various commercial 
parameters i.e. cost of  acquisition per boe (barrel oil eq uivalent), rate of return etc. 
which can be suitably bench marked by IOC Board.  
 
 
6.19 Pointing out towards present DPE guid elines which require prior Government 
approval for executing any merger and acqui sition deals, Committee asked from the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas as to whether Ministry proposed to modify these 

 148
guidelines to enable speedy deci sions by the oil companies. In reply the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas stated :- 
As per the DPE O.M No. 3 (2)2003-D PE (Fin.)/GL XVI dated 11-2-2003, the 
Central Government’s public enterprises are required to take prior approval of the 
Government in regard to merger with and / or acquisition of any other business 
entities or major business activities.  This  is applicable to all the Central PSUs 
irrespective of their financial status or grant of Navratana/Mini-Ratna status etc. 
 
There is no proposal under consideration of this Ministry to suggest modification of 
these guidelines. 
 
6.20 To a question as to whether Ministry propos ed to make available to oil PSUs in India 
a fast track dispensation mechanism on the lines of Empowerment Committee of 
Secretaries (ESC) route presen tly available to OVL to enable them take decisions on 
merger and acquisition proposals and also on other exploration ac tivities. The Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas in their note stated as under :- 
Major oil PSUs have been given Navratna stat us where by they enjoy delegation of 
powers including decision making powers for investment.  Any constraint or decision 
requiring Government approval are process ed by this Ministry expeditiously and 
efforts would be to streamline approval pr ocesses keeping in view the objective of 
domestic exploration and production and acquiring equity oil abroad. 
 
 
F MERGER OF OIL COMPANIES 
 
6.21 Committee asked from the r epresentatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
as to whether there was any proposal to mer ge all the national oil companies in order to 
have synergy amongst them and to enable them to  compete effectively in international 
market.  In reply, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their note stated as under:- 
Public sector oil companies’ strategies undergo constant changes with a view to 
improving their core competency and bus iness prospects.  The Oil companies 
analyse and evaluate various options, on a continuous basis, for developing an 
integrated approach to their growth and diversification.  However, there is no 
specific proposal under consideration of the Government to merge all the national oil 
companies. 
 
 

 149
6.22 On the issue of merger of oil com panies.  ONGC and OIL submitted as under: 
ONGC 
 
With the launching of NELP-rounds the upstream sector of  exploration and 
production of domestic basins have opene d up and during the past three rounds 
ONGC has bagged approx. 60% of the basins  for which exploration rights have 
been granted.  As such it is competing e ffectively with the other private and MNCs 
for acquiring exploration ri ghts which, given the geology of the basins have to be 
carried out on the strength of ONGC’s balance sheet only.  
 
In the downstream segment at present t here are three major PSU players but with 
the dismantling of APM, this sector is also opening up and  two major private 
companies have already entered the return marketing segment besides putting up 
their own refineries. Though with the acquisi tion of majority stake in MRPL, ONGC 
has achieved entry into downstream refi ning business, but the same remains 
inadequate commensurate to its own annual production. 
 
Globally  all major hydrocarbon com panies (Exxon Mobil with approx. 10 times 
market cap of ONGC) are achieving synergistic integration through dynamic portfolio 
management and mergers.   As such in the Indian context merger of oil companies, 
as being envisaged, will facilitate leveraging of competence in the entire 
hydrocarbon chain and  will have following salient benefits :  
 
 
 
 
Integrated approach in meeting hydrocarbons security for the country. 
Strong balance sheet of merged compani es will pose effective competition to 
existing global MNCs thereby facilitat ing chances of oil / gas property 
acquisition abroad. 
Communality of utilities and infrastructure  facilities would ensure more cost 
effective operation, consumers being the ultimate beneficiaries. 
 
OIL INDIA LIMITED 
 
OIL’s current activities (except for NELP blocks) are limited to onshore areas while 
major share of ONGCL’s production comes fr om offshore fields. Larger investments 
required for offshore operations and the consequent higher returns provide an 
inherent advantage to ONGCL as far as size and magnitude of operations are 
concerned. However if a comparison is ma de considering only onshore operations 
the performance of the two companies compares well. In effect OIL’s productivity in 
its areas of operations in t he North East compared to ON GCL’s in contiguous areas 
is provably higher. 
 
 Internationally E&P companies with OIL’s  size and resources – physical, financial 
and people, operate over la rge geographical spheres.  OIL possesses inherent 
capabilities and strength to expand its busi ness horizon under a level playing field 
both within the country and abroad. 
 

 150
Further major operations of OIL are confi ned to the geographically, geologically and 
politically difficult North East region and the Company is closely linked to the 
development of the area. P eople of the region closely i dentify themselves with OIL 
inspite of the fact that ONGCL operates nearby.  
 
It is therefore necessary from  both, the Company’s as well  as the region’s points of 
views for OIL to maintain its separate identity. 
 
E&P activities the world over are highly co mpetitive and capital intensive by nature. 
Larger players because of their inherent size, financial powers and relationships 
have natural advantages to succeed in this business. In recent times, there have 
been initiatives by all petroleum PSUs to acquire overseas properties, either alone 
or in consortium. Strategic alliances betwe en PSUs with different but complimentary 
strengths to take up such initiatives will provide the benefits of scale and size on one 
hand and help synergies to de velop between different co re competences of the 
alliance partners on the other. As against this , merger of two or more oil companies 
for taking up E&P activities abroad will lead to forcible clubbing of distinctly different 
work cultures of the individual companies. Th is is likely to generate cultural friction 
effecting productivity of the new entity. Further under the Indian scenario the general 
benefits expected out of mergers and acquisitions such as reduced manpower costs 
due to right sizing, lower overheads etc., can not be realized. 
 
In view of all of above we feel that merger of oil companies for taking up E&P 
activities overseas may not be the optimal course of action. A better solution would 
be to encourage such companies with different but complimentary core 
competencies to form strategic alliances to take up such activities. 
 
 
6.23 During evidence the Committee asked the representatives of OIL as to why OIL 
should not be merged with ONGC.  In reply a representative of OIL stated as under:- 
“In our assessment every company has its own specialised characteristics and its 
own culture.  We have tremendous amount of respect for ONGC.  At the same time, 
I would like to submit that we are also known as a different company with different 
working culture. 
 
In case of Oil India, we beg to submit that since we have been working for about five 
decades in the North-Eastern parts of t he country, our assessment, in general, is 
that the people from the North-Eastern region identify themselves with our Company 
very closely.  What we feel is that if there is a straight- forward merger, it may not be 
received with willingness.” 

 151
CHAPTER VII 
 
 
A ALTERNATE  SOURCES  OF  ENERGY 
 
7.1 Besides intensifying expl oration and production efforts in  India and abr oad, there is 
an imperative need to develop alternate sources of energy. So as to reduce India’s 
dependence on imported crude oil and save prec ious foreign exchange out go. As per a 
note furnished to the Committee by the Minist ry of Petroleum & Natural Gas several 
important steps have been taken by the Governm ent to increase the pace of exploration 
and to enhance oil and gas produce which inter-alia include exploring alternate source of 
energy such as Coal Bed Methane (CBM) and Gas Hydrate. 
 
7.2 DGH has also identified  two unconvent ional sources of hydrocarbon energy for 
development 
7.3 Emphasizing the need to develop alternat e sources of energy if India had to achieve 
self sufficiency in energy the chairman ONGC during briefing to the committee stated :- 
“As far as self-reliance is concerned, I ndia can become self-reliant in energy, but 
can never become self-reliant in  oil and gas.  It is because, from what we know, we 
have 0.4 per cent of oil and gas reserves , which is estimated at about 32 billion 
tonnes at present.  We have 15 per cent of world’s population and our average 
consumption of oil and gas today is about 180 kg. per year as against the world 
average of 550 kg.  We are one-third of world average.  The average consumption 
in U.S. is 900 plus.  For India, every kg. increase per year means one billion kg.  So, 
if you want to go from 200 kg to 600 kg., we need 400 billion kg s. of additional oil 
and gas.  So, with 15 per cent of world’s population and 0.4 per cent of reserves, we 
can never become self-reliant.  We can, of course, step up our production.  As I 
said, from the present domestic level of 50 million tonnes, we hope that we can have 
65 million tonnes domestically, more from  overseas plus discoveries – small, 
medium and large – we can bring them to lif e.  But, given the fact that by 2025 A.D., 
our oil and gas demand is like to go to 350 million tonnes from t he present level of 
120 million tonnes, we can never become self-reliant.  Even if our population 
remains at what it is at present, we do not have the reserves.  So, we will always 
have to import.  We do not have the advantage which the U.S. has.  They have 
decided to save their own oil reserves and keep on buying from abroad.  Otherwise 
energy-wise – from coal, hydel and nuclear – we can become self-reliant. 
 

 152
There are three new things on energy front.  One is coal-bed methane.  It is a 
significant input.  We propose to start its commercial production by 2007.  Second is 
gas hydrates.  We have very huge reserves on both coasts.  It will take probably 10-
15 years to start its commercial production.  In this regard, we are working with U.S., 
Canada, Japan.  Some of the work is being done in our laboratories also.  The major 
issue now launched is underground coal gasification.  It is a very exciting concept.  
We have coal below up to 400-800 metres whereas actual mining is generally done 
up to hundred metres or so.  Then, actual ly we take out only one-third while two-
thirds remain there.  In this respect, We  are working in collaboration with a Russian 
institute. So, these are the technologies which we are now going to introduce.” 
 
 
 
 

 153

 154
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 1 
FORMULATION / IMPLEMENTATI ON  OF  NATIONAL  
INTEGRATED  ENERGY  POLICY 
 
 The Committee note that current level of per capita 
consumption of primary energy in  India being at 285 kg of oil 
equivalent is amongst the lowest  in the world. However, the 
primary energy requirement of our country is increasing year 
after year. While in 1999 primary energy requirement was 304.0 
million tonnes of equivalent (m toe), in 2003 the requirement 
increased to 345.3 mtoe and the energy demand is projected to 
be 780 mtoe in 2020, which will make us along with China, US and 
Japan amongst the largest energy consumers globally.  
 At present, India’s energy re quirement is mainly met by 
fossil fuel i.e. oil, gas and coal. It  is estimated that to meet its 
energy requirement by 2020, Indi a will be required to get 730 
mtoe from fossil fuels. Amongst the three fossil fuel, the demand 
for oil and gas would be more, as they are relatively cleaner fuels. 
30% of current demand of oil in the country is being met through 
indigenous production and the rest i.e. 70% through imports. 
 As per India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025, 25% of total energy 
needs of the country would be met by oil sector by 2020. The 
Committee note that despite the fact that there has been a 
continuous surge in demand of crude oil, its production has 
remained almost static in the l ast five years, thereby further 

 155
widening the gap between demand and supply and making a big 
dent on country’s scarce forei gn exchange reserves. During 
2003-04, the estimated amount spent on import of crude oil was 
18268 US million dollar, which was more than double of the 
amount spent on import of crude oil in 1999-2000. Growing 
dependence on imported crude oil a nd soaring price of crude oil 
in international market which touched  an all time high at 55 $ per 
barrel, will not only drain our res ources but also further fritter 
away our scarce foreign exchange reserves. Needless to say that 
India’s economy is most vulnerab le to high oil prices and this 
vulnerability will increase as the economy grows in size and 
power. Besides the vulnerability of economy, huge dependence 
on imported crude oil may undermine national security in case of 
sudden disruption of supply through import which cannot be 
ignored on account of events and happenings in the regions from 
where crude supply is predominant. Viewed in this context, the 
energy security of the country is of paramount importance. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that  a National Integrated Energy 
Policy for the count ry should have been formulated and 
implemented long back to stem th e ongoing drift to wards energy 
crisis. 
 Surprisingly the issue of National Integrated Energy Policy 
– an integrated approach is still at a nascent stage as only 
discussions, being coordinated by Planning Commission, are 

 156
being held. A standing committee of Group of Ministers under the 
Chairmanship of the Minister of Power has also been constituted 
to study and formulate an energy  policy, which would include the 
implementation aspect also. 
 The Committee are, therefore, constrained to observe that 
since dependence, the Government had not addressed this issue 
of grave national importance having a bearing on economy and 
security of the country with the attention it deserved. 
 The Committee desire that expeditious steps should be 
taken to formulate and implement a dynamic National Integrated 
Energy Policy within a definite time-frame, so that the country 
moves away from excessive depe ndence on fossil-fuels based 
energy. The Committee feel that such a policy would ensure the 
security of our energy supplies and also would make it sure that 
our country does not become vulnerable to the vagaries of the 
global oil market. 

 157
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF HYDROCARBONS (DGH) 
 The Committee note that Government by a Resolution in 
1993 established Directorate Gene ral of Hydrocarbons (DGH) 
under the administrative  control of Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas with the following objectives: 
1. To provide technical advice to  Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas on exploration and exp loitation of hydrocarbon in 
India and abroad; 
2. To review the exploration programmes of companies 
engaged in  E&P activities; 
3. To reassess the hydrocarbon reserves discovered and 
estimated by the operating companies; 
4. To advise the Government on the offering of acreage for 
exploration; 
5. To review the development plans for commercial 
discoveries of hydrocarbon reser ves and advise Government on 
the adequacy of such plan and on future exploitation strategies; 
6. To review and  audit the management of Petroleum 
reservoirs; 
7. To maintain the E&P data base; and  
8. To advise Government on the la ying down of safety norms 
in oil field operations, prescribe pollution control measures and 
to assist in inspection and periodic safety audit. 

 158
 The Committee have been informed by some of the PSUs 
who have recently  ventured into E&P activities that non 
availability of data of adjoining blocks at the time of data viewing 
of a particular block on offer by Government and delay in 
availability of technical data of awarded blocks were some of the 
major constraints being experie nced by them in undertaking 
Exploration and Production activiti es.   There is no denying the 
fact that access to adequate data is necessary for making a 
proper assessment of the blocks offered. 
 Non availability of data at th e disposal of oil exploration 
companies will dissuade them to  undertake E&P activities in the 
Country.  To obviate such a situ ation, the Committee recommend 
that DGH should possess data on all Indian basins by obtaining it 
from all the explorers. The Committe e also feel that there is an 
imperative need for setting up of the  National E&P data base.   
The Committee note that DGH has taken some measures in this 
regard by conducting a feasibility  study . The Committee desire 
that based on the outcome of su ch a study, expeditious steps 
may be taken to set up the Nationa l data base and archives. It 
should be made mandatory for a ll companies to hand over a set 
of data collected by them to the archives, as this will help DGH 
and other companies to make a realistic assessment of the 
reserves of blocks offered to them. 

 159
 Despite being entrusted with  very important activities of 
monitoring and regulating India’s Hydrocarbon reserves, 
Exploration and Production activit ies within the country and 
abroad,  the  Committee note that   DGH does not have a cadre of 
its own and its manpower is  drawn from various PSUs, mainly 
ONGC and OIL on deputation.  ONGC and OIL are the two premier 
oil companies engaged in most of the Exploration and Production 
activities in the country and abroad.  The Committee feel that the  
manpower drawn  on deputation from the same Organisation, 
working of which DGH is mandate d to review and monitor, can 
hardly provide any effectiveness  to the functioning of DGH.  
Moreover, an Organisation, solely being manned by 
deputationists cannot provide continuity to its functioning.  In 
view of the important role  entrusted to DGH, the Committee 
recommend that DGH should have its own separate, independent 
cadre of staff and should be empo wered to take all decisions on 
the functions assigned to it . 

 160
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
NEW EXPLORATION LICENSING POLICY (NELP) 
 The Committee note that India today remains one of the 
least explored regions with well density per thousand sq. kms 
being among the lowest. To boost the level of exploration activity 
in the country so that new finds can be made and level of crude 
oil and gas produced may be increased, the New Exploration 
Licensing Policy (NELP) was formu lated by the Government of 
India in 1997.  NELP was operati onalised in 1999.  The Committee 
have been informed that NELP has considerably increased the 
exploration activities  of Indian sedimentary basins.  However, 
from the details of work programme and achievement of 
exploration blocks offered under NELP-I to IV, the Committee 
note that there was a huge shortfa ll in achievement of target 
pertaining to seismic survey  and drilling of blocks awarded 
under NELP II, III and IV.  As against the targets of conducting 
10415, 16320 and 12655 sq.km of 3D seismic survey the actual 
achievements were 11752 and  8072 and NIL sq km respectively.  
Position with regard to drilling of  wells is no better either.  As 
against the targets of  drilling of  52 and 57 wells under NELP II & 
III the actual number of explorato ry wells drilled were 34 and 1 
respectively.  The Committee are  unhappy over the slow pace of 
work being undertaken in seismic survey and drilling activities, 
and desire that DGH which is mandated to monitor and review the 

 161
exploration programme of Compani es engaged in E&P activities, 
should closely monitor the progress of exploration of all the 
blocks offered under NELP-I to IV and suggest corrective 
measures so that targets laid are achieved.   
 On NELP, Public sector companies engaged in E&P 
activities have informed the Committee that they are experiencing 
certain difficulties due to its present provisions.  They have 
suggested certain changes like providing of more incentives for 
frontier basins, more powers for approval to Management 
Committee related to phase extension assignments, special 
incentives for development of marginal fields, timely availability 
of data of blocks offered, according infrastructure industry status 
to E&P projects, granting of PEL  in shortest possible time, 
environmental clearance, and  awar ding of blocks on the basis of 
minimum work programme carried out.  
 The Committee desire that Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas should review all the suggestions with an open mind 
and take appropriate steps to modify  NELP so as to make it more 
attractive and conducive to the needs of the companies engaged 
in E&P activities.  The Committee also desire that NELP should 
be reviewed and modified periodi cally to ensure that terms of 
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) are comparable to the best of 
terms of PSC  offered by any count ry in the world- so that more 

 162
and more companies from India a nd abroad could be attracted to 
bid for exploration blocks offered  under NELP. 
 NELP should be reviewed in such a way that all PSUs 
engaged in E&P activities should be given preference over other 
companies in the bidding taking into account their capabilities to 
undertake the venture. Thereafter preference may be accorded to 
domestic private sector E&P comp anies over foreign companies 
in the matter of awarding of blocks under NELP. 

 163
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
SEDIMENTARY BASINS 
 The Committee note that I ndia has an endowment of 26 
sedimentary basins stretching over an area of 1.39 million sq. km. 
on land and 1.75 million sq. km. Offshore, including the vast 
stretch of sedimentary basin ar ea measuring 1.35 million sq. km. 
in deep water areas. All these basins are prognosticated to hold 
about 28 billion tonnes of hydrocarbon resources. Out of a total 
of 26 sedimentary basins, so far seven basins are in commercial 
production stage. These basins cat egorized as category I basin 
covering 16% of total basinal area, hold about 66% of 
prognosticated resources of the c ountry and account for almost 
entire hydrocarbon discovered so far.  Besides category I basins, 
category II basins have also got hydrocarbon but are yet to be 
commercially exploited. The Commi ttee desire that concerted 
efforts should be made by usi ng state-of-the art technology to 
commercially exploit these basins as well. Basins under category 
III & IV which are total 17 in number are still under/unexplored 
basins. To assess and locate additional potential resources of  
these basins,  the Committee note that DGH is carrying out a 
number of geo-scientific surveys, either alone or in collaboration 
with national /international co mpanies.  The Committee desire 
that the surveys should be comp leted expeditiously and efforts 
for exploration of these basins, be intensified so that their 

 164
hydrocarbon potential is fully tapped as early as possible. The 
Government should also award more and more blocks under 
NELP to various companies in th e less explored areas and offer 
more incentives for the companies who undertake exploration in 
these blocks.   
 Due to increase in demand for oil and persistently 
mounting oil prices which have been  inflating our oil imports bill 
year after year, it is imperative that efforts should be intensified 
to increase indigenous production and for this all sedimentary 
basins need to be fully ex plored. The Committee note that 
Hydrocarbon Vision 2025 envisages total appraisal of 
sedimentary basins of India by the  year  2025 and in order to 
meet the objectives of the Hydr ocarbon Vision 2025, action plans 
are stated to have been drawn up to achieve the following 
appraisal programme :- 
- 25% by 2005 
- 50% by 2015 
- 100% by 2025 
 The Committee desire that progress of action plan should 
be monitored strictly so that the targets laid down for appraisal of 
basins are adhered to.  

 165
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 5 
UNDER  ACHIEVEMENT  OF  SEISMIC  SURVEY AND DRILLING  
TARGETS 
 
 The Committee note that targets for seismic survey and 
drilling laid by ONGC during IX Plan could not be achieved and 
implemented in the States of Assam, Nagaland, Tripura and 
Himachal Pradesh due to one reason or the other. Shortfall in 
achievement of targets in Assam State has been attributed to 
laying of greater emphasis on cover ing the entire area with a 
blanket 3D seismic survey which resulted in compromising of 2D 
seismic survey planned targets. In Nagaland, envisaged 
programme could not be implemente d due to non-availability of 
Production Exploration Licence (PEL ). The planned contractual 
seismic survey could not be im plemented in Tripura owing to 
non-finalisation of the contract. In Himachal Pradesh, besides 
delay of PEL grant in Ganga NELP  block, slow performance of 
shot-hole drilling and foreigner’s agitation have been cited as the 
reasons for non achievement of the targets. Shortfall in drilling 
targets in North Eastern States a nd Himachal Pradesh have also 
been attributed to the delays in the exploration plan 
implementation in environmentally  sensitive and logistically 
difficult areas, drilling of incr easingly deeper wells, less rig 
availability, down hole complication, etc. 
 To obviate the delay on account of non availability of PEL, 
the Committee recommend that the Union Government should 

 166
analyse this problem in detail so that State Governments are 
made aware that certain blocks are proposed to be awarded for 
exploration and a way should be found out by which State 
Governments readily facilitate the exploration immediately after 
the award of a block to an expl orer by granting the necessary 
approvals for land acquisition, forest clearance etc. 
expeditiously. In grant of PEL for on land blocks, the effort of the 
Union Government should be focussed on prior clearance or 
consent from the State Governments concerned at the time of 
offer under NELP, so that PEL is granted in the shortest possible 
time. 
 Other causes for delay as enumerated above viz. non 
finalisation of contract, carrying out exploration in 
environmentally sensitive and logist ically difficult areas, etc may 
be identified and corrective steps be taken to prevent occurrence 
of delays in achievement of targets on such accounts in future. 
From the details regarding status  of Hydrocarbon finds / leads 
made during IX Plan, the Committee note that in many of the 
fields in western offshore, 3D sei smic API is still in progress. The 
Committee desire that the survey should be completed within a 
time-bound programme and fu rther steps be taken for 
interpretation of data and produc tion of blocks / fields with due 
promptitude. The Committee also desi re that the fields in respect 
of which 3D surveys have been ca rried out, but which have been 

 167
not yet put on production, exped itious steps be taken for 
interpretation of the data and putting these field on production. 
 The Committee note that there was a shortfall in actual 
achievement vis-à-vis targets laid by OIL for seismic survey and 
drilling, during IX Plan. Various reasons which led to shortfall in 
achievement of targets stated are – deferring of survey for 
Brahmaputra River Bed due to inability to finalise contract, 
environmental problems, bandhs, blockades, land acquisition 
problems, poor state infrastructu re, delay in acquisition of 
seismic data, problems pertaini ng to environmental clearance, 
land acquisition and contractors. The Committee feel that these 
bottlenecks should be anticipate d and corrective measures be 
taken in advance so that delays on such accounts do not recur in 
future. The Government should ensure that the best of state-of-
the art technology is made availa ble to our oil E&P companies to 
enable them to achieve their targets. 

 168
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 6 
NEED FOR PERIODICAL REVIEW OF EXPLORATION 
PROGRAMME 
 
 The Committee note that to  identify more hydrocarbon 
reserves and to augment production of crude oil, ONGC has 
formulated its exploration programme which is reportedly being 
pursued by it vigorously. The X Plan exploration programme of 
ONGC encompasses the carrying out of exploratory activities on 
a time bound manner both in pre NELP acreages and the 
exploration blocks acquired during the four rounds of the NELP. 
The Committee note that the exp loration inputs put in place 
during the first two years of X Plan have resulted in 12 new hydro 
carbon finds which have opened up new sectors for further 
exploration and a potential for accretion of new hydrocarbon. The 
Committee desire that progress of the X Plan exploration 
programme should be reviewed peri odically to ensure that there 
are no slippages of targets. 

 169
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
NEED FOR EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
STRATEGIES  
 
 The Committee note that ONGC has formulated short, 
medium and long term exploration and production strategies, for 
next 20 years, which envisage  doubling of in-place volume of 
hydrocarbons from 6BT to 12BT, improving the recovery factor 
and augmentation of production.  The Committee desire that 
ONGC should initiate steps with  due promptitude to implement 
these strategies and monitor their progress periodically to ensure 
that  achievements are in consonance with the strategies 
planned.  

 170
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
NEED FOR IMPROVED OIL RECO VERY (IOR) / ENHANCED OIL 
RECOVERY(EOR) INITIATIVES  
 
The Committee note that ONGC  and OIL have taken up 
IOR/EOR initiatives for increasing Hydrocarbons reserves.  As far 
as ONGC is concerned, the Commi ttee note that in April 2002, 
ONGC screened 41 fields for implementation of IOR/EOR 
schemes. Though these fields were studied during last two years, 
the Committee  note that the major inputs for these fields are yet 
to be firmed up. It is also noted  that studies in respect of many 
fields are either in progress or yet to be planned.  It is needless to 
mention that without completion / initiation of IOR/EOR studies, it 
would not be possible to implement IOR/EOR programme and 
develop the fields as per time bound action plan. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the studi es which are incomplete, and are 
yet to be carried out, should be initiated and steps be taken for 
further exploration and development of these fields so as to 
achieve the objectives laid down during X Five Year Plan. 

 171
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 9 
SCHEMES FOR REDEVELOPMENT OF MUMBAI HIGH FIELD 
 ONGC has also drawn up plans for redevelopment of 
Mumbai High Field and implementation of Improved Oil Recovery 
(IOR) in 14 other major fields through 19 schemes, out of which 
16 schemes are under various stag es of implementation. The 
Committee desire that other 3 schemes should also be 
formulated and implemented exp editiously. Above all, the 
Committee note that ONGC has planned specific measures for 
maintaining / enhancing oil and gas production in the fields being 
operated by it. The Committee d esire that these measures should 
be finalised and implemented with due promptitude. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the impact of these 
measures in enhancing oil production. 

 172
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
NEED TO ENHANCE THE RECOVERY FACTOR BY ONGC 
 The Committee note that current average recovery factor 
from the producing fields of ONGC is 28%. Though the recovery 
factor of ONGC is comparable  to the recovery factor being 
achieved by oil companies in USSR and China, it is well below the 
recovery factor of US which is of  the order of 32% to 33 % and 
Norwegian Companies which have the recovery factor of the 
order of 45 to 55%.   The Co mmittee note that ONGC has set a 
goal to increase average recovery f actor  from 28% to 40% by 
2020.  The increase in the average recovery factor  from the 
current 28% to 40% will appreciably augment  India’s 
hydrocarbon reserves and will help  in reducing the widening gap 
between oil supply and demand.  The Committee desire that 
ONGC should not only strive to achieve the laid down objective of 
achieving recovery factor of 40% by 2020 but also analyse the 
field cycle concept which have helped Norwegian Companies to 
achieve a recovery factor of the order of 45% to 50% and follow a 
suitable concept to achieve the r ecovery factor of the order of 
45% to 50%. 
 
 
 
 

 173
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
DEEP WATER EXPLORATION  
 The Committee note that the deep water basinal area 
constituting about 43% of the sedim entary area of the Country is 
estimated to contain about seven  billion tonnes of hydrocarbon 
resource. So far India’s explo ration and production activities 
were concentrated mainly on category I basins which have 
almost fully been exploited by no w.   Obviously,  there is no 
choice but to change the present exploration strategies and 
concentrate on deep waters which hold a large potential of 
hydrocarbons. The Committee note that though ONGC started its 
deep water exploration programme during seventies but success 
has been eluding it so far. To gi ve an impetus to its deep water 
exploration, ONGC launched `Sagar Sammridhi’ project in 
August, 2003. The Committee find th at after the launch of this 
project, ONGC has achieved su ccess by finding hydrocarbons 
from one of the two wells, disco vered so far.  ONGC has set a 
target of achieving another 6 billion tonnes of hydro carbons by 
2020, and 2/3 of the reserves are expected to be discovered from 
deep waters. As exploration in deep water basins involve huge 
expenditure, it should be ensured that exploration activities in 
deep waters do not slow down for want of funds. 

 174
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
COST OF PRODUCTION  
 The Committee note that ONGC compared the cost of 
different Oil Majors, as reported by  Deustche Bank in their report 
‘Major oils 2003’ with its own cost for a five year period and found 
that the cost of ONGC was quite  comparable to international 
standards.  The Committee are of the view that there should be 
no room for complacency  in maki ng efforts to further reduce the 
cost of production.  The Committee note that ONGC & OIL are 
taking certain steps to reduce th e cost of production.  The 
Committee desire that these steps should be implemented 
expeditiously and monitored peri odically to attain the desired 
results. 

 175
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
SHORTAGE OF FUNDS 
 The Committee have been informed that ONGC proposes  
to raise the 10 th plan outlay as the funds initially provided are 
likely to fall short for the more in tensified plan activities likely to 
be undertaken by it.  The Committee, however, note that the 
extent of shortage of funds is yet to be firmed up.  The Committee 
desire that ONGC should make an  assessment of its additional 
requirement of funds during 10th plan and find ways and means to 
meet the requirement of funds.  The Committee recommend that 
the Government and the Planni ng  Commission should allocate 
fully the additional funds requir ed by ONGC during the Mid-Term 
Review of the Plan without maki ng any cuts in the proposals  of 
ONGC.  

 176
RECOMMENDATION No. 14 
LIMITED HORIZON OF OIL 
 Oil India Limited was incorp orated as a joint venture 
company between the Government of India and Burmah Oil 
Company (BOC) with equal share holding in the year 1959. The 
Company was nationalised in 1981. The Committee note that 
despite being one of the two premier national oil companies 
engaged in the work of exploration and production, OIL does not 
have a presence at all India level  which a national company is 
expected to have, and its most of the exploration and production 
operations are mainly confined to North-East part of the country. 
 One of the main reasons fo r OIL’s limited operations was 
on account of awarding of most of the blocks to OIL in North-East 
region before nationalisation on  the ground that BOC, who was 
50% owner of OIL, was already operating in North-East, therefore, 
new exploration acreages conti guous to BOC’s area of 
operations in the region were awarded to OIL. 
 The Committee, however,  note that even after 
nationalisation of OIL in 1981, a step-motherly treatment was 
meted out to OIL, and they were awarded blocks in North-East 
coast and in Mahanadi offshore basins, Ganga Valley basin, 
Andaman offshore and Saurashtra basin which were relinquished 
by ONGC for lack of commercial pr ospectivity. Thus, it is noted 
that OIL did not get blocks of their choice even after 

 177
nationalisation. The Committee feel that in the era of global 
competition, stifling the operati ons of a company by thrusting 
upon it blocks which had earlier b een relinquished by another 
company for lack of prospectivit y is least desirable. Before 
awarding a block, the Government should also take into 
consideration the choice of companies and their capability to 
undertake exploration and production activities in such blocks so 
as to enable them perform optima lly. After advent of NELP, the 
Committee hope that all the comp anies will be treated on equal 
footing and OIL would be able to enlarge its operations 
uniformally all over the country which will make it a national oil 
company in true sense. 

 178
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
CORPORATE PLAN OF OIL 
 The Committee note that OIL has formulated strategic and 
corporate plan with the goal of more than doubling the 
production level within ten year.  The Committee desire that 
adequate steps should be taken to implement these plans so as 
to achieve the targets fixed.  The progress of the two plans 
should be monitored periodically to ensure their full 
implementation.  Besides formu lating strategic and corporate 
plan, OIL has also taken initiati ves which focus on intensification 
of exploration and development activities in its areas of operation 
through additional 2D and 3D Su rveys and drilling; undertaking 
exploration activities in far-fl ung logistically difficult and 
geologically complex areas, acquisi tion of NELP Blocks on offer, 
intensification of drilling activ ities, reasoning of prospects, 
reserves assessment; optimistic field development;  revitalization 
of old and depleted fields, and de velopment of marginal fields.   
The Committee desire that all th ese initiatives which are, in hand, 
be  undertaken within  a time bound programme.   
 The Committee would also like to be apprised of the impact 
of such measures in additional reserve accretions and 
augmentation of production. 

 179
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
REVIEW / REASSESSMENT OF IN-PLACE RESERVE  
 The Committee note that both ONGC and OIL have 
contractual system to review/reassess the in-place hydrocarbon 
reserves every year.  Besides internal review, ONGC has also 
taken a decision to have its reserve base audited by an 
internationally reputed independe nt external agency once in 
every five years.  However, OIL has not so far adopted the system 
of regular audit of its reser ves from independent agencies, 
though they intermittently undertake such audit by 
commissioning the service of intern ationally reputed consulting 
firms.  The Committee note that wh ile no significant   variations 
have been found in the reserve base of ONGC by external auditor, 
in case of OIL there has been a variation to the extent of 10-15%  
which is quite significant.  The Committee feel that to have a 
realistic assessment of its reserve, it is imperative that besides 
internal audit, audit by indepe ndent agencies should be made a 
regular feature.   The Committee, therefore, desire that OIL on the 
lines of ONGC also should evol ve a system to have a regular 
external  audit of its reserve base.  

 180
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
OIL EXPLORATION BY ALL PSUS 
 The Committee note that besides ONGC and OIL which 
have been undertaking exploration and production activities for 
more than half a century, the fo llowing PSUs which were hitherto 
performing activities pertaining to marketing of crude oil and 
supply of gas, have also made forays into the Exploration and 
Production activities: 
1. GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL) ; 
2. Indian Oil Corpor ation Limited (IOC) ; 
3. Bharat Petroleum Cor poration Limited(BPCL); and 
4. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) 
 
 The Committee note that these companies have entered 
into upstream activities to have th eir own equity oil so as to 
safeguard their business interests against the highly volatile oil 
market, to have reasonable supply security and to achieve 
greater stability of revenues/profits.   The Committee note that 
due to lack of experience in u ndertaking E&P activit ies, most of 
these companies have collaborated with experienced companies 
like ONGC, OVL and OIL.   
 The Committee have been informed by one of the down-
stream company i.e.  IOC that from the very beginning, it was 
working with OVL for the over seas E&P business activities.  

 181
However, the current participat ion is not commensurate with 
IOC’s upstream business aspirations.  OVL has been designated 
as nodal agency by Ministry of  Petroleum and Natural Gas for 
overseas  upstream opportunities and IOC participation is limited 
to equity only.  IOC has desire d that it should be allowed to 
pursue E&P opportunities indepe ndently, while avoiding any 
competition / conflict of interests with other PSUs.  It has further 
suggested that to avoid conflic t / competition with OVL, the 
regions/countries where the tw o entities will pursue 
opportunities, may be divided, based on geographical 
boundaries.  The Committee desire that the suggestions of IOC 
should be examined by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, 
and appropriate steps be taken to provide some form of 
independence to other compani es in undertaking their overseas 
E&P activities. 
 The Committee are of the view that to meet the aspirations 
and interests of other companies, feasibility of forming a new 
joint venture in which equity may be held by all the PSUs, may be 
explored.  It should also be examined as to whether the 
consortium approach, where all th e players in oil market would 
have stakes, could provide better results in pursuing overseas 
E&P activities. 

 182
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 18 
GRANT OF INFRASTRUCTURE STATUS TO E&P PROJECTS / 
ACTIVITIES 
 The Committee note that, as of now, E&P Activities qualify 
only for a 7 year tax holiday from the date of commercial 
production. But these activities do not qualify for infrastructure / 
industry status to avail of tax holiday under Section 80 IA and 
also do not have the option to c hoose the block of 10 year tax 
holiday out of 15 years, whic h is not necessarily linked to 
commencement of commercial production. The Committee feel 
that if the 7 year tax holiday  necessarily starts from the 
commencement of commercial production, the advantage of tax 
holiday is lost because of carried forward losses of the previous 
years on account of large investment. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should grant infrastructure 
industry status to E&P project s / activities because of the 
significance of oil discovery for the national economy. 

 183
RECOMMENDATION NO. 19 
SPECIAL TRANSPARENT PRO CUREMENT PROCEDURES FOR 
OIL EXPLORING COMPANIES 
 
 The Committee note that exp loration activities require 
cutting edge technology for certain goods and services and 
hardware / software.  It has b een brought to the notice of the 
Committee that by following the normal procurement procedures 
it has not been feasible for the oil companies to source the best 
technology because of the implic it incremental costs.  The 
Committee feel that if normal procurement procedure is 
disadvantageous to be followed,  then the oil exploring PSUs 
should be allowed to evolve a special mechanism for 
procurement of cutting edge technology, as long as the new 
procedure sought to be followed is characterized by 
transparency, equity and fairness which are the underlying 
principles of the usual procedure.   

 184
RECOMMENDATION NO. 20 
 
ONGC VIDESH LIMITED 
 ONGC Videsh Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of ONGC 
is engaged in overseas exploration and production of oil and gas 
to supplement the reserves of the parent Company i.e. ONGC and 
to augment the national energy security.  The company was 
incorporated on 5 th March, 1965 as Hydrocarbon India Private 
Limited and renamed as “ONGC Vi desh Limited”(OVL) in 1989.  
The Committee are, however, constrained to note that despite 
being in operation for almost th ree decade, now OVL’s share in 
World’s oil and gas reserves is minuscule being 0.0825 percent 
only.  The Committee are constraine d to note that OVL’s share in 
oil rich Middle East region which have reserves to the tune of 
63%, is zero.  The position is equally bad as regard to the share in 
North, South and Central American regions, which have a total of 
14.40% of the world reserves.  N eedless to mention that OVL’s 
efforts in supplementing countri es oil reserves have been highly 
pathetic. 
 While the world’s major oil companies like Shell and B.P. 
have been operating in 80-100 countries, OVL’s E&P activities are 
confined to only 10 countries.  The Committee are constrained to  
note that despite being in overseas E&P activities for the last 

 185
three decades, OVL has not done much to acquire oil fields 
overseas.   

 186
RECOMMENDATION NO. 21 
 
ASSOCIATION OF MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS FOR OIL 
RELATED ECONOMIC DIPLOMACY 
 
 As our domestic reserves are limited and present proven 
fields have been developed to optimal levels, there is no 
alternative but to be in the forefront in the race for acquiring 
equity oil from abroad. 
 The Committee note that OVL is facing stiff competition 
from oil companies of Malaysia and China in its bid to acquire 
overseas oil equity. The Compani es from developed world such 
as USA, Canada & Europe are also  posing competition to OVL.  
OVL recently lost two good oil and gas acquisition opportunities 
in Sudan and Angola.  While Suda n block was lost on account of 
delay in obtaining decision of CCEA, Angola deal could not be 
acquired, as the deal was pre-empted and given to China. 
 The Committee recommend that the system of single 
window clearance through ECS should be reoriented in a manner 
that would ensure that no dela y is caused in securing the oil 
deals. 
 To obviate loss of deals on such accounts, the Committee 
recommend that OVL’s efforts  should be supplemented by 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and by Ministry of External 
Affairs. 

 187
 To clinch big deals in its que st for global energy, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas s hould work in close tandem with 
the  Ministry of External Affairs.  
The Committee understand that  for extending guidance and 
advice to Indian oil companies in their efforts to acquire equity oil 
abroad, the Government have constituted an advisory Committee 
on Oil Diplomacy for Energy Secu rity comprising experts with 
specialized knowledge of the c ountries and regions with whom 
the oil companies are expected to interact.  The Committee desire 
that the Ministry of Petroleu m and Natural Gas and other PSUs 
involved in E&P activities abroad should maintain a regular 
liaison with this Committee, apprise them about their future plans 
/ proposals for acquiring oil equity abroad and seek their help to 
clinch the deals  
 

 188
RECOMMENDATION NO. 22 
NEED TO STRENGTHEN THE POWERS OF OVL 
 Besides lack of diplomatic  support, the Committee have 
been informed that OVL is f acing constraints in undertaking 
activities due to less number of Directors in its Board, less 
financial powers, and non confidentiality  of the acquisition. 
 To enable OVL to establish its significant presence in 
upstream activities abroad, it is imperative that OVL be 
strengthened both in administra tive and financial terms.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire th at Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas should analyse th e problems of OVL and take 
remedial steps to remove them. 

 189
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 23 
ECS MECHANISM FOR CLEARAN CE TO ALL OVERSEAS E&P 
PROJECTS 
 The Committee are of vi ew that ECS (Empowered 
Committee on Secretaries) mechan ism which is a single window 
clearance for OVL for overseas pr ojects should also cover all 
other PSUs as well immediately,  so that any overseas E&P 
projects by any PSU is routed through ECS for faster decision 
making in order to avoid losses due to procedural limitations / 
delays. They desire that the sys tem of single window clearance 
through the empowered Committee of Secretaries should be 
reoriented in such a manner so that no delay is caused in 
securing the oil deals. 

 190
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 24 
AUTONOMY  FOR  OIL  EXPLORING  PSUs 
 The Committee note that the oil sector PSUs have been 
performing commendably. All th e oil PSUs except OIL enjoy 
Navratna status. The navratna st atus allows the delegation of 
enhanced powers subject to certain conditions and guidelines. In 
an era of competition due to liberalisation policies, the oil PSUs 
have to compete with multinationals and private Indian 
companies. As the PSUs operating in  the oil sector have to scout 
globally for technology, for procurement and to offer global 
tender for their works etc., these matters need decisions to be 
taken on commercial and technical aspects quickly. 
 Though the navratna status confers certain powers on 
them, the Committee note that in actual practice, the PSUs lack 
autonomy to decide on matters aff ecting their performance. In an 
era where most of the oil PSUs  equity has been divested and 
there are various stakeholders, the PSUs are answerable to them 
as well. The Committee regret to note that the autonomy already 
available is inadequate. 
 The Committee feel that th e Government should consider 
granting autonomy to the Board of Directors even to the extent of 
deciding a particular kind of business that they deem fit to 
undertake. 

 191
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 25 
COLLECTIVE BARGAINI NG MECHANISM FOR OIL IMPORTING 
COUNTRIES 
 Currently oil markets are supp ly-led market and prices are 
determined by market forces. The oil producing countries have 
formed an ORGANISATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING 
COUNTRIES (OPEC) which cater to  the interests of the oil 
producers. It is seen  that no formal mechanism for collective 
bargaining exists among the o il importing countries. The 
Committee desire that Government may initiate steps to form an 
understanding with major oil im porting countries to create a 
forum to get reasonable prices for oil imports from OPEC and to 
protect the oil importing countries from being hit by high oil 
prices. 

 192
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 26 
ALTERNATE  SOURCES  OF  ENERGY 
 Primary energy requirement of our country is growing 
continuously. As noted earlier, energy requirement which was 
304.0 mtoe in 1999 rose to 345.3 mtoe in 2003. The energy 
demand is expected to grow at the rate of 4.1% over the next two 
decades. At present, India’s main source of energy are fossil 
fuels i.e. oil, gas and coal. Indi a has only 0.4% of oil and gas 
reserves of world. In view of increasing demand for oil and gas 
which is projected to go to 350 MT by 2025 from the present level 
of 120 MT, it seems that it may not be possible for India to 
become self reliant in oil and g as. To meet the country’s growing 
need for energy, the only alternative is to develop energy from 
other sources like coal, hydel, nuclear, solar and other non-
conventional sources of energy. The Committee note that two 
unconventional sources of hydrocarbons viz. Coal Bed Methane 
and Gas Hydrate have been identi fied by DGH for development. 
The Committee hope that these sources would improve our 
energy requirement considerably. 
 Besides development of al ternate sources, measures 
pertaining to energy conserva tion are equally important. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the policy for energy 
conservation and their efficient use, should be brought out within 

 193
a definite time frame so as to  reduce the country’s dependence 
on Hydrocarbons to the barest minimum.`   
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi           RUPCHAND PAL 
20 December, 2004              CHAIRMAN 
29 Agrahayana, 1926(S)    COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 

 194
 

 195
ANNEXURES 
MINUTES  OF  THE  2nd  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  30  SEPTEMBER,  2004 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1830 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
 
3. Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
4 Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
5. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
7. Shri Kashiram Rana  
8 Shri Mohan Rawale  
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
10. Shri Rajesh Verma  
11. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
  
MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
12. Shri Ajay Maroo  
13. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
14. Shri Jibon Roy  
15. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar, Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OIL INDIA LTD. 
 
1. Shri R. K. Dutta, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri S. K. Pattra, Director (Exploration & Devp) 
3. Shri M. R. Pasrij a, Director (Finance) 
4. Shri N. M.Borah Director (Operations) 
5. Shri S. K. Srivastava  Sr Geo Technical Advisor 
 
 
 
 
 

 196
REPRESENTATIVES OF OIL & NATURAL GAS CORP LTD. 
 
1. Shri Subir Raha, C hairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri Y. B. Sinha,  Director (Exploration) 
3. Shri N.Lal, Director (T&FS) 
4. Dr. A. K. Balyan Director (HRD) 
5. Shri N. K. Mitra Director (Off-shore) 
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES OF ONGC VIDESH LTD. 
 
1. Shri R. S. Batola, Managing Director 
2. Shri V. Ravindra Nath, Executive Director 
3. Shri J. Thomas, GGM 
4. Shri D. K. Sarraf GM(Finance) 
5. Shri Ashok Varma, GM(P) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, COPU ask ed the officials of Oil India Limited to 
give a briefing on the subject of Oil Exploration – Domest ic and Overseas Projects 
individually. 
3. Representatives of Oil India Limit ed gave audio-visual presentation of the 
exploration efforts being made by the Company. After audio-visual presentation, 
Members raised queries on various aspec ts pertaining to the subject. The 
Chairman, COPU asked the representatives of Oil India Limited to furnish replies to 
the all the queries in writing. The representatives of Oil India Ltd.  then, withdrew. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of  ONGC Ltd. and ONGC  Videsh Limited 
briefed the Committee alongwith audio-visual  presentation of their exploration 
activities. 
5. Some of the queries raised by the Mem bers were replied by the officials of 
ONGC Ltd. & ONGC Videsh Ltd. The Chairm an, COPU asked the officials to send 
in writing the replies to the remaining queries. 
6. XXXXX  XXXXX   XXXXX 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 197
MINUTES  OF  THE  5th  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  22  NOVEMBER,  2004 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1845 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4 Shri Kashiram Rana 
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
6. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
7. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
8 Shri Ajay Maroo 
9. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10. Shri Jibon Roy 
11. Smt. Ambika Soni 
12. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar, Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OIL & NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD. 
 
1. Shri Subir Raha, C hairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri R. S.Sharma, Director Finance 
3. Shri D. K.Pandey, Executive Dir. 
4. Shri Gautam Sen Executive Dir. (Western Onshore) 
5. Shri S. K. Majumdar, Executive Dir.(A.A. Basin) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 198
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF ONGC VIDESH LTD. 
 
1. Shri Ravindra Nath, Gr. General Manager 
2. Shri D. S.Porwal, General Manager 
3. Smt. H.K.Joshi, Chief Manager (F&A) 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OIL INDIA LTD. 
 
1. Shri S. K.Patra, Director (E & D) 
2. Shri N. M. Bora, Director (Operations) 
3. Shri P. S. Gopal , Chief Manager (F&A) 
4. Shri S. K. Srivastava , Sr. Geo-technical Advisor 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
1. Shri M. S.Srinivasan,  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Prabh Das, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Sunjoy Joshi, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri V. K. Sibal DGH 
 
 
2. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
3. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence of t he representatives of Oil & 
Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. and ONGC  Videsh Ltd. in connection with the 
examination of Oil Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Projects. 
(REPRESENTATIVES OF ONGC LTD & ONGC VIDESH LTD THEN WITHDREW) 
5. The Committee then took the evidence of the representatives of Oil India Ltd. 
in connection with the examin ation of Oil Exploration – Domestic and Overseas 
Projects. 
(REPRESENTATIVES OF OIL INDIA LTD THEN WITHDREW) 

 199
6. Finally, the Committee took the evi dence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in  connection with the ex amination of Oil 
Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Projects. 
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 200
MINUTES  OF  THE  7th  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  20  DECEMBER,  2004 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
6. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
7. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
   
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
8. Shri Ajay Maroo  
9. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar, Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
2. XXXX XXXX  XXXXX 
3. The Committee then took up for c onsideration the draft report on “Oil 
Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Pr ojects” and adopted the same with some 
modifications. 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairm an of the Committee to finalise the 
aforesaid Reports and to present / lay the same to the Parliament. 
5. XXXX    XXXX    XXXXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 