C.P.U.No. 918 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
National Highways Authority of India –  
National Highways Development Project (NHDP), Phase-I 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings  (2006 -2007) on National Highways Authority of India – National 
Highways Development Project (NHDP), Phase-I.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.04.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.04.2008 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2008 /  Vaishaka 1930 (S) 
 
 
 
 
27 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-2008)  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  1 
 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
19 
 
 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies.  
45 
 
 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
50 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of 22 nd sitting of COPU held on 
24.04.08                    
53 
 II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendatio ns contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings  (2006 -
2007) on National Highways Authority of India – 
National Highways Development Project 
(NHDP), Phase-I. 
54 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. *Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. *Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16 **Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 **Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 **Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II  
5. Ms.Malvika Sharma Senior Executive Assistant 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
*  Elected w.e.f. 17.5.2004 Dr. Rameshwar Oraon and Kunwar Jitin Prasad ceased to be Members of the Committee 
consequent on their appointment as Ministers of States w.e.f. 6.04.2008. 
** ceased to be Members of the Committee consequent on their retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 02.04.2008 and 
09.04.2008. 
 
- (iii) – 

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairma n, Committee on Public Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings  (2006 -2007) on 
National Highways Authority of India – National Highways Development 
Project (NHDP), Phase-I. 
 
2. The Fourteenth Report  of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2006-2007) was presented to Lok Sabha  on 8 th December 2006. Action 
Taken Replies of the Government to the recommendations contained in 
the Report were received vide O.M. dated 25 th September, 2007.  The 
Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 24th April, 2008.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in 
Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 14 th Report (2006 -07) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: Rupchand Pal 
24 April, 2008 Chairman, 
04 Vaisakha 1930 (S)     Committee on Public Undertakings. 
  
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings  (2006 -2007) 
on National Highways Authority of India – National Highways Development 
Project (NHDP), Phase -I which was presented to Lok Sabha on 8 th December, 
2006. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been  received from the Government in respect 
of all the 12 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows : 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the  
Government : (Chapter II) 
 
Sl. Nos.1,2,3,4,8,9,10,11 and 12    (Total 9) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies :(Chapter III) 
 
Sl. Nos. 5 and 6      (Total 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee : (Chapter 
IV) 
 
Sl. Nos. 7       (Total 1) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the  Government are still awaited : (Chapter V) 
 
Sl.Nos.  Nil     
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No.    1) 
4. Regarding delay in completion of NHDP, Phase -I, the Committee in their 
Fourteenth Report had recommended as follows:-  
 
The Committee note tha t ‘in principle approval’ for NHDP, Phase -I was 
given by the Government in December 2000, covering a road length of 
6,359 kms.  NHAI was mandated to carry out this task with the target date 
for completion as June 2004.  However, as on this target date, the NHAI  

 
 
 
 
 
could complete only 29% of the total work.  Thus, the achievement was far 
less than the targets fixed.  The target date was subsequently revised to 
December 2005, overshooting the original schedule by 18 months.  
However, even the extended completion date of December 2005 could not 
be achieved by NHAI.  As per the latest position made available to the 
Committee, 92.6% of the Golden Quadrilateral has been completed and 
the few balance portions of the work are likely to be stretched even to 
December 2008. 
 
In this regard, the Committee note with concern that work on a few of the 
stretches out of the total of 175 stretches into which the entire project was 
divided, could start only after June 2004, which was the initial target date 
set out for completi on of the entire project.  Further, according to Audit 
observation, NHAI was required to award contracts for the entire Phase -I 
by March 2002.  However, against this target, NHAI could award contracts 
only for a length of 4,863 km (76%) up to March 2002 an d 5,628 km 
(88.5%) up to March 2004 whereas contracts for 380 km were not even 
awarded by June 2004, which was the originally scheduled date for 
completion of the entire Phase -I of NHDP.  According to Audit, NHAI 
delayed the award of contracts after receip t of bids by 2 to 17 months 
beyond the bid validity periods. 
 
Analyzing the reasons for delay in completion of NHDP Phase -I, the 
Committee note that the delays occurred broadly on account of pre -
construction activities.  These include acquisition of land due to procedural 
formalities, litigation and court cases; getting forest clearance; obtaining 
clearance/approvals from Railways for construction of Rail Over Bridges; 
shifting of utilities like electric lines, water pipe -lines, sewer lines etc; 
Factors lik e poor performance of the contractors, frequent stoppage of 
work by local population demanding additional underpasses/bypasses, 
flyovers, etc. also contributed to the delay.  The Committee also take into 
account the observation of the Audit that at the tim e of sanction of NHDP 
Phase-I, 90% of the land was already acquired.  However, factors like 
inability of contractors to synchronize resources, ineffective contract 
management by NHAI and Project Supervision Consultants, faulty and 
incorrect contract clause s, incorrect and incomplete data in the Detailed 
Project Reports also contributed to the delay. 
  
The Committee note that the NHAI has justified the delay on the ground 
that a programme of this magnitude was unprecedented and the quantum 
of pre -construction activities involved in the project were unmatched to 
any project implemented in the past.  Further, most of the pre -construction 
activities depended upon the cooperation of the State Governments, 
which was not forthcoming, and most State Governments were ill- 

 
 
 
 
 equipped with the resources required for such huge pre -construction 
activities.  Thus, the progress of the NHDP was dependent on the 
cooperation by the State Governments, which was beyond the control of 
NHAI.  However, where the delays were attribu table to the contractors, 
NHAI had taken action against them by levying liquidated damages and 
terminating their contracts. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, are of the view that the main factor, which has 
contributed to the delay in implementation of Phase -I of the NHDP, is the 
slow process of land acquisition primarily caused due to the inaction on 
the part of the State Governments.  From the status report as on 31 July, 
2006 furnished by NHAI, 9.15% in Tamil Nadu, 4.83% in Maharashtra, 
4.62% in West Bengal, 2%  in Jharkhand, 1.57% in Karnataka, etc. 
(totaling 2.21% of the entire land to be acquired under NHDP Phase -I) of 
balance land is yet to be acquired from these State Governments.  In this 
regard, the Committee note that the Ministry have now taken a number of 
measures for expeditious completion of Phase -I of the NHDP and its 
subsequent phases.  These measures include authorizing the Department 
of Road Transport to issue land acquisition Notifications without reference 
to Ministry of Law by amending the Alloc ation of Business Rules; 
constitution of a Committee of Secretaries (COS) headed by Cabinet 
Secretary to resolve Centre -State issues and Inter -Ministerial 
coordination; appointment of Nodal officers to coordinate various matters 
for solving problems like l and acquisition, shifting of utilities, forest and 
environmental clearance, posting of a Director level officer of Railways on 
deputation basis to NHAI for expediting approval of Rail Over Bridges, and 
reviewing the status of pre-construction activities in NHAI Headquarters on 
a fortnightly basis. 
  
The Committee are of the view that roads are important infrastructure to 
facilitate economic development of the nation.  The NHDP has been 
undertaken as a massive up gradation programme of high traffic density 
corridors of National Highways in the country.  Therefore, the timely 
implementation of NHDP Phase -I is of utmost importance for smooth 
transportation of goods as well as offering safe and better riding quality to 
road users of the National Highways. Unfort unately, the delay factor has 
adversely affected toll revenue, traffic synchronization, and benefit to the 
road users as projected at the time of project approval. Though the 
Government/NHAI have sought to justify the delay, the fact remains that 
there wer e avoidable lapses on the part of the NHAI as well as the 
Government, which resulted in enormous delay in timely completion of 
NHDP Phase-I.  In this direction, the Committee note with concern that the 
much-hyped Committee of Secretaries (COS) constituted to resolve 
Centre-State issues and Inter -Ministerial coordination held its first sitting 
only on 1 April, 2005 i.e. after five years of the launch of NHDP Phase-I.   

 
 
 
 
 
As per the information furnished to the Committee, as on 31.7.2006, the 
said Committee h as held only one further sitting on 3.11.2005.  This is a 
serious reflection on the monitoring role of the Government for ensuring 
timely implementation of NHDP and removal of impediments.  For 
instance, in the case of Tamil Nadu, 9.15% of the land as on 3 1 July 2006 
was yet to be acquired.  The same is the case with few other States also.   
 
 In the context of the above background, the Committee recommend that 
the following urgent steps be taken to ensure that the delay occurred in 
NHDP Phase-I is not repeated in subsequent phases of NHDP: - 
 
(i) NHAI should prepare monthly progress reports for each 
project/sub-project indicating clearly, the target date of completion, 
delay if any, reasons for delay, status of land acquisition, 
rehabilitation & resettlement, s hifting of utilities, obtaining of 
environmental clearances, progress of litigation if any, the 
officers/agencies responsible for these activities, names of the state 
nodal officers and the officers/agencies associated with the sub -
project. 
 
(ii) The above ment ioned monthly progress reports should be 
considered by the NHAI Board where the areas of concern shall be 
identified along with the remedial measures to be taken.  
Thereafter, the said reports along with the action taken notes 
should be forwarded to the Mi nistry and the main highlights be 
brought to the notice of the Committee of Secretaries (COS). 
 
(iii) The Committee of Secretaries (COS) headed by the Cabinet 
Secretary should hold review meetings more frequently, say at 
least every quarter, so as to serve any u seful purpose and address 
the issues requiring immediate Government attention.   
 
(iv) The nodal officers appointed by the concerned State Governments 
for coordinating and resolving the various problems relating to the 
land acquisition progress and other matters should furnish progress 
reports on monthly basis for review by the Chief Secretaries of the 
concerned States.  
 
(v) The existing procedures relating to land acquisition, shifting of 
utilities, obtaining forest clearances, etc. should be reviewed and 
updated on a continuous basis in the light of experience gained 
during implementation of various phases of the NHDP. 
 

 
 
 
(vi) A time limit for processing of bids for award of contracts must be 
fixed and should be strictly adhered to in order to avoid any delay 
in the award of contracts. 
 
(vii) The performance of contractors must be monitored on day -to-day 
basis and stiffer penalty be imposed if the contractors underperform 
and cause delay.   
 
(viii) The monitoring role of Project Implementation Units of NHAI should 
be strengthened and additional responsibilities be entrusted to 
them to cut short any sort of avoidable delays on account of any 
shortcomings on the part of Design Consultants, Project 
Supervision Consultants and the contractors etc. 
 
(ix) For expeditious acquisition of land, the National Highways Act, 
1956 may be suitably amended prescribing inter-alia a time-limit for 
initiating the arbitration proceedings; acquisition through mutual 
consent to a limited extent; possibility of invoking an urgency clause 
as is available in the Land Acquisition Act for faster land acquisition 
process in some special cases, etc. 
 
6. In their action taken reply to the recommendation of the Committee, the 
Government have stated as follows: 
 
(i) With regard to the recommendations, it is submitted that NHAI is 
preparing monthly progress report which gives information in most of 
the aspects mentioned in COPU’s report e.g. the target date of 
completion, anticipated completion date and delay with respect to 
original completion, status of land acquisition state -wise, name of the 
agency responsible for implementation of the project – main civil 
work contractors, supervision consultants and DPR consultants.  This 
report is circulated to all senior officials of NHAI, Department of Road 
Transport & Highways, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, World Bank and ADB.   
 
 Monthly progress report of individual projects covering other aspects 
mentioned in the COPU’s report are also prepared by the 
Supervision Consultant and submitted to t he concerned officers in 
the HO and project site. 
 
 To improve the system further, NHAI has developed an On -line Real 
Time Project Monitoring System viz ‘Computerized Project 
Information System - (CPIS)’.  The CPIS will capture at one place the 
attributes mentioned in the COPU’s recommendations.  The 
information will be updated directly from the Project Site via 
Internet/Wide Area Network (WAN) set up by NHAI.  

 
 
 
 
(ii) With regards to recommendation that the monthly progress reports 
should be considered by the NHA I Board, it is submitted that CGMs, 
Members and Chairman are regularly reviewing the reports / projects, 
carrying out site visits and holding meetings at site and in HO. The 
Board of NHAI has also been periodically reviewing the progress of 
NHDP and giving  directions for time and cost bound implementation 
of NHDP. Quarterly review of the projects is also done by the 
Secretariat of Committee on Infrastructure serviced by Planning 
Commission.  The major impediments in the implementation of 
NHDP are being take n up from time to time by the NHAI and the 
Ministry, with the Empowered Committee of Secretaries headed by 
Cabinet Secretary.   
 
(iii) With regards to recommendations of the Committee on Public 
Undertaking for frequent meetings of the   Committee of Secretaries 
(COS) constituted by the Government to take up Centre -State and 
Inter-Ministerial issues, it is submitted that the meetings are held as 
and when required. 
 
(iv)   With regards to recommendation of the Committee for review of  
progress reports by Chief Secr etaries on monthly basis, it is 
submitted that the Chairman, NHAI had written a D.O letter 
No.NHAI/LE&EM/29/Policy/07, dated 29.1.2007 to Chief Secretaries 
of State Governments intimating them of above recommendation 
made by COPU and requesting that (i), m onthly progress reports on 
land acquisition/ pre -construction be submitted by Nodal Officers to 
Chief Secretaries, and that (ii),Chief Secretaries review progress of 
land acquisition/pre-construction on monthly basis. 
 
(v)   With regards to review of Exist ing procedures relating to land 
acquisition, utility shifting and obtaining forest clearances etc.  it is 
submitted  that several measures have been introduced to facilitate 
timely completion of pre -construction activities (which include land 
acquisition/utility shifting/obtaining forest clearance), as follows:- 
 
(a) Simplification of Procedure for issuing Notifications for 
acquisition of land; Notifications for acquisition of land under Section 3 
of NH Act were previously vetted from legal angle by Ministr y of Law. 
This contributed to delay in issuing/publishing Notifications. Procedure 
for issue of such Notifications has been simplified, and they are now 
issued/published after being legally vetted internally by NHAI. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
(b)  Facilities provided to Project  Implementation Units (PIUs); In order 
to assist PIUs in performance of functions pertaining to land 
acquisition/pre-construction, each PIU has been authorized to engage 
one retired State Govt. Revenue Officer supported by one 
Surveyor/Amin for each district on contract. Proposals for engagement of 
additional staff required either because of large volume of work or 
because work has to be completed within a short time are considered on 
case to case basis. Total 127 retired State Government officials have so 
far been engaged in PIUs to facilitate land acquisition/ pre -construction 
activities.   
 
(c) Facilities provided to Competent Authority for land acquisition ; 
Provision of adequate staff and infrastructure to Competent Authorities 
for land acquisition is pr imarily the responsibility of concerned State 
Government.  However, due to large volume of work or time constraints, 
Competent Authorities sometimes request NHAI for additional support.  
 
Additional staff/infrastructure is provided to Competent Authorities  in 178 
projects (approx.) for specified periods within which land acquisition is 
required to be completed.  
 
(d) Appointment of State Level Coordinator for land acquisition/pre-
construction;  NHAI HQ has nominated a Project Director located in the 
State t o function as State Level Coordinator for Land Acquisition/Pre -
construction, whose functions are as follows:-  
  
 Collection of information from all PIUs in the State, on 
pending land acquisition matters for various projects, and 
forwarding the same to HQ as per specified formats.  
 
 Coordination with State Government officers on regular 
basis for all matters pertaining to land acquisition.  
 
 Ensuring timely coordination meetings at the State level 
to resolve pending issues.  
 
(e)  Appointment of CGMs to mana ge/implement NHDP Projects in 
States; NHAI has recently appointed CGMs to manage/implement 
NHDP Projects in States. These officers are responsible for 
coordinating land acquisition/pre -construction issues (pertinent to 
stretches within the State) between c oncerned Technical Division/ 
Land Acquisition Division/State Level Coordinator/State 
Government Authorities.  
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(f)  Formation of District Coordination Committees; Land 
acquisition under NH Act 1956 is conducted primarily at district 
level.  Accordingl y, as a measure for strengthening District level 
mechanisms for land acquisition/pre -construction activities, 
Chairman has written to Chief Secretaries of Govts of States in 
which NHDP Projects are implemented requesting for constitution 
of District Coordi nation Committees (DCCs) for resolving issues 
related to land acquisition and other pre-construction activities.  The 
DCCs are to be headed by District Magistrates and comprise 
NHAI’s Project Director, Competent Authority for Land Acquisition, 
District Departmental heads of departments like PWD, Telephone, 
Electricity, Jal Nigam, and Municipality, and District Forest Officer. 
Meetings of DCC (to be held monthly, and as and when 
requisitioned by NHAI -PD) would go a long way in clearing hurdles  
coming in wa y of timely acquisition of land and completion of pre -
construction activities (such as shifting of electric poles, telephone 
lines, water/sewage pipes, cutting of tress etc).   
 
 (g) Environment and Forest Clearance; Ministry of Environment   
and Forests ( MoEF), on the advice of Committee of Secretaries, 
has been holding regular meetings every month for expediting 
proposals of NHAI for environment clearance.  There are, as such, 
no cases pending for environment clearance. With regard to forest 
clearance, NH AI is taking appropriate action (through Nodal 
Officers and Forest Departments of State Govts,) required to 
expeditiously obtain forest clearance.    
 
(vi) With regards to time limit for processing of bids for award of  
contracts,  it is   submitted  that  time  schedule  of 40 days has 
been fixed to cover the  entire process from the date of receipt of 
bids  till final  award of contracts. This has been incorporated  in 
Works Mannual of NHAI  (para 4.32 ) released recently.  However, 
in case of externally aided projects, this time schedule will depend 
upon the time for approval of process at various stages by the aid 
agency such as World Bank, Asian Development Bank, etc. 
 
(vii) Regarding monitoring of  performance of contractors it is submitted 
that the performance of the contractor is being monitored by the 
Supervision Consultant and Project Directors of the Project 
Implementation Units of NHAI on day -to-day basis.  Periodic 
progress review meetings are also being held by Chairman, 
Members, CGMs and Project Director of Units with contractors and 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Project Supervision Consultants. Penalty provision for default by 
the  contractor  is  the  integral  part  of  the  contract  and  suitable 
punitive action is also being taken.  NHAI has already terminated 
12 co ntracts of the defaulting contractors and levied liquidated 
damages in 6 contracts for delay in completion.  
 
(viii) It is submitted that vide Policy Circular No. 11041/21/2002/Admn 
dated 18/04/2006, duties and responsibilities to the Project 
Directors of PIUs ha ve been specified, which addresses the 
concern expressed by the committee.  The content of this circular 
has also been incorporated in NHAIs works manual. 
 
(ix) With regards to expeditious acquisition of land, through an 
amendment of  National Highways Act, 195 6, acquisition through 
mutual consent to a limited extent and possibility of invoking an 
urgency clause as is available in Land Acquisition Act,   it is 
submitted that  a draft/proposed amendment to National Highways 
Act requiring, inter-alia, arbitration proceedings to commence within 
03 months of declaration of award acquiring the land is currently 
under finalization by the Authority.  For expeditious action, we  have 
issued policy circular for acquisition of land  through mutual consent  
upto  5% of total land required.  
 
7. In this connection, Audit has given the following remarks on the reply of 
the Government: - 
 
 The action taken by the Authority has been verified and the following 
observation is made: 
 
(i)  Although the Authority has developed the onl ine Real Time Project 
Monitoring system viz. Computerized Project Information System, it 
is yet to be made functional. Hence, Para remains. 
(ii) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(iii) The reply has been verified and it was found that the meet ings of 
COS are not held as recommended by COPU viz. atleast once in 
every quarter. Two meetings were only held in  2006 and 2007 
respectively. 
(iv) The actual progress in this regard will be watched in audit. Hence, 
Para remains. 
(v)(a) The reply of the A uthority has been verified and it was found that 
the Authority has issued circular regarding simplification of 
procedure. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
(b&c) The reply of the Authority has been verified and it was found 
that the Authority has appointed employees on contract basis t o 
quicken the activities relating to land acquisition and other pre -
construction activities. 
(d) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(e) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(f) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(g) Actual effect of this action would be verified in due course. 
(vi) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(vii) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(viii) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(ix) The Authority is yet to finalize the  proposal .This will be watched in 
Audit. Regarding issuances of policy circular for acquisition of land 
through mutual consent upto 5% of total land required, was found 
correct. 
 
8. The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have further 
commented on the remarks of office of C&AG as under:- 
 
(i) NHAI has already developed the online Real Time Project 
Monitoring system viz. Computerized Project Information 
System(CPIS) as admitted by Audit also. It has been observed by 
Audit  that  it is yet to be ma de functional. The present status of 
development and installation of CPIS is that  the consultant has 
finished the phase I of CPIS and its  application has also been  
installed  on the NHAI server. Training on CPIS  completed.  Audit 
may watch its implementation. 
(ii) Action Taken Report (ATR) has been verified and found correct by 
Audit. Hence no further comment.  
(iii) Cabinet Secretariat has been apprised about the recommendation 
of Committee on Public Undertakings to hold review meetings more 
frequently, say at least every quarter, so as to serve useful purpose 
and address the issues requiring immediate government attention. 
(iv) Audit  has desired that the progress will be watched by them. 
Hence no comments.  
(v)  (a,b&c)The ATR have been verified by the Audit without any further  
comments.  
(d,e&f) The Action Taken Report (ATR) has been verified and found 
correct by Audit. Hence no comment. 
(g) Audit  has desired that the progress will be watched by them 
in future audit. Hence no comment. 
(vi, vii & viii)The Action Tak en Report (ATR) submitted  has been verified 
and found correct by Audit. Hence no comments. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x) Audit has desired that the progress will be watched by them in 
subsequent audit. Hence no comments. 
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
9. The Committee in their original Report had observed that the delays 
in completion of National Highways Development Project (NHDP), Phase – I 
were broadly on account of non -synchronization of pre -construction 
activities including delay in land -acquisition, environmental clearances, 
shifting of utilities, poor performance of the contractors and consultants, 
inconsistencies in the contract documen ts etc. Therefore, while 
emphasizing on the fact that roads are important infrastructure to facilitate 
economic development of the nation, the Committee had recommended a 
number of urgent steps to be undertaken by NHAI for ensuring that the 
delays occurred  in NHDP, Phase -I are not repeated in implementation of 
subsequent phases of NHDP.  These, inter-alia, included preparation of 
monthly progress reports for each project, appointment of nodal officers 
for facilitating issues regarding land acquisition, more frequent meetings of 
the Committee of Secretaries (CoS), regular monitoring of contractors and 
strengthening of the monitoring role of the Project Implementation Units 
etc. 
 The Committee appreciate that most of the steps recommended by 
them have been acc epted and implemented by NHAI to improve their 

 
 
 
functioning.  However, the Committee would like to comment upon a few 
issues, which have emerged  out of the Action Taken Replies. 
 The Committee observe from the Action Taken Replies that NHAI has 
developed a n Online Real Time Project Monitoring System called 
‘Computerized Project Information System’ (CPIS) which would capture at 
one place the attributes of each project / sub -project viz., the target date of 
completion, delay if any and  reasons therefor, stat us of land acquisition, 
rehabilitation & resettlement, shifting of utilities, obtaining of 
environmental clearances, progress of litigation, if any, the officers/ 
agencies responsible for these activities, names of the state  nodal officers 
etc. However, t he Audit in their vetting of the said reply has observed that 
the said system (CPIS) is yet to be made functional.  According to the 
NHAI, Phase – I of CPIS has been finished, its application has been 
installed on the NHAI server and the training on CPIS h as also been 
completed.  In this regard, the Committee express satisfaction that the new 
system-CPIS installed by the NHAI would not only be useful for effective 
monitoring but will also help in timely identification and correction of 
errors. The Committee  would urge the NHAI to implement the CPIS 
expeditiously so that monitoring of all the projects and sub -projects is 
strengthened. 
 The committee had recommended that frequent review meetings by 
the Committee of Secretaries are necessary to resolve inter -State / inter -
Ministerial issues.   In response thereto, the Ministry’s reply that meetings 

 
 
 
are held as and when required seems to be very casual because only two 
such meetings were held during 2006 and 2007.  The Committee, while 
strongly disapproving this kind of lackadaisical reply of the Government, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Committee of Secretaries 
should hold review meetings more frequently and play a positive role in 
expediting the implementation of NHDP. The Committee is of the o pinion 
that if the Committee of Secretaries does not play its assigned role, the 
bottlenecks in the execution of NHDP will persist and the project will suffer. 
 As regards their recommendation on expeditious acquisition of land, 
the Committee had recommend ed that the National Highways Act, 1956, 
may be suitably amended prescribing inter-alia, a time -limit for initiating 
the arbitration proceedings; acquisition through mutual consent to a 
limited extent; possibility of invoking an urgency clause etc. The 
Committee note from the Action Taken Reply that while NHAI has issued a 
policy circular for acquisition of land through mutual consent upto 5% of 
total land required, the amendment to National Highways Act, 1956 is under 
finalization.  The Committee urge the Government to finalize the proposed 
amendment as early as possible to enable faster removal of bottlenecks 
with regard to land acquisition.  
Recommendation (Sl. No.  7) 
 
10. In connection with overpayments made to the contractors on account of 
Excise and C ustoms Duty Exemptions, the Committee had originally 
recommended the following:- 
 
 The Audit in their report has observed that while calling bids for stretches 
funded by the World Bank, NHAI failed to include a clause in the Notice  

 
 
 
 
 
Inviting Tenders (NIT ) that the bidders should quote the prices excluding 
customs/excise duties, as exemptions were available to them.  Also, the 
provisions for payment of price escalation incorporated in the agreements 
did not provide for exclusion of excise duty element from  the basic price of 
raw material agreed to.  According to Audit, the omission has resulted in 
NHAI not getting the benefit of duty element and resultant lower cost.  
Further, NHAI issued exemption certificates to five contractors, after 
finalizing the contract for availing the duty exemption but could not recover 
the proportionate duty element from the bills of contractors in the absence 
of necessary stipulation.  This resulted in undue benefit of Rs. 30.69 crore 
to these five contractors. 
 
 The NHAI/Ministry have sought to justify their position by submitting that 
such exemptions were already in existence before the contracts were 
awarded to the contractors.  It would, therefore, not be legal for NHAI to 
recover the benefit availed by contractors in view of  the exemption 
Notifications of the Government of India since NHAI’s action would restrict 
the benefit given by the Sovereign.   
  
The Audit has, however, countered the above contention on the ground 
that the Government of India vide their Notification No.  108/95-C.E. dated 
28.8.1995 issued in exercise of powers conferred by Section 5A (1) of the 
Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 read with Section 3(3) of the Additional 
Duties of Excise (Good of Special Importance) Act, 1957, exempted from 
payment of excise duty all goods that are supplied to the projects financed 
by United Nations or International Organizations and approved by the 
Government of India.  As such, the duty exemption is available to the 
projects and not to the contractors.  Audit was not provide d any 
documentary evidence that the excise/customs duty elements were duly 
factored in at the time of award of contract.  In the absence of any clear 
stipulation in this regard in the contract, what could happen is that the 
contractors would receive full p ayments inclusive of the duty element and 
they would receive the refund from revenue authorities and not pass on 
the same to NHAI.  In this way the contractors would gain and NHAI would 
loose.  Normally, the provision relating to duty exemptions should be a 
routine provision incorporated in the Notice Inviting Tenders and then the 
contractors are expected to pay back to the client (NHAI, in this case) the  
 
 
duty refund received by them from the revenue authorities.  NHAI should 
have exercised due professio nal care in ensuring and documenting this 
aspect before releasing the Duty Exemption Certificate.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Taking into consideration the above -mentioned positions taken by the 
Ministry/NHAI vis -à-vis the C&AG’s contention, the Committee feel that 
the whole issue needs to be looked into. 
 
11. In their action taken reply to the recommendation of the Committee, the 
Government have stated as follows: 
 
 As directed by the Committee, the whole issue has been reviewed and it is 
submitted that in respect of the Externa lly Aided Projects (EAPs) [like 
World Bank, Asian Development Bank etc], exemption from payment of 
excise duty and custom duty were admissible under notification no. 
108/95-CE dt. 28.5.1995 and  Notification No. 84/97 -Custom, dated  
11.11.1997, respectivel y  as amended from time to time i.e. well before 
the bids for  NHDP Phase I were invited  by NHAI.   In clause 73.2 of the 
Condition of Particular Application (COPA) it was stipulated that  “the 
prices bid by the contractor shall include all customs duties , import duties, 
business taxes, and income and other taxes local/State Government 
Octroi, royalty etc. that may be levied in accordance with the laws and 
regulations being in force on the date 28 days prior to the latest date for 
submission of bid”. Furth er in COPA clause 73.4, the contractors were 
requested to verify from the Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenue) 
of the  latest position of  exemptions available. Thus, it may be submitted 
that  the excise/custom duty exemptions being in existence mu ch  before 
the contracts were awarded to the contractors  can not be presumed  to 
not having been factored  in the   bids.  In   view of this it can not be said 
that the action of NHAI resulted into undue benefits to the contractors.  As 
regards the observation that the duty exemption is available to the projects 
and not to the contractors, it is submitted that such exemptions were given 
by Govt. of India in case of the projects of International Lending Agencies 
to bring a level playing field amongst the Co ntractors from Member 
Countries of such International Lending Agencies and Indian Contractors.   
 
Standard bidding documents adopted by NHAI in August, 2004  also  
stipulates in Instructions to Bidders , under clause 14.3 that  “all duties, 
taxes and other levies payable by the Contractor under the contract, or for 
any other cause as of the date 28 days prior to the deadline for 
submission of the bids, shall be included in the rates and prices and the 
total bid price submitted by the bidder and the evaluati on and comparison 
of bids by the Employer shall be made accordingly”. 
 
However, for the sake of further clarity, NHAI has initiated action to 
incorporate the following sub -clause under Clause 14.3.1 of Standard 
Bidding Documents, “Bidders may ascertain the excise  and  custom  duty  
 

 
 
 
 
 
exemption available for this project as per the relevant policy of the 
Government of India prevailing 28 days before submission of bid.”   
 
12. In this regard, Audit has given the following remarks on the reply of the 
Government: - 
 
 While inviting bids, the Authority should clearly indicate the various 
customs /excise duty exemptions available for the project and direct the bidders 
to quote accordingly.  Instead of taking action on these lines, the Authority 
proposes to inclu de clause 14.3.1 which is vague as it does not specifically 
mention whether excise duty and custom duty exemption  were available or not 
for bids. As the reply of the Authority does not comply with the recommendation, 
the Para may stand. 
 
13. The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways has further 
commented on the remarks of office of C&AG, as under:- 
 
 It has already been submitted that to inform the bidders about the 
exemption available, following will be incorporated in Para 14.3. of 
Instruction to bidders:- 
 
“Bidders may ascertain the excise and custom duty exemption available 
for this project as per the relevant policy of the Government of India 
prevailing 28 days before submission of bid.”   
 
Basic idea of the clause is that the bidders shoul d take into account while 
bidding, the exemptions available for custom and excise duty as per the 
relevant Act.  The laws keeps on changing, thus any detailed standard 
disclosure may not be possible as in the event of any unfavourable 
changes about the cus tom/ excise duty, the contractor may claim against 
NHAI to compensate for any unfavourable changes.  
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
Comments of Committee  
 
14. The Committee in their original report had observed that NHAI had 
issued exemption certificates to five contractors after finalizing the 
contract for availing the Duty Exemption but could not recover the 
proportionate duty element amountin g to Rs.30.69 crore from the bills of 

 
 
 
contractors in the absence of necessary stipulation in the Notice Inviting 
Tender (NIT).  While taking note of the Audit observation that no 
documentary evidence is available to ascertain whether the excise/customs 
duty elements were duly factored in at the time of award of contracts, the 
Committee had felt that NHAI should have exercised due professional care 
in ensuring and documenting this aspect before releasing the Duty 
Exemption Certificates and had recommended th at the whole issue be 
looked into.   
However, the Committee note that the Action Taken Reply received 
from the Government is far from satisfactory and it seems that the 
Government has completely disregarded the seriousness of the issue.  In 
this regard, th e Committee note that the NHAI has simply proposed to 
incorporate a new sub -clause under clause 14.3.1 of the Standard Bidding 
Documents, namely  “Bidders may ascertain the excise and custom duty 
exemption available for this project as per the relevant pol icy of the Govt. 
of India prevailing 28 days before submission of bid”.  The Committee find 
that this proposal is inadequate and vague as it neither specifically 
mentions whether excise/customs duty exemption were available for the 
project nor does it direct the bidders to quote accordingly.  The Committee, 
therefore, feel that this new sub -clause would not serve the purpose of 
ensuring transparency regarding quotation of prices in specific bids for the 
internationally funded projects involving customs/excise duty exemptions.   

 
 
 
In order to avoid controversy and ensure transparency in the 
bidding process, the Committee recommend that the NIT should invariably 
include in unambiguous terms, the prices inclusive of Customs/Excise 
Duty vis-à-vis prices exclusive of such duty.  By doing so, NHAI would be 
able to avoid recurrence of such imbroglio.    

 
 
 
CHAPTER  II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation  (Sl. No.    1) 
 
Delay in Completion of NHDP, Phase-I 
 The Committee note that ‘ in principle approval’ for NHDP, Phase -I was 
given by the Government in December 2000, covering a road length of 6,359 
kms.  NHAI was mandated to carry out this task with the target date for 
completion as June 2004.  However, as on this target date, the NH AI could 
complete only 29% of the total work.  Thus, the achievement was far less than 
the targets fixed.  The target date was subsequently revised to December 2005, 
overshooting the original schedule by 18 months.  However, even the extended 
completion date of December 2005 could not be achieved by NHAI.  As per the 
latest position made available to the Committee, 92.6% of the Golden 
Quadrilateral has been completed and the few balance portions of the work are 
likely to be stretched even to December 2008. 
 
In this regard, the Committee note with concern that work on a few of the 
stretches out of the total of 175 stretches into which the entire project was 
divided, could start only after June 2004, which was the initial target date set out 
for completion of the entire project.  Further, according to Audit observation, 
NHAI was required to award contracts for the entire Phase -I by March 2002.  
However, against this target, NHAI could award contracts only for a length of 
4,863 km (76%) up to March 2002 and 5,62 8 km (88.5%) up to March 2004 
whereas contracts for 380 km were not even awarded by June 2004, which was 
the originally scheduled date for completion of the entire Phase -I of NHDP.  
According to Audit, NHAI delayed the award of contracts after receipt of bids by 2 
to 17 months beyond the bid validity periods. 
 
Analyzing the reasons for delay in completion of NHDP Phase -I, the 
Committee note that the delays occurred broadly on account of pre -construction 
activities.  These include acquisition of land due to procedural formalities, 
litigation and court cases; getting forest clearance; obtaining clearance/approvals 
from Railways for construction of Rail Over Bridges; shifting of utilities like 
electric lines, water pipe -lines, sewer lines etc; Factors like poor  performance of 
the contractors, frequent stoppage of work by local population demanding 
additional underpasses/bypasses, flyovers, etc. also contributed to the delay.  
The Committee also take into account the observation of the Audit that at the 
time of s anction of NHDP Phase -I, 90% of the land was already acquired.  
However, factors like inability of contractors to synchronize resources, ineffective 
contract management by NHAI and Project Supervision Consultants, faulty and 
incorrect contract clauses, inc orrect and incomplete data in the Detailed Project 
Reports also contributed to the delay. 

 
 
 
  
The Committee note that the NHAI has justified the delay on the ground 
that a programme of this magnitude was unprecedented and the quantum of pre -
construction acti vities involved in the project were unmatched to any project 
implemented in the past.  Further, most of the pre -construction activities 
depended upon the cooperation of the State Governments, which was not 
forthcoming, and most State Governments were ill -equipped with the resources 
required for such huge pre -construction activities.  Thus, the progress of the 
NHDP was dependent on the cooperation by the State Governments, which was 
beyond the control of NHAI.  However, where the delays were attributable to the 
contractors, NHAI had taken action against them by levying liquidated damages 
and terminating their contracts. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, are of the view that the main factor, which has 
contributed to the delay in implementation of Phase -I of the NHDP , is the slow 
process of land acquisition primarily caused due to the inaction on the part of the 
State Governments.  From the status report as on 31 July, 2006 furnished by 
NHAI, 9.15% in Tamil Nadu, 4.83% in Maharashtra, 4.62% in West Bengal, 2% 
in Jharkhand, 1.57% in Karnataka, etc. (totaling 2.21% of the entire land to be 
acquired under NHDP Phase -I) of balance land is yet to be acquired from these 
State Governments.  In this regard, the Committee note that the Ministry have 
now taken a number of measur es for expeditious completion of Phase -I of the 
NHDP and its subsequent phases.  These measures include authorizing the 
Department of Road Transport to issue land acquisition Notifications without 
reference to Ministry of Law by amending the Allocation of Business Rules; 
constitution of a Committee of Secretaries (COS) headed by Cabinet Secretary 
to resolve Centre -State issues and Inter -Ministerial coordination; appointment of 
Nodal officers to coordinate various matters for solving problems like land 
acquisition, shifting of utilities, forest and environmental clearance, posting of a 
Director level officer of Railways on deputation basis to NHAI for expediting 
approval of Rail Over Bridges, and reviewing the status of pre -construction 
activities in NHAI Headquarters on a fortnightly basis. 
  
The Committee are of the view that roads are important infrastructure to 
facilitate economic development of the nation.  The NHDP has been undertaken 
as a massive up gradation programme of high traffic density corridors of National 
Highways in the country.  Therefore, the timely implementation of NHDP Phase -I 
is of utmost importance for smooth transportation of goods as well as offering 
safe and better riding quality to road users of the National Highways. 
Unfortunately, the delay factor has adversely affected toll revenue, traffic 
synchronization, and benefit to the road users as projected at the time of project 
approval. Though the Government/NHAI have sought to justify the delay, the fact 
remains that there were avoidab le lapses on the part of the NHAI as well as the 
Government, which resulted in enormous delay in timely completion of NHDP 
Phase-I.  In this direction, the Committee note with concern that the much-hyped  

 
 
 
 
 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) constituted to res olve Centre-State issues and 
Inter-Ministerial coordination held its first sitting only on 1 April, 2005 i.e. after five 
years of the launch of NHDP Phase -I.  As per the information furnished to the 
Committee, as on 31.7.2006, the said Committee has held only one further sitting 
on 3.11.2005.  This is a serious reflection on the monitoring role of the 
Government for ensuring timely implementation of NHDP and removal of 
impediments.  For instance, in the case of Tamil Nadu, 9.15% of the land as on 
31 July 2006 was yet to be acquired.  The same is the case with few other States 
also.   
 
In the context of the above background, the Committee recommend that the 
following urgent steps be taken to ensure that the delay occurred in NHDP 
Phase-I is not repeated in subsequent phases of NHDP: - 
 
(i) NHAI should prepare monthly progress reports for each project/sub -
project indicating clearly, the target date of completion, delay if any, 
reasons for delay, status of land acquisition, rehabilitation & 
resettlement, shifting of utilities, obtaining of environmental clearances, 
progress of litigation if any, the officers/agencies responsible for these 
activities, names of the state nodal officers and the officers/agencies 
associated with the sub-project. 
(ii) The above mentioned month ly progress reports should be considered 
by the NHAI Board where the areas of concern shall be identified along 
with the remedial measures to be taken.  Thereafter, the said reports 
along with the action taken notes should be forwarded to the Ministry 
and the main highlights be brought to the notice of the Committee of 
Secretaries (COS). 
(iii) The Committee of Secretaries (COS) headed by the Cabinet Secretary 
should hold review meetings more frequently, say at least every 
quarter, so as to serve any useful purpos e and address the issues 
requiring immediate Government attention.   
(iv) The nodal officers appointed by the concerned State Governments for 
coordinating and resolving the various problems relating to the land 
acquisition progress and other matters should furn ish progress reports 
on monthly basis for review by the Chief Secretaries of the concerned 
States.  
(v) The existing procedures relating to land acquisition, shifting of utilities, 
obtaining forest clearances, etc. should be reviewed and updated on a 
continuous basis in the light of experience gained during 
implementation of various phases of the NHDP. 
(vi) A time limit for processing of bids for award of contracts must be fixed 
and should be strictly adhered to in order to avoid any delay in the 
award of contracts. 

 
 
 
(vii) The performance of contractors must be monitored on day -to-day 
basis and stiffer penalty be imposed if the contractors underperform 
and cause delay.   
(viii) The monitoring role of Project Implementation Units of NHAI should be 
strengthened and additional responsibilities be entrusted to them to cut 
short any sort of avoidable delays on account of any shortcomings on 
the part of Design Consultants, Project Supervision Consultants and 
the contractors etc. 
(ix) For expeditious acquisition of land, the National Highways Act, 1956 
may be suitably amended prescribing inter-alia a time-limit for initiating 
the arbitration proceedings; acquisition through mutual consent to a 
limited extent; possibility of invoking an urgency clause as is available 
in the Land Acquisition Act for faster land acquisition process in some 
special cases, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) With regard to the recommendations, it is submitted that NHAI is preparing 
monthly progress report which gives information in most of the aspects 
mentioned in COPU’s report e.g. the target date of completion, anticipated 
completion date and delay with respect to original completion, status of 
land acquisition state -wise, name of the agency responsible for 
implementation of the project – main civil work contractors, sup ervision 
consultants and DPR consultants.  This report is circulated to all senior 
officials of NHAI, Department of Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, World Bank 
and ADB.   
 
Monthly progress  report of individual projects covering other aspects 
mentioned in the COPU’s report are also prepared by the Supervision 
Consultant and submitted to the concerned officers in the HO and project 
site. 
 
To improve the system further, NHAI has developed an O n-line Real Time 
Project Monitoring System viz ‘Computerized Project Information System - 
(CPIS)’.  The CPIS will capture at one place the attributes mentioned in the 
COPU’s recommendations.  The information will be updated directly from 
the Project Site via Internet/Wide Area Network (WAN) set up by NHAI.  
(ii) With regards to recommendation that the monthly progress reports should 
be considered by the NHAI Board, it is submitted that CGMs, Members and 
Chairman are regularly reviewing the reports / projects, ca rrying out site 
visits and holding meetings at site and in HO. The Board of NHAI has also 
been periodically reviewing the progress of NHDP and giving directions for 
time and cost bound implementation of NHDP. Quarterly review of the 
projects is also done b y the Secretariat of Committee on Infrastructure 
serviced by Planning Commission.  The major impediments in the 

 
 
 
implementation of NHDP are being taken up from time to time by the 
NHAI and the Ministry, with the Empowered Committee of Secretaries 
headed by Cabinet Secretary.   
(iii) With regards to recommendations of the Committee on Public Undertaking 
for frequent meetings of the   Committee of Secretaries (COS) constituted 
by the Government to take up Centre-State and Inter-Ministerial issues, it is 
submitted that the meetings are held as and when required. 
(iv)   With regards to recommendation of the Committee for review of  progress 
reports by Chief Secretaries on monthly basis, it is submitted that the 
Chairman, NHAI had written a D.O letter No.NHAI/LE&EM/29/P olicy/07, 
dated 29.1.2007 to Chief Secretaries of State Governments intimating them 
of above recommendation made by COPU and requesting that (i), monthly 
progress reports on land acquisition/ pre -construction be submitted by 
Nodal Officers to Chief Secreta ries, and that (ii),Chief Secretaries review 
progress of land acquisition/pre-construction on monthly basis. 
(V)  With regards to review of Existing procedures relating to land acquisition, 
utility shifting and obtaining forest clearances etc.  it is submi tted  that the 
several measures have been introduced to facilitate timely completion of 
pre-construction activities (which include land acquisition/utility 
shifting/obtaining forest clearance), as follows:- 
 
(a) Simplification of Procedure for issuing Noti fications for 
acquisition of land; Notifications for acquisition of land under Section 3 
of NH Act were previously vetted from legal angle by Ministry of Law. 
This contributed to delay in issuing/publishing Notifications. Procedure 
for issue of such Notifi cations has been simplified, and they are now 
issued/published after being legally vetted internally by NHAI. 
 
(b) Facilities provided to Project Implementation Units (PIUs) ; In 
order to assist PIUs in performance of functions pertaining to land 
acquisition/pre-construction, each PIU has been authorized to engage 
one retired State Govt. Revenue Officer supported by one 
Surveyor/Amin for each district on contract. Proposals for engagement of 
additional staff required either because of large volume of work or  
because work has to be completed within a short time are considered on 
case to case basis. Total 127 retired State Government officials have so 
far been engaged in PIUs to facilitate land acquisition/ pre -construction 
activities.   
 
(c) Facilities provided to Competent Authority for land acquisition ; 
Provision of adequate staff and infrastructure to Competent Authorities 
for land acquisition is primarily the responsibility of concerned State 
Government.  However, due to large volume of work or time constra ints, 
Competent Authorities sometimes request NHAI for additional support.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Additional staff/infrastructure is provided to Competent Authorities in 178 
projects (approx.) for specified periods within which land acquisition is 
required to be completed.  
 
(d) Appointment of State Level Coordinator for land acquisition/pre-
construction;  NHAI HQ has nominated a Project Director located in the 
State to function as State Level Coordinator for Land Acquisition/Pre -
construction, whose functions are as follows:-  
  
 Collection of information from all PIUs in the State, on pending 
land acquisition matters for various projects, and forwarding the 
same to HQ as per specified formats.  
 
 Coordination with State Government officers on regular basis 
for all matters pertaining to land acquisition.  
 
 Ensuring timely coordination meetings at the State level to 
resolve pending issues.  
 
(e) Appointment of CGMs to manage/implement NHDP Projects in 
States; NHAI has recently appointed CGMs to manage/implement NHDP 
Projects in S tates. These officers are responsible for coordinating land 
acquisition/pre-construction issues (pertinent to stretches within the State) 
between concerned Technical Division/ Land Acquisition Division/State 
Level Coordinator/State Government Authorities.  
  
(f) Formation of District Coordination Committees; Land acquisition 
under NH Act 1956 is conducted primarily at district level.  Accordingly, as a 
measure for strengthening District level mechanisms for land 
acquisition/pre-construction activities, Chai rman has written to Chief 
Secretaries of Govts of States in which NHDP Projects are implemented 
requesting for constitution of District Coordination Committees (DCCs) for 
resolving issues related to land acquisition and other pre -construction 
activities.  The DCCs are to be headed by District Magistrates and comprise 
NHAI’s Project Director, Competent Authority for Land Acquisition, District 
Departmental heads of departments like PWD, Telephone, Electricity, Jal 
Nigam, and Municipality, and District Forest Officer. Meetings of DCC (to be 
held monthly, and as and when requisitioned by NHAI PD) would go a long 
way in clearing hurdles coming in way of timely acquisition of land and 
completion of pre -construction activities (such as shifting of electric poles, 
telephone lines, water/sewage pipes, cutting of tress etc).   
 

 
 
 
 
 
(g) Environment and Forest Clearance; Ministry of Environment   
and Forests (MoEF), on the advice of Committee of Secretaries, has been 
holding regular meetings every month for expediting proposals of NHAI for 
environment clearance.  There are, as such, no cases pending for 
environment clearance. With regard to forest clearance, NHAI is taking 
appropriate action (through Nodal Officers and Forest Departments of 
State Govts,) required to expeditiously obtain forest clearance.    
 
(vi) With regards to  time limit for processing of bids for award of  contracts,  it 
is   submitted  that  time  schedule  of 40 days has been fixed to cover the  
entire process from the date of receipt of bids  till fin al  award of contracts. 
This has been incorporated  in Works Mannual of NHAI  (para 4.32 ) 
released recently.  However, in case of externally aided projects, this time 
schedule will depend upon the time for approval of process at various 
stages by the aid agency such as World Bank, Asian Development Bank, 
etc. 
(vii) Regarding monitoring of  performance of contractors it is submitted that 
the performance of the contractor is being monitored by the Supervision 
Consultant and Project Directors of the Project I mplementation Units of 
NHAI on day -to-day basis.  Periodic progress review meetings are also 
being held by Chairman, Members, CGMs and Project Director of Units 
with contractors and Project Supervision Consultants. Penalty provision 
for default by the contractor is the integral part of the contract and suitable 
punitive action is also being taken.  NHAI  has already terminated 12 
contracts of the defaulting contractors and levied liquidated damages in 6 
contracts for delay in completion.  
 
(viii) It is subm itted that vide Policy Circular No. 11041/21/2002/Admn dated 
18/04/2006, duties and responsibilities to the Project Directors of PIUs 
have been specified, which addresses the concern expressed by the 
committee.  The content of this circular has also been i ncorporated in 
NHAIs works manual. 
 
(ix)    With regards to expeditious acquisition of land, through an amendment of  
National Highways Act, 1956, acquisition through mutual consent to a 
limited extent and possibility of invoking an urgency clause as is av ailable 
in Land Acquisition Act,   it is submitted that  a draft/proposed amendment 
to National Highways Act requiring, inter-alia, arbitration proceedings to 
commence within 03 months of declaration of award acquiring the land is 
currently under finalizati on by the Authority.  For expeditious action, we  
have issued policy circular for acquisition of land  through mutual consent  
upto  5% of total land required.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
The action taken by the Authority has been verified and the following observation 
is made: 
(i)   Although the Authority has developed the online Real Time Project 
Monitoring system viz. Computerized Project Information System, it is yet 
to be made functional. Hence, Para remains. 
(ii) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(iii) The reply has been verified and it was found that the meetings of COS are 
not held as recommended by COPU viz. atleast once in every quarter. 
Two meetings were only held in  2006 and 2007 respectively. 
(iv) The actual progress in this regard will be watched in audit. Hence, Para 
remains. 
(v)(a) The reply of the Authority has been verified and it was found that the 
Authority has issued circular regarding simplification of procedure. 
(b&c) The reply of the Aut hority has been verified and it was found that the 
Authority has appointed employees on contract basis to quicken the 
activities relating to land acquisition and other pre-construction activities. 
(d) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(e) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(f) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(g) Actual effect of this action would be verified in due course. 
(vi) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(vii) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(viii) The reply has been verified and found correct. 
(ix) The Authority is yet to finalize the proposal .This will be watched in Audit. 
Regarding issuances of policy circular for acquisition of land through 
mutual consent upto 5% of total land required, was found correct. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
(i) NHAI has already developed the online Real Time Project Monitoring 
system viz. Computerized Project Information System(CPIS) as admitted 
by Audit also. It has been obser ved by Audit  that  it is yet to be made 
functional. The present status of development and installation of CPIS is 
that  the consultant has finished the phase I of CPIS and its  application 
has also been  installed  on the NHAI server. Training on CPIS  
completed.  Audit may watch its implementation. 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report (ATR) has been verified and found correct by Audit. 
Hence no further comment.  
 

 
 
 
 
(iii) Cabinet Secretariat has been apprised about the recommendation of 
Committee on Public Undertakings to hold r eview meetings more 
frequently, say at least every quarter, so as to serve useful purpose and 
address the issues requiring immediate government attention. 
(iv) Audit has desired that the progress will be watched by them. Hence no 
comments.  
(v)  (a,b&c) The ATR have been verified by the Audit without any further  
comments.  
(d,e&f)  The Action Taken Report (ATR) has been verified and found 
correct by Audit. Hence no comment. 
(g) Audit  has desired that the progress will be watched by them in 
future audit. Hence no comment. 
(vi, vii & viii) The Action Taken Report (ATR) submitted  has been verified and 
found correct by Audit. Hence no comments 
(ix) Audit has desired that the progress will be watched by them in subsequent 
audit. Hence no comments  
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.2) 
 
Performance of Detailed Project Report (DPR) Consultants 
 
 The Committee note that the execution of any project initially starts with 
the preparation of the Detailed Project Report.  The Detailed Project Report 
primarily consists of designs, quantities of works and cost estimates etc. involved 
in the execution of a project.  With this sole purpose, the DPR Consultants are 
appointed by NHAI for preparing various Detailed Project Reports.  The Audit has 
pointed out that the NHAI did not address the risks associated with the  terms of 
contracts and performance of DPR Consultants with adequate attention, which 
ultimately became the prime reason for time and cost overrun in execution of 
Phase-I of NHDP.  The Audit has further pointed out that DPRs were deficient in 
terms of prec ise items of works; land to be acquired; sub -soil investigations, 
bridge design; correct technical specifications; shifting of utilities and designs of 
various key items of works etc. 
  
 The NHAI has tried to justify the deficiencies in DPRs on the grounds  that 
– quantities in highways projects cannot be estimated with full accuracy; the site 
conditions dictate some changes from the original quantities; additional facilities 

 
 
 
are created due to public pressure and additional features are included for 
safety considerations which might not have been envisaged at the DPR stage 
etc.  The NHAI has, however, admitted that there have been instances where 
DPRs have been found wanting and the action has been taken against the 
defaulting DPR consultants.  The Committee  fully agree with the 
recommendations made by the Audit in their Report that – NHAI needs to frame 
and issue guidelines/ policy directives to the DPR consultants to ensure uniform 
design practices, to initiate action against the DPR consultants in case of 
deficiencies due to negligence and to install a system where DPRs are reviewed 
before commencement of tendering process to avoid large variations etc. 
 
 In this direction, the Committee note with satisfaction that NHAI has since 
strengthened the system by revamping the system of DPR preparation, providing 
for peer review of DPRs and associating the Field Officers of NHAI in preparation 
of DPRs.  The performance of DPR consultants is now watched carefully and 
apart from performance security, provisions have also been made for 
penalty/debarment in case of delay in preparation of DPRs; variation in DPRs 
and actual quantity; proof checking of major structures etc.  Further, DPR 
consultants are now required to furnish an Indemnity Bond to take care of any 
shortcomings.  The Committee while approving the above -mentioned remedial 
measures recommend that the same should be reviewed periodically during the 
implementation of subsequent phases of NHDP. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is submitted that suggestive checklist / guidelines has been provided in  
the  NHAI Works Manual, 2006 for monitoring the performance of design 
consultants and at the end of every job, Performance Appraisal Report of the 
consultant will be written by the GM, reviewed by the CGM and countersigne d by 
Member, NHAI and this report shall be attached to the consultant’s dossier.     
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The reply has been verified and found correct in respect of guidelines provided 
in the   Works Manual. Regardin g Performance Appraisal Report of the 
Consultant, the Authority is yet to start this practice. Hence, this would be 
watched during subsequent audit. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of   C&AG 
 
Audit has desired that the progress regarding  Performance Appraisal Report of 
the consultant will be watched by them  in subsequent Audit.  Hence no 
comments. 
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3) 
 
Performance of Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs) 
 
 Project Supervision Consultants (PSCs) are responsible for the overall 
supervision of the works related with project implementation.  The PSCs are 
appointed by NHAI throu gh a competitive selection procedure.  The PSCs 
administer the contracts.  Day to day activities like monitoring the progress and 
quality, measurement of works, certification of payment etc. are performed by 
them.  In addition, the PSCs recommend extension  of time and variations to the 
contracts etc. 
 
 The Committee note that the Audit in their report has pointed out that 
NHAI did not address the risk associated with the terms of contract and 
performance of PSCs with adequate attention which resulted in tim e and cost -
overrun.  The NHAI failed to determine comprehensively the terms of reference 
of the PSCs, which did not provide for performance warranty and penalties for 
underperformance.  The performance of PSCs was also found wanting in overall 
supervision of the projects, in following quality assurance procedures, verification 
of works and bills, variations in the works, determination of rates of payment for 
varied quantities, approval of the sub -contractors, recommendations on 
Extension of Time (EOT) and c ompliance to the terms of contract by the civil 
contractors. 
 
 In this context, the Committee note that NHAI has admitted to the 
existence of certain shortcomings in the contract documents entered into with the 
PSCs inasmuch as the requirements of seeking client’s approval were not very 
clearly spelt out.  As such, various consultants took varying stands on the 
interpretation of clauses relating to variations and extensions of time and 
interpretation of the ground conditions leading to inefficient contract management 
and non-compliance of the contract provisions.  In many cases, the items were 
approved by the Consultants without obtaining prior technical approval from 
NHAI. As regards the action initiated by the NHAI against the erring PSCs, the 
Committee ob serve that based on the severity of non -compliance, punitive 
measures have been undertaken by NHAI including debarment of the 
consultants for participating in future contracts and for recovering damages for 
negligence and misconduct. 
 
 The Committee note t hat as per the reply of NHAI, the above 
shortcomings have now been properly addressed and the standard contract 
documents for civil contracts as well as consultancy contracts now contain 
explicit provisions in this regard.  Now, in case of breach of contract provisions by 
PSCs, various remedies like encashment of bank guarantees and recourse to 
Professional Liability Insurance will be resorted to.  Further, NHAI has recently 
formulated a policy according to which the performance of the consultants is 

 
 
 
reviewed and in cases where the performance is found lacking, the erring 
consultants would be warned and even debarred for a period of one year or 
more depending upon the severity of the non-compliance. 
 
 The Committee observe that NHAI has miserably failed in l ot of areas 
concerning Project Supervision. The Committee recommend that overall 
mechanism of Supervision of projects/works should be strengthened and be 
given a radical reorientation to make it more effective. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is submitted that the NHAI has formulated a policy according to which 
the performance of the consultants is reviewed and in cases where the 
performance is found lacking, the erring consultants would be warned and even 
debarred for a period of one year or more depending u pon the severity of the 
non-compliance. Through NHAI Works Manual, 2006 and Standard Bidding 
Document, monitoring of performance as well as tasks and responsibilities to be 
delivered by the Consultant  have been defined in detail in order to strengthen 
the mechanism of supervision and make it more effective.  In addition to this, 
NHAI is also in the process of finalizing the Performance Monitoring Criteria for 
Supervision Consultants by evolving a system/ mechanism supported by data 
bank for continuous moni toring of the performance of Supervision Consultants.  
A Committee of the CGMs has also been constituted for taking up cases related 
to non-performance and shortcomings in the services to be rendered on the part 
of Supervision Consultants. 
 
  So far as the  general observation regarding NHAI having failed in Project 
Supervision, it may be noted that NHAI, for the first time in the country, have 
implemented road projects following the internationally established norms of 
Project Implementation and Supervision  through the FIDIC system. This FIDIC 
system has been well received and accepted by all stake holders in the Road 
Sector Programme and has led to a strong sense of confidence and transparent 
environment particularly with the private sector. The system prov ides for Project 
Supervision and monitoring through independent professional consultant 
appointed through open bidding system. Their work is also supervised through 
Project Director’s / Technical Divisions concerned.  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The reply of the Authority has been correct. However, the outcome of the policy 
of NHAI to strengthen the supervision of projects would be watched in 
subsequent audit. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
Audit has desired that the progress regarding outcome of the policy of NHAI to 
strengthen the supervision of projects will be watched by them  in subsequent 
Audit. Hence no comments.  
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4) 
 
Quality of Work Executed. 
 
 The Committee note that as per the Audit observations, NHAI did not 
ensure compliance to the quality assurance procedures by the P roject 
Supervision Consultants.  The lapses on the part of PSCs include – failure to 
obtain quality assurance plans from contractors; not carrying out quality control 
checks; incomplete documentation on quality control etc.  The independent 
quality checks in seven stretches carried out by the Central Road Research 
Institute engaged by Audit revealed many works not conforming to the 
specifications.  As per the information furnished by NHAI to the Committee, M/s 
Engineers India Limited were awarded the contra ct for conducting Quality Audits.  
The defects/ deficiencies/ non-conformities observed by the said audit team were 
rectified by the concerned contractors and the PSCs. 
 
 The Committee feel that adherence to quality assurance procedures is 
vital for the success of the entire NHDP.  The fact that some tests on the material 
used for road construction failed indicates the unsuitability of the material used 
and deficient quality of road construction.  Such projects of international repute 
must match the well laid down global standards in terms of quality.  The situation 
becomes grimmer in the light of the fact that NHAI did not react to the quality 
audit reports endorsed to them by the Audit.  To quote a glaring instance, in the 
case of Gorhar -Barwa Adda stretch , Audit observed that the geo -textile material 
valued at Rs. 5.79 crore used between sub-grade and granular sub-base was not 
even approved material. The Committee feel perturbed at the response of the 
Ministry/NHAI who had stated that the said quality chec k work was entrusted to 
IIT Delhi but due to non -availability of the testing facilities in the Institute, NHAI 
failed to ascertain the suitability of the material used.  This issue raises a very 
serious doubt over the overall ability of the NHAI to ensure quality assurance of 
the executed work.  The NHAI have tried to defend themselves by submitting that 
guidelines have been issued to all Project Implementation Units of NHAI covering 
the general deficiencies observed by Audit, for taking corrective action.  Even 
M/s Engineers India Limited (EIL) engaged by NHAI have pointed out several 
deficiencies in the quality assurance procedures such as – (i) Quality Assurance 

 
 
 
Plans prepared by contractors were being submitted in piecemeal (ii) Plans 
prepared by PSCs were differing from the plans prepared by the contractors (iii) 
the test results of materials tested in outside laboratories were being received by 
the contractors and not by the consultants; (iv) routine tests were not witnessed 
by the Supervision Consultan ts (v) road tests were not carried out and the work 
was allowed to go ahead (vi) in the case of Built Operate Transfer (BOT) 
projects, the concessionaire did not give due regard to the instructions issued by 
the independent consultants; in some cases the j obs were sub -let even without 
the approval, etc.  This speaks volumes about the overall quality of execution of 
work on various undergoing phases of NHDP.  The only positive thing done by 
NHAI on the said observations of EIL is that they circulated these o bservations to 
all their Project Implementation Units with the request to bring them to the 
attention of the contractors and Supervision Consultants for discussion and 
taking preventive and remedial measures for assuring the desired quality vide 
NHAI communication dated 12 July, 2003. 
 
 In the light of the above backdrop, the Committee agree with the 
recommendations of the Steering Group (SG) constituted by the Ministry in the 
year 2001 which inter-alia provide for; (i) requirement of external quality audit  
system for highway projects; (ii) preparation of a panel of pre -qualified quality 
auditors; (iii) instead of engaging a single institution for carrying quality audit, the 
system should be more broad based involving a number of 
institutions/individuals; (i v) the quality audit should be done at intervals of 6 
months and by rotating the auditing agencies; and (v) the quality audit should 
also keep in view the conditions of the consultancy contract of the Project 
Supervision Consultants.  The Committee recomme nd that NHAI should follow 
these recommendations in letter and spirit and should not compromise on any 
aspect of quality of the executed works.  The Committee further note that there is 
a proposal for creation of a Quality Assurance Cell in NHAI with key 
responsibilities for promotion of quality assurance initiatives, quality checks 
through inspection of the ongoing works including quality audit through external 
professional agencies.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that the said 
proposal needs to be expedited and implemented at the earliest.  The Committee 
are of the view that if good quality of road construction is ensured at the initial 
stage itself, then it would definitely minimize the subsequent maintenance costs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that the   recommendations for the Steering Group  have been 
incorporated in the Request For Proposal (RFP)  for appointment of Quality 
Auditors. 
The RFP provides for:- 
1. Open bidding for appointment of Quality Auditors. 
2. RFP document contains st ringent qualifying criteria for the prospective 
bidders and Auditors.  

 
 
 
3. The documents shall form the basis for preparation of audit plan/ check 
list drawn from following documents:- 
 
 
 
 Construction Supervision Manual  
 Approved Quality Assurance Manual for the project. 
 Approved method statement. 
 Quality system/ Quality plans, inspection and test plans etc. 
approved by PSC. 
 About Quality System Audit to be more broad based involving 
number of institutions/ individuals, the same may be implemented 
after bidding.    
 
It is also submitted that quality assurance procedure was in existence in NHAI for 
implementation of NHDP Phase I.  Now in pursuance of the recommendations, a 
separate Quality Assurance Cell  has been constituted by NHAI, which has 
reviewed  so far the existing system and finalized following.  
 
(a) NHAI Works Manual 2006. 
(b) Quality Assurance Manual. 
(c) Document for procurement of a panel of external professional agencies for 
conducting Quality Audit and surveillance of on-going NHDP works. 
(d) Invited bids for appointment of Quality Auditors.  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
Though the Authority has constituted a separate Quality Assurance Cell, it has 
not yet appointed external agency for quality audit of ongoing projects.  
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
It is submitted that tenders for evaluation of technical and financial proposals for 
appointment of external agencies for quality Audit of ongoing projects, has been 
completed.  The work is under final stage of award.   
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
System of obtaining/revalidating Bank Guarantees 
 
 According to the Audit  observation, the NHAI did not have a reliable 
system/mechanism of verifying the credentials of the bidders and keeping the 
Bank Guarantees valid through periodical renewals to avoid their expiry.  This 

 
 
 
resulted in legal complications and contributed towar ds loss.  On these 
accounts, the NHAI could not recover a total of Rs. 24.44 crore from two 
contractors. 
 
In this regard, the Committee note that various Bank Guarantees like performance 
security, mobilization and equipment advance Bank Guarantees, retenti on money 
etc. are obtained from the contractors to safeguard the interest of the client i.e, 
NHAI.  However the whole purpose is likely to be defeated if the Bank Guarantees 
so furnished by the contractor are not verified or periodically renewed to prevent  
their expiry.  The lackadaisical manner in which the Bank Guarantees were 
handled is revealed from the fact that in the case of six projects, the Bank 
Guarantees furnished by the contractors were found to be forged.  This raises a 
very serious question on  the overall system of engaging high profile firms/ 
contractors by the NHAI to carry out execution of such big projects.  Submitting 
forged bank guarantees is definitely a criminal offence and should have been 
dealt with equal severity.  Further, had there  been a robust system of timely 
renewal of bank guarantees in place, the recovery could have been affected 
without loss of time/interest and legal complications.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommended that responsibility must be fixed on the 
concerned off icers of NHAI who were responsible for verification and timely 
renewal of bank guarantees in view of the losses suffered by NHAI on these 
counts.  Further, the NHAI must put into place a fool proof and robust system of 
handling the Bank Guarantees. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards fixing the responsibility it is submitted that in the reports of the COPU 
there are five projects in which instances of submission of forged Bank 
Guarantee by the Civil Contractor was detected and referred to Vigilance 
Division. In all the five projects the civil contractors were M/s Maharia 
Resurfacing & Construction Pvt. Ltd. and his other joint ventures namely M/s You 
One Maharia and Maharia -Raj. Two projects have since been investigated w.r.t. 
the records available at Hqrs and project offices and with the concurrence of 
CVC, Major penalty Proceedings have been initiated against the officers against 
whom lapses were identified. Simultaneously, FIRs have been lodged with the 
Police Authorities and criminal investigation is und er process against the 
Contractor. Having regard to the complexity of the case, the CVC has assigned 
the case to the CBI for further investigations. As regards the other three cases, 
the same are being examined w.r.t the original records available with Tec h. Wing 
at Hqrs. and respective PIUs in the field. As regards the observation that the 
NHAI could not recover a total of Rs. 24.44 crore from two contractors, it is 
submitted that in one  contracts (Gurgaon -Kotputli Project) against the total 
recovery of R s. 28.37 crores,  NHAI has already recovered Rs. 14.23 crores by 
enchashing the Bank Guarantee. Balance amount was proposed to be recovered  
from the account of contractor in other project. The matter is sub -judice at the 

 
 
 
present.  In another case (Kanpur - Lucknow Project), the contractor has 
already been black listed for submission of forged bank guarantee. NHAI’s claim 
for  
 
recovery is being pursued through arbitration.  Appropriate action under the 
Conduct Rules will be taken against the officers invol ved in the projects in due 
course.  
 
As regards strengthening the system of handling of Bank Guarantees, it is 
submitted that a ppropriate procedure has been  laid down for  verification, 
acceptance and renewal of Bank Guarantees. System of maintaining and 
confirmation of Bank Guarantees has also been laid down in the NHAI Works 
Manual (Para No. 4.38 -4.39). To strengthen the verification system, it has also 
been provided that a responsible officer not below the rank of Manager should 
personally obtain the confirmation from the issuing branch.   
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
Reply has been verified and found correct. The Authority has initiated disciplinary 
proceedings against the officers involved in forged bank guarantee cases in 
respect of all stretches except Lucknow -Kanpur section. The action to be taken 
by the Authority against the officers involved in Kanpur-Lucknow project would be 
watched in subsequent audit. Hence, the Para remains. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
The progress of action taken by the Authority regarding fixing the  responsibility 
on the  concerned officers of NHAI who were responsible for verification of bank 
guarantees in Kanpur -Lucknow project would be intimated  to Audit in due 
course. 
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  9) 
 
Payment of Escalation  
 The Audit has observed that there were ambiguities/ inconsistencies in the 
contract clauses in respect of 15 contracts.  This had led to different 
interpretations with regard to admissibility of price adjustment under various 
categories.  NHAI initially withheld the price escalation claims but subsequently 
released payments of Rs. 77.71 crore to 15 contractors as price escalation 
against receipt of Bank Guarantees.  Further, the said price escalation was paid 
with total disregard to the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice that no price 
escalation was payable as per the provisions of the agreement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 In this regard, the Committee note that the NHAI/Ministry have admitted 
that the contract conditions for 15 out of 28 contract packages relating to payment 
of escalation were worded differently leading to the inadmissible payment of 
escalation.  As regards the releasing of such escalation amount to the contractors 
pending opinion of the Law Ministry, the Committee are not at all convinced with 
the justification of the NHAI that this step was taken in view o f the representations 
made by the Contractors’ Federation pleading that this was an unintentional 
discrepancy in the wording of contract conditions in these particular contracts vis -
à-vis the other contracts and that the payment was made against the Bank 
Guarantees.  The Committee feel that such a step by a professional organization 
like NHAI was totally against the concept of sound business principles and 
prudent commercial practices as it has jeopardized its own financial interests.  
The Committee do not find that any urgency was involved for release of payments 
pending decision of the Law Ministry, which have now become difficult for NHAI to 
recover and are being litigated in the courts.  In fact, such a situation would not at 
all have arisen had NHAI ado pted uniform and unambiguous contract provisions 
for all the contracts.  While observing that NHAI has recovered Rs. 11.73 crore of 
this escalation payment, the Committee strongly recommend that NHAI may make 
all possible efforts to recover the balance amo unt of Rs. 65.98 crore.  It may also 
ensure standardization and uniformity in contract provisions so as to prevent 
recurrence of such lapses in the future 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards standardization and uniformity of contract provisions, it is sub mitted 
that the NHAI  has now adopted a standard bidding document in which contract 
provisions for payment of price escalation have been standardized and made 
uniform.  This Standard Bidding Document has been adopted for subsequent 
phases of NHDP.   
 
Regarding, recovery of the amount of Rs.65.98 crores paid to the 15 contractors, 
NHAI is putting its best efforts in doing so.  However, the matter pertaining to 
price escalation payment/ recovery has been referred to DRB, Arbitration and in 
some cases, court ha s also been approached either by NHAI or by contractor to 
safeguard respective interest.  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The reply has been verified and found correct. The recovery of Rs. 65.98 crore 
would be watched in subsequent audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
The Action Taken Report  has been verified by Audit  and found correct.  Hence 
no comments.  
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10 ) 
Toll Collection  
 
 Toll revenue is a fee levied and collected from mechanical vehicles for 
services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of a section of a National  
Highway, bridge or tunnel.  The National Highways Act, 1976 authorizes the 
Government to levy such fee. 
 
 The Committee note that according to the Audit observation, there was a 
loss of toll revenue of Rs. 42.23 crore due to various reasons such as delay in 
issue of Gazette Notifications; late handing over of site, non -finalization of site for 
the toll plaza and law and order problems etc.  Further, NHAI did not take timely 
action in foreclosure of contract with a toll -collecting agency that defaulted in i ts 
payments as per the terms of agreement resulting in non -recovery of Rs. 31.26 
crore. 
 
 The NHAI while admitting that there were some procedural delays in the 
issuance of Gazette Notifications has sought to justify the above audit 
observations on the gro unds that tolling is an entirely new concept in India.  As 
such, it initially needed some time to operationalise and streamline the same.  
However, the system has since been streamlined and now it is ensured that 
required Notifications for levy of toll are  published well in advance and fee 
collection is started as per the schedule without any loss of revenue.  For this 
purpose, a nodal officer of the rank of General Manager has also been appointed 
in NHAI for following up the toll Notifications with the Dep artment of Road 
Transport and Highways and also the Ministry of Law.  Further, the locations of 
toll plazas and tollable lengths have also been finalized for the Golden 
Quadrilateral and those for North -South & East -West corridors are under 
finalization. 
 
 As regards the delayed decision to terminate the contract with a toll 
collecting agency resulting in non -recovery of Rs. 31.26 crore, the Committee 
note from the information furnished by the Ministry that this issue pertains to 
Kotputli – Alwar Section of NH-8 in the State of Rajasthan where the contract for 
toll collection was awarded to M/s Ganapati Tolls on the basis of competitive 
bidding.  The period of contract was from 30.03.1998 to 14.03.2000.  The said 
contractor started defaulting in making the contractual payments and also started 
overcharging from the users.  On the matter being pursued by NHAI, the 
contractor resorted to several litigations to delay the punitive action against him.  

 
 
 
As per the latest status furnished by the Ministry, the matter of toll recovery from 
the toll agent is presently under arbitration.   
 
 The Committee are of the view that huge investments are involved for 
construction and development of the National Highways.  Hence, proper 
collection of toll revenue is of unassumed significance.  The Committee has been 
further informed that the actual user fee collection for the financial year 2005 -06 
is to the tune of Rs. 798.34 crore.  With the completion of the subsequent phases 
of NHDP, the toll revenue is likely to attain gigant ic amounts.  In view of this, the 
Committee feel that proper planning, timely action for issuance of toll 
Notifications, putting up of toll plazas and engagement of agencies for toll 
collections are of paramount importance.  However, the Committee feel tha t by 
all accounts there have been prevalent irregularities in practice causing 
avoidable leakages.  Keeping in view the fact that the system of toll collection is 
prone to leakages, there is a dire need for NHAI to improve its system of 
monitoring of tolli ng agencies so as to pre -empt any attempt at leakage/non -
remission of the toll collections as had happened in the above mentioned case.  
The Committee trust that various measures taken by the NHAI to prevent toll 
leakages such as conducting frequent surprise checks; engagement of round the 
clock supervisors; 72 hours plus spot study of fee collection; study of discreet 
observations; computerization of toll plazas etc. would be strictly adhered to.  
The Committee recommend that such measures be reviewed peri odically for 
removal of any shortcomings and a fool proof and legally sound system needs to 
be evolved and put into use so as to avoid ugly situations where the NHAI 
becomes totally helpless either to foreclose a contract or to take any punitive 
action aga inst the contractor in case of his defaulting the terms of agreement. 
The Committee wonder whether the credibility of the contractor so appointed by 
NHAI in the extant case was at all ascertained by the NHAI before awarding the 
contract.  The present case definitely points towards shortcomings on this 
account.  The Committee also direct that all efforts must be made by the NHAI to 
recover its legitimate due by presenting its case professionally during the 
arbitration proceedings.  In this regard, the Commit tee desire that the proposal of 
the Ministry for creation of a Legal and Arbitration Cell in NHAI headed by a Chief 
General Manager with experience in Concessions and Contract Law be 
implemented without any delay for the purpose of handling competently the  
issues related to monitoring of dispute resolution process and all legal and 
arbitration cases. 
 
 Coming to the question of the proposed implementation of a Modern Toll 
Collection System as a future solution, the Committee note from the information 
furnished by NHAI that the said system comprising of many advance sub -
systems would have some distinct advantages in terms of preventing leakages 
besides being user convenient by allowing the toll collecting agency to improve 
customer service and satisfaction.  In this direction, the Committee recommend 
that with the fast development of NHDP, all efforts must be made by the 
Government as well as NHAI to put into place the Modern Toll Collection System 

 
 
 
at the maximum number of toll plazas in a time bound manner so  as to cover 
the entire NHDP.  For this purpose, target dates for various toll sections must be 
fixed and their implementation must be ensured.  
 
Lastly, the Committee recommend that as an exercise of foresight, the NHAI 
must prepare a list of all the pres ent and future tollable stretches indicating the 
details of expected revenue, cost of collection, arrangement for collection etc. 
besides bringing out clearly the variations, if any, from the Government approved 
toll norms and the reasons for the same etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NHAI is taking advance steps to ensure proper and timely commencement of 
user fee (toll) collection as well as for timely construction of toll plazas.  
 
To safeguard NHAI interests in situations like M/s Ganpati Toll, provisions for 
sufficient advance performance securities i.e. cash equivalent   to 3 months fee 
collection in addition to bank guarantee for a equivalent amount, have been 
made in the contract documents for user fee collection through private 
contractors(auction). To recover its legitimate dues from M/s Ganpati Tolls, NHAI 
is putting its best efforts as well as taking help of the leading legal experts for 
proper presentation during arbitration proceedings. Further, Ministry has already 
issued guidelines vide its circu lar dated 04.05.2006 that no new contracts shall 
be awarded to private contractors and user fee collection is to be primarily done 
through DGR agencies.  
 
NHAI being well aware of the inherent problem of leakages in tolling, various 
measures like decoy customers, discreet observations, 72 Hr spot survey etc are 
being conducted from time to time to keep a close surveillance on the toll 
collecting agencies, besides other measures at PIU level. 
 
To keep pace with the increased task of User Fee Collection (Toll ), the system of 
monitoring user fee agencies is being reviewed and improved based on past 
experience as well as to make it legally more binding on user fee agencies. 
Some of the recent measures taken in this matter, are detailed below: 
 
 To keep pace with the increasing number of fee plazas, EoI has already 
been called for empanelment of CA firms at State levels to carry out 72 Hr 
Spot Study as well as to perform the functions of Local Fee Auditor.  
 The contract documents for engagement of DGR sponsored ex -
servicemen agency has been reviewed clearly defining the penalties in 
case of defaults by fee collecting agencies.  The revised draft contract 
document is under preparation. This is expected to be finalized shortly. 
 All contractual documents are got vetted  through renowned legal firms to 
avoid any clause not sustainable against legal grounds. 
 

 
 
 
 Based on the experience gained from levy and collection of user fee, the 
Sub – Committee of CoS under the Chairmanship of the Secretary 
(Expenditure) has already fina lized its recommendations on new toll 
policy. This is expected to take care of various issues of Public as well as 
Private Funded projects pertaining to user fee collection (tolling). 
 To handle the issues related to monitoring of dispute resolution process  
and all legal and arbitral cases, a Legal and Arbitration Cell headed by a 
Chief General Manager with experience in Concessions and Contract Law 
has already been created in NHAI and is functional.    
 
Regarding Modern Toll Collection System, NHAI on pilot  basis, has already 
identified 10 plazas in 1st phase for implementation of Modern Toll Collection 
Systems. With reduced human intervention, it would certainly help in prevention 
of leakages in user fee collection to a great extent. On the basis of the 
experience of these pilot projects, this concept is thereafter proposed to be 
applied to other projects under NHDP in a time bound manner. The 
computerization which is also a part of Modern Toll Collection System has 
already been achieved on most of the plaza s and all the plazas are being 
connected through WAN to NHAI HQ for real time monitoring of user fee 
collection at various plazas.  
 
The Committee’s recommendations regarding preparation of a list of all the 
present and future tollable stretches indicating  the details of expected revenue, 
cost of collection, arrangement for collection etc. shall automatically be catered 
through CPIS which is presently under implementation. Besides, as apprised 
earlier, the overall plan of plaza locations and lengths covered  under each plaza 
for all the 4 arms of GQ has already been finalized and Tolling Plan for NS/EW is 
under finalization.  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
Reply of the Authority regarding the preparation of a list of present and fu ture 
tollable stretches indicating the details of expected revenue, cost of collection, 
arrangement for collection etc. is not verifiable at this stage because the 
Computerized Project Information System is still under implementation. The 
Authority should frame time schedule for its implementation and should adhere to 
it.   Further, action taken by the Authority to safeguard its interests in situations 
like Ganapati Toll is contrary to the reply given by the Authority. Though the 
Authority replied that provision for performance security like cash equivalent to 3 
months toll collection and bank guarantee for equivalent amount have been 
made in the contract documents, in the latest toll collection agreement signed in 
June, 2007, the Authority has stipulated pe rformance security deposit equivalent 
to 2 days toll collection or Rs. 10.00 lakh whichever is high in the form of bank 
guarantee.  Other measure to be taken by the Authority may be watched during 
subsequent audit.  
 

 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
Computerized information system in 10 locations identified by the Authority will 
be implemented upto  the end of September, 2008. Thereafter the efforts will be 
made to implement at other toll plazas.  All efforts will be made to stick to the 
above stated  time schedule.   
 
It has been informed earlier  that in the  case of user fee collection through 
private contractors (auction), sufficient performance securities are now taken in 
advance i.e. cash equivalent   to 3 months fee collectio n in addition to bank 
guarantee for a equivalent amount. This shall be sufficient to avoid such type of 
situation to surface again   as faced by NHAI in case of Ganpati Tolls. This type 
of bid document will be used only if the collection activities  are gi ven on auction 
basis to the Private Contractor.  Whereas the  provision of performance 
guarantee equivalent to two days of toll collection  or Rs. 10 lakhs whichever is 
higher , has been made in a new formulated bid document which are being 
entered into only  with Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) sponsored ex -
servicemen personnel.  In this arrangement the DGR agency is paid service 
charges on monthly basis and the total actual collection goes to NHAI account on 
daily basis which is unlike  to the a rrangement with Private Contractor  who pays 
a lump -sum amount to NHAI on monthly basis and the actual collection is 
retained by themself.  Therefore, there is no contradiction in the two statements 
as it is for two different type of contract documents.  
 
All measures taken by NHAI will be submitted in subsequent Audit.  
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.  No.  11) 
 
Restructuring of National Highways Authority of India 
   
The Committee note that in 1995 when the NHAI was set up, its mandate was 
limited to implementation of a few Asian Development Bank assisted works and 
subsequently, a few more projects were entrusted to it by the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways.  It was only after the sanctioning of the NHDP in 1998 that 
its mandate was enlarged exponentially.  To cope with the increased mandate, 
the Committee feel that institutional strengthening of NHAI is very crucial.  In  this 
direction, the Committee note that the Committee on Infrastructure under the 
Chairmanship of Prime Minister considered this issue and decided that it is 
necessary to build NHAI’s institutional capacity by making it a multi -disciplinary 
body having hi gh quality expertise in financial and contract management.  
Accordingly, an Inter-Ministerial Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of  
 
 

 
 
 
Secretary, Road Transport and Highways has inter-alia recommended that the 
tenure of the NHAI Chairman be fixed for at least 3 years extendable to 5 years; 
increase in number of part -time members in NHAI Board from the present 4 to 6; 
6 full time members against 5 at present; to empower the Authority to create posts 
in NHAI upto the level of Chief General Manager a nd creation of additional posts 
of CGMs, etc.  This Committee has also recommended establishing expert cells in 
NHAI in the fields of Project Appraisal, Planning, Quality Assurance, 
Standardization and R&D, Contract Management, Legal Arbitration and Safety .  
The Committee note that the above -mentioned report is presently under the 
approval of the Cabinet.  In view of this, the Committee while appreciating the 
efforts made by the Government for restructuring of NHAI feel at the same time 
that this should have been done much earlier.  There has been a definite laxity on 
the part of the Government for not initiating these measures during the initial 
stages of NHDP.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that, as promised by the 
Ministry during their deposition be fore the Committee, all requisite efforts must be 
made to complete the whole exercise of restructuring of NHAI including some 
amendments required in the NHAI Act, 1988 for creation of certain additional 
posts, by the end of the year 2006.  The Committee fu rther recommend that the 
exercise of framing the Recruitment Rules, if any, required to be framed in 
pursuance of the amendments in the NHAI Act should also be started 
simultaneously so that requisite posts in NHAI could be filled up in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that the Draft Cabinet Note for restructuring of NHAI is under 
finalization.    
As regards, recommendations of inter -ministerial Committee on Infrastructure 
regarding creation of cells to look after specialized functions have b een 
implemented by creation of separate cells for Road Safety, Law & Arbitration, 
Standardization, Planning & Quality, Contract Management and Project 
appraisal. Simultaneously, an exercise for framing Recruitment and other 
Regulations for the Authority is currently under finalization.   
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The work relating to restructuring of NHAI and framing of Recruitment and other 
Regulations of the Authority is not yet finalized. The Authority has, however, 
created all the cells as promised to COPU.  The finalization of above work will be 
watched in Audit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
As desired by Audit, the position of restructuring of NHAI and framing of 
Recruitment and ot her Regulations of the Authority will be watched by them in 
subsequent audit.  Hence no comments. 
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.  12) 
 
Implementation of Subsequent Phases of NHDP  
 
 The Committee note that Phase -I of the NHDP suffered many 
shortcomings during its implementation resulting in time and cost overrun.  These 
shortcomings occurred primarily on account of inadeq uate planning and non -
synchronization of pre -construction activities, lack of coordination with 
governmental agencies, deficient Detailed Project Reports, inadequate contract 
management and non -standardization of contract provisions.  Further, lack of 
effective deterrent provisions regarding performance of DPR consultants, Project 
Supervision Consultants and Contractors etc. led to making of overpayments and 
sub-standard quality of works besides resulting in delayed completion of project. 
  
The Committee is , however, inclined to give lenient view to NHAI with regard to 
the above-mentioned deficiencies keeping in view the fact that the Authority was 
performing such a mammoth task for the first time.  The lack of experience by 
NHAI in handling projects and pro grammes of this magnitude is the main reason 
for the deficiencies observed in planning and contract management during 
implementation of Phase-I of the NHDP.   
  
In the above backdrop, the Committee observe that the subsequent phases i.e. 
Phase-II and Phase-III of the NHDP Project are already under implementation by 
the NHAI and the approval for other phases like Phase -IV to Phase -VI has 
already been given by the Government.  The Committee feel that NHAI should 
learn a lesson from its past experiences and en sure that the lapses which 
occurred during the implementation of Phase -I do not recur in the subsequent 
phases of NHDP.  The Committee recommend that the NHAI must evolve a 
system for continuously storing and using experiences gained over the passage 
of ti me in various fields such as bid process, contract management, time and 
cost overrun, quality of work, performance of Contractors, Design Consultants 
and Supervisory Consultants etc. and this must be put into use in the subsequent 
phases in the best possible manner.  The Committee further recommend that the 
recommendation of the Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) constituted by the 
Ministry regarding establishment of Expert Cells in the field of  Project  Appraisal,  
 
 

 
 
 
Planning, Quality Assurance, Standardiz ation and Research & Development, 
Contract Management, Arbitration and Safety be implemented without any 
further loss of time so as to establish in-house specialist expertise in these fields. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that NHAI had taken sev eral steps to capture the best practices 
and using its experience in improving the system of the bid process, contract 
management etc. NHAI has already created Standardization and R&D Cell and 
Planning & Quality Assurance cell. The Standardization and R&D cell inter-alia is 
responsible for tracking the best practices; facilitating design consistency and 
standardization of the document of the bid process of contractors, design 
consultant and supervision consultants. The request for proposal, bid document 
for design consultant, contractors, supervision consultants, civil works manual, 
quality manual, model concession agreement etc. have already been 
standardized. Planning and Quality Cell on the other hand is responsible for 
promoting the quality initiatives.  
 
The experience gained by NHAI in NHDP -Ph-I is being used for improving and 
strengthening the system of bid processes, quality of work, performance of 
contractor/design consultant/supervision consultant by incorporating suitable 
clauses in the contract ag reement for keeping effective check on the outsourced 
agencies. 
 
The monitoring system is also being strengthened to keep continuous checks on 
the progress of the projects and for resolving the critical issues. NHAI has also 
developed RIS and CPIS software  which will assist in monitoring the projects 
effectively to avoid any time or cost overrun. 
 
NHAI has already constituted Expert Cells in the fields of Project Appraisal, 
Planning, Quality Assurance, Standardization and R&D, Contract Management, 
Legal & Arbitration and Road Safety and putting its best possible efforts to avoid 
recurrence of lapses which were observed during the implementation of Phase -I, 
in the subsequent phases of NHDP.   
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Auth ority has created all the cells as promised to COPU. However, the 
outcome of this action will be watched during the Audit of subsequent phases of 
NHDP.  
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
As desired by Audit, outcome of the action taken by NHAI will be watched by 
them in their subsequent audit.  Hence no comments. 
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 

 
 
 
Chapter III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Standardization of Stretches  
 The Audit in their report has pointed out that NHAI did not standardize the 
length of stretches for award of cont racts to facilitate cost comparison for award 
and execution of work nor did it devise any more robust and effective cost control 
mechanism as an alternative.  This resulted in variation in cost per km of 
contiguous stretches from 1.86 crore to Rs. 4.20 crore per km.  In this regard, the 
Committee note that both the Ministry as well as NHAI have expressed 
reservations on the possibility of standardization of stretches.  It has been 
submitted that the same is not possible because of a large number of variable s 
like variations in number of major bridges/stretches, length of service roads, 
terrain and soil conditions, traffic volume, etc. 
 
In this connection, the Committee note that according to the guidelines 
specified by the Public Investment Bureau (PIB) for scrutiny of individual sub -
projects under NHDP by NHAI Board, it has specifically been inter-alia included 
that the proposals for the investment decisions of the sub-projects should contain 
the details of the costs of 4/6 laning along with the comparative cost of latest 
approved/awarded projects on a like to like basis.  In case of substantive 
variations, specific justification should be given.  However, no information either 
by the NHAI or by the Ministry has been furnished to the Committee suggesting 
that any attempts have been made to compare the cost on a like to like basis as 
indicated in the said guideline.  In this regard, the Committee feel that now after a 
lapse of almost 6 years since launching the NHDP, enough experience and 
technical data is available with NHAI and the same is required to be put into use 
to take care of the reservations expressed by the NHAI regarding standardization 
of the stretches.  In addition to this, the NHAI should also explore the possibility 
of devising alternative cost control system so that the kind of variance pointed out 
by the audit could be addressed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding standardization  of the stretches, it is submitted that the 
decision regarding the length of the package is taken after carefully st udying 
various aspects of the project corridor like geographical and topographical 
features, requirement of bypasses, service roads, major bridges, traffic volumes, 
cost etc.  Packages sizes accordingly have different lengths.  In view of the 
factors indicated above, it is not feasible to standardize the length of packages. 
 

 
 
 
 As regards comparing the cost of various projects (packages) on like to 
like basis, it is submitted that the DPR are prepared for each project following 
basic standards codified by IRC  and MOST and the cost per km. depends on 
number of parameters like condition of existing road, sub soil data, facilities to be 
provided like service roads, flyovers, underpasses, cross drainage works like 
bridges, culverts, leads for natural and manufactu re material required as inputs 
for the projects etc.  The cost of the project as determined by the DPR 
Consultant is then indicated in the bid document and the bidders quote their 
price.  The bid price is then compared with the DPR’s estimated cost.  Follo wing 
the system of open and transparent bidding, competitive bids are received, 
processed and appropriate decision for acceptance / rejection of the bids is 
taken.  Whenever the proposals are placed before the NHAI Board for approval 
of the sub projects, e xplanatory notes are invariably given for variation in costs 
per km. of the sub project. 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
In connection with the alternative cost control system, NHAI has recently invited 
proposal from International Consulting Firms to undertake the followings tasks: 
(i) Study of DPRs of National Highways Development Projects sub -
projects with a view to find out the possible variation and 
inconsistencies in the project preparation with regard to prescribed 
guidelines and design standards and to examine the cost estimation 
methods adopted and unit rates for various items of works 
considering the leads and basic rates of materials etc. 
(ii) Study of the work executed in respect of the DPR selected under 
Task (i) above to analyse the possible reasons for the variation in the 
provisions of DPRs and actual execution of work. 
(iii) Review of specifications and design standards. 
(iv) Review of analysis of rate and standardization of Bill of Quantities 
(BOQ).Review of construction technology. Th e detailed cope of work 
under the above assignment has  been elaborated in Terms of 
Reference International Consulting firm for providing consultancy 
services for reviewing costs of construction of projects  
 
 As the Authority has established alternative c ost control system, Audit has 
no further comments. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
The ATR have been vetted by the Audit without any further comments.  
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.    6) 
 
Preparation of Contract Documents 
 
 The Committee note that NHAI did not prepare the contract documents 
with due care and there were inconsistencies in var ious clauses in respect of 
Conditions of Particular Application (CoPA), price escalation clause, recovery 
clause for Mobilization Advance and Standardization of Bills of Quantities (BoQ) 
in respect of Bituminous Course.  Regarding the Bills of Quantities, the Audit has 
pointed out that an extra cost of Rs. 260.98 crore was incurred with reference to 
the lowest quantities of bituminous work in the 23 stretches for which the analysis 
was made.  In these stretches, the quantities per km of Bituminous Course varied 
widely from 4% to 1280%.  The Committee note that as remedial measures, the 
Conditions of Particular Application in respect of price variation clause and 
recovery clause for Mobilization Advance in the bid documents have since been 
standardized vide NHAI circular dated 27 August, 2004.  The Committee note 
with satisfaction that the same has been verified and found correct in the follow -
up audit conducted by the C&AG. 
 
 As regards standardization of Bills of Quantities, the NHAI has stated that 
it is no t feasible to standardize the per km quantity of bituminous work as 
bituminous pavement thickness depends on various parameters such as traffic 
density, type of terrain, soil, climate conditions etc.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with this sort of respo nse from NHAI.  Though it may be correct that the 
thickness of bituminous layer may depend on the above parameters, but these 
parameters do not undergo abrupt changes for similar type of stretches.  Further, 
laying of bituminous course commences only after the completion of the sub-base 
and base courses, which ensure evenness of the surface.  As informed by Audit, 
the maximum thickness of the Bituminous Course should be 40 mm only (up to 
100 msa-million standard axles).  In view of this, the Committee recom mend that 
NHAI must explore the possibility of standardization of Bituminous Course to the 
best possible extent in view of data collected so far in this regard.  Further, 
collective views of the DPR consultants along with the in -house expertise 
available w ith NHAI may also be put into use to achieve this objective besides 
making its whole set of operations more transparent and accountable. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In connection with the recommendations of the Committee regarding 
exploring the possibility of standardization of bituminous course, it is submitted 
that the National Highways Development Project undertaken by NHAI is to 
increase the capacity of the existing National Highways by increasing  the number 
of lanes, generally from two lanes to four la nes & six lanes. This program 
accordingly involves:- 
(i) Strengthening the existing pavement 
(ii) Constructing new pavement 

 
 
 
(iii) Improving geometrics of the road 
(iv) Re-aligning the existing roads. 
 
Bituminous layers, provided in the road structure consists of structural 
layers, profile correction & wearing course.  The thickness of structural 
bituminous layer to be provided depends upon existing thickness of the 
pavement, traffic density, type of terrain, properties of foundation (soil),  climatic 
conditions etc. The thickne ss of profile corrections depends upon from the 
existing & the modified layout & cross section of the road.  Thickness of wearing 
course generally remains the same.  All the factors mentioned above collectively 
decide the total thickness of bituminous laye r to be provided. In view of the 
variety of factors mentioned above it is not feasible to evolve a standard 
thickness of bituminous layer to be provided.  However, detailed designs are 
carried out as per the IRC standards, MOST specifications & good engine ering 
practices.   NHAI follows these guidelines while designing the flexible bituminous 
pavements.  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee gave this recommendation after examining the reply given 
by the Authority on the audit observation. Despite this, the Authority, without 
taking any action to comply with the recommendation, is giving the same reply as 
it gave earlier. Hence, the Para stands. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 The Audit pointed  out that the quantities per km of bituminous works 
varied widely from 4% to 1,280% with reference to the lowest quantities in one 
out of 23 stretches as per the analysis detailed below:- 
S.No Bituminous work Qty. Per 
km. 
Lowest quantity in the 
Project 
1 Prime Coat (Technical Specification 
Clause – 502) 
4,800 sqm Delhi Border – Samalkha 
(NS-2 Package) 
2 Tack Coat (Technical Specification 
Clause – 503)  
(a) on granular surface 
(b) on bituminous surface 
 
3,028 sqm 
3,829 sqm 
 
Vijayawada – Eluru 
Lucknow – Kanpur (EW-2) 
3 Profile Correction with Dense Bituminous 
Macadam (Technical Specification Clause 
– 507) 
100 cum Agra – Dholpur (NS -5 
Package) 
4 Dense Bituminous Macadam (Technical 
Specification Clause – 507) 
1,329 cum Vijayawada – Eluru 
5 Bituminous Concre te (Technical 
Specification Clause – 509) 
484.6 cum Palanpur – Dessa (EW –XI 
Package) 
 
2. The following variables are involved in above bituminous layers, which 
vary from Project to Project : 
i) Prime Coat: Prime Coat is laid on granular surface, i.e., th is layer 
requirement comes in case of new 2 -lane/ 4 -lane or reconstruction of existing 

 
 
 
pavement.  This layer is not required in case PCC (Bituminous) is laid over the 
existing road before strengthening layers.  In the projects, the length of new 
construction and strengthening of existing road vary. Hence, this quantity per km 
can not be same in various projects. Further as per Technical Specification 
Clause – 502, the quantity of prime coat varies from 6 to 15 kgs per 10 sqm 
depending upon the porosity of the surface.   
ii) Tack Coat: Tack Coat is applied over the Prime Coat or Bituminous 
Surfaces before applying further layers. As per Technical Specification Clause – 
503, the quantity varies from 2 kg to 3 kg per 10 sqm. Further where the material 
to receiv e an overlay is a freshly laid bituminous layer that has not been 
subjected to traffic, or contaminated by dust, a tack coat is not mandatory where 
the overlay is completed within two days.   
iii) Profile Correction Course (PCC) with DBM : This is used in c ase of 
strengthening of existing pavement (without scarification/ reconstruction).  The 
thickness of PCC depends upon the cross profile/ levels of the existing road and 
designed levels of PCC top.  Hence this quantity can not be same per km.  
iv) BC: As pe r IRC -37-2001, guidelines for design of flexible pavements, 
thickness of BC for traffic upto 50 MSA is 40 MM and it is 50 MM for 150 MSA.  
Further, this quantity varies from Project to Project depending upon the length of 
structures/ bridges involved as we aring course over the structures/ bridges is 
measured separately under bridges item. 
3. The pavement composition (thickness of various layers) varies from 
Project to Project depending upon sub -grade CBR and traffic (MSA). In IRC -37-
2001, (guidelines for de sign of flexible pavements), the thicknesses of various 
layers for new constructions are already recommended (copy  of Code  is placed 
at   Annexure I)  
4. In view of above, it may kindly be considered that standardization of per 
km quantities of bituminous layers is not possible technically.   
 
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.   7) 
 
Overpayments made to the contractors on account of excise and customs 
duty exemptions. 
 
 The Audit in their report has observed that while calling bids for stretches 
funded by the Wor ld Bank, NHAI failed to include a clause in the Notice Inviting 
Tenders (NIT) that the bidders should quote the prices excluding customs/excise 
duties, as exemptions were available to them.  Also, the provisions for payment 
of price escalation incorporated  in the agreements did not provide for exclusion 
of excise duty element from the basic price of raw material agreed to.  According 
to Audit, the omission has resulted in NHAI not getting the benefit of duty 
element and resultant lower cost.  Further, NHAI issued exemption certificates to 
five contractors, after finalizing the contract for availing the duty exemption but 
could not recover the proportionate duty element from the bills of contractors in 
the absence of necessary stipulation.  This resulted in u ndue benefit of Rs. 30.69 
crore to these five contractors. 
 
 The NHAI/Ministry have sought to justify their position by submitting that 
such exemptions were already in existence before the contracts were awarded to 
the contractors.  It would, therefore, no t be legal for NHAI to recover the benefit 
availed by contractors in view of the exemption Notifications of the Government 
of India since NHAI’s action would restrict the benefit given by the Sovereign.   
  
The Audit has, however, countered the above conte ntion on the ground 
that the Government of India vide their Notification No. 108/95 -C.E. dated 
28.8.1995 issued in exercise of powers conferred by Section 5A (1) of the 
Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 read with Section 3(3) of the Additional Duties 
of Ex cise (Good of Special Importance) Act, 1957, exempted from payment of 
excise duty all goods that are supplied to the projects financed by United Nations 
or International Organizations and approved by the Government of India.  As 
such, the duty exemption is  available to the projects and not to the contractors.  
Audit was not provided any documentary evidence that the excise/customs duty 
elements were duly factored in at the time of award of contract.  In the absence 
of any clear stipulation in this regard in the contract, what could happen is that 
the contractors would receive full payments inclusive of the duty element and 
they would receive the refund from revenue authorities and not pass on the same 
to NHAI.  In this way the contractors would gain and NHAI would loose.  
Normally, the provision relating to duty exemptions should be a routine provision 
incorporated in the Notice Inviting Tenders and then the contractors are expected 

 
 
 
to pay back to the client (NHAI, in this case) the duty refund received by the m 
from the revenue authorities.  NHAI should have exercised due professional 
care in ensuring and documenting this aspect before releasing the Duty 
Exemption Certificate.  
   
Taking into consideration the above -mentioned positions taken by the 
Ministry/NHAI vis-à-vis the C&AG’s contention, the Committee feel that the whole 
issue needs to be looked into. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As directed by the Committee, the whole issue has been reviewed and it is 
submitted that in respect of the Externally Aided Projec ts (EAPs) [like World 
Bank, Asian Development Bank etc], exemption from payment of excise duty and 
custom duty were admissible under notification no. 108/95 -CE dt. 28.5.1995 and  
Notification No. 84/97 -Custom, dated  11.11.1997, respectively  as amended 
from time to time i.e. well before the bids for  NHDP Phase I were invited  by 
NHAI.   In clause 73.2 of the Condition of Particular Application (COPA) it was 
stipulated that  “the prices bid by the contractor shall include all customs duties, 
import duties,  business taxes, and income and other taxes local/State 
Government Octroi, royalty etc. that may be levied in accordance with the laws 
and regulations being in force on the date 28 days prior to the latest date for 
submission of bid”. Further in COPA claus e 73.4, the contractors were requested 
to verify from the Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenue) of the  latest 
position of  exemptions available. Thus, it may be submitted that  the 
excise/custom duty exemptions being in existence much  before the c ontracts 
were awarded to the contractors  can not be presumed  to not having been 
factored  in the   bids.  In   view of this it can not be said that the action of NHAI 
resulted into undue benefits to the contractors.  As regards the observation that 
the d uty exemption is available to the projects and not to the contractors , it is 
submitted that such exemptions were given by Govt. of India in case of the 
projects of International Lending Agencies to bring a level playing field amongst 
the Contractors from M ember Countries of such International Lending Agencies 
and Indian Contractors.   
 
Standard bidding documents adopted by NHAI in August, 2004  also  stipulates 
in Instructions to Bidders , under clause 14.3 that  “all duties, taxes and other 
levies payable by the Contractor under the contract, or for any other cause as of 
the date 28 days prior to the deadline for submission of the bids, shall be 
included in the rates and prices and the total bid price submitted by the bidder 
and the evaluation and compariso n of bids by the Employer shall be made 
accordingly”. 
 
However, for the sake of further clarity, NHAI has initiated action to incorporate 
the following sub -clause under Clause 14.3.1 of Standard Bidding Documents, 
“Bidders may ascertain the excise and cust om duty exemption available for this 

 
 
 
project as per the relevant policy of the Government of India prevailing 28 days 
before submission of bid.”   
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
While inviting bids, the Authority should clearly indicate the various customs 
/excise duty exemptions available for the project and direct the bidders to quote 
accordingly.  Instead of taking action on these lines, the Authority proposes to 
include clause 14.3.1 which is vague as it does not specifically  mention whether 
excise duty and custom duty exemption  were available or not for bids. As the 
reply of the Authority does not comply with the recommendation, the Para may 
stand. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 It has already b een submitted that to inform the bidders about the 
exemption available, following will be incorporated in Para 14.3. of Instruction to 
bidders:- 
 
“Bidders may ascertain the excise and custom duty exemption available 
for this project as per the relevant pol icy of the Government of India 
prevailing 28 days before submission of bid.”   
 
 Basic idea of  the clause  is that  the bidders should take into account 
while bidding, the exemptions available  for custom and excise duty as per the 
relevant Act.  The laws keeps on changing, thus any detailed standard disclosure 
may not be possible as in the event of any unfavourable changes about the 
custom/ excise duty, the contractor may claim against NHAI to compensate for 
any unfavourable changes. 
  
[Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Deptt. Of Road Transport & Highways,) O.M No.-- 
RW/H-11016/47/2006-PIC Dated 25.9.2007]. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: Rupchand Pal 
24 April, 2008 Chairman, 
04 Vaisakha 1930 (S)     Committee on Public Undertakings. 

 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE 22 nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 24th APRIL, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1630 hours to 1730 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N. S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
   Shri J.N. Gupta    Director General of Audit 
 
2. xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the two other draft reports on the following 
subjects and adopted the same without modifications: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on Fourteen th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2006 -07) on National Highways 
Authority of India – National Highways Development Project (NHDP), 
Phase-I. 
 
(ii)  xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxxxxxx
 xxxxxxxxxxxxxx    xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx  xxxxxxxxxxxx
 xxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
4.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report for presentation. 
 
5. xxxxxxx  xxxxxxxxxx  xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxx     
xxxxxxx  xxxxxxxxxx  xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned.  
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
 

 
 
 
Appendix II 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings  (2006 -2007) on National Highways 
Authority of India – National Highways Development Project (NHDP), 
Phase-I. 
 
 
l Total Number of recommendations  12 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government. (vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 
1,2,3,4,8,9,10,11 and 12.) 
 
Percentage of total  
 
 
 
 
75% 
lII Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. (vide 
recommendations at Sl. Nos.5 and 6) 
 
Percentage of total  
 
 
 
 
16.67% 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been ac cepted by the 
Committee. 
(vide recommendations at Sl. No.7) 
 
Percentage of total 
 
 
 
 
 
8.33% 
V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the  Government are still awaited : 
 
 
NIL 
 
 