C.P.U. No. 931 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA - SAFETY AND SECURITY ASPECTS  
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Twenty-Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 
th  Lok 
Sabha) on – Airports Authority of India – Safety and Security Aspects) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.02.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.02.2009 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2009/ Phalguna 1930 (S)  
 
37  

  
 
CONTENTS  
 
  Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted  by 
Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government 
Replies  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which repl ies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations in respect of which fina l 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
 
 APPENDICES  
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
Minutes of the sitting  
Appendix-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Governm ent on 
the recommendations contained in the 29 th  
Report of COPU (14 th  L.S.) on ‘ AAI – Safety and 
Security Aspects’ 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

  
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2008 – 2009)  
 
CHAIRMAN  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5.  Shri Francis K. George 
6.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
7.  Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8.  Shri Kashiram Rana 
9.  Shri Mohan Rawale 
10.  Shri K.C.”Baba” Singh 
11.  Smt. Pratibha Singh  
12.  Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
13.  Shri K.V.Thangkabalu 
14.  Shri Rajesh Verma 
15.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
16 Shri Rahul Bajaj 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
20 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
21 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
22 Shri Amar Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
 3. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings h ave been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf, present their 37 
th  Report 
on Action Taken by Government on the recommendation s contained in the 29 th  
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th  Lok Sabha) on – Airports 
Authority of India – Safety and Security Aspects. 
 
2. The Twenty Ninth Report of the Committee on Publ ic Undertakings was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 24 
th  April, 2008.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations contained in the Report were receiv ed on 19 th  November  2008.  
The Committee on Public Undertakings considered and  adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 24 th  February 2009.  The minutes of the sitting are giv en in 
Appendix-I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on  the recommendations 
contained in the 29 
th  Report of the Committee (2007-2008) is given in Ap pendix-
II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI :      RUPCHAND PAL  
24 February 2009       CHAIRMAN, 
5,Phalguna 1930 (S)     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTA KINGS 

  
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action  taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty ninth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public U ndertakings, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 24 
th  April 2008. 
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the G overnment in respect of 
all the 14 recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been 
categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been acc epted by the 
Government (Chapter-II) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12 and 14         (Total 10) 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observation which the Committee  do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: (Chapter-III) 
Sl. No. 11                (Total 1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: (Chapter-IV) 
Sl. Nos. 10 and 13                        (Total 2)  
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government is still awaited: (Chapter-V)    
Sl. No. 8                (Total 1) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in r espect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have  been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action take n by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 

  
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Security role of Airport Director 
 
5. The Committee in their 29 
th  Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the role assigned to the Airport Directors over security; 
 
“The Committee observe that the Airport Director ha s been allocated a 
very critical function of overall management and co ordination of security 
matters in the airports. In view of the trend of pr ivatization of Airports and 
their management, and also to enable the Airport Di rector to devote more 
attention to safety management, the Committee feel that it is necessary 
that the Airport Director is relieved of the primar y responsibility over 
security matters. In the opinion of the Committee, it may not be advisable 
that an Airport Director of a private airport be en trusted with such vast 
security related responsibilities in the interest of National Security. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Govern ment should 
take immediate steps to relieve the Airport Directors of the responsibility of 
overall management and coordination of airport secu rity at each airport. 
The Committee further desire that the Airport Direc tor should be made 
accountable to the Security Incharge of the airport  in all matters of 
security.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken  reply on the above 
recommendation has stated as follows:- 
 
(i) “At an airport, many governmental/semi governme ntal agencies e.g. 
customs, health, immigration, state police and/ or CISF, oil companies etc. 
and non governmental agencies e.g. airlines and var ious concessionaires 
are present. Each organization has its own independ ent administrative 
and operational set up. There is an inter-play of v arious organizations and 
the Airport Director acts as a nodal point to resol ve the issues arising out 
of the interplay and to ensure synergy in the opera tions of various 
agencies with the ultimate aim of smooth flight ope rations. The Airport 
Director represents the Airport Operator and is res ponsible for providing 
the infrastructure required for airport security as per BCAS guidelines. 
 
(ii) At all the AAI airports the present system in vogue is running smoothly. A 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) approved by the government 
regarding the deployment of CISF at the airports co vers all aspects of 

  
 
 
coordination required between the CASO of CISF and the Airport Director 
and AAI has not faced any difficulties in this regard. 
 
(iii) A circular directing CASO to report to Airpor t Director is being issued by 
BCAS.” 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. Taking note of critical importance of security m atters in the airport 
especially in view of the trend of privatization of  airports, the Committee in 
their report had recommended that Airport Director be relieved of primary 
responsibility of security matters.  The Committee regret to note that the 
Ministry has not examined the thrust of their recom mendation for relieving 
the Airport Directors of their responsibility of ov erall management and 
coordination of airport security at each airport an d making airport directors 
accountable to security incharge of the airport in all matters of security.  
On the contrary, the BCAS is issuing a circular dir ecting CASO to report to 
Airport Director which further enhances the importa nce of Airport 
Directors. The Ministry’s reply, in the opinion of the Committee, is 
premised narrowly in a context where all Airports in the country were under 
AAI, a government undertaking. In view of growing t hreat perception of 
terrorism, the Committee would like to reemphasize that all airport security 
related matters should be handled by governmental a gencies. The 
Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recomme ndation and desire that 
the government consider it denovo  in the light of the Committee’s 
observations herewith and seriously contemplate pre -empting such 
undesirable scenario.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
Action Taken in the matter.   

  
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
National Policy on Civil Aviation 
 
8. The Committee in their 29 
th  Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the delay in finalization of a National Policy on Civil Aviation. 
“The Committee observe that even after more than a d ecade into the 
liberalization of the Civil Aviation Sector, the Ministry has not put in place a 
National Policy framework for the Civil Aviation Se ctor. The Committee 
further observe with regret that despite being awar e of the larger growth 
path that a policy framework can provide to the sec tor, the Ministry are still 
in no hurry to draw up such a roadmap and are showi ng a lackadaisical 
approach to the whole issue, saying its absence doe s not affect the 
sector. 
 
The Committee feel that lack of a much needed wider  perspective 
and the Ministry’s failure in providing a clear vis ion to the sector is largely 
responsible for haphazard growth in the sector. The  Committee strongly 
disapprove the lackadaisical approach of the Minist ry resulting in 
unsynchronized decisions and sporadic growth in the  sector. The 
Committee feel that such developments have, among o ther things, 
seriously undermined safety and security concerns. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Government should expe dite the process of 
having the National Policy on Civil Aviation in pla ce at the earliest, after 
obtaining inputs from experts in the field, who may  be given lateral entry 
into the Ministry on contractual basis, if required.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken  reply on the above 
recommendation has stated as follows: 
 
 
“After extensive consultation with stakeholders and  inter-ministerial 
consultations, Ministry of Civil Aviation had propo sed a Draft National Civil 
Aviation Policy for approval of the Union Cabinet, on 16.05.2007. Cabinet 
in its meeting held on 15.6.2007, decided to refer the matter to a Group of 
Ministers (GOM) for further consideration. The reco mmendations of GoM 
are yet to be finalized.” 
 
10.  It is further submitted that this Ministry is conscious of the need for early 
finalization of National Aviation Policy. However, it is also to be observed that the 
non-finalization thereof has not precluded the Gove rnment from taking various 

  
 
 
policy initiatives, which are required for developm ent of civil aviation sector. 
Some of the important policy decisions taken/initia ted by the Government, in 
recent past, are as under: 
 
(i) Revised FDI Policy for airports has been put in  place vide 
which 100% FDI, through automatic route, has been p ermitted 
in Greenfield airports. 
 
(ii) FDI requirements for air transport side of civ il aviation has 
been revised and separate limits have been prescrib ed in 
respect of different sectors such as cargo, airline s, non-
scheduled operators, MRO etc. 
 
(iii) Greenfield Airport Policy has been announced,  which lays 
down policy guidelines for establishment of new airports. 
 
(iv) Relaxed procedure for establishment of private  airports for 
‘private use’ has been announced. 
 
(v) Proposal for establishment of an economic regul ator for 
airports viz Airports Economic Regulatory Authority  (AERA) 
has been formulated.  A Bill, in this regard has be en recently 
passed by both Houses of Parliament. 
 
(vi) Private domestic airlines have been permitted to fly on 
overseas routes subject to specified guidelines. Fu rther, 
bilateral arrangements with other countries have be en 
gradually liberalized. These initiatives have enabl ed 
considerably better international connectivity. 
 
(vii) Air India and Indian Airlines have been merge d to create a 
strong and efficient national carrier. 
 
(viii) A new Flying Training Institute is being est ablished at Gondia, 
Maharashtra. Further, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Adademi 
has been restructured. These measures would help in  putting 
in place better training infrastructure for technic al manpower in 
the aviation sector.” 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 

  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
11. In their Action Taken Reply to the Committee’s recommendation to 
expedite the process of finalization of National Po licy on Civil Aviation so 
as to give a wider perspective to growth of aviatio n sector, the Government 
has enumerated a host of policy initiatives taken for the development of the 
sector in the absence of national policy. The Committee are very well aware 
of these policy decisions that the government had t aken in the absence of 
a National Policy on Civil Aviation and do not agre e with the Government’s 
contention that its absence does not hamper decisio ns being taken by the 
Government.  The Committee still feel that lack of a much needed wider 
perspective and the Ministry’s failure in providing  a clear vision and 
holistic approach to the sector, which a National P olicy ought to offer, is 
largely responsible for haphazard growth in the sec tor.  The Committee 
deplore that despite their specific recommendation for formation of 
National Civil Aviation Policy, Ministry has not ta ken up the matter with the 
Group of Ministers for early finalization of the po licy.    The Committee 
therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation de siring the government to 
expedite the finalization and operationalization of  a National Civil Aviation 
Policy under which future policy decisions can be m ade in consonance 
with set goals. 

  
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Need for planned growth in aviation sector 
 Airports Authority of India is the primary airport  operator and the lone Air 
Navigation Services (ANS) provider in the country a nd has responsibilities that 
are critical to aviation safety and security. The C ommittee note that there has 
been phenomenal growth in air traffic during the la st 5 years especially at the 
metro airports. The air traffic has been growing at  the approximate rate of over 
30% per annum during the last five years. With the opening of aviation sector to 
private airlines, the number of scheduled air trans port operators has also 
increased from five in 2002 to fifteen in 2007. All  these have put a great strain on 
airport infrastructure and Air Traffic Services, wh ich have not been augmented in 
proportion to the increased traffic. The Committee also note that the DGCA, 
which is the safety regulator, and the BCAS that re gulate aviation security are 
severely under staffed to handle the expanding resp onsibilities arising from the 
growth in air traffic. They observe that timely act ion to enhance the capacity of 
these institutions has not been taken by the Govern ment. The Committee have 
been informed that AAI has taken several steps to c ope with the increasing traffic 
like simultaneous use of runways, new  high speed e xist taxi-bays, parallel taxi-
tracks, ATC automations, etc. The Committee while appreciating these measures 
would also like to caution that safety and security  of air travel should not be 
compromised, and emphasize that international norms  of safety and security 
should be scrupulously adhered to while taking step s to cope up with the 
increase in air traffic. 
The Committee recommend that permission to the new operators, as well 
as additional operations by existing operators, sho uld be granted only after 
through assessment of infrastructure availability v is-à-vis safety requirements. 
The Committee further recommend that the Government  should take steps to 
synchronize all future growth in aviation sector wi th a corresponding 

  
 
 
enhancement of the organizational and technical cap acity of the aviation safety 
and security regulators. 
Reply of the Government 
 
There is a proposal to restructure and strengthen D GCA to meet the 
demand of exponential growth in aviation sector. Fo llowing steps have been 
taken as per the international norms to cope with the increase in traffic: 
(i) Modernization of Air Traffic Services; 
(ii) Procedures are being revised; 
(iii) Performance Based Navigation procedures are i mplementation 
stage; 
(iv) Implementation of SMS at the airports; 
(v) Modifications in SOP’s; 
(vi) Increase in ground infrastructure, constructio n of new runway, bays 
and terminals;  
(vii) Implementation of flexible use of airspace to  reduce congestion in 
air. 
 
 Beside above, all infrastructural facilities inclu ding CNS/ATM facilities are 
developed/installed by Airports Authority of India (AAI) in accordance with the 
specification/parameters of Annex-14 of ICAO Docume nts and Aerodrome 
Design Manual. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Database on incidents/accidents 
 
The Committee note with regret that AAI could furni sh details of 
accidents/incidents at only three airports, names, Kolkata, Thiruvanthapuram and 
Chennai Airports, when asked to furnish the details  in respect of all airports 
operated by them. The Committee observe that the sy stem of reporting of 
accidents/incidents at airports and the maintenance  of centralized data thereof is 
weak, as evident from AAI’s inability to furnish su ch data for all airports operated 
by them. The Committee would like to stress that co mpilation and collation of 

  
 
 
data is of paramount importance for identifying and  rectifying the 
shortcomings/deficiencies in the airport operations. 
 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that AAI  should make a 
comprehensive review of the system of incident/acci dent reporting and take 
urgent steps to set up a centralized database of in cidents of runway intrusions 
and accidents of any description within the precinc ts of its airports. Further, the 
Committee desire that the DGCA should make it oblig atory on all Airport 
Operators to put a modern system in place and submi t the data to DGCA every 
quarter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Aerodrome Operators/Airports Authority of India  is being advised by 
DGCA to put in place a system of maintaining accide nt/incident data and to 
submit to DGCA quarterly. 
A centralized Database for keeping records of runwa y incursions/ 
incidents/accidents type of occurrences, within the  precincts of AAI airports, is 
being maintained. 
 
 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Ground Traffic Management 
 
The Committee note that in the three airports about  which information was 
furnished regarding accidents/incidents, 24 acciden ts/incidents took place within 
a span of three years and a majority of such accide nts/incidents occurred in the 
apron/taxiways of airports,. This is indicative of the fact that adequate attention is 
not being paid to the management, monitoring and im provement of movement of 
service vehicles, passenger ferry buses, equipments  and persons in the apron 
area. Further, the Committee observe that inadequat e attention given to the 

  
 
 
management of human, equipment and vehicle movement s in the apron and 
taxiways of airports have caused several accidents and incidents. 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that a proper sys tem of ground 
traffic management with a structured and accountabl e organization be put in 
place at each airport. Further, the Committee desir e that case of accidents may 
be properly enquired into, responsibilities be fixe d and the penalties for violations 
leading to accidents must be made harsher and hefti er so that they have 
deterrent effect. Further, the Committee also desir e that DGCA should regulate 
this matter by making it mandatory for all airport operators to put in place a 
structured and functional system to manage human, e quipment and vehicular 
traffic in the apron and taxiways of airports. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DGCA has issued Air Safety Circular and Guidelines to manage human, 
equipment and vehicular traffic as the Air side. Op eration, Monitoring and 
Surveillance Inspection of operations at Airport are also being conducted. 
 
Further, in accordance with the Standards and Recom mended Practices 
(SARPs) contained in Annex 14 to ICAO Convention, r equirement for 
establishing Apron Management service and Airport V ehicular Operations in 
maneuvering area, by the aerodrome operator at the airports, are already laid 
down in the Civil Aviation Requirement Part 4 Serie s B Issue I dated 31 
st  July 
2006. 
AAI has established dedicated Airside Services Mana gement (ASM) at 
Kolkota, Chennai and Thiruvanthapuram airports wherein: 
• Training is imparted to all drivers/operators. 
• After successful completion of training, Airfield D riving Permit 
(ADP) is issued. 
• Apron Control Unit officials regularly monitor/regu late the traffic 
and penalty is imposed on erring drivers/operators. 
• Incident/accident is analyzed and remedial actions are taken. 
 

  
 
 
ASM will also be established at other airports in a  phased manner 
depending upon the complexity of operations. 
In addition, at busy airports, where ground traffic  and number of aircraft 
movements have increased significantly, a Surface M ovement Control (SMC) is 
being established. These SMCs will be manned by the  trained manpower from 
air traffic control. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
          OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Emergency drills and their regulation 
The Committee have been informed that AAI have no s eparate 
organizational structure to handle disasters and em ergencies. Instead, the 
officers in AAI have been imparted training on disa ster management in general 
and assigned a definite role in the Local emergency  Procedure and Contingency 
Plan. 
While appreciating the above arrangement, the Commi ttee are of the firm 
view that there is a need to buttress the functiona lity of the Local Emergency 
Procedure and Contingency Plan and therefore recomm end that regulator mock 
drills at specified intervals should be made mandat ory so as to improve the 
effectiveness of the system and minimize the respon se time to handle and 
emergency. The Committee further desire that the DG CA make it mandatory for 
all Airport operators to put such a system in place  by issuing appropriate 
regulations. 
 

  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Though AAI have no separate organizational structur e to handle disaster 
and emergencies but the officers have been trained on the disaster management 
system. Local Emergency Procedures and Contingency Plan are in place at all 
airports. Monthly hot fire drills are being conduct ed regularly at all airports. 
Aerodromes are now being licenced by DGCA as per in ternational standards. 
Civil Aviation requirement (CAR) is in place for such requirement. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Upgradation and regulation of and systems & equipments 
 
The Committee observe that despite the number and f requency of airport 
incidents in the Indian skies comparing favourably to incidents in other countries, 
the fact remained that the absolute figures in Indi a are on the rise from 10 in 
2004 to 21 in 2007. Further, the Committee note wit h concern that a high 
percentage of such airport incidents are due to err ors by Air Traffic Controllers or 
due to procedural and technical shortcomings in the  communication, navigation 
and surveillance (CNS) and Air Traffic Management ( ATM) services, commonly 
known as Air Navigation Services (ANS). The Committ ee appreciate the efforts 
made by AAI to minimize air proximity incidents. Ne vertheless, they feel there is 
an urgent need to speed up the process. 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that AAI should t ake steps to 
accelerate the pace of implementation of improvemen ts in procedures and the 
introduction of latest system and equipments, espec ially relating to ATC 
procedures, ATC automation, surface movement radar,  air traffic flow 
management and safety management system. The Commit tee further desire that 
AAI should take urgent steps for implementation of improvements in the ANS 
system and upgradation of equipments in all major a irports in a phased manner. 

  
 
 
The Committee further recommend that system improve ments and equipment by 
the ANS provider should be adequately regulated by the DGCA to ensure strict 
adherence to international norms and standards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government have amended the Aircraft Act, 1934 to i nclude provision for 
the certification, inspection and regulation of com munication, navigation and 
surveillance/or air traffic management facilities. 
 
The amendment has been notified in the Gazette date d December 6, 
2007. In order to develop regulatory capability of DGCA in the fields of 
certification of aerodromes, communication, navigat ion and surveillance, a 
proposal  to strengthen existing Directorate of Aer odrome Standards, DGCA is 
under consideration. 
 
Further, AAI continuously upgrade its CNS/ATM syste ms and procedures 
by providing state -of- the-art equipment to ensure  smooth and efficient air traffic. 
The pace of induction of such equipment has been ac celerated in the last two 
years in view of rapid increase in air traffic. Fol lowing major initiatives have been 
taken/are planned: 
   
• Though a number of radars have been provided, but s till the surveillance 
coverage is not seamless in the land mass. Projects  have been initiated 
for procurement of additional radars to fill such g aps. Additionally, at busy 
airports it has been decided to provide a second ra dar to ensure the 
continuity of radar service in case of non-availabi lity of the main radar. 
Approach Radar is also proposed to be provided at Cochin and Amritsar. 
• For control and guidance of air traffic on the serv ice, in addition to 
Advances Surface Movement Guidance and Control Syst em (ASMGCS) 
available at Delhi Airport, similar systems are bei ng implemented at 5 
more airports namely, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Kolkata , Chennai and 
Mumbai. 
• Increasing level of automation in the ATC system is  the need of the hour. 
A number of projects have been initiated to bring i n higher level of 
automation with control tool and safety alerts. The  ATM automation 
system at Delhi and Mumbai are being upgraded. New automation 
systems are planned at Kolkata and Chennai. A proje ct has also been 

  
 
 
taken up for tower automation at 30 other airports.  All these projects will 
go a long way in increasing the efficiency and safety of the ATC services. 
• As far as navigation facilities are concerned, ILS is being provided at 11 
additional airports. DVOR/DME is also being provide d at 10 additional 
airports. 
• The ambitious project launched jointly by AAI and I SRO namely GAGAN, 
which will usher satellite navigation in the Indian  airspace, is progressing 
well. The first phase namely, the Technology Demons tration System 
(TDS) has been successfully completed in 2007 and t he results obtained 
are very satisfactory. For making the system fully operational by 2010, 
tenders have also been received and are evaluation. 
• AAI is also going ahead in providing GBAS system at  Delhi and Mumbai 
by providing precision approach. 
• Data communication is planned to be introduced. A p roject has been 
taken up for networking of D-ATIS and for providing  Pre-departure 
Clearances on data network for efficient and reliable communication. 
• The VHF voice coverage over the Indian land mass an d possible areas in 
the ocean is being augmented by providing a number of RCAG VHF 
stations. This project is expected to be completed shortly. 
 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Recommendation No.6 
  Air Traffic Control – strength and efficiency 
The Committee observe that despite continuously ris ing air traffic 
beginning from 2002, no recruitment of Air Traffic Control Officers has been 
carried out till 2005 and gap between sanctioned an d actual strength of ATCs 
increased from 29 in 2002 to 526 in 2007. The Commi ttee also observed that 
substantial number of non-executives of ATC discipl ine had been elevated to 
executive levels. The upgradation of non-executives  to executive cadre in such 
large numbers, the Committee feel may compromise on  quality of ATCOs. One 
of the findings of ICAO Audit of 2006 inter-alia re lates to lack of policies, 
procedures and programmes for determining the short , medium and long term 
staffing requirements for the provision of an adequ ate ATS system, including the 
timely recruitment of ATM staff. The Committee furt her observe that in the 
backdrop of rising air traffic, failure on the part  of AAI to put in place necessary 
policies, procedures and programmes for staffing as  pointed out by ICAO Audit, 

  
 
 
resulting in shortage of manpower, has imposed long  hours of work on ACTOs 
whose jobs require undivided attention. The 42 hour s per week working hours 
are higher than that of a civil servant with a job that is less strenuous at 40 hours 
per week. The Committee also note that of late attr ition rate of ATCOs is also 
rising which is evident from the fact that during t he year 2007, 32 ATCOs left the 
job. 
Taking into account the stressful and sensitive nat ure of job an ATCO 
performs, and the revelation that a high percentage  of airport incidents have 
been attributed to Air Traffic Control personnel, t he Committee strongly 
recommend that AAI should take prompt measures to a ttract, recruit and retain 
adequate number of qualified ATCOs by reviewing wor king hours, making 
working conditions more attractive and upgrading su itably the salary structure 
and career progression. As high alertness of ATC pe rsonnel is crucial to the 
safety of air operations, it is incumbent upon ever yone of them to perform their 
duties with utmost care and caution. In this regard , the Committee recommend 
that a system of breath analysis/alcohol tests as i s done in the case of pilots be 
introduced for ATCOs before logging-in for duty. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is stated that the increase in the strength of A TCOs from 2002 to 2007 
was due to the increase in the requirement at few a irports and also due to 
operationalisation of few smaller airports, which were earlier non-operational. 
Recruitment process for 300 posts of Junior Executi ve (ATC) has been 
recently completed.  Offer of appointment to 248 ca ndidates has been sent and 
for remaining 52 candidates offer is being issued as per training schedule.  
Services of retired ATCOs are also being availed to  meet the shortage. 
Besides, efforts are on to increase the training ca pacity at ATC/RTC and also at 
the new created training establishment at Begumpet airport at Hyderabad. It is 
expected that the position shall improve in the next couple of years. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 

  
 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Corporatization of ANS 
The Committee take note of the critical role of Air  Navigation Services 
(ANS) in the management of aviation safety. The Com mittee also are in 
agreement about the need to separate ANS provision from Airport operators. 
Most importantly, the Committee feel that Air Navig ation Service needs to be 
managed effectively and with no compromise on stand ards. The Committee feel 
that challenges such as attracting and relating ade quate trained manpower, 
development of safety procedures, introduction of a dvanced systems and 
induction of new and emerging technologies demand u rgent and sustained 
attention. Besides, AAI as an airport operator, can not be allowed to be ANS 
provider in an environment where private airport operators are fast emerging. 
 
The Committee therefore recommends that a separate corporate entity 
should be created under 100% Government ownership a nd steps taken to 
expeditiously make it a world class ANS provider. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
M/s KPMG were appointed as Consultants for advising  AAI/Ministry of 
Civil Aviation the various options for Corporatizat ion of ANS Services.  M/s. 
KPMG have recommended hiving off the ANS services f rom AAI to a 
Government owned Company in a two steps process.  I n the first stage, all ANS 
functions have been recommended to be aggregated un der a separate Member 
(ANS).  Thereafter, based upon the review of such a ggregation, the ANS 
functions may be assigned to a separate Government owned Company, which 
would require an amendment to the Airports Authority of India Act’ 1994.  Ministry 
of Civil Aviation is “in - principle” agreement wit h the aforesaid recommendations 
and action is being initiated to implement the first stage proposals. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 

  
 
 
Recommendation No.9 
Restructuring of DGCA 
The Committee observe that while the number of airl ine operators was 
allowed to increase and airlines were allowed to ex pand, the Government have 
failed to take necessary steps to restructure and s trengthen the regulatory 
authority, i.e. the DGCA in tandem with the growth in the sector. Further, the 
Committee feel that burdening the regulator with in spectorate functions not only 
put pressure on the organization but also stand to compromise its independent 
functioning as far as inspection and safety audits are concerned. The Committee 
are aware that the M.K. Kaw Committee constituted b y Government had 
submitted its report on restructuring the DGCA. 
While the Government is implementing the Kaw Commit tee 
recommendations, the Committee would like to stress  upon the need for an 
investigation, as distinct from the regulator, DGCA , which should be outside the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Civil Avi ation. The Committee therefore 
urge the Government to keep this aspect into consid eration while implementing 
the Kaw Committee recommendations. Further, the Com mittee is of the view that 
(in place of the present one-man Director General o f Civil Aviation) a multi-
member body consisting of preferably three members,  one of them as Chairman, 
may be set up and the criteria/qualification for se lection of such members shall 
be as per the international norms for such posts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) ha s made a 
recommendation regarding review of legislation and regulations to ensure that 
investigation of aircraft accidents and serious inc idents are conducted by an 
independent authority separate from Directorate Gen eral of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA). The matter is under active consideration an d DGCA has been asked to 
prepare a road map for separation of investigative functions from the regulatory 
agencies. 

  
 
 
A proposal regarding re-structuring and strengtheni ng of DGCA is also 
under consideration. 
  
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM  No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
BCAS – reviewing strength, functions and efficiency 
The Committee observe that the Bureau of Civil Avia tion Security is the 
regulator and overall supervisor of aviation securi ty. The Committee, while 
applauding the BCAS are appalled at the callous tre atment meted out to this 
important institution. The number of sanctioned strength of critical positions in the 
BCAS remained unrevised since its formation in 1987  despite tremendous 
expansion in its responsibilities with the growth in civil aviation sector. Worse, the 
actual strength of ACOS and DCOS officers in the BC AS did not even meet 50% 
of the sanctioned strength till May 2007. Further, the Committee observe that due 
to acute shortage of manpower, the BCAS has been re duced to a body merely 
issuing regulations without having adequate capacit y of oversee adherence by 
concerned agencies to such regulations. 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that ste ps be taken by the 
Government to expedite the plans to restructure and  strengthen the BCAS on 
priority. The Committee further recommend that besi des the regulatory functions 
of the BCAS, its supervisory and inspectorial funct ions and responsibilities ay be 
enhanced to cope up with the Aviation Security chal lenges posed by 
unprecedented growth in the domestic civil aviation  sector as also the entry of 
the private airport & airline operators. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Proposal of restructuring and strengthening of BCAS  is under examination 
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on priority. Furt her proposal to enhance 
supervisory and inspectoral powers and responsibili ty of BCAS to cope with the 
Aviation Security challenges posed by unprecedented  growth in the domestic 

  
 
 
civil aviation sector as also the entry of the priv ate airport and airline operations 
in under consideration of Bureau of Civil Aviation. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Safety Norms 
 
The Committee observe that safety instruction of tr ansiting foreign air 
transport operators’ aircraft was started by the DG CA as recently as January 
2008. The Committee also noted that an Aviation Saf ety Week was organized 
during December 2007. The Committee express shock o ver the laxity in 
inspecting the foreign operators while transiting I ndian airspace and Indian 
Airports. The Committee also feel that aviation saf ety needs to be ensured 
through systematic and sustained efforts towards co ntinuous improvements, and 
desire that the lessons learnt from events such as the Aviation Safety Week 
should be properly assessed and gainfully utilized. 
 
The Committee recommend that a proper and fool proo f system to ensure 
adherence to safety norms by all the aircrafts oper ating/transiting the national 
airspace should be put in place by the Government through the DGCA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DGCA has initiated to conduct surveillance checks o f Foreign Operators 
and a few operators were checked in recent past.  I t is proposed to conduct 
random surveillance of foreign operators so as to e nsure strict adherence to 
safety norms.  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008  

  
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.11 
Review of structural mechanism to handle aircraft hijack 
 
The Committee observe that the Central Committee ch aired by the DGCA 
is responsible for implementing the orders of the C ommittee of Secretaries on 
Aircraft Hijack (COSAH) and handling hijack situations at operational level. 
While appreciative of the existence of a structural  mechanism to handle 
aircraft hijack situations, the Committee of Secret aries on Aircraft Hijack 
(COSAH), and handling hijack situation at operation al level by the DGCA, which 
is the authority on safety threat, the Committee de sire that the possibility of 
having an authority on security, like the COS (CA) of the BCAS, at the chair of 
such a Committee may be seriously explored. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Decision for  the DGCA  to chair the Central Committee was taken 
consciously by the Government having regard to the fact that a lot of coordination 
is required with the aeronautical authorities of ot her countries for release/  
handling of hijacked  aircraft etc. There is no doubt that the Commission er of 
Security (Civil Aviation) is an important member of  the Committee, who gives 
inputs in regard to security matters and the decisions are taken collectively by the 
Committee.  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008  
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Security role of Airport Director 
 
The Committee observe that the Airport Director has been allocated a very 
critical function of overall management and coordination of security matters in the 
airports. In view of the trend of privatization of Airports and their management, 
and also to enable the Airport Director to devote m ore attention to safety 
management, the Committee feel that it is necessary  that the Airport Director is 
relieved of the primary responsibility over securit y matters. In the opinion of the 
Committee, it may not be advisable that an Airport Director of a private airport be 
entrusted with such vast security related responsibilities in the interest of National 
Security. 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that the Governme nt should take 
immediate steps to relieve the Airport Directors of  the responsibility of over 
management and coordination of airport security at each airport. The Committee 
further desire that the Airport Director should be made accountable to the 
Security Incharge of the airport in all matter of security.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) At an airport many governmental/semi government al agencies e.g. 
customs, health, immigration, state police and/ or CISF, oil companies 
etc. and non-governmental agencies e.g. airlines an d various 
concessionaires are present. Each organization has its own 
independent administrative and operational set up. There is an inter 
play of various organizations and the Airport Direc tor acts as a nodal 
point to resolve the issues arising out of the inte rplay and to ensure 

  
 
 
synergy in the operations of various agencies with the ultimate aim of 
smooth flight operations. The Airport Director repr esents the Airport 
Operator and is responsible for providing the infra structure required for 
airport security as per BCAS guidelines. 
(ii) At all the AAI airports the present system in vogue is running smoothly. 
A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) approved by th e government 
regarding the deployment of CISF at the airports co vers all aspects of 
coordination required between the CASO of CISF and the Airport 
Director and AAI has not faced any difficulties in this regard.  
(iii) A circular directing CASO to report to Airpor t Director is being issued 
by BCAS. 
 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
Please see Para No.7 of Chapter-I 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
National Policy on Civil Aviation 
 
The Committee observe that even after more than a d ecade into the 
liberalization of the Civil Aviation Sector, the Mi nistry has not put in place a 
National Policy framework for the Civil Aviation Se ctor. The Committee further 
observe with regret that despite being aware of the  larger growth path that a 
policy framework can provide to the sector, the Min istry are still in no hurry to 
draw up such a roadmap and are showing a lackadaisi cal approach to the whole 
issue, saying its absence does not affect the sector. 
The Committee feel that lack of a much needed wider  perspective and the 
Ministry’s failure in providing a clear vision to t he sector is largely responsible for 
haphazard growth in the sector. The Committee stron gly disapprove the 
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry resulting in  unsynchronized decisions and 

  
 
 
sporadic growth in the sector. The Committee feel t hat such developments have, 
among other things, seriously undermined safety and  security concerns. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the Government s hould expedite the 
process of having the National Policy on Civil Avia tion in place at the earliest, 
after obtaining inputs from experts in the field, who may be given lateral entry into 
the Ministry on contractual basis, if required. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After extensive consultation with stakeholders and inter-ministerial 
consultations, Ministry of Civil Aviation had propo sed a Draft National Civil 
Aviation Policy for approval of the Union Cabinet, on 16.05.2007. Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 15.6.2007, decided to refer the mat ter to a Group of Ministers 
(GOM) for further consideration. The recommendation s of GoM are yet to be 
finalized. 
 
2.  It is further submitted that this Ministry is c onscious of the need for early 
finalization of National Aviation Policy. However, it is also to be observed that the 
non-finalization thereof has not precluded the Gove rnment from taking various 
policy initiatives, which are required for developm ent of civil aviation sector. 
Some of the important policy decisions taken/initia ted by the Government, in 
recent past, are as under: 
 
(i) Revised FDI Policy for airports has been put in  place vide which 
100% FDI, through automatic route, has been permitt ed in 
Greenfield airports. 
 
(ii) FDI requirements for air transport side of civ il aviation has been 
revised and separate limits have been prescribed in  respect of 
different sectors such as cargo, airlines, non-sche duled operators, 
MRO etc. 
 
(iii) Greenfield Airport Policy has been announced,  which lays down 
policy guidelines for establishment of new airports. 
 
(iv) Relaxed procedure for establishment of private  airports for ‘private 
use’ has been announced. 

  
 
 
 
(v) Proposal for establishment of an economic regul ator for airports viz 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) has b een 
formulated.  A Bill, in this regard has been recent ly passed by both 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
(vi) Private domestic airlines have been permitted to fly on overseas 
routes subject to specified guidelines. Further, bi lateral 
arrangements with other countries have been gradual ly liberalized. 
These initiatives have  enabled considerably better  international 
connectivity. 
 
(vii) Air India and Indian Airlines have been merge d to create a strong 
and efficient national carrier. 
 
(viii) A new Flying Training Institute is being est ablished at Gondia, 
Maharashtra. Further, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Adademi has 
been restructured. These measures would help in put ting in place 
better training infrastructure for technical manpow er in the aviation 
sector. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
Please see Para No.11 of Chapter-I. 
 

  
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Need for separation of safety inspection and accident investigation from 
regulatory function. 
 
The Committee appreciates the submission made by th e Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding the considerat ion given by the Government to 
separate the accident investigating functions from the regulatory authority. 
However, in addition to separating the accident inv estigation functions from the 
regulatory authority, i.e. DGCA, the Committee are of the opinion that the new 
agency that shall be created should also be vested with inspectorate functions 
currently handled by DGCA. The Committee are inform ed that all the safety 
related functions of the AAI like fire safety, air traffic services, ground traffic 
management, etc. are subject to internal inspection s and internal safety audits. 
They also found the DGCA as severely ill-equipped i n terms of adequate trained 
personnel to deliver its functions of safety inspec tion and audit over Airport & 
Airline operators. Besides, it was not mandated to regulate and inspect ANS 
activities until recently. The Committee strongly b elieve that there is a need for 
an independent, efficient and credible system of sa fety inspection and safety 
audit over the safety functions of Airport operator s, Air Transport operators and 
ANS provider. They appreciate the internal inspecti on and monitoring that exists 
and desire this to continue with enhanced rigour. H owever, the Committee are of 
the opinion that internal inspections and audit s a re executive functions aimed at 
enhancing efficiency  and effectiveness and needs t o be complimented with the 
existence of an independent and external agency for  inspection and 
investigation. Besides, the Committee feel that reg ulatory functions of DGCA will 
also be rendered more efficiently once the added re sponsibilities of inspection 
and investigation are offloaded from it. 

  
 
 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that exp editious steps 
should be taken to set up an independent agency, wh ich should carry out 
inspections and safety audit of all safety related activities of all players in the 
sector including air Transport operators, Airport o perators, the ANS provider, etc. 
and should be vested with responsibility of accident investigation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Ministry has proposed need for separation of Sa fety Inspection and 
Accident Investigation from regulatory function and DGCA has been requested to 
suggest a road map for the same. 
 
 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
OM No. H -12019/1/2008 –AAI Dated: 17.11.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI : RUPCHAND PAL  
24 February 2009  CHAIRMAN, 
5, Phalguna, 1930(S)     . COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  

  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE 16 
th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON  24 th  February 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1030 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
4 Shri Harikewal Prasad 
 5 Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA 
 
6 Shri Rahul Bajaj 
7 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
8 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri J. P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the followi ng Draft Reports 
without modifications: - 
 
(i) XXXXXXXX   XXXXXXXX   XXXXXX 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on action taken by t he Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 29 
th  Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (14 th  Lok Sabha) on Airports Authority of India - 
Safety and Security Aspects. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 

  
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 29 
TH  REPORT OF COPU (14 TH  
L.S.) ON “AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA – SAFETY AND S ECURITY 
ASPECTS.” 
 
 
I. 
 
Total number of recommendations 14 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations that have been acc epted 
by the Government 
(vide  recommendations at Sl. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12 and 
14) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
71.42  
III. Recommendations / Observations which the Commi ttee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
(vide  recommendations at Sl. Nos. 11) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
1
 
 
 
 
7.14  
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by  the 
Committee 
(vide  recommendations at Sl. Nos. 10 and 13) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
14.28  
V. Recommendation/Observation in respect of which f inal 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(vide  recommendations at Sl. No. 8) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
1
 
 
 
 
7.14  
 