21
 
C.P.U. No. 911 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
“AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA-REVIEW OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
OPERATIONAL FACILITIES" 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
 
 
(Based on the Audit Report No . 17 of 2007 (Performance Audit) of C&AG of 
India-Union Government (Commercial) on Revie w of Infrastructure and 
Operational Facilities)  
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.11.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.11.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November 2007/ Agrahayana 1929 (S) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 Page No.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)………………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………………….. (v) 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………………………………………………. (vii) 
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS……………………………………………………………... (ix) 
                                          PART A 
 
                                            REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………… 1 
CHAPTER II ORIGIN, HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND FUNCTIONS OF 
THE AUTHORITY 
3 
CHAPTER III PERFORMANCE 7 
 A. Delay in Finalisation of Corporate Plan ………………….. 
B. Financial Outlay on Infrastructure / Capital Projects……. 
C. Non Traffic Revenue………………………………………... 
7 
8 
13 
CHAPTER IV OPERATIONAL AREA INFRASTRUCTURE 18 
 A. Timely completion of Projects…………………………….. 
B. Problems in Land Acquisition and Encroachment on 
Airport Land…………………………………………………. 
18 
22 
CHAPTER V  AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT, COMMUNICATION, 
NAVIGATION and SURVEILLANCE FACILITIES 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
A. Visual Simulator…………………………………………….. 
B. Voice Communication System……………………………. 
C. Dedicated Satellite Communication Network…………… 
D. UHF Links…………………………………………………… 
E. Instrument Landing System & Doppler Very High 
Frequency Omni Range…………………………………..  
F. Infructuous Expenditure of  Rs. 7.65 crore on Indigenous 
Manufacture of Radars ……………………………………. 
G. Idling of Flight  Inspection System………………………… 
27 
 
 
27 
28 
28 
29 
31 
 
32 
 
32 
CHAPTER VI PASSENGER FACILITIES INFRASTRUCTURE  34 
 A. Customer Satisfaction Levels…………………………….. 36 
CHAPTER VII CARGO FACILITIES INFRASTRUCTURE 39 
  A. Implementation of  Bar Code System……………………... 40 
CHAPTER VIII NO UNIFORMITY BETWEEN NAD AND IAD CONTRACTS 42 
CHAPTER IX NON-FINALISATION OF LAND/SPACE LEASE POLICY 44 
 PART B 
 
 
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee……………… 48 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Highlights of the Audit Report………………………………………… 63 
II Cases of Time and Cost Overrun in Creation of Operational 
Facilities………………………………………………………………… 
66 
III Cases of Problems in Acqui sition of Land Needed for 
Development Purposes……………………………………………….. 
69 
IV Minutes of Sittings of Committee……………………………… 70 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF  
THE COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal         -       Chairman 
 
Members  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16 
 
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J.P. Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
4. Shri N.C. Gupta   - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Under Secretary 
6. Ms. Malvika Sharma  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on  their behalf, present 
this Twenty First Report on Airports Authority of India - Review of 
Infrastructure and operational facilities. 
2. The Committee’s examination of  the subject was based on the 
Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India-Union Government 
No. 17 (Commercial) of 2007. 
3. The Committee had a technical briefi ng by the officials of C&AG on 
5th June, 2007.  The Commi ttee took oral evidence of the representatives 
of Airports Authority of India on 19th June, 2007 and on 13th July, 2007 and 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on 29th August, 2007.   
4. The Committee on Public Undert akings (2007-08) considered and 
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 26th November, 2007. 
5. The Committee wish to express t heir thanks to the representatives 
of the Airports Authorit y of India and Ministry of Civil Aviation for placing 
before them the desired material an d information in connection with the 
examination of the subj ect.  The Committee also place on record their 
appreciation for the assistance rendered by the Officials of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India.  They would also like to place on record their 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials 
of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Part-B of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                         Rupchand 
Pal 
26th November 2007                             
Chairman, 
05 Agrahayana 1929(Saka)                Committee on Public 
Undertakings  
 
 
(v) 

  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
 
Sl. No. Abbreviation Full form 
 
1.  AAI Authority Airports Authority of India 
2.  ADS Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
3.  AFFRV Air Field Fire fighting and Rescue Vehicle 
4.  ARSR Air Route Surveillance Radar 
5.  ASR Airport Surveillance Radar 
6.  ASFT Airport Surface Friction Tester 
7.  ATC Air Traffic Control 
8.  ATM Air Traffic Management 
9.  ATS Air Traffic Services 
10.  CFT Crash Fire Tender 
11.  CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
12.  CNS-P Communication, Navigational and 
Surveillance - Planning 
13.  CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
14.  DGCA Director General of Civil Aviation 
15.  DME Distance Measuring Equipment 
16.  DSCN Dedicated Satellite Communication Network 
17.  DVOR Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range 
18.  FANS Future Air Navigation System 
19.  FDPS Flight Data Processing System 
20.  GAGAN GPS And Geo Augmented Navigation 
21.  GPS Global Positioning System 
22.  GBP Great Britain Pound 
23.  IAD International Airports Division 
24.  ICAO International Civil Aviation Organisation 
25.  ILS Instrument Landing System 
26.  IRR Internal Rate of Return 
27.  ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
28.  MOCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
29.  MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
30.  MSSR Monopulse Secondary Surveillance Radar 
31.  NAD National Airports Division 
32.  NIT Notice Inviting Tenders 
33.  NOTAM Notice to Airmen 
34.  PCN Pavement Classification Number 
35.  RDPS Radar Data Processing System 
36.  UHF Ultra High Frequency 
37.  VCS Voice Communication System 
38.  X-BIS X-Ray Baggage Inspection System 
  
 
 
 
 
(vii) 
 
 

 
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS 
 
SL. 
No. 
Item Description 
1. Aerobridge An aerobridge is a movable bridge normally enclosed which 
extends from an airport terminal allowing the passengers to board 
an airplane without having to go outside. 
2. Apron A defined area in an airport intended to accommodate aircraft for 
purposes of loading or unloading passengers or cargo, fuelling, 
parking or maintenance. 
3. Approach 
funnel 
A specified airspace around an approach path within which an 
aircraft approaching to land is considered to be making a normal 
approach. 
4. CAT I, II, III 
A, B, C 
An instrument runway served by ILS and visual aids intended for 
operation with different runway visual ranges.  
5. DVOR DVOR or Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range provides 
electronic navigation to an aircraft. The DVOR gives accurate, 
specific directional information enabling pilots to determine their 
relative direction to or from a station. 
6. ILS A ground based precision approach system that provides course 
and vertical guidance to landing aircraft. 
7. NOTAM A notice containing information, the timely knowledge of which is 
essential to personnel concerned with flight operations. 
8. PCN A number representing the bearing strength of a pavement for  
unrestricted operations by an aircraft. 
9. Radar A radio detection device, which provides information on range and 
elevation of objects. 
10. Rapid exit 
taxiway 
 
A taxiway connected to a runway at an acute angle and  designed 
to allow landing aircraft to turn off at higher speeds than are 
achieved on other exit taxiways thereby minimizing runway 
occupancy times. 
11. RESA An area symmetrical about the extended runway centre line and 
adjacent to the end of the strip primarily intended to reduce the 
risk of damage to an aircraft undershooting or overrunning the 
runway. 
12. Runway A defined rectangular area in an airport prepared for the landing 
and take-off of aircraft. 
13. Runway 
Friction 
Condition of the runway surface determining aeroplane braking 
performance. 
14. Shoulders An area adjacent to the edge of a pavement so prepared as to 
provide a transition between the pavement and the adjacent 
surface. 
15. Taxiways A defined path in an airport established for the taxing of aircraft 
and intended to provide a link between one part of the airport from 
another. 
16. X- BIS 
machine 
X ray Baggage Inspection machine for screening baggage 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix) 
 

 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
1.1 The Audit Report of t he Comptroller & Auditor General of India-Union 
Govt. (Commercial)-No. 17 of 2007 ex amined the creation,  augmentation and 
adequacy of infrastructure and operational fac ilities by the Airports Authority of 
India (the Authority). The main functi ons of the Author ity are designing, 
construction and maintenance of airports  including operational and terminal 
facilities, providing communication and navigational aids and providing 
passenger facilitation and information syst ems.  The report was based on test 
check of records of 40 airports out of  total of 127 airports and discussions held 
with the management of AAI. The selection of  airports was made on the basis of 
geographical location, expenditure incurred,  criticality of t he project and physical 
progress of work. 
  
1.2  The salient features of t he Audit Report are as follows:- 
a) During the period 2000-01 to 2005-06,  the Authority spent Rs.3161.94 
crore for creation of infrastructure facilitie s at the airports. There was shortfall in 
actual expenditure compared to the plan outlay in all the years, which ranged 
between 1.82 per cent (2005-06) and 58.35 per cent (2000-01). These were due 
to delays in finalisation of schemes and tenders, midway alteration and delays by 
contractors during execution of work etc.  In respect of De lhi and Mumbai, due to 
the proposed restructuring of  the airports, no major in frastructure project was 
taken up in the four years ending 2005-06. 
 
b) The 84 airports, which had meager/no commercial operations, continued 
to incur revenue expenditure and in the four years upto 2005-06, 20 such airports 
ended with cash loss of Rs. 50.38 crore. The share of non-traffic revenue in the 
Authority, which is above 50 per cent internationally, was woefully short at 
around 11 to 14 per cent. The Authority did not finalise a land/ space lease policy 
for commercial exploitation of land to increase the share of non-traffic revenue. 
 
c) The Authority did not standardise its procedures and contract documents. 
The International Airports Division (IAD) and the National Airports Division (NAD) 
were following different Works Manuals and procedures  with attendant 
inconsistencies. The infirmities in the contract conditions led to contractual 

complications, overpayments, delays and lo ss of revenue. Projects were taken 
up without any commitment fr om the users. These proj ects yielded only negative 
return. 
 
d) Several works were foreclosed due to non-availability of work 
sites/disputes leading to wasteful expenditure, cost and time overrun. 
Encroachments were not removed in ti me. 702 acres of land were still under 
encroachment in different airports depriving the Authority of land required for 
infrastructure development. Land acquisition problems with St ate Governments 
and Defence authorities were not resolved in  time. Project monitoring and quality 
assurances were inadequate as these did not meet the standard requirements. 
 
e) Installation and commissioning of Communication and Navigational 
equipment were inordinately delayed due to delays in finalisation of orders, non-
availability of sites,  non-synchronisation of  allied activities etc. Terminal facilities 
at 11 out of 18 airports test checked were  saturated. Customer satisfaction level 
in a number of airports was below 70 per cent in respect of general comfort, toilet 
facilities, flight information system and trol ley availability. The Authority did not 
meet the International Civil Aviation Organisation (I CAO) recommendations on 
safety standards fully.  
 
 A copy of the Highlights of the Audit Report is given at Annexure-I. The 
various acts of omissions revealed by the Audit in the above Report have been 
dealt with by the Committee in detail in the succeeding chapters. 

 
Chapter II 
Origin, Historical Background and Functions of the Authority 
 
2.1 The Airports Authority of India managed 15 international airports, 86 
domestic airports and 26 civil enclaves as  on 31 March 2006 covering the entire 
Indian airspace. These 127 airpor ts included 83 oper ational and 44 non-
operational and closed airports. The five in ternational airports at Delhi, Mumbai, 
Chennai, Kolkata and Thiruvananthapuram are managed by the Authority’s 
International Airports Division (IAD) and the other airports  by the National 
Airports Division (NAD). 
 
2.2 Giving an outline of thei r origin and functions, AAI  in their written reply 
stated as under:- 
 “Airports Authority of India (AAI) was formed on 1st April, 1995 by merging 
erstwhile International Airports Authority of India (IAAI) and National 
Airports Authority (NAA), through an act of Parliament (A irports Authority 
of India Act 1994). AAI controls and manages Indian Air Space extending 
beyond the territorial limits of the country as designated by International 
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). The functions of AAI are as under: 
 
(i) To manage the airports, the civil enclaves and the aeronautical 
communication stations efficiently. 
(ii) To provide air traffic services and air transport services at any 
airport and civil enclaves. 
(iii) To plan, develop, construct and maintain runways, taxiways, aprons 
and terminals and ancillary buildings at the airports and civil enclaves. 
(iv) To plan, procure, instal l and maintain navigational aids, 
communication equipment, beacons and ground aids at the airports and at 
such locations as may be considered necessary for safe navigation and 
operation of aircrafts. 
(v) To provide air safety services and search and rescue, facilities in 
co-ordination with other agencies. 
(vi) To establish schools or  institutions or centre s for the training of its 
officers and employees in regard to any matter connected with the 
purposes of this Act. 
(vii) To establish warehouses and ca rgo complexes at the airports for 
the storage or processing of goods. 
(viii) To make appropriate arrangements for watch and ward at the 
airports and civil enclaves. 
(ix) To develop and provide consul tancy, construction or management 
services, and undertake operations in  India and abroad in relation to 
airports, air-navigation services, gr ound aids and safety services or any 
facilities thereat. 
(x) To perform any other function co nsidered necessary or desirable by 
the Central Government for ensuring the safe and efficient operation of 
aircraft to, from and across the air space of India.” 

 
2.3 The Authority were asked by the Co mmittee to give in chronological order, 
their development activities since ince ption including inter-alia, the aims and 
objectives, and problems coming in the way of achievement of objectives. In 
their written reply, they stated:-  
“The major development activities taken place since inception are 
enumerated below: 
 
¾ Action initiated for modernization of the Air Traffic Services (ATS) for Delhi 
and Mumbai airports during the year 1995-96. 
¾ State of Art Center for Perishab le Export Cargo commissioned at IGI 
Airport, New Delhi during the year 1997-98. 
¾ Integrated Cargo Terminal with fac ilities for processing Domestic, 
International and Courier/Express Ca rgo commissioned at Nagpur Airport 
during the year 1997-98. 
¾ In March 1998, the Delhi system of the modernization of the ATS was 
taken over from M/s. Raytheon. 
¾ The Cat. II ILS equipment at Runway 28 at IGI Airport was replaced with a 
new Cat. III compliant system and co mmissioned as Cat.II in February 
1999. 
¾ Terminal Building was commissioned in June, 1999 at Silchar Airport. 
¾ N.T. Rama Rao Domestic Terminal Building was commissioned in June, 
1999 at Hyderabad Airport. 
¾ New Terminal Building was constr ucted and commissioned in July, 1999 
at Imphal Airport. 
¾ Modification and expansion of exis ting Terminal Building was completed 
and commissioned in December, 1999 at Vijayawada airport. 
¾ AAI initiated action in t he year 2000 for restructuri ng of the Metro Airports 
at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai. 
¾ Airports Authority of India has been awarded Certificate of Approval under 
ISO 9001 for the Chhatrapati Shivaji In ternational Airport, Mumbai and 
Chennai International Airport, Chenna i during the year 2001-02.  Also 
Jaipur airport has been certified to ISO-9002 standards in respect of Air 
Traffic Services and Terminal Facilities with associated infrastructure 
during the same period. 
¾ During the year 2002-03, AAI initiated plan for development of 35 Non-
Metro Airports in the country. 
¾ In the year 2003, the AAI took over the Airport at Surat in Gujarat from the 
Government of Gujarat for development and modernization. 
¾ In the year 2003 AAI has initiated a pl an for implementation of a Satellite 
Based Augmentation System (SBAS) as  a part of the Global Navigation 
Satellite System (GNSS) programme of International Civil Aviation 
Organisation (ICAO).  The system is  being jointly developed by AAI and 
ISRO under Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed between the 
two organizations.  This will be one of the very few systems under 
development worldwide and will have the capability to provide satellite 
navigation services far beyond Indian air space. 
¾ A new modern passenger Terminal Buil ding with all passenger facilities 
was commissioned at Bhuj in August 2003. This Terminal Building was 
built after the earlier building was devastated during the earthquake. 

¾ AAI was awarded merits certificate by Hon’ble Vice Presi dent of India for 
Excellence in the Achievement of MOU Targets for the year 2003-2004 on 
10th January 2006. 
¾ In order to enhance Quality Managem ent System (QMS), AAI has 
undertaken plans for ISO 9001-2000 Certif ication of airports in a phased 
manner, which also forms part of MoU signed with the Ministry of Civil  
Aviation.  A total of 21 Airports / Offices / Units have been certified for 
QMS before 31.03.05.  During the cu rrent Financial Y ear 2005-06, ISO 
9001-2000 Certification of Nagpur, Trivandrum, Lucknow, Amritsar, 
Calicut, Indore, Trichy and New ATS Complex, Delhi has been obtained. 
¾ On 4 th April, 2006, AAI signed the Operations, Maintenance and 
Development Agreement (OMDA), S hareholders’ Agreement (SHA) and 
Land Lease Agreement and CNS-ATM Agreement with the two Joint 
Venture Companies namely Delhi Inte rnational Airport Private Limited 
(DIAL) and Mumbai International Airpor t Private Limited (MIAPL).  As per 
the mandatory Clause contained in the OMDA, these two airports namely 
Delhi and Mumbai were handed over to  the respective JVCs namely 
DIAPL and MIAPL on 3.5.2006 for operation and management of these 
two airports on thirty year long term lease basis.  After the three months 
transition period which ended on 3.8.2006,  the management of these two 
airports have been vest ed with the respective Jo int Venture Companies 
namely DIAPL and MIAPL. 
¾ Center for Perishable Cargo (CPC) at Amritsar airport in association with 
State Government of Punjab has been commissioned on 28.7.2006. 
¾ Phase I of Integrated Cargo Terminal  at Kolkata Airport for export 
operation has been commissioned on 31.7.2006.” 
 
2.4 On being asked by the Committee as to how many of the total number of 
airports are non-operational/ closed and t he reasons therefor, the Authority 
stated: -  
 “AAI is managing 133 airports (inc luding airports which are not owned by 
AAI but AAI is providing CNS/ATM fa cilities)….Out of 133 airports, 33 
domestic airports belonging to AAI are non-operational and 7 Civil 
Enclaves are non-operational. These ai rports are non-operational due to 
no firm commitment from airlines for scheduled commercial operations.” 
 
2.5 On being asked what is the expenditure incurr ed annually in maintaining 
these airports and whether any initiative has been taken to make them operative, 
AAI stated that: - 
 “The expenditure incurred for the y ear 2005-06 in maintaining these 
airports is about Rs.212 lakhs…. These airports have remained non-
operational mainly due to lack of co mmitment from the airlines for 
operation of scheduled flights. Apart from giving financial incentives to the 
airlines viz.  exemption of aircraft upto 80 seater capacity from payment of 
landing and parking charges, AAI has also taken up with the various State 
Governments the development of some of the unused airstrips. AAI has 
since entered into MoUs with some of the State Governments viz. 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Pondich erry to make unused airstrips 
operational. AAI is also taking up with other State Governments to 
develop the non-operational airstrips in the respective States.” 
 

Chapter-III 
Performance 
 
A. Delay in Finalisation of Corporate Plan 
3.1 As per Audit in Para 2.1, the Authority did not have any Corporate Plan. 
An unsuccessful attempt was made in January 2004 for finalising such a Plan. 
The attempt was revived again in Ma y 2005 when the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Delhi was appointed (at a cost  of Rs. three lakh) to prepare a 
Corporate Plan for the Authority. The dr aft report was received in February 2006 
but was yet to be approved. The Management stated (August 2006) that a 
Corporate Plan was under consideration. 
 
3.2 In this connection, when asked by the Committee as to what were the 
reasons due to which the attempt made in January, 2004 fo r having Corporate 
Plan did not fructify, the Authority in their written reply submitted as under: - 
“The Corporate Plan document was pr epared by AAI in 2004, however, at 
the approval stage, it wa s considered appropriate by the management to 
get it reviewed by some outside ex pert. Followed by this decision, the 
services of DMS, IIT Delhi were engage d for review and finalization of the 
document.” 
   
3.3 On being asked whether there were any directives from Government to 
the Authority to prepare such a plan, the Authority stated that: - 
 “As such there was no directive fr om the Government to prepare the 
Corporate Plan. However, while the attempt was being made for 
preparation of Corporate Plan, the matter came up for discussion during 
the MOU Negotiation meeting with t he Task Force for the year 2004-05 
and ‘Preparation of Corporate Pl an’ was adopted as one of the 
parameters under MOU 2004-05 & MOU 2005-06 signed with MOCA.” 
 
3.4 To a question as to why it was cons idered appropriate at the final approval 
stage to get the Corporate Plan reviewed by an outside expert, AAI stated: - 
“Corporate Plan document  was prepared by AAI wit h in-house efforts in 
the year 2004. The decision for review  of document from outside expert 
was taken keeping in view that an independent person who is also a 
management expert may see the things in a different perspective and may 
add values to the work already done es pecially at a ve ry crucial stage 
when the aviation industry was/is at a transition stage experiencing very 
high growth of traffic and various chall enges like privatizat ion of airports 
and the emerging economic scenario in the country.” 
 
3.5 Further, when the Committee enquired about the late st position regarding 
the Corporate Plan, the AAI in their written reply stated that: - 

“…The Corporate Plan has since been finalized and approved by AAI 
Board.” 
 
 
B. Financial Outlay on Infrastructure/Capital Projects 
 
3.6 According to Audit in Para 2.2,  the year wise plan outlay and actual 
expenditure on capital works executed by the Authority in the six year period upto 
2005-06 covered by Audit were as below:  
(Rupees in crore)  
Year  2000-
01 
2001-  
02 
2002-
03 
2003-
04 
2004-
05 
2005-
06 
Original Plan Outlay  835.53 573.71 996.05 800.00 795.08 892.30
Actual Expenditure  348.00 319.49 445.66 566.22 606.49 876.08
Shortfall  487.53 254.22 550.39 233.78 188.59 16.22 
Percentage of 
shortfall  
58.35 44.31 55.26 29.22 23.72 1.82 
 
The shortfall in expenditure that ranged from 1.82 per cent in 2005-06 to 58.35 
per cent in 2000-01, was mainly due to del ay in sanctioning of schemes, delay in 
finalisation of tenders, non availability of clear sites and modification and midway 
changes in scope of work . Some of the schemes rela ting to Delhi and Mumbai 
airports were kept in abeyance on accoun t of the proposed restructuring of the 
airports. Consequently, the facilities plan ned were either not created or were 
completed after considerable time and co st overruns as discussed subsequently. 
The goal of creating capacity ahead of demand was thus not met fully. 
 
3.7 In this regard, the Committee asked the Authority as to what is the 
mechanism in place in AAI to moni tor the preparation, sanction of 
schemes/projects, release of funds and impl ementation of projects to ensure full 
utilization of funds.  In reply AAI stated as under: - 
“Respective Executive Directors of Engineering/Planning/CNS/ 
Equipment, etc. are directly involved in  preparation of sc hemes / projects, 
release of funds and impl ementation of projects and monitoring including 
release of funds at appropriate interv als.  The Schemes / Projects are 
sanctioned by the Competent Authorit y as per the Delegation of Powers. 
These are monitored by Member (Plann ing). In addition, Directorate of 
Project Monitoring & Quality Assuranc e monitors various activities in 
connection with the schemes/projects fr om pre-award stage to execution, 
completion and operational isation.  Finance pe rsonnel are posted at 
various projects/airports by Directorate of Finance to ensure timely and 

uninterrupted flow of funds for proper progress of the work at site. Further, 
projects are reviewed periodically by the Chairman, Members of the Board 
and respective EDs to ensure maximum utilization of funds.”   
 
 
3.8 Asked by the Committee as to what action/steps have been taken by the 
Authority to remove bottlenecks causing shortfall in actual expenditure as 
compared to planned resulting in denial of  envisaged benefits of these schemes.  
In reply AAI submitted as under: -   
“Expenditure monitoring is done with due diligence periodically.  There is a 
continuous improvement in expenditure  against the budget provisions in 
respect of capital projects due to im plementation of remedial steps based 
on AAI’s experience gained over the period of time, and analysis of 
problem areas. Timely actions are taken by the concerned Executive 
Directors to reduce the bottlenecks and hi ndrances in execution of work.  
The remedial actions are also taken by the Project-In-Charges at site 
through efficient scheduling of activities. Technical instructions are issued 
by the respective Executive Direct ors as guidelines for compliance to 
ensure transparency and efficient deliv ery mechanism in the tendering 
process and project execution at site.  Member (Planning) interacts with 
other departments for coordi nation in the execution of the projects. Inter-
departmental co-ordination is improved with the formation of dedicated 
department of Project Moni toring and Quality Assurance.  Project review 
meetings are regularly organized at site and Headquarters to review 
progress and sort out critical issues  affecting implementation of the 
project, so that cost intensive assets created are operationalised timely.” 
 
3.9 On the above subject during oral  evidence before the Committee, the 
Chairman, AAI, further stated that: - 
“There is better coordination bet ween the corporate headquarters 
and the project units at various airports.  I would like to submit before 
the Committee that for each projec t we have created a separate 
project unit at various airports if  it is beyond a certain amount, 
maybe Rs.50 crore and above.  That  has yielded good result.  That 
is a self-contained unit so that the bills are passed.  Also, with regard 
to the procedures in short-listing the contractors and agencies, we 
have brought in the pre-qualificatio ns without violating or deviating 
from the CVC guidelines.  We have  been able to ge t good agencies 
because recently we have tightened th e pre-qualification criteria.  In 
the contract document also we have  brought in the incentive clause 
and the penalty clause if the cont racting or the executing agencies 
are not able to execute the contract.  We have also been able to put 
in place a liquidate damage clause.  This clause has been invoked in 
some cases.  In recent couple of years wherever the work is not 
proceeding as per the schedule we  have taken action to terminate 
the contract at risk an d cost and then go to the new contractor.  
These are some of the actions which we have taken in the past 
couple of years.” 
 
 

3.10 On being asked whether any as sessment has been made about the loss 
of revenue or customer services affe cted due to non-utilisat ion of outlay and 
timely completion of schemes, the Authority replied:- 
 “No specific assessment has been made in AAI as regards loss of revenue 
due to non completion of schemes on ti me. However, it is ensured that 
passengers/customers are not put to  any inconvenience by making 
alternate arrangements for passenger movement and towards facilitation 
at airports.” 
 
 
3.11 Regarding details of t he competent authority to sanction and monitor the 
projects, the AAI further elaborated:- 
“The approval of schemes costing more than Rs.15 crores is vested with 
AAI Board, including overall budgetary allocati on of works to be 
undertaken by AAI. The Chairman is empowered to accord approvals to 
the schemes costing upto Rs.15 crores.  
 
The mechanism for monitoring the impl ementation of projects lies within 
the purview of Chairman AAI and the progress of schemes costing more 
than Rs.5 crores is also monitored at AAI Board’s level. 
 
 The delegation of powers of officials fo r sanction of schemes / projects, as 
per Delegation of Powers of AAI are as below: 
 
Regional Executive Directors - Pr oject Cost upto Rs. 5.00 crores 
Board Members                             - Project Cost upto Rs. 10.00 
Crores 
Chairman AAI                                - Pr oject Cost upto Rs. 15.00 
crores 
AAI Board - All projects more than Rs. 15.00    
 crores & up to Rs. 150 Crores. 
 Over Rs.150 Crores with the 
 approval of PIB” 
 
3.12 When asked by the Committee as to what were the problem areas 
regarding planned and actual expenditure in  respect of capital projects and what 
were the shortfalls that came to the Au thority’s notice for which some measures 
had to be taken, AAI in their written reply stated that: -  
 “Common problem areas are the initia l teething problems like identification 
of site for labour camp, entry point to  the airport area, site for hot mix 
plant, concrete batching plan, ident ification of aggregate queries and job 
mix formula from Recognized Engineering Colleges. Project 
implementation in operational area incl uding terminal building also suffers 
due operational, security and safety r easons.  With better communication 
and co-ordination, the above problem s have now been minimized to a 
great extent.  
 
 The maximum utilization of fund by  AAI means incurring of capital 
expenditure on various scheme/pr ojects towards upgradation and 
improvement of airports infrastructu re in the country as per the approved 

plan outlay for the year. The funds were  utilized by AAI for the purpose as 
per approved plan.  
 
 The details of capital expenditure incurred by AAI as against approved 
plan during last five years are as under: 
 
Year BE RE Actual % of 
Actual to 
be 
% of 
Actual to 
be 
2002-03 996.05 717.29 445.66 44.74 62.13 
2003-04 800.00 685.00 566.22 70.78 82.66 
2004-05 795.08 701.71 606.49 76.28 86.43 
2005-06 892.30 951.83 876.08 98.18 92.04 
2006-07 1506.44 
# 
1149.82 1040.17 69.05 90.46 
 
 # Includes outlays for Delhi & Mumbai airports which have been 
subsequently handed over to JV company on 3 rd May 2006. Further 
capital expenditure is incurred by JV companies. 
 
 The progress reports are indicative of problem’s description given in the 
remarks column, submitted for review at  appropriate levels  from time to 
time.  
 
 The following major reasons / areas have been identified for shortfall in 
progress / expenditure on projects: 
 
i) Non-availability of complete site  due to operational continuity in the 
airports, encroachments of land by outsiders, shifting of services / old 
structures like VOR / DVOR / old hangar etc. falling in the layout. 
ii) Delay in land acquisition wholly / partly from State Government / 
Defence. Diversion of roads, HT / LT lines etc. to be made by the State 
Government. 
iii) Lengthy and cumbersome tend ering and contract management 
procedures. 
iv) Inadequate resource mobiliz ation by the contractor. 
v) Insurgency, inclement weather condi tions at airports in North-East 
and hard areas. 
vi) Unusual climatic changes and unseasonal rains which affects the 
progress badly. 
vii) Restricted working hours in the operational area of airports. 
viii) Delays also occur due to not  getting environmental clearance in 
time. 
ix) Policy change of Govt. vis-à-vi s natural resources i.e. ban on 
quarrying, installation of Hot Mix Plant  within city limit due environmental 
reasons etc. 
x) Increase in cost of constructi on materials like cement, bitumen, 
steel etc. during the project execution phases. 
xi) Complaints forwarded by internal vigilance, CVC, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation during the process of eval uation of tender leading to cross-
checking, furnishing of details etc. 
xii) Multiple agencies at  airport – coordination. 
  
 

The measures taken for improving the capital expenditure against the plan 
are: 
i) Parallel activities like prequalific ation for shortlisting of firms, tender 
processing along with the pending admin istrative approval initiated 
so that as soon as administrative approvals obtained the activity for 
award of work is also ready wh ich has reduced from two to four 
months depending upon the magnitude of work.  
ii) Encouragement of new agenc ies to participate in tender 
procedures. 
iii) Remedial measures have been taken against the defaulting firms 
which has delayed the projects. 
iv) Introduction of online project monitoring…. 
 
Such evaluation is made only for those schemes where any revenue loss 
is suffered by AAI and action is ta ken in accordance with contract 
provisions of respective work.” 
 
3.13 In this connection, the Chairman, AA I, during oral evidence further stated 
that: - 
“….In the last few years we could see that our spending, that is the 
expenditure on capital work has impr oved.  In 2002 when we started it 
was Rs.445 crore and in 2006-07 we are able to achieve Rs.1040 crores.  
The Planning Commission has review ed the performance of the Civil 
Aviation Ministry recently and has said  that over the years at least the 
Airports Authority has  improved their projec t management and they are 
showing more than 90 per cent of their Budget spending in capital 
expenditure.  This, of course, we take as a positive comment and it has 
given good motivation to my officers  to do more work and take up 
challenging tasks. 
 
In the current year, 2007-08 we have made a projection of Rs.2,000 crore 
and we are confident that we woul d be able to spend this money....We 
have a project management cell at the Headquarters headed by the 
Executive Director.  That cell is c onstantly monitoring the work.  In 
addition, at my level we are having quarterly meetings with the Regional 
Executive Directors and the Airports Dir ectors.  We will continue to have 
these meetings with the Regional Ex ecutive Directors to assess the 
performance.  In addition to that we are also constantly interacting with the 
project-in-charges and moni toring the projects.  We  are confident that we 
will be able to achieve the targets which we have projected
….” 
  
3.14 The Committee wanted the view of t he Ministry regarding the utilization of 
funds on capital expenditure by the Authorit y.  The Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation during oral evidence stated the following: - 
“The plan expenditure of the AAI has been increasing substantially in the 
recent past.  As against the expenditu re of Rs. 876.08 crore in 2005-2006 
and Rs. 1040.17 crore in 2006-2007, the budgeted expenditure for the 
current financial year, that is, 2007-2008  is Rs. 1961.41 crore.  In fact, 
during the 11
th Plan Period, the AAI pr oposes to spend about Rs. 
12,417.17 crore as against Rs . 3534.62 crore during the 10 th Five-Year 
Plan period.  This is an increase of almost 250 per cent.” 
 

C. Non-Traffic Revenue 
3.15 In Para 2.5 of the Audit Report, it is mentioned that the task force set up 
by the Planning Commission suggested in its ‘Integrated Transport Policy’ 
(October 2001), an increase in the s hare of airport revenue from non-
aeronautical services for making the airports viable and for generating surplus for 
further expansion. Audit observed that the share of non -traffic revenue was more 
than 50 per cent at major international airports  such as British Airports Authority, 
Toronto, Sydney, Houston, Heathrow, Ku ala Lumpur, Los Ange les, Singapore, 
Paris and Zurich. In comparison, the share of non-traffic revenue of the Authority 
was only 11.90 per cent in 2001-02, which increased marginally to 14.04 per cent 
in 2005-06. A table showing the above is given below: - 
(Rupees in crore) 
 2001-02 
 
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
Traffic Revenue (A)  
 
1531.28 1656.74 1764.15 2080.15 2387.23 
Non Traffic Revenue (B)  
 
267.20 312.80 346.71 414.07 489.96 
Cargo and other 
Revenue  
 
446.36 414.95 519.73 505.44 613.27 
Total Revenue (C)  2244.84 2384.49 2630.59 2999.66 3490.46 
 
Percentage of (A) to (C)  68.21 69.48 67.06 69.35 68.39 
 
Percentage of (B) to (C)  11.90 13.12 13.18 13.80 14.04 
 
 
3.16 In this regard, when asked by the Committee what were the targets fixed 
for generation of non-traffic revenue and achievements made during the last 5 
years, the Authority in their written reply submitted the following:- 
 “The targets fixed and the actual non-tr affic revenue earned in the last five 
years are as follows: 
 
  Year   B E    A c t u a l 
          (Rs. Crores )        (Rs. Crores) 
 
  2001-02  727.21   713.56 
  2002-03  709.21   727.75 
  2003-04  737.90   866.45  
  2004-05  799.70   917.26 
  2005-06  880.68           1103.23” 
 
 
3.17 When asked as to what steps the Aut hority is taking to augment the share of 
non-traffic revenue and whether the Authority has taken help of any consultancy firm 

or experts to plan, optimiz ation of the non-traffic rev enue, the Authority submitted 
that: - 
“AAI is constantly endeavoring to achi eve the non traffic revenue targets set 
each year, AAI has given encouragem ent in introducing innovative 
commercial venture at each airport t hereby creating more potential for 
revenue generation and even smaller air ports have started breaking even on 
the operating results. 
 
Further, AAI has also identified devel opment of 35 non-metro airports for 
commercial exploitation based on the repor ts submitted by global technical 
advisors and financial experts. 
 
AAI has identified 24 non-metro airports  primarily for development of non-
traffic revenue through city-side develop ment.  Two consultants namely M/s. 
UTI Bank Limited and M/s. Capital Fortunes Ltd., have been appointed.  
 
AAI at the time of working out designing and developing the terminal 
buildings, is laying emphasis at the pl anning stage itself to harness full 
commercial potential from these buildings. 
 
In addition, AAI has also initiated ac tion in respect of ground handling 
services to be provided to the airlines at various airports which also will 
augment the non traffic revenue. 
 
AAI has also initiated action in develop ing flying schools at various airports 
which will help in increasi ng the number of pilots required for meeting the 
current requirement and also help AAI  in generating more non traffic 
revenue.” 
 
 
3.18 The Authority also further stat ed in their written reply that: - 
“The following major heads of revenue have been identified and action 
has already been initiated in generating revenue: 
 
a) Allotment of land for aviation fuel station at 25 airports  
b) Through put charges from o il companies on supply of ATF. 
c) Providing ground handling services at airports. 
d) Setting up of flying schools” 
 
3.19 When asked further by the Committee as to whether any collaboration or 
joint venture with some infrastructure  companies has been considered to 
increase non-traffic revenue, in reply AAI stated as under:- 
“Based on the report of global technical advisors appointed by AAI, action 
has been taken for generation of non traffic revenue by development on 
the city side at 35 non metro airports  through public-private participation. 
The mode of such oper ation will be decided while carrying out the 
tendering process.” 
 
3.20 Regarding the action tak en for generation of non-traffic revenue at 35 non-
metro airports, the Authority stated that:- 

“For generation of non-traffic revenue, based on report of GTA / IFC, 24 
airports are being taken up for city side development with private sector 
participation.  These airports are: Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Guwahati, Jaipur, 
Udaipur, Trivandrum, Lucknow, M adurai, Mangalore, Aurangabad, 
Khajuraho, Rajkot, Vadodara,  Bhopal, Agartala, I ndore, Raipur, Vizag, 
Trichy, Bhubaneshwar, Varanasi, Dehradun, Ranchi and Dimapur.  
 
 M/s. Capital Fortunes Ltd., Hyderabad and UTI Bank Ltd., Mumbai have 
been awarded the consultancy to assist AAI in selection of Joint Venture 
Partner and Bid Proce ss Management for these airports. The IMG 
Meeting is scheduled to be held shortly to finalise the modalities in this 
regard.  MoU has be en signed with MADC for development of Nagpur 
airport.  At remaining 10 airports, wh ich are either Defence operated or 
having limited land, the non- aeronautical generation wi ll be done by land 
lease and revenue sharing option, as at present.”  
 
3.21 On being asked by the Committee as to when the plan to modernize and 
develop non-metro airports was draw n up and the progress with regard to 
modernization and development of these airports, the Authority stated as under:- 
 “An Action plan was formulated for dev elopment of 35 non-metro airports 
with emphasis on the City Side Development to enhance non-aeronautical 
revenue.  The proposal envisaged preparation of Techno Economic 
Feasibility Study to recommend devel opment works including city side 
development by appointing GTA on gl obal basis and IFC on national 
basis.  GTA / IFC were appointed each for a group of 05 ai rports covering 
25 non-metro airports.  Reports for remaining 10 airports are being 
prepared in house out of which studi ed have been carried out for 07 
airports and remaining 03 airports will be done very shortly.  The GTA / 
IFC reports were received by March / Ap ril, 2005 for first 10 airports and 
October, 06 / January, 07 for next 15 airports.  
 
The Terminal Building with associat ed infrastructure and Air Side Works 
comprising of Runway, Apron, Taxi  tracks etc. have been finalised taking 
into account above reports. These works are in progress at some airports 
and at other airports they  are nearing completion / awarded / process of 
sanction / process of detailed engineering etc.  
 
As regards, city side development fo r land use plans identified by GTA 
and IFC, these are being undertaken with private sector participation at 24 
identified airports. Two Consultants hav e been appointed to assist AAI  in 
selection of Joint Venture Partners  for City Side Development.  The IMG 
Meetings are likely to take place shortly in finalizing the modalities.  
 
The process for development of 35 non- metro airports including CNS / 
ATM infrastructure will be completed by March, 2010.”  
 
 
3.22 Asked by the Committee about the progress made so far in augmenting 
the share of non traffic revenue, AAI in their written reply stated as under: - 
i) “AAI has called Expression of Interest (EOI) for providing ground 
handling services to the airlines at various airports.  18 parties have 
shown interest which is being scrutinized for inviting financial bids.   

 
ii) With regard to developing flight schools at various airports, EOI has 
been called by AAI for 31 airports  and for Phase I parties have 
been short listed in respect of  airports where non-schedule 
operations are not taking place and the financial bids are to be 
opened on 16th July, 07.  
 
iii) Based on tender proce ss, the allotment of land for aviation fuel 
station at 25 airports have been completed.  
 
iv) Through put charges on supply of ATF have been finalized by 
tendering process and Indian Oi l Corporation have been awarded 
at Chennai and Kolkata Airports respectively.” 
 
 
3.23 Elaborating further regarding the progress made in augmenting the share 
of non-traffic revenue during the oral ev idence, the Chairman, AAI, stated as 
under:- 
“….About the non traffic revenue.  We have improved from 10 per cent to 
15 per cent.  We have taken some  action to increase the non-traffic 
revenue like ground handling.   We will be able to increase the non traffic 
revenue in the years to come.”   
 
3.24 Asked by the Committee as to whet her Ministry of Civil Aviation had 
issued any directions to AAI for raisin g the non-traffic revenue commensurate to 
international airports. In reply, the Ministry, inter-alia stated as under: - 
“…….AAI is managing 127 airports  including 37 non-operational and 90 
operational airports, of which only 12 airports are profit making and the 
remaining operational airports generat e very meagre non-traffic revenue.  
Thus, the non-traffic revenue generati on at Heathrow, Los Angeles and 
Paris airports is not an appropriate re ference for the airports managed by 
the AAI.  Government have taken fo llowing decisions for increasing the 
non-aeronautical traffic revenue of AAI: 
 
(i) City side development of select  24 airports out of 35 non-metro 
airports, undertaken for modernizati on, will be done through Public 
Private Participation (PPP) so as to maximize non-aeronautical 
revenue. 
(ii) Commercial management of terminal  buildings constructed by AAI 
will be so organized as to optimize revenue generation as also user 
convenience. 
(iii) AAI has been advised to encourage comprehensive scope of 
commercial development at the st age of planning and design of 
terminal buildings so as to har ness full commercial potential of 
these buildings.” 
 
 
 

Chapter IV 
 
Operational Area Infrastructure 
A. Timely Completion of Projects 
4.1 The Committee note that as per Paras 3.2.1 to 3.2.8 of the Audit Report, 
the Audit conducted a test check of majo r works executed by the Authority at 
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Gaya, Agartala and Jaipur  during the period 
2001-2005 relating to runways, taxiways,  aprons, hangars and parking bays.  
Cases of time overrun, idling of fac ilities, additional expenditure etc., were 
pointed out.  
 
4.2 Further according to Para 3.2.9, A udit also test checked works undertaken 
by the Authority in 17 other airports ( Annexure-II).  Cases of time overrun upto 
75 months due to reasons like absence of clear possession of land before taking 
up the work leading to delay and forecl osure of work, poor performance of the 
contractor leading to rescinding of the contract and subsequent re-award of work 
and cost overrun up to Rs.3.47 crore due to changes in scope of work leading to 
extra items of work were noticed. 
 
4.3 In this regard, the Committee ask ed the Authority a bout the prevalent 
monitoring mechanism in AAI to monitor th e timely completion of projects.  In 
their written submission, they stated: - 
“The Respective Executive Directors & the Project-in-Charges at site are 
monitoring the progress of work from  inception to completion of the 
work/project.  Day to day decisions pertaining to projects are taken by the 
Project In Charge at the station itself.  The respective Executive Director 
at the Regional Level and Headquarters Level en sure the targeted 
progress of work, keeps control ov er the pace of work, and timely 
completion. In addition, a dedicat ed Project Monitoring and Quality 
Assurance Department is set up at CHQ, which reports to the Chief 
Executive, and monitors all the schem es from planning i.e. pre-award 
stage to award of scheme, timely execution and operationalisation 
thereon.  Slippages, delays, shor tfalls and hindrances noticed in 
implementation of envisaged schem es are examined and analyzed at 
every stage in an endeavour to sort out  the issues in coordination with 
concerned Directorates in an integrat ed manner through review meetings.  
Chairman and the Members concerned ar e apprised from time to time.  
Project implementation is also reviewed  at the level of Member (Plg.) and 
Chairman periodically.” 
 
 

4.4 When asked what steps the Authority has taken to avoid time and cost 
overrun in future projects, the Authority replied: - 
“To avoid time and cost overrun in future projects, AAI has taken following 
steps: 
 i) Timely actions are being taken for land acquisition so that as far as 
possible land is available at the time of  award of work/installation of facility 
& equipment. 
 
(ii) Advance and paral lel actions are plan ned and implemented as 
regards diversion of services, su rvey reporting and demolition of 
structures falling in the approved layout plan so t hat clear site free from 
encumbrances is made available for execution of main package of work. 
 
iii) Prequalification criter ia has been modified to enlist competitive 
response from resourceful contract ors with adequate financial capacity 
and requisite experience.  Possibilit y of introducing evaluation of bid 
capacity of tenderers is being explored.  
 
iv) Selection criteria for cont ractors and consultants has been made 
performance based with introduction of Performance Evaluation Reports 
of the working contractors in major projects in AAI to weed out contractors 
whose performance is not satisfactory. 
 
(v) Better coordination with St ate Government agencies for 
expediting clearances of schemes such as diversion of roads, HT/LT lines 
etc. is being ensured through periodic review meetings. 
 
(vi) On-line Project Monitoring at  CHQ to effectively review the 
progress at site is being introduced. 
 
(vii) Review Meetings are being c onducted at Hqrs. and at site 
for sorting out inter departmental issues  affecting final completion of the 
work and its operationalisation thereon.” 
 
4.5 Further, on being asked, whether  any responsibility has been fixed for 
delays in completion of projects, the Authority replied that: - 
“Since, airport projects are inter di sciplinary in nature wherein not only 
different departments of t he Authority, but also other Government/State 
Government Departments, Airline Operators etc. are involved, it is not fair 
to fix responsibility solely on one officer or department.  However, 
performance of various contract agencies is evaluated and liquidated 
damages are levied on merit of the case wherever delays are solely 
attributed to the contractor.  Agenc ies with unsatisfactory performance 
are forbidden from tendering process for future works/projects through 
the process of performance evaluation in respect of major projects.  
Actions are also taken for rescindi ng the contracts on account of non-
performance.  This aspect is being strengthened for initiating timely 
action(s) linked to performance and quantitative progress at site.”  
 
4.6 When asked as to what shortcomings  have come to notice of the Authority 
during such reviews and what remedial measures have been taken, the Authority 
replied: - 

 “Generally the common shortcomings noticed in planning stage are as 
below: 
 
(i)  Land not available free from all encumbrances. 
(ii)  Delay in sanction of major pr ojects requiring approval of higher 
statutory authorities like PIB / Planning Commission etc. 
 
The shortcomings noticed in execution stage are generally as below: 
 
i) Delay in finalizing site for labour camp 
ii) Delay in security clearances for workforce. 
iii) Delay in issue of NOTAM 
 
Project implementation in operational area including terminal building also 
suffers due operational, security and safety reasons. 
 
In addition to above, decisions are ta ken during the review meetings at 
various levels on the issues which ar e held up and measur es are taken to 
expedite the work…. The review meet ings to expedite the progress of 
works are conducted at various levels  like regional level, Executive 
Director (Engg.) level, Member (Plann ing) and Chairman AAI at site as 
well as at Corporate Headquarters and remedial measures are taken / 
suggested to expedite the progress.”  
 
 
4.7 When the Committee asked in how m any such cases liquidated damages 
were levied on contractors, the Authority submitted as under: -  
“The cases where liquidity damages has  been imposed on the contractor 
are given as below: 
i) Strengthening & Extension of  Runway at Hyderabad Airport 
ii) Construction of visual simulator at CATC, Allahabad  
iii) Construction of Boundary wall at CA Keshod 
iv) Construction of Boundary wall at Kandla Airport 
v)       Modernization of Air Tr affic Services at Chennai Airport.” 
 
4.8 On being asked by the Committee to  give details of cases wherein 
contracts have been terminated, the Authority stated that: - 
“The contracts which have been terminated due to bad performance are 
as below: 
i) Strengthening & Extension of  Runway at Hyderabad Airport 
ii) Construction of New Terminal Building at Porbandar Airport 
iii) Extension & Strengthening of Runway at Trichy  
iv) Extension of apron i/c taxi -track at Agartala Airport 
v) Strengthening of existing runway , apron, taxi-track etc. at Gaya 
Airport.” 
 
4.9 During oral evid ence of the representatives of the Authority, the Chairman, 
AAI further elaborated as under:- 
“I would like to submit before the Co mmittee that while certain delays have 
taken place in the execution of the projects which have been highlighted in 
the last meeting, of course, we have taken up a number of measures in the 
last couple of years to cut down the delays in the completion and 

execution of the major projects.  Works Manual have been approved and 
is in place of International Airports  Authority of India and the National 
Airports Authority.  
The two organizations were merged by an Act of Parliament in 1995.  
Subsequently, the two organizations  have been functioning as two 
divisions; International Airport Division and the National Airport Division.  In 
eighties both were following two differ ent procedures.  In the initial stages 
the merger itself was an issue which we were able to overcome in 1998 
only and then the organizations started stabilizing.  In the meantime the 
Government announced that four metro airports will be restructured and 
built as world-class airports.  Again, there was some sort of uncertainty; as 
to what will happen, whet her it will be corporatis ed.  When we were about 
to settle it again the Government issued some direction saying that major 
capital works in these four airports  should not be done.  Later on it was 
said that only Delhi and Mumbai Airports will be restructured.  These are 
some of the reasons in the past whic h could be taken into account while 
we have to analyse why it has happened, why the amount which was 
budgeted could not be spent.  We have ex plained to the Audit some of the 
reasons which came in the way and also  certain scope of work which got 
changed during its execution.  We explai ned all this when various airports 
were inspected. 
 We have in the last couple of year s taken a number of corrective steps 
which we want to place before the Committee.  One is the works manual 
has been put in place.  Second is be tter coordination wit hin the Airports 
Authority and outside also because there are certain agencies outside 
also.  There is better coordinati on between the corporate headquarters 
and the project units at various airports.  I would like to submit before the 
Committee that for each project we have created a separate project unit at 
various airports if it is beyond a ce rtain amount, maybe Rs.50 crore and 
above.  That has yielded good result.  T hat is a self-contained unit so that 
the bills are passed.  Also, with regard to the procedures in short-listing the 
contractors and agencies, we have brought in the pre-qualifications without 
violating or deviating from the CVC gu idelines.  We have been able to get 
good agencies because recently we have tightened the pre-qualification 
criteria.  In the contract document al so we have brought in the incentive 
clause and the penalty clause if the c ontracting or the executing agencies 
are not able to execute the contract.  We have also been able to put in 
place a liquidate damage clause.  This clause has been invoked.  In recent 
couple of years wherever the work is not proceeding as per the schedule 
we have taken action to terminate the contract at risk and cost and then go 
to the new contractor.  These are some of the actions which we have 
taken in the past couple of years……”  
 
B. Problems in Land Acquisition a nd Encroachment on Airport Land 
4.10 Audit in Para 3.3.1 of the Audit Report have brought many instances of the 
authority’s efforts at Land acquisition were held up due to procedural delays and 
litigation ( Annexure-III).  Further, 702 acres of land were still under 
encroachment in 20 airports as on Ma rch 2006 depriving the Authority of land 
required for infrastructure development. At Mumbai, the encroachment was to the 
extent of 171 acres.  During five year s ending 2005, the Aut hority was able to 
remove encroachment from only 30 acres of land, incurring in the process an 

expenditure of Rs.24.35 cr ore.  Major encroachment s were at Hyderabad (97 
acres), Kolkata (76 acres) and Amritsar (83 acres) airports.  The encroachment 
at the airports hampered ex pansion and upgradation of fa cilities.  According to 
Audit, the management while accepting t he fact stated (August 2006) that 
removal of encroachment at the airports was a Herculean task which required the 
assistance of the local polic e and the State Governmen t. Besides socio political 
difficulties, legal hurdles were also required to be taken care of. 
4.11 In this regard, the Authority were  questioned by the Committee as to what 
steps have been taken to resolve the i ssue of land acquisition with State 
Governments. The Authority in their written submission replied that:- 
“Land required by AAI for Airport ex pansion is deemed to be needed for 
public purposes and is acquired compul sorily under Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 through the State Govt.   
 
Requisition is made to State Govt. after approval of Competent Authority 
to acquire land and wherever land is required urgently, clause of 
“Urgency” is invoked.   
 
However, due to procedural difficult ies and resistance/ interference 
coupled with court verdicts, when acquisition proceedings are challenged, 
there has been delay in acquisition.  
 
However, AAI has been making persist ent efforts by holding discussions 
with the Senior officials of the State Govt. in cutting down the delay.”  
 
 4.12 The AAI in their written reply further elaborated as under:- 
“…After AAI Board accords approval for acquisition of land required for the 
development / expansion of airport (s), formal requisition is made to State 
Govt. and the State Govt. thereafter undertake survey, notifies under 
Section 4 of Land Acquisition Act for acquisitioning of land; inviting of 
objections. Thereafter, the Land Acquisition Collector has to satisfy the 
objections either by over ruling or accepting or rejecting, issues notification 
under Section 6 of acquisition of land which is compulsory.  Assessment is 
made by the Land Acquisition Collector of land, building structure on it, 
trees etc. for purpose of payment of compensation. There is time period 
prescribed.  The land under acquisiti on is private and / or Govt. land, 
some times road services are also r equired to be shifted / diverted.  In 
between there are interferences from the local peoples whose land is 
being acquired resisting acquisition; filing of Court cases etc.  
 
To resolve the above, discussions are held with the Land Acquisition 
Collector, District Collector, Secretary (Revenue) and Chief Secretary and 
Chief Minister’s level so that ex peditious acquisition of land is 
undertaken.” 
 

4.13 Asked to give details of cases wherein the issue of land acquisition with 
State Government was pending and for how long these cases were pending. In 
reply, AAI submitted as under: -   
“The details of cases wherein the i ssue of Land acquisition with  State 
Govt. is pending is given below:-                                                                                              
 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport State Govt.   Pending since (upto 
December, 2006) 
 
1.  Varanasi Uttar Pradesh 2004 
2.  Amritsar Punjab 2006 
3.  Jaipur Rajasthan 2005 
4.  Udaipur Rajasthan 2006 
5.  Khajuraho Madhya Pradesh 2006 
6.  Jorhat Assam 2005 
7.  Dibrugarh Assam 2006 
8.  Ranchi Jharkhand 2006 
9.  Malda West Bengal 2006 
10.  Behala West Bengal 2006 
11.  Tirupathi Andhra Pradesh 2006 
12.  Belgaum Karnataka 2006 
13.  Hubli Karnataka 2006 
14.  Mysore Karnataka 2005 
15.  Aurangabad Maharashtra 2003 
 
 
4.14 On being asked about the causes of  encroachments of land of AAI, what 
is the status of removal of encroachments on 702 acres of land in 20 airports and 
the period the land h ad been under encroachment at each of the airports, the 
Authority stated as under:- 
I. “Causes of encroachments are:- 
 (i) Absence of boundary wall / fencing at Airport boundary.  
Earlier due to lack of funds, boundary wall was constructed around 
Airport operational areas and not on the Airport boundary. 
 (ii) Due to influx / migration of  population from villages to mega/ 
major cities. 
  (iii) Lackadaisical attitude / lack of support from Police and State 
 Govt. 
 (iv) Courts interference / Stay granted by Courts. 
 
As regards status of removal of encroachments, there is not much 
progress. 
The land has been under encr oachment at different airports for period 
ranging from 5 – 40 years. 
 
(i) Land belonging to Airport Authority of  India is vested with AAI i.e. it 
belongs to Central Govt. provisions of Public Premises Eviction Act, 
1971 are applicable and action under PPE Act is taken for removal 
of encroachments. 
 

(ii) Since laws relating to la nd are State subject, depending upon 
location where the land under encroachment is there, Airport 
Authority of India takes up wit h State Govt. for removal of 
encroachment.  Depending upon po licy of the State Govt. the 
removal and / or rehabilitation of encroachment or encroachers is 
undertaken.” 
 
4.15 The Authority further clarified that: 
“….AAI had taken up the process of rehabilitation at Mumbai and 
Hyderabad. At Mumbai Airport 2500 hutme nts were removed in Jari Mari 
area through process of rehabilitation under a tripartite agreement with 
State Rehabilitation Aut hority and Shivsahi Punarvikas Prakalp Ltd. AAI 
spent a sum of Rs.25 crores approx . At Hyderabad also  AAI also paid 
Rs.1.25 crores to State Govt. fo r removal of encroachment but no 
encroachments have been removed.” 
 
4.16 On being asked what steps hav e been taken to check further 
encroachment on its land, the Authority submitted that:- 
“Airport Authority is constructing boundary wall / fencing at all its airports 
wherever land exists whether contiguous  or on isolated pockets of land.  
Airport Directors have been advised for ens uring regular inspection of the 
land so that no further encroachment ta kes place.  Areas which are prone 
to encroachment are guarded through deployment of security guards.”   
 
4.17 The Authority further added that:- 
  “Out of 127 airports vested wi th AAI including Civil Enclaves, 
encroachments were in 20 airports  and that too historical.  The 
encroachments have been in airports in  mega / big cities like Mumbai, 
Kolkata, Delhi, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Lucknow etc. In mega / big cities, 
encroachment is in the form of hutm ents / make shift shops, semi-kacha 
structure etc.  In cities like Satna, Amritsar, Juhu and Gaya, the 
encroachment is in the form of unauthoriz ed cultivation by ex-land owners 
etc. During last decade, there has not been any major encroachment in 
the form of hutment etc. due to construction of boundary, barbed wire 
fencing etc. and routine inspection.” 
 
4.18 On the question of whether any assessment has been made by the 
Authority for future requirement of l and for expansion of projects so that 
schemes/projects do not suffer due to non availability of land at site, the Authority 
stated that :- 
“On request of different State Governm ents AAI is developing airports in 
respective States for which land has been requested to be provided free 
of cost and free from all encumbrances.  
 
MOU has also been signed between AAI and State Govts. Further as per 
the directions of Ministry of Civil Aviation [Govt of India] 35 Non-Metro 
airports are being developed. Master  Plans of the airports have been 
proposed. Projections for additional land for these airports are being made 
to the respective State Governments. Assessment for other airports will be 
projected on approval of t he Master Plan by the AAI Board. Instructions 

have already been issued not to award any work unless the land has been 
acquired/taken possession by AAI.”       
 
4.19 The Committee sought to know in  how many such cases, the State 
Government has been asked by the Authority for removal of encroachment and 
the State Government had not complied with because of their policy. The 
Authority in their written reply stated that:- 
“At Hyderabad AAI paid Rs.1.25 crores to State Govt. for removal of 
encroachment but no encroachments have been removed.” 
 
4.20 On being asked about details of cases where rehabilitation has been 
undertaken and completed, the Authority stated that: - 
“Following rehabilitation process has been undertaken by AAI: 
i.  Rehabilitation of 25 00 hutments at Mumbai ai rport – Rehabilitation 
completed. 
ii.  Resettlement of village Nan gal Dewat at Delhi Airport– 
Resettlement under process / yet to be completed.  
iii.  Rehabilitation of Gadaura v illage Lucknow Airport – yet to be 
initiated.” 
 
4.21 The Committee wanted to know the role of the Ministry in matters relating 
to land encroachment. So the Committee ask ed the Ministry of Civil Aviation as 
to  what steps have been initiated by them to help AAI in getting its land freed 
from encroachment.  They submitted in their written reply that:- 
 
“The AAI Act, 1994 was amended in 2004 to include a Chapter VA 
regarding ‘Eviction of Unauthorized Occupant s, etc. of Airport Premises’.  
In terms of amendments, AAI has bee n empowered to take necessary 
action for eviction of encroachments on its own.  Further, the removal of 
encroachments from airport land requires support from the State 
Governments. AAI have taken up the process of removal and 
rehabilitation at Mumbai and Hyderabad airports.” 
 
 
 

Chapter V 
 
Air Traffic Management, Communication, Navigation and Surveillance 
Facilities Infrastructure 
 
A. Visual Simulator 
5.1 The Committee note that according to Audit in Para 4.2, there was delay 
in commissioning of Visual Simulator proc ured for training of Air Traffic Control 
(ATC) staff at the Civil Aviation Trai ning College, Allahabad, which not only 
resulted in blocking of funds amounting to Rs.7.14 crore over six months but also 
denied the benefit of visual simulation training facilities for the ATC staff.  
5.2 The Authority were asked to explain the reasons for delay in 
commissioning of the Visual Simulator.  In their written r eply, the Authority 
submitted the following: - 
“Reasons for delay: 
 
 The work order for construction of the building to house Visual 
Simulator was issued in March 2005 with schedule completion period of 3 
months.  The Visual Simulator equipment was received at Civil Aviation 
Training College (CATC) during July – September 2005.  However, when 
the execution was taken up, few defects were observed in the design of 
the building and the rectification t hereof took time and building was 
completed only in March 2006.  It may,  thus, be seen that though the 
execution of the building works were  synchronized with the arrival of 
equipment, but due to defect in design the completion of building got 
delayed. 
 
 The installation of the equipment was completed in December 
2006.  The Site Acceptance Test was carried out in February 2007.  Few 
defects were noticed and the same are now under rectification.  A 
supplementary Site Acceptance Te st for commissioning is being 
conducted again in June 2007….” 
 
5.3 It was further supplemented that: - 
 “This was a special project only one of  its kind and so the design of the 
building was required to be reviewed to  meet specifications.  This took 
long time and caused delay. Civil contractor was also defaulted and 
penalized for delay in construction of civil structure….Supplementary FAT 
was conducted on Aerodrome Vi sual Simulator from 19 th to 22 nd June 
2007. Most of the requirements are fulf illed but the test was unsatisfactory 
with respect to some of the ATC simu lation procedures. The supplier is 
expected to deliver software modifications by Aug 2007.” 
 
 
 
 

B. Voice Communication System (VCS) 
5.4 In Para 4.3, Audit has stated that there was delay in in stallation of Voice 
Communication System at thre e stations ranging from 6 months to 10 months    
and in one station, the inst allation was still pending (March 2006) which resulted 
in denial of improved communication interface between the airports.   
 5.5 The Authority on being asked to comment on this issue submitted:- 
“Out of 8 systems, 4 systems were installed within the schedule date of 
installation.  The 5th system at Guwahati was also installed though slightly 
beyond the normal installation time.  Reasons for delay in installation of 
systems at Varanasi, Mumbai and Nagpur are as under: 
 
i) Varanasi  
The equipment initially allotted to CATC was shifted to Varanasi.  The site 
preparation work at Varanasi, thus started late because decision to shift 
the equipment to Varanasi was taken at a later point of time….” 
 
5.6 It was further clarified that: - 
 
“Equipment was shifted from CATC  to Varanasi due to operational 
requirement at Varanasi…” 
 
ii) “Mumbai 
Due to the unprecedented rains, entire airport operations had come to a 
halt.  Since all efforts were diverted for normalizing the operations, the site 
preparation got delayed. 
 
iii) Nagpur  
Because of local unique siting issues , due to Control Tower being away 
from the Radar Building (about 1.5 Kms.), solution to the connectivity 
issue took time, which  resulted in delayed installation…”  
 
5.7 It was further added by the Ministry that: - 
“The existing cable was required to be replaced by new cable suitable for 
such a long distance communication. The requirement came through the 
site survey after placement of order.” 
 
 
C. Dedicated Satellite Communication Network (DSCN) 
5.8 As per Para 4.4 of the Audit Re port, the Authority approved (December 
1998) a proposal for providing a Dedica ted Satellite Communication Network 
(DSCN) linking 80 airports with the objective of upgrading the existing low speed, 
less reliable and almost saturated tele com network to support high speed data 
and voice connectivity.  DSCN infrastructu re was considered essential for the 
world wide implementati on of the new Communica tion, Navigation and 
Surveillance (CNS) /Air Traffic Managem ent (ATM) systems.  The complete 
network was planned to be commissioned in 24 months. But there was delay of 

five years in providing Dedicated Sa tellite Communication Network which 
resulted in foregoing benefit  of Rs.16 crore apart from failure in achieving 
upgradation of an efficient and fast telecom network.  
5.9 On this subject, the Au thority stated the following:- 
“DSCN is a large network connecti ng 80 locations.  The process of 
surveying for suitable site for antenna and equipment and then 
preparation of each site was quite a comprehensive task.  In spite of best 
efforts by all concerned, this acti vity took more than expected time, 
primarily because of t he volume of work involved.  Further, delays 
occurred due to Government regulat ions for getting each approved from 
NOCC.  Rate of inspection of in stallation by NOCC is not to our 
expectations, delaying the commissioning of installed equipments. 
 
As on date physical installation of  DSCN at 67 stations have been 
completed and NOCC testing at 30 sites has been completed. 
 
We have been pursuing the matter with M/ s Bharti on a regular basis and 
it is expected that the major part of the network will be commissioned by 
September 2007.” 
  
5.10 It was further elaborated that: - 
“AA&ES for Rs. 57.93 Crores  was given by the Board in the year 1999 for 
providing a Dedicated Satellite Co mmunication Network (DSCN) linking 
80 airports. Tenders were invited in Ma rch 2000 and again in Aug. 2001  , 
but these could not be finalized due to technology evolution  and a 
general downward trend in prices of  Electronic Equipments.  After 
finalization of specificati ons tenders were finally invited  in May 2003 and 
purchase order was placed to M/s Bharti  Comtel Ltd. at a total cost of 
Rs.19.09 Crores in October 2004.  
 
As on date physical equipment insta llation have been completed at 68 
sites. As per Govt. regulations,  antenna radiation pattern testing is 
required to be conducted by Ne twork Operation and Control 
Centre(NOCC) before givi ng uplinking permission. The rate of inspection 
of installation by NOCC is not upto AAI expectations, delaying the 
commissioning of installed equipments.  Till date NOCC testing has been 
completed at 35 sites. The matter  have been pursued with M/s Bharti 
Comtel  and NOCC on a regular basis  and it is expected that the major 
part of the network will be commissioned by September 2007.” 
 
D.  UHF Links 
5.11 According to Para 4.5 of the Audi t Report, it has been observed that eight 
wireless communication links remained un installed for more than two years after 
their receipt.  The failure to ensure site readiness before receipt of equipment 
resulted in delay of over two years in installation  of the links depriving the 
authority of the benefits of superior technology and improved performance as 
well as savings in recurring revenue expenditure on lease rent for BSNL lines.  

5.12 In this regard, the Authority in their written submission stated that :- 
“Out of 40 links, 28 lin ks were installed by Januar y 2006.  As of now, we 
have installed all links excepting one which is pending due to siting issues. 
 
The delay in installation of links has been either due to non-clearance of 
required mast heights or non-availability of masts at some sites.  
Arranging the masts etc. took time.  Also, some of the equipments were 
required to be diverted to some other  stations due  to non-feasibility at 
some location or due to operational needs.” 
 
5.13 It was further clarified that: - 
 
“Mast height requirement at some of  the UHF link sites was beyond the 
permissible limits causing obstructi on to aircraft operation as per 
Navigational and Aerodrome & Ground Aid criterion .Hence equipment of 
those sites was diverted to other suitabl e sites. Mast requirement at most 
of the sites was met by diverting dismantled/ spare masts available within 
AAI.” 
 
5.14 As pointed out by Audit, the suppl ier also declined to impart necessary 
training as required in the purchase order.  In this regard, AAI stated that:- 
 “Due to non availability of site clear ance, site readiness & diversion of 
UHF links installation of only 19 links was completed by the supplier M/s 
Stratex Networks within the stipulat ed period of project. Due to pending 
site readiness and site clearance, ext ension of time was not granted by 
the competent authority and decision wa s taken to install remaining UHF 
links by AAI itself. In response the firm declined to impart necessary 
training.  The rest of the UHF lin ks were installed & commissioned by AAI 
itself and all the UHF links are maintained by AAI engineers since 2004. 
Over the period AAI officers have attained desired expertise for 
maintenance of UHF links.” 
 
5.15 The Authority were asked to explai n the failure to ensure site readiness 
before receipt of equipment re sulting in delay of over 2 years in installation of 
masts.  In reply they submitted that: - 
 “AAI has taken following actions to av oid/minimize idling  of  equipment: 
 
1. Make all  efforts to ensur e availability of technically 
suitable site before placement of PO. 
2. Coordinate with field stations for timely creation of 
infrastructure required for installation work.  
3. Coordinate all related acti vities in order to complete 
installation as soon as equipment is received.” 
 
E. Instrument Landing System (I LS) & Doppler Very  High Frequency 
Omni Range (DVOR) 
5.16 In Para 4.6 of Audit Report, it is  mentioned that six Instrument Landing 
Systems (ILS) costing Rs.9.17 crore received between January 2002 and 
February 2003 were still to be installed/commissioned as on March 2006.  

Further, Eight Doppler Very High fr equency Omni Ranges (DVORs) costing 
Rs.9.24 crore received between May 2003 and September 2003 were yet to be 
installed as on March 2006.   
5.17  When asked to clarify the position in this regard, the Authority submitted 
that:- 
“The main reason for delay in commissioni ng / installation of ILS is either 
due to non-availability of sites due to land issues or delay in completion of 
Civil & Electrical Works.  
 
The main reason for delay in commissi oning / installation of DVORs is 
either due to non-availability of site s or delay in completion of Civil & 
Electrical Works.”   
 
5.18 It was further added that: - 
“Suitable site for installation of DVOR was identified outside airport 
premises as per DVOR siting criteri on at few locations.  The cause of 
delay in installation of DVOR was due to litigation by the owners of the 
identified land and delay in handing over the i dentified site by the State 
Govt at those locations…. 
 
There is no direct loss to AAI due to these delays as the earlier equipment 
continued to work at sites where thes e were for replacement and in case 
of new facilities, the procedures and other conditions applicable prior to 
the installation continued to be followed…. 
 
To avoid such delays in future a policy decision has been taken to place  
the purchase orders only in such cases where either the sites are readily 
available or likely to be available before receipt of equipment.” 
 
5.19 When asked as to what steps have  been undertaken by the Authority to 
avoid delays in installation and commi ssioning of equipment in future, the 
Authority stated as under: - 
“1. To the extent possible, the purc hase orders are placed only in such 
cases where either the sites are readily available or likely to be available 
before receipt of the equipment, also taking into account the lead time in 
procurement of these items. This will ensure that readiness of site can be 
synchronized with the receipt of the equipments. 
 
2. Regular mechanism for monitoring progress of projects at pre-
award and post-award stages has been es tablished to ensure that the 
factors which could contribute to delay can be controlled at early stage.” 
 
F. Infructuous Expenditure of Rs. 7.65 crore on Indigenous Manufacture 
of Radars 
5.20 As per Audit in Para 4.10, the decision of  the Authority to enter into an 
agreement with Bharat Electr onics Limited (BEL) without assessing the latter’s 

capability to upgrade technology and produce radars at reasonable price resulted 
in Infructuous expenditure of Rs. 7.65 crore.  There was a liability to pay an extra 
Rs. 3.79 crore to BEL.  
 
5.21 The Authority were asked to clarif y their position in this regard. The 
Authority submitted that: - 
“In 1992 when AAI intended to proc ure ASR/MSSR, Department of 
Electronics advised that selected foreign vendor will transfer the 
technology to M/s BEL to meet future requirement of AAI. 
 
With reference to liability to pay  balance amount of Rs.3.79 Crores 
claimed by M/s BEL, the basis of a rriving at the ca lculation has been 
asked from M/s BEL. The issue will be examined on receipt of required 
information from M/s BEL and settled appropriately.” 
 
G. Idling of Flight Inspection System 
5.22 As mentioned by Audit in Para 4.12, Radio navigationa l and surveillance 
aids available for use by aircraft are subj ect to periodic ground and flight tests.  
Flight inspection, i.e., ca libration of navigation and surveillance systems verifies 
that certain technical Parameters remain within precisely defined tolerances as 
laid down in international  guidelines.  Flight Ins pection System procured for 
Rs.19.50 crore in November  2004 had not been installed as the procurement of 
the aircraft in which it was to be fitted was delayed.  
 
 5.23 In this regard, it was asked wh y there was lack of synchronization in 
procurement in Flight Inspection System  and the aircraft in which it was to be 
installed.  The Authority in their written reply submitted that: - 
“1. With a view to synchronize the av ailability of aircraft as well as 
Automated Flight Information System (AFIS), action for procurement of 
aircraft was initiated in November 2003 by call of tenders. It was expected 
that the period of 11-12 months will be sufficient for finalization of 
procurement and receipt of aircraft so that the installation of AFIS could be 
taken up on its receipt in India. Howe ver, keeping in view the complexity 
as well as the fact that the procurem ent of aircraft is different from the 
other procurements being carried out by Communication Planning 
Department and the task being taken up fo r the first time and also due to 
lack of proper expertise within the or ganization to evaluate the aircraft 
both technically and financially, the matter was deliberated at various 
levels. The process of involving ex perts from outside the department with 
a view to ensure that AAI finally get s an aircraft meeting its requirements 
and also that the procurement is cost  effective over its life cycle, the 
process of evaluation took time. 
 

2. Further delays occurred due to rais ing of evaluation related issues 
by one vendor after opening of price bi ds, the resolution of which took lot 
of time.” 
 
5.24 It was further added that: - 
“In the technical evaluati on of the bid a sub committee was constituted in 
which expert from Indian Airlines and Director Gener al of Civil Aviation 
were Members.”  
 
5.25 Regarding the issues raised by the vender, the Authority explained that: -  
“M/s AvCraft in its letter dated 5.1. 2005 stated that though their offer was 
lowest but they were still to rece ive a confirmed order from AAI. The 
following issues were raised: 
 
1. That the commercial bid did not contain any formula for evaluation 
of the economy of the aircrafts. 
 
2. That though the clause No.1.8.4  of section C of the tender 
document seeks details of the cost of operating the aircraft @ 1000 hours 
per year, it does not specify that th is would be a deciding factor for 
finalization of tender. 
 
The matter was referred to  the committee appointed by the Board for 
technical evaluation of bids,  which in  turned referred to Law Dte. of AAI. 
The matter was also referred to the Solicitor General of India. The Solicitor 
General opined that the issues raised by M/s AvCraft on the evaluation 
process are not tenable.” 
 
5.26 The Ministry of Civil Aviation when  asked to comment on all of the above 
mentioned issues, they stated that: - 
“Ministry of Civil Aviation has already  asked for the comments of AAI on 
the report of C&AG. Corrective action will be taken, wh erever required, 
after receipt of comments from AAI.” 

 
 
Chapter VI 
 
Passenger Facilities Infrastructure 
6.1 In Para 5.2, Audit has mentioned that  one of the objectives of the Policy 
on Airport Infrastructure was to provi de capacity ahead of demand in order to 
handle an increasing volume of air traffic and to garner maximum share of traffic 
in the region.  The Authority was unable to achieve the objective in many of the 
airports. The Authority conducted surve ys in selected airports during 2004-05 in 
areas like check-in, immigr ation, customs, security  and baggage delivery.  An 
analysis of the surveys revealed that the above facilities were either already 
saturated or inadequate for future pa ssenger demands.  In 11 out of the 18 
airports surveyed both the departure and arri val capacity were already saturated. 
In the remaining seven airports thes e would be saturated between 2006-07 and 
2018-19.   
6.2 In this connection, the Authority we re asked by the Committee to give the 
reasons due to which capacity commens urate to the demands could not be 
augmented at major airports and to give details of the monitoring mechanism of 
the Authority so as to plan capac ity expansion of terminals and other 
infrastructure to synchronise  with demand at saturating ai rports.  In their written 
reply, the Authority stated that: - 
 
“i. A traffic boom has been witnessed by Indian Aviation continuously 
for the last three years.  The Passenger traffic has witnessed a 
record growth of 31.4%, 23.7% and 21.5% respectively during the 
years 2006-07, 2005-06 and 2004-05.  And unpr ecedented growth 
of more than 20% has never been witnessed during the past except 
for the last three years.   
 
ii. Airports Authority of  India is monitoring the capacity of the airports 
vis-à-vis demand through Normati ve Planning / Capacity 
Measurement Surveys and Short-Term, Medium-Term and Long-
Term traffic forecast.  With th is mechanism, capacity is being 
augmented in advance before the saturation of the terminal 
building.” 
 
6.3 On being asked as to what st eps have been initiated to augment the 
capacity of saturated terminals, the Authority replied that: - 
 
(i) “Already Mumbai and Delhi Airports have been handed over to 
Joint Venture Companies under Institutional programme. The 
Greenfield airports at Banga lore and Hyderabad are being 
developed by Joint Venture Compani es.  The Green Field Airports 

which are coming up at Bangal ore and Hyderabad are likely to be 
put into operation during 2008.   
 
(ii) AAI have identifie d 54 airports including  Chennai and Kolkata 
airports for upgradation/ expansion/ modernisation.  
 
(iii) In the mean time, to meet the short term demand, AAI is 
augmenting capacity at various ai rports….existing capacities 
available at all Indi an airports taken t ogether are 305.29 lakh 
passengers and 540.62 lakh passengers respectively at 
international and domestic terminal.   301.80 lakh and 601.05 lakh 
additional capacities are under construction respectively at 
international and domestic termi nals of various airports to be 
commissioned in the next two to three years.” 
 
6.4 During Oral Evidence of  the representatives of AAI before the Committee, 
the Committee asked as to whether the Au thority has any particular cell to 
conceptualize the level of modernity in terms of technology, better facilities as 
some of the metro airports would have a higher rate of growth and increasing 
number of international air lines would operate. In r eply, Member, Planning, AAI 
stated the following:- 
“I will start with the question which the hon. Chairman has  put regarding 
availability of a cell for planning and l ooking into the modernization issues 
related to the development activities at the airports.  I would like to answer 
here that we have a direct orate which is involved in  planning and there is 
a statistical wing in air ports authority which colle cts the traffic data and 
then with the relevant models predicts and  makes a forecast for the future 
growth in the passenger aircraft movement and the other related activities 
and relates it with the availability of the capacity at the various airports and 
draws a model plan and gives us recommendations for the activities which 
can be taken up at various airports.” 
 
6.5 In view of the above, the Committee further sought to know as to whether 
any dedicated cell exists which would ta ke into account the demand, growth and 
need in terms of a particular sector viz, international developments in the areas 
of technology, of airport management, pa ssenger amenities, internet facilities, 
areas of safety and security etc.  In reply, the Member, Planning, AAI further 
clarified as under:-  
“Exclusive R&D is not there, but  then the issues which you have 
mentioned are being addressed at the planning stage and the updatement 
is being done on a regular basis.  For example, signages of the airports, 
toilette facilities and other additional fa cilities which are required, the team 
is examining these issues when we  take modernization for a particular 
activity or any work related to that new  element are in-built  in that plan.  
But there is no specific R&D as you are asking for.  It is not existing”. 

 
A. Customer Satisfaction Levels 
6.6 As per Audit Para 5.3, the Authority carried out customer surveys at 
40 airports through the Agricultural Finance Corporation during 2004-06 
on the facilities and services provided by the Authority, expectations of 
customers, feedback on introduction of new services and reasons for 
dissatisfaction. Audit examined the r eport of the second round of survey 
conducted during April-May 2005. The ov erall customer satisfaction index 
during the second round was 74 per cent  against 75 per cent in the first 
round conducted during October-Novem ber 2004. Audit observed that in 
some of the services the ratings were even below 70 per cent in the 
second round in a number of airports. 
6.7 In this regard, the Authority were asked by the Committee to explain the 
reasons for customer satisfaction level being as low as 70% in a number of 
airports.  The Authority in their written reply explained that: - 
        “The results of latest Custom er Satisfaction Survey Report (Feb-April) 
2007 at top 40 airports whic h handles 98% of total tr affic reveals that the 
Customer Satisfaction Level at Indian  airports varies from 70% to 87% 
with an average of 75%. It may be ment ioned that the world average of 
the Customer Satisfaction Level is 76%.  However there may be variations 
in Customer Satisfaction Level from  one service item to another service 
item.   The Customer Satisfaction Level could further be improved.  The 
congestion due to explosive growth in air traffic during last 3 years has 
caused downward pressure on the Customer Satisfaction Level.  The 
Airports Authority of India has succeeded in neutralizing the downward 
pressure due to various steps taken to increase Custom er Satisfaction 
Level.” 
 
6.8 On being asked as to what st eps have been taken to increase the 
Customer Satisfaction Level, the Authority stated that: -  
 “Besides improving the quality of ex isting infrastructure the steps have 
been taken to add a capacity of 301.80  lakhs for international 601.05 
lakhs for domestic passenger terminals dur ing next two to three years to 
overcome the infrastructure bottlenecks.    A medium term plan has also 
been drawn to modernise non-metro airports by constructing more 
spacious terminals.” 
 
6.9 AAI further added that: - 
“AAI has institutionalized the system of   conducting Customer Satisfaction 
Survey by an independent agency commi ssioned by AAI on half yearly 
basis at top 40 airports since 1995-96.  The overall Customer Satisfaction 

Level is witnessing increasing trend i. e. Customer Satisfaction Level has 
increased from 53% in 1995-96 to 75% in 2007.  Improvements are 
carried out based on the feedback from the survey.  The improvements 
are monitored at the highest level and reviewed by the top management in 
Quarterly Review Meetings taken by the Management.” 
 
6.10 Supplementing further, AAI in their written reply stated as under:- 
 “The airports / regions which fall s hort of excellent ra ting on Customer 
Satisfaction Level were taken seriously  and the letters were issued at the 
highest level (Mem (Plg.) / Mem (Ops.) advising them to ensure that all out 
efforts should be made to achieve the excellent rating in the next round of 
Customer Satisfaction Survey.  The REDs / Airport Directors were also 
provided with the copy of the Repor t and Customer Satisfaction Level of 
each airport alongwith the target rati ng….AAI takes corrective action for 
the areas identified for improvement through the Customer Satisfaction 
Survey. The amenities and facilities are continuously improved / upgraded 
at the existing terminals and a proper care is taken that the shortcomings / 
bottlenecks as identified in the existi ng terminals are improved in the new 
coming up terminals. The capacity of the existing terminals is assessed 
continuously and addition of capaciti es are planned before hand to avoid 
excessive congestion in the terminals.” 
 
6.11 During the oral evidence of the representatives of  AAI before the 
Committee, the Chairman, AAI, added that: - 
“….I would also mention to the Commi ttee that customer satisfaction is 
one of the area which has been menti oned.  We have to constantly 
improve the customer satisfaction.  There are some of the weak areas like 
maintenance of toilets, trolleys and ot her things which have been pointed 
out by the Audit.  We hav e addressed those issues and we have procured 
the trolleys and given them  to various Airports.  In the non-metro airports, 
all the toilets have been changed so t hat we will get the better and clean 
new terminals which are being built  design of the toilets and the 
maintenance is minimal.”    
 
6.12 The Committee during oral evi dence also sought to know if 
consultative committees could be formed at airports consisting of local MPs, the 
stakeholders, different airline people, Airports Authority and the District 
Administration so that maximum local prob lems could be solved there. In reply, 
the Authority stated in their post-evidence note that:- 
“Airport Advisory Committee has already been established at major 46 AAI 
airports. The purpose of this Committee is to make airports user friendly 
and encourage community participation in airport management.  This 
Committee is chaired by Hon’ble Memb ers of Parliament of the local 
airport area and is convened by Airport Director / Controller, AAI.  
 
The Committee includes Member(s) of the Legislative Assembly from the 
airport constituency, incharge of AP SU, representative (s) from local 
administration, collector, represent ative - (s) of Airlines Operators 
Committee, President of Hotel Federation, repres entative from Airline 

Passenger Association, r epresentative of Travel Agents and a number of 
Social Workers / Prominent citizens.   
 
The Committee meets every 3 months and issues related to upgradation 
and improvements in the ai rport functioning includ ing local problems are 
deliberated to improve standard of airport.” 
 
 
 
 

Chapter VII 
Cargo Facilities Infrastructure 
 
7.1 One of the major functions of the Authority as provided in Section 
12 of the Airports Author ity of India Act, 1994, is  the establishment of 
warehouses and cargo complexes at the airports, for storage and 
processing of goods. There was 65.95 per cent growth in cargo operations 
from 8.46 lakh tonnes in 2000-01 to 14.04 lakh tonnes in  2005-06. Cargo 
operations generated revenue of Rs.369.90 crore and constituted 10.59 
per cent of the total revenue of the Authority during 2005-06. 
 
7.2 As per Para 6.2 of the Audit Repor t, the Amritsar cargo complex, which 
was completed in November 2004 at a co st of Rs. 2.93 cror e, had not been 
commercially utilised till December 2006. Further, according to Para 6.3, the 
construction of integrated cargo comple x at Kolkata had alr eady suffered time 
overrun of more than one year.   
 
7.3 In this regard, the Committee want ed to know as to why the new cargo 
complex at Amritsar airpor t could not be put to comm ercial operation despite 
lapse of more than two year s since its completion.  To  this, the AAI in their 
written reply stated the following:- 
 “With the persistent efforts of AAI, the Customs have granted the 
Custodianship to AAI on 1.5.2006 at Amritsar Airport for handling 
perishable cargo. AAI has approved a Business Plan for development of 
domestic airports for handling International Cargo, whereby the AAI Board 
has approved the proposal for leasing t he cargo facilities created by AAI 
as well as allotment of land/space at non-metro airports to agencies on 
commercial terms, following a uniform procedure for leasing the cargo 
facility on an open tender basis. 
 
 In June 2007, operation of the Cargo Complex at Amritsar has been 
awarded to a private operator as per the approved Business Plan.” 
 
7.4 Regarding the latest position of  commercial utilization of the cargo 
complex at Amritsar airport, the Authority stated: - 
 “The NIT has been invited for the projec t. The finalization of tender is in 
the advance stage for award of operati on and management of the Cargo 
Terminal.” 
 
7.5 The Authority were asked by the Co mmittee as to what were the reasons 
due to which integrated Cargo Complex at Ko lkata suffered time overrun of more 

than one year and what is the position with regard to completion of integrated 
Cargo Complex at Kolkata.  In their written submission, the Authority stated that:- 
 “The New Integrated Cargo Terminal (NICT) at Kolkata Airport was 
planned and designed with facility of Elevated Transport Vehicle in Export 
Wing and Automated Storage and Retrie val System (ASRS) in Import 
Wing. Orders have been placed for both the systems. However, both the 
systems have yet to be installed. 
 
 The Export operations have been started from NICT with effect from July 
2006. 
 
 The Import operation is yet to comm ence. In this regard, there is a 
proposal for outsourcing of import functions through contract system.” 
 
 
A. Implementation of Bar Code System 
 
7.6 According to Audit in Para 6.4,  a bar code system was planned in March 
2004 to be installed for bette r monitoring and tracking of cargo at the Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai airports.  The time allowed for completion of the 
work was 16 weeks in Delhi and 20 weeks fo r the other stations from the date of 
issue of award.  However, till March 2006, an amount of Rs. 5.15 crore had 
already been spent but the system was yet to be commissioned.  Further, even in 
August 2006, two years after the issue of work order, the implementation of the 
system was still in progress.  
7.7  When asked by the Committee to give reasons for such a long delay, the 
Authority replied that: - 
“Since the system was very new in the case of cargo operations there was 
a delay in the finalizati on of system requirement s pecifications (SRS) of 
application software. 
 
 The first message IGM (Import general manifest) has not been made 
available on on-line by customs department till date.” 
 
7.8 Regarding the latest pos ition of implementation of bar code system, the 
Authority in their written submission stated that: - 
“At Delhi and Mumbai airports bar code system was commissioned 
without IGM message. 
  
At Chennai airport system was tested on on-line mode and full operation 
will be carried out after the upgradati on of ICMS database servers and 
also IGM message from customs is awaited. 
 
At Kolkata Airport software was loaded and tested on off-line mode and 
could not made on-line due to shifting of the syst em hardware of main 
equipment room to the newly built Cargo Terminal which is under progress 

by the Project department apart from this IGM message from Customs is 
awaited.” 
 
7.9 On this issue, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in their post evidence reply to 
the Committee stated that:- 
“AAI has implemented the Bar Code System as per  the directives of the 
Export Promotion Board (EPB) in order to bring accuracy and efficiency in 
the cargo handling system of AAI to ma tch the pace of international cargo 
growth. 
 
AAI carried out the offline trial/testing in exports at IGI Airport.  The system 
bugs reported during the trial/testi ng were informed to M/s CMC for 
rectification.  The online trial/testi ng was completed at IGI Airport cargo 
terminal in a phased manner as per t he revised SRS document submitted 
by M/s CMC.  The Bar Code System interface with ICMC in export wing 
has been commissioned in January, 2007. 
 
As regards import module of Bar Code System, the testing of the software 
has been completed by AAI.  The system can be used subject to the 
required input from the Customs system.  
 
New technologies like Automatic St orage Retrieval System (ASRS) and 
automation by way of Elevated Transport Vehicles (ETCs) are being 
introduced.”  
 

Chapter VIII 
 
No Uniformity between NAD and IAD Contracts 
 
8.1 As per Para 9.2 of Audit report, t he Authority did not have a works manual 
of its own.  For the NAD projects, the division was adopt ing the NAD manual 
prepared earlier and for the IAD projects the CPWD manual was followed.  This 
resulted in adoption of diffe rent procedures for escala tion, penalty, security 
deposit, performance guarantee et c. for the same items of work in IAD and NAD 
projects. 
 
8.2 Asked by the Committee to explain as to why a common uniform works 
manual has not been prepared despite lapse of more than ten years after merger 
of both the divisions.  In reply, the Authority submitted that: - 
“A common Works Manual was approv ed by AAI Board in March 2007 
which is being adopted uniformly by both Divisions.” 
 
8.3 It was further added that: - 
“AAI was formed in April 1995 by merging NAA & IAAI. NAA was having 
its own Works Manual while IAAI was following CPWD Works Manual. 
 
 On stabilization of activities a fter merger, a committee was formed to 
formulate common Works Manual for AAI. 
 
 The team formed, studied Works Manual being followed by various 
organization including CPWD and 1 st draft was framed. The draft 
document was forwarded to regions for review & comments. After review 
at regional level, the draft was discussed at HoD level at CHQ. 
 
 The suggestions / points raised we re reviewed by the team and draft 
manual was revised & re-circulated. 
 
In the draft Works Manual, the guidelines  issued by Ministry of Finance, 
Govt. of India were also  considered. After incorporating above, the draft 
Manual was forwarded for scrutiny / vetting of legal Directorate. 
 
After vetting by law / Finance Directo rate the manual was put to AAI 
Board. The Manual was deliberated in Board meeting and suggestions 
given by AAI Board were incorpor ated in the draft Works Manual. AAI 
Board finally approved the Works Manual in March 2007. 
 
As the Draft Works Manual was reviewed at various levels  in the field 
which are spread all over India, the receipt of comments suggestions from 
field units proved to be time consuming. 
 
During period of formation of Wo rks Manual the works were being 
executed as per existing Works Manual by AAI. Any changes required 
were being effected through issue of te chnical instructions / circulars by 
Competent Authority to facilitate smooth working.” 

Chapter IX 
Non-finalisation of Land/Space Lease Policy 
 
9.1 According to Audit in Para 10.1.1, until Ap ril 1995, the erstwhile 
International Airports Authority (IAA) and National Airports Authority (NAA) 
were following separate bases for fi xing rates of land leased and space 
allotted at airports under their control. Upon forma tion of the Authority by 
merger of IAA and NAA in April 1995, the practice of adhoc annual 
escalation of ten per c ent per annum was followed pending finalisation of 
the land lease policy. Committees were formed in this respect in both IAD 
and NAD. The Committee reports were received by the Authority in July 
1997 and September 1997 respectively . The policy was however not 
finalised and it was decided to appoint  a consultant in the matter. The 
consultant, M/s Colliers Jardine gav e its final report (June 1999) and 
recommended fixation of land/space rent al on the basis of categorisation 
of airports into five categories bas ed on traffic and escalation of licence 
fee annually by eight per cent instead of the prev alent ten per cent. The 
consultant also recommended revision of land lease policy and licence fee 
every six years. The licence fee/r ental for land was worked out on the 
basis of 3.33 per cent return per annum on the total cost of land which 
included infrastructure developmen t. The report was discussed by the 
Board (March 2000) but no uniform la nd lease policy was finalised. 
Pending finalisation of a uniform me thodology, adhoc revisions were 
effected in lease rentals from time to time. Audit thus observed that 
despite a lapse of more than ten years from the formation of the Authority, 
it had not been able to firm up a unifo rm land/space lease policy. Different 
periods and rates of adhoc  annual escalation were  being applied by the 
IAD and the NAD resulting in non scientific fixation of lease rentals without 

any relation to market rates, cost of  land/space and potential of the airport 
depending upon the traffic handled. 
 
9.2 In this regard, on being asked by the Committee as to why the land/space 
lease policy, for which action was initiated more than a decade ago, has not been 
finalized so far, the Authority in their written reply stated that:- 
“1. The policy for the leasing / licens ing of land / space, duly approved 
by the Board of the AAI, is already in vogue.   
 
2. The land at the airports for the av iation related activities as well as 
for other commercial activities is being allotted with the prior approval of 
the Board of AAI, for a maximum period of 30 years.   
 
3. The built up space at  the airports to the airlines is being licensed 
within the delegated powers of  REDs / APDs (Interna tional Airports) for a 
maximum period of 3 years.   
 
4. The space for all other commerc ial activities is being allotted 
through call of tenders.   
 
5. However, AAI Board has observed that as there were significant 
variations in land and space rental rates, the same need to be rationalized 
and accordingly, a proposal to rationa lize the land and space rentals at all 
the airports is under active consideration.   
 
6. For this purpose, a consult ant was appointed and based on the 
recommendation, a Committee has exam ined in detail and the matter is 
being placed for further consideration of the management.” 
 
9.3 Elaborating on each of the above points,  the Authority further stated that:- 
“It is stated that Cons ultant appointed for subm ission of Land / Space 
Lease Policy has since submitted the r eport.  The same is being put up to 
Commercial Advisory Board for its consideration and recommendation.  
Therefore, the same will be put up to AAI Board for its approval / adoption.  
 
 Basically, policy for price fixation wit h regard to lease rental / licence fee 
rates is to be adopted / fix ed.  Policy for leasing of land at airports exists 
and land is allotted for various aviation activities like hangar construction, 
Aviation Fuel Station, Ground S upport Parking Equipments, Cargo 
warehouse; land for perishable cargo centre; Hotel: Motels : Flight Kitchen 
etc.  
 
 The policy basically pricing is expec ted to be finalized / implemented by 
end of this year….  
 
30 years is maximum period prescri bed under AAI Act for which AAI can 
lease the land.  Land for hotels, Flight Kitchen, sorting office of P&T 
Deptt., Customs offices etc. where pe rmanent buildings are required to be 
constructed are leased for 30 years. Simi larly national carriers i.e. Indian 
Airlines, Air India and public sector oi l companies for Aviation Fuel Station 
have been leased land for 30 years.  

 
 The built up space at airports to the airlines for a maximum period of 3 
years.  This being allotted as built up space as airlines / parties are not 
required to construct the same.  The examples of three years allotment 
are airlines / agencies engaged in ground handling activities etc.  
 
 The criteria of licencing of land is based on first-come-first-served basis as 
per following: 
 
  i. The first priority  to scheduled operators. 
  ii. The second priority to other operators.          
iii. The third priority to approved maintenance agencies 
including new agencies.  
 
 …The other commercial activities at the airport include duty free shops, 
advertisement rights, catering estab lishments, airport business centre, 
executive lounge, transport facilitie s, money exchange, management of 
car park, communication services, hotel reservation, tea/coffee / soft 
drinks / snacks vending machines, let l uggage facility, airport entry tickets, 
information / cyber kiosks, health centre and all kinds of shops etc…….” 
 
9.4 When asked as to whether any assessment has been made regarding 
losses incurred to the Authority due to  non-finalisation of uniform land/space 
Lease Policy, AAI stated:- 
“Since AAI has been regular ly increasing the land / space licence fee at 
the rate of 7.5% compound per annum dur ing the last 3 years   (prior to 
that @ 10%), AAI has maintained its revenue generation and has not 
suffered any loss. The licence fee rate c ontinues to be escalated. In fact 
various agencies have requested for lesser rates of escalation.” 
 
9.5 On being queried by the Committee about the rationale behind the rate of 
7.5 per cent compound per annum during the last three years as compared to 10 
per cent earlier, the AAI explained in their written replies:- 
i)  “At major airports the licence fe e in respect of l and / space allotted 
to airlines and other agencies has been escalated annually at a 
compounded rate of 10% w.e.f. 01.10.1994. The 10% escalation 
was found to be in order duri ng the period 1993-1994, when the 
annual rate of inflation was in t he range of 8.9% and 9.4%. After 
1995, the annual rate of inflation has been falling and the rate 
during 2002-03 was only 5.1% and 4% for the calendar year 2003. 
 
ii) The wholesale price index and the consumer price index 1970 to 
2000 also showed the same trend. 
 
iii) The airlines and other agencies were also protesting against the 
10% annual escalation being applied by AAI  and requested for 
review in the same and also for freezing the licence period at 
current level in view of the financ ial crisis in the airline industry 
prevailing at the time. 
 
iv) It was observed that the return  on bank deposit during the year 
which was in the range of 11 -12% during the period 1993-94 had 

decreased to 6.7% on long term deposit and 3-4% on short term 
deposit. 
 
v) Further due to SARS / war in Ir aq etc. (2002) many  airlines were 
facing severe financial problems on account of which few airport 
operators had elected to freeze t he airport charges and reduced 
space rentals. 
 
Keeping in view above factors, AAI with due approval of the AAI Board, 
also considered reduction in the rate  of escalation from 10% to 7.5% 
annually.” 
 
9.6 When the Ministry of Civil Av iation were asked whether they 
were aware of this undue delay in finalization of the Land/Space Lease Policy 
and further what directions, if any, has t he Ministry issued to the Authority to 
expedite the process of fi nalization of the Land/Space Lease Policy, the Ministry 
in their written reply stated as under:- 
“…….. 
(i) Erstwhile IAAI had different rate s in respect of land and space 
licence fee from Mumbai & Delh i in one group and Kolkata, 
Chennai & Trivandrum Ai rports in other group.   Similarly, based 
on policy guidelines circulated fo r fixing the rate for land/space 
in respect of domestic airports by the then NAAI, there was a 
wide variation in rates prevaili ng even within the same region 
and as well as within the states.    Accordingly, as decided by 
the AAI Board, a Consultant was appointed for rationalizing the 
rates. 
(ii) The consultant so  appointed submitted his final report in July 
2006 and has broadly taken into consideration a relationship 
between the passenger traffic handled at each airport vis-à-vis 
the population of the city to work out rate of rentals for the top 
airports categorized under 6 groups.   
(iii) The report was examined by an internal sub-committee which 
observed that the rate of licence fee for land and space 
recommended by the Consultant were having wide fluctuations 
and were less than the existing rate  of licence fee prevailing at 
majority of the airports.   
(iv) The sub-committee has accord ingly reviewed  the existing 
licence fee vis-à-vis the suggestion of the consultant and is in 
the process of submitting its revised report shortly to the 
Commercial Advisory Board (CAB) for a decision.   
(v) In view of the above, the dela y has been basically on account of 
the process of rationalizing the different licence fee rates and 
has not caused any financial loss to AAI due to annual 
escalation being made applicable on the licensees.   
 
As such the management is in the process of finalizing the land/space 
lease policy.” 
 
 
 
 

PART-B 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Corporate Plan 
 
The Airports Authority of India came into existence on 1 st 
April, 1995 by merger of IAAI and NAI. As per Audit Report, the 
Authority did not have a Corporat e Plan.  An unsuccessful attempt 
was made in January 2004 for fi nalizing such a plan, which was 
revived again in May 2005 when th e Indian Institut e of Technology 
was appointed to prepare a Corporate Plan for the Authority who 
submitted their Report in Februa ry 2006.  The Committee note that 
the Corporate Plan has now been finalized and approved by the AAI 
Board.   
The Committee regret to note th at AAI has taken more than a 
decade in preparing and finalizing a very important document like 
Corporate Plan which inter alia  includes the vision of the 
organisation for the short-term as well as long-term perspectives.  
The Committee feel that by not having proper Corporate Plan in 
place, AAI had to resort to segmen ted approach to the issues arising 
from time to time rather than having holistic approach to such 
issues. The Committee are of the vi ew that early preparation and 
implementation of Corporate Plan  was imperative in view of 
unprecedented growth in aviation sector and to meet various 
challenges like modernization of airports in the wake of boom in civil 
aviation sector and also the emerging economic scenario in the 
country.  
Now that the Corporate Plan has been finalized and approved, 
the Committee desire that concerted efforts should be made for its 

implementation in a time bound manner.  Therefore, the Committee 
would like to be apprised by the Authority about the follow-up action 
taken to implement the Corporate Plan, and its impact in handling 
the exponential increase in the aviat ion sector in a more systematic 
and organized manner.  

Recommendation No. 2 
 
Financial Outlay on Infrastructure / Projects 
 
The Committee regret to note that  in the year from 2000-01 to 
2005-06, there was a shortfall in act ual expenditure vis-à-vis plan 
outlay on capital works executed by Airports Authority of India which 
resulted in non-creation /completi on of projects after considerable 
time and cost overrun.  Thus, the goal of creating capacity ahead of 
demand was not fully met.   
The Committee take note that the shortfall in expenditure was 
registered at an all-time high at 58.35 per cent in 2000-01 which later 
on came down to 23.72% in 2004-05 .  The situation regarding 
utilization of funds has improved  only since last two years. The 
Committee note that during the year 2006-07, funds to the extent of 
90.46% were utilized due to vari ous measures taken for improving 
the capital expenditure.  The Committee also note that AAI has set up 
a project management cell at the headquarters headed by Executive 
Director to assess the progress of projects.  The Committee 
recommend that this cell should pe riodically assess the work of 
ongoing projects so as to ensure that  there is no cost and time 
overrun in the implementation of projects and the intended objective 
of creating adequate infrastructure and capacity to meet future 
demand is fully achieved. 
The Committee further note that during the 11 th Five Year Plan 
period, the Airports Authority of India proposes to spend about Rs. 
12,417.17 crore as compared to Rs. 3,534.62 crore during the 10 th 
Five Year Plan period, an increase of almost 250 per cent.  The 
Committee would like to emphasise that  Airports Authority of India 
fully utilize the allocated funds by way of creation and augmentation 

of infrastructure and operational facilities.  Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the Authority should create an appropriate 
mechanism/framework through which full utilisation of funds is 
planned and ensured.   

Recommendation No. 3 
 
Non-Traffic Revenue 
 
The Committee note that the A udit in their Report have 
observed that the share of non-traffic revenue out of the 
total revenue of the Airports Authority of India was only 
11.90% in 2001-02 (Rs. 267.20 cr ores) increasing marginally 
to 14.04 % in 2005-06 (Rs. 489.96 crores).   In view of the fact 
that out of 90 operational airpor ts being managed by AAI, 
only 12 airports were profit making and the remaining 
operational airports generate very meagre non-traffic 
revenue, the Committee emphasize the need for taking 
adequate measures for augmenting the shares of non-traffic 
revenue of the airports to strengthen and augment the 
existing infrastructure at the airports.  
The Committee are happy to note that AAI has identified the 
development of 35 non-metro airports for commercial exploitation 
based on the reports submitted by global technical advisors and 
financial experts which inter alia  provide for creation of flying 
schools at various airports, ground handling services to be provided 
to airlines and development of non -traffic revenue through city side 
development. The Committee emph asize that the work of 
development for these non-metro airports should be completed 
within time bound programme.   The  Committee also desire that 
mechanism for commercial exploitation of other non-metro airports 
should be explored and steps be taken with due promptitude for 
augmentation of non-traffic revenue from these airports as well.  

Recommendation No. 4 
 
Operational Area Infrastructure- Timely Completion of Projects 
 
The Committee note that Audit from a test check of major 
works executed by AAI during 2004-05  at many airports have 
found cases of time overrun up to 75 months due to reasons like 
absence of clear possession of land before taking the work 
leading to delay and foreclosur e of work, poor performance of 
the contractor etc.  Audit has al so noticed cost overrun of Rs. 
3.47 crore due to changes in scope of work. 
As already pointed out by the Committee in their earlier 
recommendation, they would again emphasise the imperative 
need of timely execution of pr ojects to strengthen the existing 
infrastructure which is woefully inadequate to meet the growing 
demand which has risen due to high growth in Civil Aviation 
Sector.  
The Committee note that AAI has taken several steps to 
avoid time and cost overrun in future projects.  The Committee 
desire that a strong mechanism should be put in place to ensure 
that all these steps are scrupulously adhered to, to obviate any 
chance of cost and time overru n in implementation of future 
projects.  

Recommendation No. 5 
Problems in Land Acquisition and Encroachment 
As per Audit, as on March 2006, land under encroachment 
was 702 acres in 20 airports and during the five years ending 
2005, the Authority was able to remove encroachment from only 
30 acres of land while incurring an expenditure of Rs. 24.35 
crore.  The Committee also observe that the land has been under 
encroachment at different airports for periods ranging from 5 
years to 40 years and there is  not much progress as regards 
status of removal of encroachme nts. The Committee also take 
note of Audit observation that AAI’s efforts to resolve land 
acquisition issues were held up due to procedural delays and 
litigation.   
In view of the fact that land is a key resource for Airports 
Authority of India to implemen t its programme of expansion, 
modernization and augmentation of facilities, the Committee 
need hardly emphasize that the issues of land acquisition and 
encroachment need to be addressed on top priority.  
The Committee note that th ough AAI Act 1994 was 
amended in 2004 to include Chap ter 5A empowering them to 
take necessary action for eviction of encroachments on their 
land, yet it has not helped in achieving the intended objectives.   
It is true that AAI is fully empo wered and competent to deal with 
issues of land acquisition and removal of encroachments on its 
land but the Committee feel that these are very sensitive issues 
involving various agencies a nd State Governments.   The 
Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that the Ministry should 
not abdicate themselves of their responsibility and provide all 
necessary support to AAI to resolve all such contentious issues. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to 
resolve this vexatious problem , an institutional mechanism 
consisting of senior officials from  AAI and the Ministry of Civil 

Aviation be formed to periodically liaise with concerned 
agencies and State Governments so  that the problems can be 
addressed in a far more pragmatic manner. The Committee also 
desire that a nodal officer shou ld also be appointed in the 
Authority to pursue these issues.  

Recommendation No. 6 
 
Air Traffic Management, Communication, Navigation and 
Surveillance Facilities Infrastructure 
 
The Committee note that undue delays occurred in 
procurement/commissioning of various equipments viz 
Visual Simulator, Voice Communication System, Dedicated 
Satellite Communication Networ k, UHF links, Instrument 
Landing System (ILS) and Doppler Very High Frequency 
Omni Range (DVOR) at various airports.  This not only 
resulted in blocking of huge f unds but also led to denial of 
improved communication interface between the airports. 
The Committee further note that AAI incurred 
avoidable expenditure to the tune of Rs. 7.65 crore by 
deciding to enter into an agreement with BEL (Bharat 
Electronics Limited) without assessing their capability to 
upgrade technology and produce Radars at a reasonable 
price.   Also, Flight Insp ection System produced for Rs. 
19.50 crore in November 2004 had not been installed as the 
procurement of the aircraft in which it was to be fitted was 
delayed.  
The Committee highly deprecate lack of perspective 
planning on the part of AAI  in foreseeing procedural 
problems such as delayed decision in procuring 
equipment, non-synchronisation of allied activities and 
poor contract management.  The Committee view these 
aspects very seriously and woul d like to hold Airports 
Authority of India responsi ble for non-synchronisation of 
the various above-quoted activities.  
The Committee recommend th at the Authority should 
develop more expertise in pl anning and synchronizing its 

various activities so as to avoid losses on account of delay 
in procurement and installation of various systems.  
  

Recommendation No. 7 
 
Passenger Facilities Infrastructure 
In view of the fact that ther e has been unprecedented growth of 
more than 20% in passenger traffic ranging from 21.5% in 2004-05 
and 23.7% in 2005-06 to 31.4% in 2006-07, the Co mmittee note that 
the Airports Authority of India has failed in achieving the objective of 
providing capacity ahead of demand at airports with regard to 
services such as check-in, immigr ation, security, customs and 
baggage delivery etc.  
The Audit have also observed that the overall customer 
satisfaction index has hovered around 74-75% and in some cases, 
the ratings went below 70%. As per latest customer satisfaction 
survey report from February to Ap ril 2007 at top 40 airports, which 
handles 98% of total traffic, show s that the Customer Satisfaction 
Level at Indian airports varied fr om 70% to 87% with an average of 
75%.   The Committee, therefore, ob serve that infrastructure created 
at the airports is not commensur ate with the growth in passenger 
traffic thereby resulting in lower customer satisfaction level.  
The Committee take note of um pteen number of measures 
taken by AAI to improve its faciliti es.  In view of the fact that 
Passenger traffic is expected to gr ow at a compound annual growth 
rate (CAGR) of 12% from 96.4 mill ion now to 280 million in 2020 and 
cargo traffic would grow  at a CAGR of 14% per annum to 9 million 
tones, the Committee would like to emphasise that AAI need to gear 
up its functioning for achieving th e twin objectives of providing 
capacity ahead of demand and im proving customer satisfaction 
index.  

The Committee recommend that a dedicated in-house cell be 
created by the Airports Authority of India which would make a 
realistic assessment of the rate of growth of passengers and the  
need of passenger facilities on a holistic basis over the next 20-40 
years based on which requisite infrastructure should be created in 
terms of technology, passenger facilities, airport management, areas 
of safety and security etc.  The Committee further desire that this cell 
may study the international and domestic airports in other countries 
for more efficient management of Indian airports.   
The Committee note that to make airports user-friendly, Airport 
Advisory Committees have been co nstituted by AAI at 46 major 
airports.  The Committee desire  that these committees should meet 
at regular intervals as they can pl ay a crucial role in improving 
facilities at airports for passengers.   

Recommendation No. 8 
 
Cargo Facilities Infrastructure 
 
The Committee note that Audit in their Report have pointed out 
that a new cargo complex was cons tructed at Amritsar despite a 
recommendation to the contrary by  a Committee.  The Committee 
regret to note that though the complex was completed in November, 
2004 at a cost of Rs. 2. 93 crore, yet it had not been commercially 
utilized till June 2007. Further, the construction of integrated cargo 
complex at Kolkata also suffered a ti me overrun of more than a year.  
Now that New Cargo Complex have been constructed, it is imperative 
that they are commercially exploi ted so as to augment the revenues 
of the AAI.  
Beside above, a Bar Code System to be implemented at the 
airports for better monitoring and tracking of cargo was not 
operational even after two years of the issue of the work order 
leading to non-utilisation of investment to the tune of Rs. 5.15 crore.  
The Committee strongly deplore the inaction on the part of AAI to 
activate an important system like Bar Code.  
 The Committee recommend that in future before taking a 
decision for construction of new f acilities, an assessment regarding 
gainful utilization of existing facilities should be invariably done.  
The Committee further recommend th at the Bar Code System be 
implemented at the earliest as it is  crucial to have a sound system of 
monitoring and tracking cargo.  

Recommendation No. 9 
 
No Uniformity between NAD and IAD Contracts 
 
The Committee note that though the Airports Authority of India 
was created by merging the erstwhile International Airports Authority 
of India with the National Air ports Authority in 1995, a common 
works manual for both the IAD and the NAD was finalized after more 
than a decade of the merger of th e two divisions.  The Audit have 
pointed out in their report that this delay has led to lack of uniformity 
resulting in different procedures fo r same items of work reflecting 
poorly in the functioning of the Authority.  
The Committee note with satisfact ion that a uniform policy for 
the functioning of the two divisions  has now been put into place and 
hope that the same would be fo llowed scrupulously by both the 
divisions.  Further, the Committee d esire that the Authority should 
conduct a review so as to standardize all procedures and systems in 
the Airports Authority of India to minimize any difference with regard 
to procedure and practice on issues like tendering, bidding, award of 
contracts and commercial aspects related to the functioning of the 
Authority.  

Recommendation No. 10 
 
Non-Finalisation of Land/Space Lease Policy 
The Committee note that since formation of Airports 
Authority of India after merger of IAA and NAA in April 1995, the 
AAI has been resorting to adhoc annual escalation of ten per 
cent per annum for land leased and space allotted. The 
Committee also note that many  committees and consultants 
appointed in the past have submit ted their Reports and still no 
land/space lease policy has been put in place so far. The 
Committee are of the view that the present practice of adhoc 
annual escalation is unscientific and does not reflect the 
prevalent market rates, cost of land/space and potential of the 
traffic handled at the airports. Hence, there is an imperative need 
to finalize and adopt a uniform and standardized policy of lease 
rental and license fee rates.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that AAI should finalise a policy on land/space lease 
rates without further delay and apprise the Committee on the 
steps taken in this regard.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                    Rupchand Pal 
26th November 2007                                                                     Chairman 
05 Agrahayana 1929(Saka)          Committee on Public Undertakings  
 

Annexure-I 
 
CREATION AND AUGMENTATION OF 
INFRASTRUTURE AND OPERATIONAL FACILITIES BY AIRPORTS 
AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 
HIGHLIGHTS 
 
• The Authority did not prepare a Corporate Plan. 
(Para 2.1) 
 
• There was shortfall in actual expenditure compared to plan outlay in all the 
years examined in audit. The shor tfall was mainly due to delay in 
finalisation of schemes, te nders, midway alteration in the scope of the work 
etc. 
(Para 2.2) 
 
• Audit noticed that there were instances where the Authority could not recover 
cost of works carried out on behalf of State Governments which resulted in 
blocking of funds of Rs.15.83 crore. 
(Paras 2.4.1 and 2.4.2) 
 
• Non-Traffic revenue constituted less than 15 per cent of the revenue of the 
Authority whereas internationally such revenue was more than 50 per cent. 
(Para 2.5.1) 
 
• The Authority had to incur extra expenditure of Rs.86.22 lakh in rectification of 
defective work executed at Agartala airport. 
(Para 3.2.7) 
 
• Cases of time overrun ranging upto 75 months and cost overrun upto Rs.3.47 
crore were noticed in works undertaken at 17 airports. 
(Para 3.2.9) 
 
• Problem of encroachment  continued unabat ed. 702 acres of land was under  
encroachment in 20 airports. 
(Para 3.3.1) 
 
• Delay in installation of Voice Communication system at three airports resulted in 
denial of improved communication interface between the airports. 
(Para 4.3) 
 
• Delay of five years in providing Dedicated Satellite Communication Network 
resulted in foregoing benefit of Rs.16 crore. 
(Para 4.4) 

• Eight wireless communication links remained uninstalled for more than one year 
after their receipt. 
(Para 4.5) 
 
• The decision of the Authority to enter into an agreement with Bharat Electronics 
Limited (BEL) without assessing the latter’s capability to upgrade technology and 
produce radars at reasonable price resulted in infructuous expenditure of Rs.7.65 
crore. There was a liability to pay an extra Rs.3.79 crore to BEL. 
(Para 4.10) 
 
• Delay in completion of the Flight Data Processing System project due to its 
nonintegration with the existing radar system resulted in the Authority not being 
able to derive the benefits of an integrated system. 
(Para 4.11) 
 
• Flight Inspection System procured for Rs.19.50 crore in November 2004 had 
not been installed as the procurement of the aircraft in which it was to be fitted 
was delayed. 
(Para 4.12) 
 
• Out of 18 passenger terminals test checke d, the capacity for customer services 
in 11terminals was already saturated by  2004-05. Customer satisfaction level 
was less than 70 per cent in a number of airports. T here was delay of more than 
two years in commissioning of Flight Information Display system at seven 
airports. 
(Paras 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4) 
 
• Terminal II-B of Mumbai airport remained idle from  September 1999 to June 
2005. 
(Para 5.5.2) 
 
• New domestic departure building was completed at Ahmedabad with a time 
overrun of 20 months. Non synchronisation  of procurement of  aerobridges with 
construction of the building kept the rela ted facilities created at a cost of Rs .3.67 
crore idle.  Upgradation of A mritsar airport registered del ay of three years. Time 
overrun of one year to three years was observed in completion of Phase I and II 
of the terminal building at Agartala due to delayed decisions and delay in handing 
over of the site. 
(Paras 5.5.3, 5.5.4 and 5.5.6) 
 
• The Amritsar cargo complex had not been commercially utilised till December 
2006.  The construction of integrated ca rgo complex at Kolkata had already 
suffered time overrun of more than one year. 
(Paras 6.2 and 6.3) 
 
 
• A bar code system for better monitoring and tracking of cargo at Delhi, Mumbai, 
Kolkata and Chennai airports, planned at a cost of Rs.5.81 crore could not be 
completed as the required software connectivity was not achieved. 
(Para 6.4) 
 
• The delay in taking decision either for procurement of new crash fire tenders or 
for the refurbishment of the existing ones for over four years resulted in many 
airports being left only with old fire tenders. 
(Para 7.2.1) 

 
• Airport Surface Friction Tester valuin g Rs.61.91 lakh positioned at Guwahati 
airport remained unserviceable most of t he time. New tester valuing Rs.80 lakh 
was purchased for Imphal even while the existing one was underutilized and 
even this equipment was lying unutilised at Guwahati. 
(Para 7.5) 
 
• There was no uniform Works Manual for both the divisions of the Authority 
resulting in adoption of different procedures by the two divisions. 
(Para 9.2) 
 
• No land/space lease policy had been finalised by the Authority. 
(Para.10.1.1) 
 

Annexure-III 
 
Cases of Problems in Acquisition of Land Needed for Development Purposes 
 
Airport Purpose of 
requirement 
 
Reasons for non/delayed 
acquisition 
Infrastructure facility denied 
1. Chennai Development of  
airport  
 
23.89 acres of land already in 
possession of the Authority since 
1980 was not legally acquired. The 
State Government issued 
notification in August 2000 for land 
acquisition and the Authority made 
initial payment of Rs. 1.10 crore in 
March 2002. Award for the balance 
amount of Rs. 1.78 crore was 
passed in September 2002, which 
is being contested (March 2006).  
 
The perimeter wall around the 
airport was constructed without 
clearly acquiring possession of 
the entire area encircled.  
 
2.Coimbatore Wire transmitting  
station and 
navigational 
equipment 
Land required for runway extension 
was acquired in 1994. However, 
land where the wire transmitting 
and navigational facilities were 
installed is yet to be acquired.  
 
The installation of CAT-I lighting 
system is still pending  
 
3. Jammu Extension of 
runway 
Land was acquired in 2000-01 at a 
cost of Rs. 2.75 crore for extension 
of runway. However a portion of 
land in between the existing 
runway and the land acquired for 
extension could not be acquired 
(March 2006).  
 
Proposed extension of runway 
by 1,300 feet had not been 
taken up and the land already 
acquired could not be utilised. 
4. Kolkata Extension of  
secondary 
runway  
 
Due to presence of public road in 
the south and religious place of 
worship in the north, extension of 
runway is not possible. The project 
approved in June 2003 is yet to be 
taken up.  
 
Bigger aircraft cannot be 
operated in the present 
secondary runway.  
 
5. Lucknow Construction of  
boundary wall  
 
Due to lack of clear possession, the 
work only partially completed in the 
site handed over. Further work was 
held up due to dispute over land.  
 
Incomplete boundary wall 
around the airport.  
 
6.Mangalore Land for 
construction  
of control tower, 
fire station, link 
taxiway etc.  
Exact requirement of land for 
development of airport was not 
decided initially and the 
requirement was changed many 
times and land acquisition being a 
lengthy process, the delay in 
finalisation of requirement delayed 
acquisition of additional land. 
A-300 type of aircraft could not 
be operated from the airport 
due to limited length of runway 
and terminal capacity.  
 
7. Madurai Extension of 
runway length 
from 5990 feet 
to 7500 feet  
State Government handed over 
only part of land required. The 
balance land required is yet to be 
transferred (March 2006).  
 
Delay in extension of runway. 
The installation of ILS and DME 
equipment was pending for 
want of extended runway.  
 
8. Mumbai Land required 
for expansion  
 
13927 sqm of land within Mumbai 
airport was given on lease to Indian 
Airlines in 1959 for use as a 
playground. The Authority 
requested for vacation of land in 
May 1993 for expansion purposes. 
The land is yet (March 2006) to be 
handed over.  
 
The land required for expansion 
of Mumbai airport is not 
available.  
 
9. Pune Expansion of 
apron and 
additional 
taxiway  
 
7276.20 sqm of defence land 
acquired with conditional no 
objection from the defence 
authorities.  
 
Since the area is restricted, 
creation of the operational 
facilities are hampered. 

 
 Annexure-IV 
MINUTES OF THE 3 rd SITTING OF THE CO MMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 19th JUNE, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1315 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Francis K. George 
3. Shri Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasada 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Mohan Rawale 
8. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
14. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
3. Shri N.C. Gupt a  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
2. Shri J. Wilson  Principa l Director (Commercial)  
 
Representatives of Airports Authority of India 
 
1. Shri P. Seth    Member (Operations) 
2. Shri H. S. Bains  Member (P&A)  
3. Shri S. C. Chhatwa l  Member (Finance)  
4. Shri V. P.  Agrawa l  Member (Planning)  
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ai rports Authority of 
India (AAI) in connection with examination of  C&AG’s Report No. 17 (Commercial) of 2007 
(Performance Audit) regarding review of infrastr ucture and operational facilities provided by 
Airports Authority of India.   
 

3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he representatives of  AAI and also drew 
their attention to direction 58 of the Directions  by the Speaker relating to evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives of AAI  made an audio-visual 
presentation on the infrastructural and operational facilities being developed by the Authority.  After 
the audio-visual presentation, Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject 
and the explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the representatives of AAI.  
Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was not readily available with the 
representatives of AAI.  It was, however, promised by them that the same would be furnished to 
the Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the represent atives of AAI for providing all the 
material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 

MINUTES OF THE 5 th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 13th JULY, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1320 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Shri Francis K. George 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Shri Kashiram Rana 
8. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri Ajay Maroo 
10. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
3. Shri N.C. Gupt a  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
Representatives of Airports Authority of India 
 
1. Dr. K. Ramalingam  Chairman 
2. Shri P. Seth    Member (Operations) 
3. Shri H. S. Bains  Member (P&A)  
4. Shri S. C. Chhatwa l  Member (Finance)  
5. Shri V. P.  Agrawa l  Member (Planning)  
6. Shri M.C. Kishore  ED(CA) & CS 

2. The Committee took further oral evidenc e of the representatives of Airports 
Authority of India (AAI) in connection with examination of C&AG’s Report No. 17 (Commercial) of 
2007 (Performance Audit) regarding review of infr astructure and operational facilities provided by 
Airports Authority of India.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he representatives of  AAI and also drew 
their attention to direction 58 of the Directions  by the Speaker relating to evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives of AAI  made an audio-visual 
presentation on the infrastructural and operational facilities being developed by the Authority.  After 
the audio-visual presentation, Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject 
and the explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the representatives of AAI.  
Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was not readily available with the 
representatives of AAI.  It was, however, promised by them that the same would be furnished to 
the Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. In the course of the de liberation on AAI, some members raised the issue of safety 
and security of airports and s uggested that Committee should take  up the subject of safety and 
security of airports under AAI for examination.  The Committee have therefore decided to select the 
subject “Airports Authority of India – Safety and Security Aspe cts” for examination during the 
current term. 
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the represent atives of AAI for providing all the 
material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
7. The witnesses then withdrew. 
8. The Committee then adjourned. 

MINUTES OF THE 7 th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 29th AUGUST, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1645 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Ch. Lal Singh 
3. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
5. Shri Kashiram Rana 
6. Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
8. Shri Ajay Maroo 
9. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
10. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
3. Shri N.C. Gupt a  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
3. Ms. Bharti Prasad  Chairperson, Audit Board 
4. Shri A.K. Awasthi  Dir ector General (Commercial) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation  
 
1. Shri Ashok Chawla Secretary  
2. Shri Raghu Menon Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser 
3. Shri K.N. 
Shrivastava 
Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Sandeep Prakash Director 
 
Representatives of Airports Authority of India 
 
1. Dr. K. Ramalingam Chairman 
2. Shri S.C. Chhatwal Member (Finance) 
3. Shri P. Seth Member (Operations) 
4. Shri V.P. Agrawal Member (Planning) 
5. Shri M.C. Kishore CS&ED (Corp. Affairs) 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representati ves of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation in connection with examination of C&AG ’s Report No. 17 (Commercial) of 2007 

(Performance Audit) regarding revi ew of infrastructure and operational  facilities -  Airports 
Authority of India.   
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he representatives of M/o Civil Aviation 
and drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence before 
the Parliamentary Committee.  Thereafter, Members raised querie s on various aspects pertaining 
to the subject and the explanations/ clarifications on the same were made by the representatives of 
Ministry.  Information on some of the points rais ed by the Committee was not readily available with 
the representatives of Ministry .  It was, however, promised by  them that the same would be 
furnished to the Committee Secretariat in due course.   
 
5. The Chairman then thanked the representat ives of Ministry of Civil Aviation for 
providing all the material/information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
8. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 

MINUTES OF THE 12 th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 26th NOVEMBER, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1620 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
7 Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8 Shri Kashiram Rana 
  
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Ajay Maroo 
10 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
11 Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
 
Secretariat 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
4 Shri N.C. Gupta Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1.    Shri A.K. Awasthi   Director General (Commercial) 
2.    Shri Naveen Kumar  Pr incipal Director (Commercial) 
 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Airports Authority of 
India based on C&AG (Commercial) Report No. 17 of 2007.  The Committee adopted the Report 
without any changes.   
 
3. Then, the Committee took up for consid eration the draft Action Taken Report on 
the recommendations contained in the 17 th Report of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings 
pertaining to GAIL(India) Limited. The Committee adopted the Report without any changes.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for co nsideration the draft Action Taken Report 
on the recommendations contained in the 16 th Report of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings 
pertaining to Special Contingen cy Policies on Mobile Handsets by Insurance Companies. The 
Committee adopted the Report without any changes.  
 

5.  The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
********** 
 
 
 