 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.P.U. NO. 903 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS
 
 
(2006  -  2007) 
 
 
( FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA ) 
 
 
 
GAIL(INDIA) LIMITED- A COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15 .12.2006
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   15.12.2006 
 
 
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW  DELHI 
 
December 2006/Agrahayana 1928(S) 
 
 
 
 
17 

 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2006-07)       (iii)  
Introduction                                                                                                                             (v) 
List of abbreviations                                                                                                                (vii) 
 
 
Part A
 
REPORT 
 
1. Introduction                         1
 Historical Background and present activities                                                                 
 
2. Organisational set up                       6  
 
3. Performance of the Company                      9 
 ( i )  P r o j e c t  A p p r a i s a l             
(ii) Financial performance of the Company                    15 
(iii) Capacity utilisation          19 
 
4. Gas exploration by GAIL          24 
 
5. The Role Of GAIL In India’s Gas Security                    30 
 
 (i) Import of gas through transnational pipelines.                   32 
(ii) LNG (Liquefied Natural Gas)                     37 
a) Import of LNG                       37 
b) Setting up of LNG terminals.                    39 
(iii) Underground coal gasification.                     42 
 
6. Gas Transmission By GAIL                      45 
 
(i) Decline in percentage share of GAIL in natural  
gas transmission.          45 
(ii) National Gas Grid           47 
(iii) Gas pipeline Policy           49 
 
7. Gas Storage Capacity                       52 
 
8. Gas distribution by GAIL          54 
(i) Distribution of Piped Natural Gas to Households                               54 
(ii) Supply of CNG to vehicles in cities                    56 
 
9. Shortage of Rich Gas to HVJ Based Plants                     58 
10. Gas Pricing policy           61 
11. R e g u l a t o r             64 
12. S a f e t y  M e a s u r e s            66 
 
Part B
 
                           Conclusions /Recommendations of the Committee     72 
     Appendix 
                           Minutes of the sittings of Committee on Public Undertakings                      99 
(i) 
 
 

 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2006 – 2007) 
 
CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
9. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Kashiram Rana 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Rishang Keishing  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
19. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
20. Shri Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
21. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
      SECRETARIAT
 
 
 1. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri N.C. Gupta  Under Secretary 
 3. Shri Bala Guru G.  Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present  this Seventeenth Report on GAIL(India) Limited. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
GAIL(India)Limited on 23rd August, 2006 and the repr esentatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 26 th September, 2006.  The 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2006-07) considered and adopted 
the Report at their sitting held on 12th  December, 2006. 
3. The Committee wish to express t heir thanks to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, and GAIL (India) Ltd.  fo r placing before 
them the material and information they wanted in connection with 
examination of the subject.  They also wish to  thank in particular the 
representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, who 
gave evidence and placed their considered views before the 
Committee. 
4. They would also like to pl ace on record their sense of deep 
appreciation for the invaluable a ssistance rendered to them by the 
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi                        RUPCHAND PAL  
15 December, 2006                         CHAIRMAN 
24 Agrahayana, 1928(S)COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS           
 

 
List of Abbreviations 
Natural Gas: Mixture of hydrocarbons, consisting of Methane, Ethane, Propane, 
Butane, etc. 
C1:   Methane 
C2;  Ethane 
C3:  Propane 
C4:  Butane & other heavier hydrocarbons 
Lean Gas:  C1  & C2 (i.e.)Methane and Ethane used as feedstock for fertilizer 
industry. 
Rich Gas: C3 & C4 etc. (i.e.) Propane,  Butane etc. used  in production of 
LPG. 
MMSCMD: Million Standard Cubic Metres of Gas per day. (Standard unit for 
Volume of Natural gas). 
LNG: Liquified Natural Gas (i .e.) Gas Liquified at -160
0 c (LNG is 
imported from Qatar through special tankers /ships). 
R-LNG: Re-gasified LNG(Re-gasification of LNG is done at Hazira & Dahej) 
APM:  Administered Pricing Mechanism 
PNG:  Piped Natural Gas (Natur al Gas supplied to households). 
CNG; Compressed Natural Gas (Used as fuel for bus/automobiles  
transport). 
KG:  Krishna-Godavari Basin (Ne wly discovered huge gas field in 
Andhra). 
JV:  Joint Venture 
E & P:  Exploration & Production 
PNGRB: Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board. 
GSPL  Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation 
IGL:  Indraprastha Gas Limited (GAI L  is a JV partner in IGL). 
MGL:  Mahanagar Gas Limited (GAIL  is a JV partner) 
HVJ:   Hajira – Vijaipur – Jagdhis pur (Principal Gas Pipeline of India) 
PLL: Petronet LNG Limited (Principal  LNG importing company, in which 
GAIL is a JV partner) 
GAILTEL: Gail Telecommunication. 
NELP:      New Exploration  & Licensing Policy 
CGD:  City Gas Distribution  
MMTPA: Million metric tonnes per annum 
GSA:  Gas Sales Agreement 
TSA:   Term Sheet Agreement 
RIL: Reliance Industries Limited (Domes tic private player in Natural gas 
business). 
Mou Memorandum of Understanding 
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
HDPE High Density Poly-Ethylene 
PMT Panna-Mukhta-Tapti 
VSPL Vizag Secunderabad LPG pipeline 
UCG Underground Coal Gasification 
ISGG Inter-State Gas Grid  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I. Historical background and present activities
 
 
1.1. The Gas Authority of  India was formed on 16 th August 1984, with an 
authorized capital of Rs 1000 crore and paid up capita l of Rs.845.32 crore. 
The main objective and functions of GAIL are as under:  
(i) To create necessary infrastructure for transportation, 
processing and distribution of natural gas; 
(ii) To plan, design and construc t pipelines, distribution systems 
and fractionation facilities for extraction of LPG and C2/C3;  
(iii) To operate and maintain the systems to be taken over from 
ONGC/ OIL as well as facilities to be set up by it; and  
(iv) To liaise and co-ordinate with the gas production 
organizations, Government and the gas users to ensure 
proper utilization of gas. 
    1.2   Briefing the Committee about the  ba ckground of setting up of GAIL 
and the present activities of the Company, the CMD of  GAIL, during his oral 
evidence before the Committee submitted as under: 
“Sir,  GAIL(India) Limited as it  is called now was originally 
formed in 1984 as Gas Authority of India Limited.  The organisation 
was born out of the Oil and Natura l Gas Commission in those days 
basically because natural gas was being flared in Bombay High and 
a separate entity was creat ed to take the gas to the fertilizer plants 
and power plants for which Hazira-Vijaipur-Jagdishpur and other 
pipelines were laid.  That is how GAIL started its existence.   
 
Over the last 22 years, we hav e diversified our portfolio into 
a number of areas which include gas processing,  production of 
LPG gas, production of liquid carbons, gas cracking etc,..  We have 
a plant in Uttar Pradesh which produces about 3, 30,000 tonnes of 
polymers.  We have also diversifi ed into  city gas marketing. The 
most successful instance is that of Delhi where we have a joint 
venture called Indraprastha Gas Limi ted.  As all the hon. Members 
may know, the entire public transport system of Delhi today runs on 
CNG.  It has made a very big differ ence to the environment of the 
city.       
 
In addition, we have  eight more joint ventures for the cities 
of Mumbai, Hyderabad, Agarta la, Indore, Pune, Kanpur and 
Lucknow.  So, we have in total about eight cities for city gas 
disbursement.  Now we have ident ified about 22 more cities where 

we propose to have this particular line of business.  We also have a 
very small presence in the tele com sector.  We have a separate 
unit called  GAIL -Tel which is invo lved in carriers’ carrier to supply 
bandwidth to telecom companies. 
 
I am very pleased to inform you that GAIL has participated in 
each round of  New Exploration Licensing policy(NELP) and as on 
date, we have 13 blocks in Indi a, two in Myanmar and one in 
Oman.  One of these has already started producing oil.  Gas has 
been discovered in both the blocks in which we are involved and 
associated with in Myanmar. We ar e very hopeful of finding oil and 
gas in the other blocks  where we are working.   I am equally happy 
to share with you that in the latest round of bids for coal bed 
methane, we have submitted bids along with some foreign partners.  
We are hopeful we should get about two to three blocks in this 
round.  In addition, we  are pursuing projects for gasification of coal 
because this country has the fourth  largest stocks of coal in the 
world In  terms of surface coal gas ification as well as in-situ coal 
gasification, projects have been i dentified.  We are working on 
them.  We are looking at two pet rochemical projects one in The 
North-East and one in Kerala.  Then we have a proposal for 
petrochemical plant in Iran.   
 
The Company has been performing in financial terms 
extremely well.  Over the last five  years, we have added almost 3.7 
U.S.billion dollars to our market  capitalization and the performance 
review by the Ministry of Petroleum and the DPE has been very 
satisfactory because all the MoUs that we have b een signing with 
the Government have received excellent rating.”   
 
     1.3  From the preliminary material, the Committee note that  
            GAIL is the owner and operator of: 
• India's largest gas transmission networks (5600 km. pipelines)  
World's longest exclusive Jamnagar-Loni LPG pipeline (1269 km) and 
another one Vizag-Secunderabad LPG pipeline (653 km.) 
• Seven   gas   processing facilities with a capacity of more   than     1 
MMTPA of LPG. 
• India's largest gas-based petrochemicals complex with an installed 
capacity of 310,000 TPA of polyethylene (HDPE, LDPE, LLDPE), which is 
undergoing expansion up to 440,000TPA.  
• Optic fibre cable network of more than 9,000 Kms to offer bandwidth as a 
carrier's carrier in the telecom sector.  
1.4 Asked as to whether any study has  been conducted by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas to ascertain the extent to which the company has 

achieved its objectives and the reasons for non-achievement of objectives, 
GAIL in their written note stated as follows: 
 
“Every year, GAIL signs a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with the Ministry of Petr oleum and Natural Gas, which is 
framed in line with the guideline s issued by the Department of 
Public Enterprises. The MoU envisages targets of achievement on 
all major activities of the company, which are computed with 
reference to the objectives, and micro-objectives of the company.  
GAIL has been receiving “Excellent” rating consistently since 
inception of MoUs, which bears a testimony of compliance of the 
micro objectives and accomplishment of the targets envisaged with 
reference to the same every year.   The achievements of GAIL in 
this regard reached a pinnacle in the year    2004-05 when it 
accomplished the best possible score of 100/100.”     
 
 
 
          GAIL (India) Limited which was initially known as Gas Authority 
of India Limited, was established on 16 th August, 1984 with the 
objective of creating necessary infr astructure for transportation, 
processing and distribution of natu ral gas; planning, designing and 
construction of  pipelines, distri bution systems and facilities for 
extraction of LPG  and C2/C3: to operate and maintain the systems to 
be taken over from ONGC/ OIL as we ll as facilities to be set up by it 
and to liaise and coordinate with gas production organizations, 
Government and the gas users to ensure proper utilization of gas.  
The Committee are happy to note th at  over the last 22 years, 
GAIL  has diversified its portfolio into a number of new areas such as 
gas processing, production of LPG, production of liquid carbons, 
gas cracking, polymer production etc. ; and today  this company is  
the owner and operator of India’s largest gas transmission network 
of about 5600 km length of pipelin es, world’s longest exclusive 

Jamnagar – Loni LPG pipeline, In dia’s largest gas based petro-
chemical complex, seven gas processing  facilities with a capacity of 
more than 1 million metric tonnes per annum(MMTPA) of LPG etc..  
GAIL has also been receiving “Excellent rating” as regards the MoUs 
signed with the Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural gas and has been 
performing extremely well so far as its financial performance is 
concerned which is evident from the fact that the company has 
added 3.7 US billion dollars to its market capitalization.  
While appreciating  the abo ve achievements of GAIL, the 
Committee find that in many other asp ects viz. capacity utilization of 
pipelines, share in natural gas transmission business, gas storage 
capacity, city gas distri bution, gas explorati on activities, bringing 
gas by trans-national pipelines, setting up of LNG terminals, 
underground coal gasification, comp letion of various limbs of the 
proposed gas grid, etc, their performance needs further 
improvement.  
After going into the working of  GAIL (India) Limited, the 
Committee are of the view that a lo t more is required to be done in 
many areas. These and other aspect s have been dealt with by the 
Committee in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.  

 
2. Organisational set-up 
 
2.1  From the organizat ional set-up of GAIL it  is noted that CMD is 
the head of the company and below him are five directors viz. Director 
(Marketing), Director (Projects), Director (Business Development), Director 
(Finance) and Director (HR) to oversee the activities of various divisions of 
the company. Besides above there are two Government nominees and 
three non-official part -time Directors on the board of Directors of GAIL. 
  
2.2  Asked as to whether the present organizational set up was 
satisfactory, to run the company in an effective  manner GAIL in their 
written reply stated as under: 
 
“The present organizational set up is considered to be 
adequate/ satisfactory.  However,  in view of emerging new 
business requirements, the organi zational set up may undergo 
changes in future, decisions on which will be taken at the 
appropriate time.” 
 
2.3 On being asked about the changes that are contemplated in the 
organizational set-up in view of the new business requirements, GAIL in 
their note stated as under: 
 
“During the last few years, GA IL has diversified its business 
portfolio by adding E&P, City gas ma rketing, Value added Energy 
Management System to name a few, besides creation of an 
investment arm GAIL Global (Si ngapore) Pte for overseas equity 
participation. 
 
The diverse business profile has warranted a re-alignment of 
portfolio among the various Directors , that, inter-alia, includes 
creation of new directorat e(s).  Accordingly, a proposal for creation 
of position of Director (Operations) has been put up before the HR 
Committee, a sub- committee of Board of Directors.  Further, based 
on the Government of India’s dire ctions from time to time and 
directions of the Board of Direc tors, the organizational set up may 
require review and   re-organization.”   
 

     GAIL has further stated that there is a requirement of additional 
Independent directors on the Board in terms of revised clause 49 of the 
Listing Agreement.  
2.4 When asked as to whether GAIL has taken up the matter 
regarding the requirement of additi onal Independent Directors with the 
Ministry, GAIL in their reply stated as under: 
 
“The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas a number of times.  However, no decision 
has been communicated so far.” 
 
2.5 Asked by the Committee to give the reasons for taking no 
decision on the requirement of additi onal independent dire ctors for GAIL, 
Ministry in reply stated as under:  
 
“At present, 3 Independent Direc tors are in position.  
Proposal for ad hoc extension of t heir tenure for a period of three 
months w.e.f. 18.8.2006 has been sent to DOPT for the approval of 
ACC.  Proposal for appointment of Shri Ajit K. Kapadia as non-
official part-time Director, has been returned by DOPT.  Currently, 
proposal for induction of a fresh panel of non-official part-time 
Directors on the Board of GAIL is under consideration in the 
Ministry.  This exercise will take some time. “ 
 
 
 
The Committee note that GAIL’s activities have increased 
manifold since its setting up in 1984.  The Committee have been 
informed that the diverse business profile of company such as 
exploration & production, city gas marketing etc.,  has warranted a 
realignment of portfolio among var ious Directors which include 
creation of new directorates and accordingly a proposal for creation 
of the position of Director (Opera tions) has been put up before the 
HR Committee, a sub-committee of  Board of directors.  The 
Committee are unable to understand the reasons due to which no 
decision has yet been taken by  the HR Committee on the said 

proposal.  The Committee desire th at the proposal for creation of 
Director(Operations) be cleared exped itiously and steps be taken to 
appoint Director (Operations) with due promptitude.  
                    The Committee are also cons trained to note that Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural gas h ave not communicated any decision 
on GAIL’s proposal for requirement of additional independent 
Directors on its Board despite the fact that GAIL has taken up the 
matter with them a number of ti mes.  The Committee need not 
emphasise the imperative need of  full complement of Directors on 
the Board of GAIL for the  effect ive and efficient functioning of its 
various activities.  They therefor e recommend that Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natuiral Gas should take immediate decision on GAIL’s 
proposal for appointment of addi tional Directors. The Committee 
also recommend that a comprehensive review of organizational 
setup of GAIL may be undertaken in view of its fast expanding role 
and responsibility in meeting the energy requirements of the 
country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.Performance of the Company 
3(i). Project Appraisal 
 
   3.(i)(a) From the Preliminary mate rial furnished to the Committee, it 
is noted that during t he last five years (2001-2006), GAIL has 
commissioned 5 major pipeline projects involving total actual cost of 
Rs.4142.00 Crore  against approved cost of Rs. 5113.86 Crore   Details  
giving actual expenditure vis-à-vis  original estimates in respect of each of 
these projects are as under: 
                  (Rs. in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Original 
approved cost 
Actual/committed 
capital expenditure 
1 Jamnagar – Loni LPG 
Pipeline 
1167.00 1084.00
2 Lanco – Kondapalli 
Pipeline 
299.50 186.00
3 Vizag – Secunderabad 
LPG Pipeline 
491.00 480.00
4 Dahej – Vijaypur Pipeline 2936.36 2240.00
5 Thulendi – Phulpur 
Pipeline 
220.00 152.00
Total 5113.86 4142.00
  
3.(i)(b)  Asked as to whether all the projects were commissioned as 
per schedule and the reasons for delay in commissioning of projects if 
any, Ministry in their note stated as under : 
“The projects at sl nos 1,2 and 3 were executed ahead of 
schedule.  The Vizag-Secunder abad Pipeline project was 
mechanically completed within schedule.  However, commissioning 
was delayed due to non-availability of LPG from the oil marketing 
companies.  The commissioning of  the Thulendi P hulpur Pipeline 
project was behind schedule by  about three weeks as its 
commissioning was synchronized with the requirement of the 
customer viz., M/s IFFCO, Phulpur.   
It may be stated that one of the proj ects viz., the prestigious 610 
Km. long Dahej-Vijaipur gas pipeline (DVPL) project was 
successfully commissioned 5-1/2 months ahead of schedule. 
 
In addition to the pipeline pr ojects mentioned above, GAIL 
has also commissioned the Gas Cracke r Unit at Pata, which is the 
first part of the Pata expansion pr oject, involving actual capital 
expenditure of Rs. 72. 15 crores against original estimated cost of 
Rs. 124.42 crores.   The project was commissioned on 31.10.2005, 
the scheduled date of its commissioning”  
 

     3.(i)(c) Asked about the pipeli ne projects which are currently under 
execution and the position regarding their completion,  GAIL in their note 
stated as under: 
“The major pipeline projects, whic h are currently under execution, 
are: - 
1. Dahej-Uran pipeline project 
2. Dabhol-Panvel pipeline project 
3. Vijaipur-Kota pipeline project 
4. Kelaras-Malanpur pipeline project 
5. Jagoti-Pithampur  pipeline project 
6. Dadri-Panipat pipelin e project – under hold 
 
   
Status as on 31.05.06 
 
STATUS OF MAJOR P/L PROJECTS UNDER EXECUTION 
 
Sl. No. Project Name/ 
Description 
Schedule 
Completion 
Date 
Revised Completion 
Schedule 
Anticipated 
Completion 
Date 
Reasons for 
Delay in 
Completion 
1. Dahej-Uran 
Pipeline (30”, 24”, 
18” – 475 kms, 
capacity – 12 
MMSCMD 
 
28.02.06 Feb’ 07 
 
(as per Board resolution of 
226th Meeting on 21.06.05) 
31.3.07 
(as per record notes of 
review meeting dt. 13.4.06 
Chaired by Secretary 
P&NG) 
 
31.03.07  
--- 
2. Dabhol Panvel 
P/L 
 
17.11.07 17.11.07 
(as per board approval) 
31.3.07 
(as per record notes of 
review meeting dt. 13.4.06 
Chaired by Secretary 
P&NG) 
 
31.3.07 
 
 
--- 
3. Vijaipur Kota 
Pipeline (18”, 16”, 
8” – 192 Kms, 
Capacity – 3.47 
MMSCMD 
 
31.12.06 31.12.06 31.12.06  
--- 
4. Kelaras Malanpur 
Pipeline (12”, 6”, 
4” – 95 Kms, 
Capacity – 2 
MMSCMD 
 
27.7.06 27.7.06 27.7.06  
--- 
5. Jagoti Pithampur 
Pipeline ( 16”, 
12”, 4” – 180.50 
kms Capacity 3 – 
MMSCMD 
27.7.06 27.7.06 Dec. 2006 2 months 
delay is 
anticipated 
due to delay 
in award of 

 order for 
procurement 
of linepipe. 
6. Dadri Panipat 
Pipeline (28”, 16” 
– 122 kms, 
Capacity – 4.8 
MMSCMD 
18 months 
from project 
approval 
subject to 
signing of 
TSA/GSA and 
Environmental 
clearance. 
 
--- 
 
--- 
Project under 
hold for want 
of GSA/ TSA 
with IOCL 
 
 From the above statem ent of status of im plementation of above 
projects, it is noted th at there are variations in the scheduled completion 
date, revised completion date and antic ipated completion dates in respect 
of Dahej-Uran pipeline and Jagoti-Pita mpur pipeline.  Further, Dadri-
Panipat pipeline has been underhold for want of GSA/TSA with IOCL.   
 
 
3.(i)(d)  The Committee were info rmed that Dahej-Uran pipeline was 
to be commissioned  by 1 st December 2006. However from the material 
furnished to the Committee it was not ed that only 55.9% of the work has 
been completed till July 2006. 
Asked to give the reasons for delay in the commissioning of Dahej-Uran 
pipeline, Secretary Ministry of Petroleum and natural gas, during his 
evidence before the Committee stated as under: 
 
“It is because the source has not been tied up.  In between 
there was a delay in supply of gas and that has made it.  The Board 
has discussed, kept it on hold and that has been cleared.  Once the 
particular tie-up is final a nd revised schedule has also been 
approved by the Board, the pipeline will be constructed.”         
 
      3.(i)(e) The CMD  of GAIL fu rther clarified that the construction has 
also started and there is no delay, as per the March 2007 schedule. 
“In addition to the above mentio ned pipeline projects, GAIL 
is also executing HDPE plant at Pata, which is the second part of 
the Pata expansion project.  Th is project is expected to be 
completed by 24.03.2007 against the scheduled date of 
30.04.2006.  The main reason for t he delay is non-availability of 
process package in time.”   
 

3.(i)(f)  Asked to indicate the reasons for delay in availability of 
process package, GAIL in their written reply stated as follows:   
      
“Process package has been already made available on 25.03.2005.  
However, the reasons for its delay are as under:- 
  
1.) Secretariat of Industrial Assist ance (SIA) approval for technology 
transfer took nearly five months as against normal time of 15 days. 
 
2.) In future cases, advance action w ill be taken for evaluation of different 
technologies.” 
 
 
       While the Committee appreciate the successful execution of 
Dahej-Vijaipur gas pipeline, which had the distinction of both cost 
reduction as well as completion of the project  by 5-1/2 months 
ahead of schedule, in the case of Dahej-Uran pipeline, the Committee 
are constrained to note that only 55% of the project had been 
completed by July 2006 and the date of commissioning has also 
been rescheduled to March 2007.  The reasons for delay in 
commissioning of the project have been attributed mainly due to  
non-tieing-up of the gas source and delay in supply of gas.  The 
Jagoti-Pitampur pipeline whose co mpletion date has been revised 
from July, 2006 to December 2006 is further expected to be delayed 
by 2 months due to delay in award of order for procurement of 
pipeline.  The Committee are cons trained to note that despite 
revision in the completion schedul e in case of Dahej-Uran pipeline 
and Jagoti-Pitampur pipeline they are not expected to be completed 
even on their revised dates of completion.  The Committee would like 
to emphasize the imperative need of completion of pipeline projects 

on time not only for augmenting GAIL’s share in transmission of 
natural gas which has declined from 90% in 2003-04 to 86.07% in 
2005-06 but also to facilitate uninte rrupted supply of gas to power, 
fertilizer, petrochemical industries located in various States.  The 
Committee desire that the progr ess of work of these pipeline 
projects be monitored continuously so as to ensure that they are 
completed as per their revised schedule.  
As regards, Dadri-Panipat pipeline project, which has been put 
under hold for want of Gas Sales Agreement /Terms–Sheet 
Agreement with Indian Oil Corpor ation Ltd., the Committee desire 
that negotiations be held with IO C for signing of TSA/GSA and steps 
may be taken for early construction of Dadri-Panipat pipeline.    
         The Committee are unhappy to note that second part of the 
HDPE plant at Pata  which was sch eduled to be completed by 30 
April 06 has been now delayed due to non availability of process 
package in time and the project is now expected to be completed by 
24 March 07. The Committee are not  convinced with the reasons 
cited for delay  in availability of process package viz, SIA (Secretariat 
of Industrial Assistance) approval  for technology transfer taking 
nearly five months as against normal time of 15 days as they feel that 
advance action ought to have been  initiated for evaluation of 
different technologies. The Committ ee recommend that in future all 
these steps should be initiated well in advance so as to obviate any 
delay in completion of projects in time.   

 In view of undue delay that h as been taking place in execution 
of projects by GAIL, the Committee feel that the set up in GAIL meant 
for project formulation and implementation needs to be improved.  
The Committee, therefore, desire  that a stricter mechanism for 
monitoring and control of pr ojects at the formulation and 
implementation stage should be evolved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3(ii)Financial performance of the company 
 
3.(ii)(a) From the preliminary material, the Committee note that 
during the last  four years, the financial performance of GAIL was as 
under:      
         Crores( in Rs) 
Item 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
 BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual 
Turnover/ 
Sales 
 
15928.22 10217.53 15474.12 10826.49 14873.56 12412.20 12200.36 14459.41 
Value Added 
 
2871.72 3756.00 2856.05 4079.00 3917.77 4413.00 3744.69 4467.76 
Profit/Loss 
 
896.68 1639.11 793.27 1869.34 1138.48 1953.91 1164 2310.07 
Dividend paid 
to the 
Government 
164.41 398.65 160.29 421.78 230. 01 387.95 200.25 387.95* 
Internal 
Generation of 
Resources 
1565.46 2281.70 1509.20 2533.31 2207.65 2900.56 2127.67 2869.56 
 
 
From the above it is noted that GA IL has been earning profits year 
after year. However there is a wid e variation between the figure of 
estimated profit and the actual profi t. Asked by the Committee as to why 
realistic assessment of pr ofits was not made, the CMD of GAIL during his 
evidence before the Committee submitted as under: 
  “As far as profit is concerned,  I wish to submit that based on 
our general experience, as a ph ilosophy we try to be very 
conservative because if you make an estimate which is not met, 
then we find that the answerability to all concerned including the 
shareholders becomes that much hi gher. So, while we have been 
progressively showing a higher leve l of profit, in the budget we 
have consciously not pegged it to the actual performance because I 
may draw the kind attention of the Members that we are paying a 
subsidy for LPG and kerosene which has an impact on the 
profitability of the company. But its quantum is completely unknown 
to us. It is an element which we  come to know on a quarter to 
quarter basis. Sometimes it is 150 per  cent more than the previous 
quarter. So, we have chosen to be conservative to give a lower 
projection so that the final pictur e, as it emerges, is a pleasant 
surprise to all concerned rather than our having to disappoint 
people.” 

  
He further added:  
“Regarding the dip in the profitability, I would like to submit 
that the growth in the profitability would have been much more than 
regular had we not been subjected to sudden increases on account 
of subsidy. In earlier years, it was about Rs. 400 crore to Rs. 500 
crore. In the last year , it was Rs. 1,100 crore. So, the impact of the 
subsidy has brought down the rate of growth in our profitability. It 
has also been affected by the hi gher price that we pay for our 
feedstocks for LPG and petrochemicals, but what has kept us afloat 
is the significant increase in the prices of petrochemicals.” 
    
 3.(ii)(b) Noting that GAIL’s profitability has been under heavy 
pressure due to the subsidy, borne on LPG, Committee asked the Ministry 
of Petroleum and natural gas as to why GAIL had been asked to share the 
subsidy burden of oil marketing compani es on kerosene. In reply Ministry 
of Petroleum and natural gas stated as under :   
  
“While higher international prices impacted the downstream 
companies marketing petroleum pr oducts adversely as they were 
not allowed to increase the consum er prices of sensitive retail 
products in line with the international prices, they benefited 
upstream companies like ONGC, OIL  and GAIL. Keeping this in 
view, it was decided by the Govern ment that a part of the under 
recoveries of the downstream ma rketing PSUs would be borne by 
the upstream companies by way of providing discounts on crude oil 
and products.  As GAIL produc es LPG, the quantum of under 
recovery to be borne by them was passed on to the downstream 
companies through discounts on LPG pr ice. While it is correct that 
GAIL has been asked to share the under-recoveries on account of 
kerosene, it may be noted that du ring 2005-06 and at present while 
GAIL shares under-recoveries only on account of LPG and 
kerosene, ONGC and OIL share the under-recoveries on all four 
products, viz., Petrol, diesel, LPG and kerosene.  The magnitude of 
total under-recoveries of Oil Market ing Companies is so large that 
all other companies, viz., ONGC, OIL and GAIL are required to 
contribute to make the mechanism work.” 
  
3.(ii)(c) It is noted from the above that Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas has justified the shari ng of subsidy burden of oil marketing 
companies by GAIL.  However, the R eport of the Committee on Pricing and 
taxation of Petroleum Products (Februar y 2006), under the chairmanship of Dr. 
S. Rangarajan states otherwis e.  The Committee in their report has inter-alia
 

observed that to the extent  the Government decides to extend subsidies, the 
burden should be borne entirely and transparently in  the Union Budget. 
The oil marketing companies should be freed from the burden of subsidy. 
It has recommended to discontinue the practice of asking ONGC/GAIL/OIL to 
provide up -stream assist ance and observed that if no action is taken, and the 
Government is unable to pr ovide the required subsidies,  the financial position of 
the public sector oil compani es will deteriorate rapidly,  jeopardizing the country’s 
energy security. 
                 
 
                The Committee note that while GAIL has been 
earning profits continuously year after year, their profitability has 
been affected adversely due to sharing of subsidy burden of 
downstream oil marketing PSUs on LPG and kerosene. Besides 
adversely affecting the profitability of the Company, the Committee 
note that due to uncertainty regarding the quantum of subsidy 
burden to be shared GAIL is not in a position to make any realistic 
estimate of its profits. In the absence of realistic estimates of its 
profits, Committee have every reason to believe that GAIL would not 
be in a position to prepare its future plans in a fair and objective 
manner. The Committee note that Dr. Rangarajan Committee on 
pricing and taxation of petroleum products has recommended for 
discontinuing the practice of asking ONGC/OIL/GAIL to provide 
upstream assistance. They have observed that “to the extent the 
Government decides to extend subsidies, the burden should be 
borne entirely and transparently in the Union Budget and the oil 
marketing companies should be freed from the burden of subsidy.” 

This Committee has also expressed the view that if no action is taken 
and Government is unable to provide the required subsidies, the 
financial position of the public sector oil companies will deteriorate 
rapidly and jeopardize the country’s energy security. The Committee 
on Public Undertakings therefore recommend that the present 
arrangement wherein GAIL is required to share the subsidy burden 
on account of LPG and kerosene may be reviewed in the light of 
recommendations made by Dr. S. Rangarajan Committee so as to 
enable it to make realistic assessment of its profits, and to protect its 
financial as well as  functional autonomy, while the Government may 
find other revenues like reduction of duties and setting up of oil price 
stabilisation fund to protect the interests of the common man, ‘aam 
admi’. 
 
3 (iii).Capacity utilization  
 
3.(iii)(a) Capacity utilization, during the preceding three years, of the 
natural gas pipelines and LP G pipelines being operated by  GAIL is given in the 
following table:- 
 Capacity    utilization (%)  Sr. 
No. Item 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
1 
Natural Gas 
Pipelines 
59.35 55.14 60.77 
2 LPG Pipelines 73.6 58.41 60.86 
 
From the above it is noted that capacity utilization of natural gas 
and LPG pipeline is about 63% only. 
 
3.(iii)(b)  Under-utilisation of Natural gas pipelines
 

Asked to give the reasons for lo wer capacity utilization of natural 
gas pipelines, CMD,GAIL stated as under: 
“On the utilisation part that you mentioned, I may submit that 
we have three kinds of pipelines. We have the main inter-State gas 
pipelines. These pipelines are utilis ed practically to 100 per cent 
capacity. We have smaller networ ks in the States of Gujarat, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, M aharashtra and Tripura. These 
networks are utilised to the extent of, as you have mentioned, about 
60 per cent only because there is not sufficient gas available from 
the main producer, ONGC. If the gas  were available, then the 
pipelines would be utilised to a higher capacity and the consumers 
will also have more gas to use.” 
 
Asked further about the steps that  had been taken for increasing 
the capacity utilization of natural gas pipelines, GAIL  in their note stated 
as under:  
“Efforts are being made to source additional gas/LNG As 
and when the efforts start bearing fr uit, capacity utilization of the 
gas pipelines are expected to go  up considerably. In addition to 
sourcing of natural gas, GAIL is  also endeavoring to tie up 
transportation of natural gas of  other domestic producers to 
enhance capacity utilization of the pipelines.”    
 
        In a subsequent not e, GAIL further stated as under:  
“GAIL is already op erating pipeline of 5600 Kms which 
connect various source points viz Hazira, Dahej, Uran, KG Basin, 
Cauvery, etc. In addition, Dabh ol and Hazira LNG terminals will 
also be shortly connected to GAIL’s  grid. Discussions are also in 
progress with major pot ential producers of gas  viz SHELL, RIL, 
GSPCL, PMT, ONGC, etc for sourci ng / transportation of gas from 
their new finds in future.”   
  
 
3.(iii)(c ) Under utilization of LPG Pipelines:
  
The Committee were informed that  fo r transportation of LPG, GAIL has 
two pipelines namely Jamnagar-Loni and Vi zag-Secunderabad. While utilization 
of Jamnagar-Loni pipeline wa s stated to be pretty high. The Committee  were 
informed that utilization of Vizag-Secunderabad pipeline was merely 30-40%.  As 
regards the under-utilizatio n of Vizag-Secunderabad LP G pipeline GAIL stated 
that the main reason fo r the low capacity utilizat ion of Vizag-Secunderabad LPG 
pipeline (30 to 40%) was due to  non-usage of the pipeline to the fullest extent by 
the oil marketing companies under the Pe troleum Ministry as the oil companies 

were bringing in LPG by ra il and road.  Asked to ex plain the reasons for low 
capacity utilization of Vizag –Secunderabad LPG pipeline, GAIL in their note 
stated as under.  
 
“LPG availability at Vizag through indigenous refinery 
production/imports is limited as the OM Cs are not able to receive full 
LPG import parcel due to inadequate LP G storage available at Vizag.  
Therefore, OMCs are s ourcing part requirement of their bottling plants 
located at Secunderabad through alternate supply sources such as 
Mangalore, Ratnagiri, Mumbai and Ha zira through road/rail modes.  
Moreover, sourcing of product for Secunderabad through rail is 
logistically cheaper. “ 
     
Asked by the Committee as to whet her the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural gas  were aware of the Low Capac ity utilization of above pipeline and If 
so, what action was taken by them so as  to augment the capacity utilization, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as follows : 
 
“The Vizag-Secunderabad LPG pipeline has a capacity of 1.33 MMTPA 
and the pipeline was commissioned in April 2004. The oil marketing 
companies (OMCs) are presently m eeting 75-80% of their total LPG 
requirement of all bottli ng plants en-route VSPL th rough the pipeline. The 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas is  aware of low capacity utilization of 
the pipeline (at present about 0.40 MMTPA).
      
  
Measures undertaken to increase the VSPL utilization are as follows:- 
 
1. Discussions are progressing with IOC to provide VSPL connectivity to 
their Parwada bottling plant and with HPCL to their Rajamundry plant 
within the  next 1-2 years, which will enhance VSPL utilization. 
 
2. Setting up of LPG cavern storage of 60,000 MT capacity at Vizag by 
HPCL in joint venture with TOTAL,  France by September, 2007, which 
will augment the LPG availability at  Vizag through receipt of large 
import parcel, thereby improving utilization of VSPL. 
 
3. There will be no ‘Take or Pay’  obligation on OMCs and OMCs will 
utilize the pipeline on ‘best endeavour’ basis on economic 
considerations. 
 
4. GAIL is exploring the po ssibility of transportation of 
POL products through VSPL,  thus proposing to make VSPL a multi 
product pipeline.”   
 
 

 
The Committee are constrained to note that the capacity  
utilization of the existing gas transmission infrastructure for 
transporation of natural gas and LPG is merely 60-63%.  In case of 
natural gas pipelines  while it is a ppreciable that the main inter-state 
gas pipelines are being used to 100% capacity,  the Committee regret 
to note that the utilization of sma ller network of natural gas pipelines 
in the states of Gujarat, Andhra  Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra 
and Tripura is merely 60% mainly du e to  shortage of gas from the 
main producer ONGC. In view of  depleting gas reserves of ONGC, 
Committee desire that GAIL should explore new avenues to meet the 
deficit by sourcing additional gas/ LNG so as to ensure the optimum 
utilization of natural gas pipe lines.  The Committee have been 
informed that to improve capacity ut ilization, GAIL has a proposal to 
connect Dabhol and Hazira LNG te rminals to GAIL’s grid.  The 
Committee desire that this should be done with due promptitude.  
The Committee also recommend th at discussions which are in 
progress with major potential produ cers of gas viz., SHELL, RIL, 
GSPL, PMT, ONGC etc. for sourcing / transportation of gas from their 
new finds in future should be held to their logical conclusion so as to 
ensure utilization of natural gas pipelines capacity to optimum level.  
 
 As regards capacity utilistion of  LPG pipelines, the Committee 
note that Vizag-Secunderabad LPG pipeline (VSPL) is being utilized 
to the level of 30 to 40 percent only due to non-usage of pipeline to 
the fullest extent by Oil Market ing Companies (OMCs) who are 

bringing in LPG by road and rail. The Committee have also been 
informed that due to limited availability of LPG at Vizag through 
indigenous refinery production/ im ports, OMCs are sourcing part 
requirement of their bottling plants located at Secunderabad through 
alternate supply source.  The Co mmittee need not emphasise that 
under-utilization of pipelines, cons truction of which involves huge 
expenditure is a gross wastage of public funds and loss to the 
country.  It is therefore imperati ve that all efforts are made to 
augment capacity utilization of these pipelines. The Committee find 
that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has undertaken certain 
measures like setting up of LPG cavern storage at Vizag, VSPL 
connectivity to Parwada Bottling Plant of IOC and Rajmundry plant of 
HPCL etc., to increase VSPL utiliz ation.  The Committee desire that 
all these measures be implemented with due promptitude so that 
VSPL is utilized to its maximum capacity.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4. GAS EXPLORATION BY GAIL 
 
4.1 From the preliminary material, Committee note that to ensure long-
term gas-supply security from multiple nat ural gas sources, GAIL has ventured 
into liquefied natural gas re-gasificati on and exploration & production through 
joint ventures / equity parti cipation routes. GAIL has m ade equity participation in 
several joint ventures in India and abroa d. The extent of equity participation 
made in the joint ventures is, ranging from 10% - 80% in 16 blocks. 
 
4.2 Giving a brief backgro und about the exploration activities of GAIL, 
the CMD during the evidence submitted as under: - 
“…The primary activity in which ON GC is engaged is of exploration and 
production. They produce huge quantities of  oil and gas in this country. 
They needed an organisation who,  with uncluttered mind, would 
concentrate on how to reach the gas to  the customers. That is how GAIL 
was created. We started as a pipel ine company, but t hen we developed 
ambitions on our own and we actually poached into ONGC’s territory by 
getting into exploration as well
.” 
 
He further added: - 
 
“…At one time, nobody other than ONGC  and Oil India could engage in 
exploration and production in this country. But the new Exploration 
Licensing Policy came, and it has thrown  open this field to all. Therefore, 
we also pitched into it.” 
 
4.3 On being asked as to how ma ny independent blocks have been 
acquired by GAIL and the details regarding the discovery of gas in such blocks,  
GAIL in their written reply stated as follows: 
 
“GAIL consortium has so fa r been awarded 16 exploration 
blocks comprising of 2 blocks un der NELP-I, 5 blocks under NELP-
II, 2 blocks under NELP-IV, 3 bl ocks under NELP-V, 3 “farm-in” 
blocks and 1 block acquired overseas through bidding.  
 
Gas has been discovered in Blocks A-1 and A-3 in Myanmar 
in January, 2004 and March, 2006 respectively. The estimated gas 
in-place is of the order of 5.7 to 10 trillion cubic feet (TCF) in both 
the blocks taken together, of which recoverable reserves are of the 
order of 4.8 to 8.6 trillion cubic f eet (as per the estimates confirmed 
by Gaffney Cline & Associates.)  
 

Oil has been discovered in th e Cambay onland block in 
September, 2004. The block is under test production, producing 
approx. 400 barrels of oil per day.”  
 
The details of the ex ploration blocks with GA IL’s participation are 
given below : 
  
S. 
No Block No. 
Date of PSC 
Signing Participating Interest & Partner Current Expln. 
Phase 
NELP - I  
 
1 MN-OSN-97/3 
Mahanadi Offshore 
12.04.2000 GAIL                             - 15% 
ONGC (Operator)         - 85%  
Phase-II 
2 NEC-OSN-97/1 
Bay of Bengal 
Offshore 
03.10.2000 GAIL                             - 50% 
GAZPROM (Operator) - 50% 
Phase-II 
NELP – II 
 
3 GS-DWN-2000/2 
Gujarat Saurashtra 
Offshore 
17.07.2001 GAIL                        - 15% 
ONGC (Operator)      - 85% 
Phase-I  
4 MB-DWN-2000/2 
Mumbai Offshore 
17.07.2001 GAIL                        - 15% 
ONGC (Operator)     - 50% 
IOC                            - 15% 
OIL                            - 10% 
GSPC                          - 10% 
Phase-I 
5 MN-OSN-2000/2 
Mahanadi Offshore 
17.07.2001 GAIL                         - 20% 
ONGC (Operator)      - 40% 
IOC                             - 20% 
OIL                            - 20% 
Phase-II 
6 CB-ONN-2000/1 
Cambay Onland 
17.07.2001 GAIL                        - 50% 
GSPC(Operator)      - 50% Phase-II  
7 MN-ONN-2000/1 
Mahanadi Onland 
17.07.2001 GAIL   - 20% 
OIL (Operator) - 40% 
IOC   - 20%  
ONGC   - 20% 
Phase-II 
NELP – IV 
 
8 AA-ONN-2000/1 
Tripura Onland 
06.02.2004 GAIL                          - 80% 
JOGPL (Operator)       - 20% 
Phase-I 
9 CY-ONN-2000/1 
Cauvery Onland 
06.02.2004 GAIL                          - 50% 
JOGPL (Operator)       - 30% 
GSPC                        - 20% 
Phase-I 
 
 
 
 
  
Sl. 
No Block No. 
Date of PSC 
Signing Participating Interest & Partner Current Expln. 
Phase 
“Farm – in” 
10 A-1, Myanmar 
Offshore 
01.10.2000 GAIL                          - 10% 
DAEWOO (Operator) - 60% 
OVL                           - 20% 
KOGAS                    - 10% 
3
rd One Year 
Extension Period 

11 A-3, Myanmar 
Offshore 
Assignment 
Agreement 
signed on: 
03.10.2005 
GAIL                           - 10% 
DAEWOO (Operator) - 60% 
OVL                          - 20% 
KOGAS                    - 10% 
2nd Exploration 
Period 
12 CY-OS/2 
Cauvery Offshore 
19.11.1996 
(Farm-in w.e.f. 
22.2.2002) 
GAIL                          - 25% 
HARDY (Operator)  - 75% Phase-III  
NELP – V 
13 AA-ONN-2003/2  
Assam Onland 
16.12.2005 GAIL   - 35% 
JOGPL (Operator) - 10% 
JSPL   - 35% 
GSPC   - 20% 
Grant of PEL is 
awaited. 
14 AN-DWN-2003/2 
Andaman Offshore 
23.09.2005 GAIL   - 15% 
Eni India (Operator) - 40 % 
ONGC  - 45% 
Phase – I 
15 CB-ONN-2003/2 
Cambay Onland 
23.09.2005 GAIL   - 20% 
GSPC (Operator) - 50% 
JCPL   - 20% 
GGR   - 10% 
Phase-I 
Blocks acquired by bidding (Overseas) 
16 Block 56, Oman 28.06.06 GAIL   - 25% 
OILEX NL (Operator)- 25% 
Videocon  - 25% 
HPCL   - 12.5% 
BPCL   - 12.5% 
Initial Period 
 
 
4.4 On being asked further as to how much money is invested every 
year by GAIL in Exploration & Production  of Natural Gas, GAIL in their note 
stated as follows : 
“Amounts invested in ex ploration and production by GAIL during the 
last six years are as follows:- 
              (Rs./crore) 
Year Amount 
2000-01 0.24 
2001-02 11.81 
2002-03 20.74 
2003-04 29.46 
2004-05 77.26 
2005-06 192.42 
Total 331.93 
4.5 From the details r egarding exploration acti vities of GAIL, the 
Committee note that GAIL’s participation in  exploration of gas  as a partner in 
various blocks varies from 10-80 %.  In  many blocks, where GAIL’s equity 
participation is as high as 50 – 80%, they  are not operators. in any of the blocks. 
Asked to give the reasons due to whic h GAIL has not taken up the job of 

operator in any of t he blocks, the Ministry of Pe troleum & Natural Gas in its 
written reply stated as follows:               
 
1. GAIL has 10% share in A-1 an d A-3 block in Mayanmar fields. 
GAIL is not the operator in thes e blocks. Daewoo, Korea is the 
operator of these blocks. 
 
2. GAIL is participating in 16 ex ploration blocks as non-operating 
partner. The participating interests vary from 10% to 80%. 
 
3. The eligibility for taking up operat orship under NELP is defined by 
the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) during various 
NELP rounds.  
 
4. During NELP-V, GAIL had bid as an operator in 2 blocks which the 
GAIL consortium could not win. In NELP-VI, as per the qualification 
criteria of bidding document, GAIL  cannot bid as operator on its 
own since operatorship experi ence has been made mandatory. 
However, GAIL can participate as  a joint operating partner along 
with other operators. 
 
5. It is further mentioned that in  one of the NELP awarded blocks, 
there is a provision in the Joint Operating Agreement (JOA) 
executed under the auspices of Pr oduction Sharing Contract (PSC) 
for GAIL to assume operatorship on a rotational basis. 
 
6. As regards GAIL’s participation in  blocks abroad, the stipulation of 
operatorship would be as per t he terms and conditions for such 
participation. 
 
  
 
           GAIL was set-up by Government of India primarily to undertake 
the activities pertaining to transmission and marketing of natural gas 
and to establish long distance gas pipelines for transportation to 
locations where gas was to be used as a feed stock and fuel. To 
ensure long term gas supply securi ty from multiple natural gas 
sources, the company has also ventured into exploration and 
production activities through joint ventures/equity participation 
routes. The Committee however note that GAIL’s performance in 

exploratory activities are not at all impressive which is evident from 
the fact that out of 16 blocks awarded to GAIL’s consortium so far, 
its contribution is confined to e quity participation varying from 10-
80% and in none of the blocks GAIL has any bid as a main operator. 
The Committee are of the view that if GAIL is not an operator in any 
of the blocks, wherein it has equi ty participation, it has limited 
control over the actual cost of developing the reserves. 
              The Committee feel that if GAIL h as to actively participate in 
exploration activities, it should strive to become an operator. In view 
of qualification criteria of bidding document, under NELP-VI, 
Committee note that GAIL cannot bi d as an operator on its own as 
operatorship experience has now b een made mandatory.  It can 
however participate as a joint ope rating partner along with other 
operators. Committee desire that accordingly GAIL should strive to 
become joint operating partner along with other operators and also 
assume operatorship on a rotational basis under the production 
sharing contracts with other pa rtners.  The Committee further 
recommend that GAIL should make every endeavour to become 
operator in overseas blocks.  

5. THE ROLE OF GAIL IN INDIA’S GAS SECURITY  
 
5.1 In view of hike in the prices  of crude oil and pressure in the 
international market to make optimum us e of gas, Committee desired to know as 
to how GAIL proposed to help the economy and to achieve the security level to 
meet the energy requirements of industries. In reply the CMD of GAIL stated as 
under:         
“Sir, first of all, let me share with  you that currently gas constitutes 
eight per cent of the energy  consumption in this country.  In other words, 
the majority of the supply of energy  in this country comes from coal 
followed by oil and not by gas.   Furt her, there has been review of the 
energy basket compositions by GoM.  The Planning Commission recently 
has looked at this issue and it is ex pected that the contribution of gas to 
the energy sector will go up to 20 per cent  in the next 15 to 20 years’ time, 
which also means that even 15-20 years down the road, gas will not be 
the primary source of energy for this country.    
 
Having said so, since we are in  the dedicated business related to 
natural gas, we adopted a multi-pronged strategy.   Firstly, as I have 
mentioned earlier, we have participat ed in the earlier rounds of NELP.  
The sixth round is due in September and GAIL will be participating in that.  
The second strategy that we have adopted is that we are trying to promote 
the use of LNG in this country.   We have also discussed with SHELL for 
taking part in LNG terminal  at Hazira.  As you kn ow, we have taken part 
in, an integrated LNG cum power proj ect at Dabhol.  We are one of the 
promoters of LNG at Koch i .    I n  o t h e r  w o r d s ,  on the West Coast alone, 
GAIL will be involved in at least three to four LNG terminals, the capacity 
of each of which will be five million tonnes which can be increased to ten 
million tonnes.    So, I c an say that during the 11
th Plan period, we may 
have the capacity to import 40 million to nnes of LNG which is definitely 
going to relieve the pressure on liquid fuels for primary s ource of energy 
as well as for domestic sectors today.    
  
Thirdly, to bring gas by trans -national pipelines, we have had 
rounds of negotiations at the Govern ment to Government level on the 
Iran-Pakistan-India pipeli ne.  We are making strides in putting up a 
pipeline from Myanmar to India.  There has been progress also recently 
on the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakist an-India pipeline.   Several 
meetings and discussions on these proj ects have taken place.   These 
projects are being taken up under bi lateral discussion with different 
countries.  
 
While we, as commercial people, as professional managers, are 
taking the discussions forward, ther e are, as the hon. Members know, 
geo-political dimensions to these pr ojects. It is only when these geo-
political dimensions are resolved that  we will be actually  in a position to 

execute the projects. We find eac h one of them techno-commercially 
viable projects. 
  
Fourthly, as I mentioned earlier, coal in this country is not utilised to 
the extent that it should be becaus e of environmental issues and handling 
issues. So, we have taken recourse  to clean coal technology. It can 
produce gas from coal  by  either gasifiying coal  based ground sources of 
gasification inside the pit itself as ligni te. That is yet another strategy that 
we have adopted. I believe that a comb ination of these mutiple strategies 
will enable us to reach the target of 20 per cent c ontribution to the energy 
basket. We are also looking at participating in CBM because there are 
blocks outside India like South Africa, Myanmar and other countries. This 
will make gas available to us and to other producers. We try to bring LNG 
from nearby countries”. 
 
 5.2 The Secretary, during the evid ence, submitted in this regard as 
under: - 
“Today, the availability of gas in  India is roughly 95 to 100 
million cubic metres per day includ ing LNG, which is also emerging 
as a major source of au gmented availability of hydro carbons in this 
country.  We are, today, importin g close to 18 to 20 million cubic 
metres per day equivalent to LNG.   We are proposing to enhance in 
order to be able to meet our ener gy security in an effective and 
efficient manner.  We are also enga ged in discussion with countries 
such as with Iran, Turkmenistan  and Myanmar with a view to 
importing gas from them.   
 
Today, we are able to meet only around 60 per cent of our 
demand.  With the expe cted increase in domestic production over 
the next five years, the domestic supply is expected to increase 
substantially by 2010-11.  Even then the demand will still increase 
and continue to rise higher beca use gas is emerging a preferred 
fuel. 
 
Globally, today, gas occupies 23 per cent to 24 per cent of the 
total hydro carbons used. Over the ne xt 20 years, it is expected to 
increase up to 40 per cent, as I me ntioned, with the technological 
break-through when pipeline gas mobility and tradability and use will 
increase.   
 
Coming to India, today, gas oc cupies eight per cent of our 
total energy.  This 8 per cent is expected to increase up to 20 per 
cent over the next 20 years.  I thin k, it is a sizeable increase which 
will require considerable investment in our exploration, considerable 
investment in our production and al so tremendous investment in our 
gas transportation infrastructure facilities.” 

 
5 (i).Import of gas through transnational pipelines    
 
5.(i).(a) Briefing the Committee about the import of gas through 
transnational pipelines the Secretary Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas stated as follows:-  
“Sir, now let me mention all the three one by one – Iran-
Pakistan-India pipeline, Myanmar-India pipeline through or without 
passing through Bangladesh and the third is Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline.       
  
Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline has been under discussion for 
the past over two and half years.  There were several issues which 
were really topics of discussion.  In a pipeline which passes through 
troubled region, we have to take extra precaution in order to ensure 
safety and security of people and also safety of the infrastructure, 
namely the pipeline.  All the technical parameters have been more 
or less finalised by a specific sub-committee consisting of 
representatives of three countries.  What should be the project 
structure for implementing the pipeline whether it should be one 
consortium which takes care of the entire segment right from 
upstream to down stream or the respective country should take 
care of the respective segment.  On this point also a consensus 
has emerged.  The final issue is one of pricing.”   
 
  
5.(i).(b) The Secretary, further stated as under : 
“The only issue which is now pending resolution and which is 
under active discussion between the th ree countries is the price at 
which gas is to be sold by Iran a nd the price at wh ich Pakistan and 
India are willing to buy it.  Till this issue is resolved, all the major 
issues of the project, namely, pr oject structure, the technical 
parameters, the contours of th e pipeline, the terrain and the 
alignment are more or less frozen.  Once the price is finalised, 
things will be clear.  The thi ng is, we are talking about an 
agreement which will involve a total outgo of close to 25 billion 
dollars from this country and close to 15 billion dollars from 
Pakistan.   We are talking about a total involvement of 40 billion 
dollars as the cost or the pric e of gas.  These are not negotiated 
overnight and signed because t he producing country has its 
expectation.  When the global scenar io changes, they also think 
why not we ask for a higher price.  This sort of a negotiation goes 
on and on for months together.  We  have already had three rounds 
of major discussions at Secretaries level.  In fact, two months back, 
we were in Shanghai and we met the Iranian President on this 
matter.  He also expressed the des ire that it has to be a matter of 
give and take from both sides, that  is, the buyer and the seller.  

Both of them have to come to an understanding and we will try to 
resolve it.  We are very confident that over the next two months, the 
pricing issue will see a resolution.  Once this is done, then the zero 
date for the project commences.  T he total project investment is 
over 7 to 10 billion dollars in cluding the upstream development.  
Getting the funds is going to be a major issue because any lender 
will ask for an upstream tie-up.  We will say that unless we are 
satisfied that gas production will st art on that day, how will I ensure 
the safety of my funds?   All thes e things will take time but we will 
resolve them.  Once the price i ssue is resolved which we are 
expecting within the next two months, and once the financial 
closure is achieved, the project will start because physical project 
per se is not a complicated business.  I t  i s  j u s t  a  matter of three 
years.  Once the first pi pe is laid, it is three years flat for the whole 
pipeline and  the gas wi ll start flowing.  The preliminary work and 
the planning take a long time.  In fa ct, if you take into account other 
international pipelines, they have been under discussion for 7 to 8 
to 15 years.  But once the physica l work starts, it is a matter of 
three years.  But if you start the physical work without adequate 
planning, I think the project will st and half way and we do not want 
this to happen.   
 
As regards Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India, till last 
year, India was not in the picture.  Only this May, the Government 
gave the clearance for participation of India in the project.  We have 
communicated our willingness to participate in the project.  Earlier, 
there were only three countries involved and now with our 
participation, it would  become four countries.  The first meeting of 
all the four countries together to discuss this project is expected to 
take place sometime in near future. One factor which is really to be 
ascertained, verified and got satisfied by all the concerned 
countries is the extent of reserves available in Turkmenistan for 
supplying the demands of Pakistan and India because 
Turkmenistan has already committed a huge quantity of gas to 
Russia.  After leaving that, do they have adequate reserves to 
supply gas through a pipeline for 25 years to Pakistan and India?   
This is one factor on which we have requested ADB which is the 
technical sponsor of the project to go to Turkmenistan, sit with 
them, have enough surveys and explorations and then come back 
to us with a clean certification.   Once that certification is available, 
then serious discussions will begin.   We are very confident that 
over the next four to five months, ADB will be in a position to give 
the necessary certification.  After that, the discussion will start. 
 
About Myanmar, as I mentioned, we have about 30 per cent 
share through our two companies, the ONGC Videsh Limited and 
GAIL.  It is 30 per cent in two blocks. Each country follows its own 
strategy for price fixation.  What Myanmar has done is this. The 
majority of gas produced in Myanmar is at present being sold by 

them to Thailand.  Last month, they have floated an international 
bid for the quantum of gas from these two new blocks.  They asked 
India also to put in the bid.  So, we have put in the bid.  If you are 
the highest bidder, then we will get the gas.  Once we get the gas, 
we already have the pipeline ready for getting that gas from 
Myanmar to India through our North-East from where we will hook it 
up to the rest of the gas pipeline. So, if that bid is acceptable to 
Mynamar, over the next two months negotiations should reach the 
final shape.  Then whoever is the winner will get the gas.  But it 
does not mean that if we are not the winner, we will not get 
anything.  We will still get the money for our share of the gas with 
which we can buy gas elsewhere.   So, that is not the major issue”.   
  
  
  

In view of steep hike in prices of crude oil in international 
market and resultant strain on foreign exchange reserves of the 
country, it is imperative that con certed efforts are made to augment 
the supply of gas, which is relati vely cheaper and cleaner fuel to 
meet the energy requirements of  the country.  The Committee note 
that that at present natural gas meets only 8% of the energy 
requirement of our country and its share is projected to grow up to 
20% in the next twenty years i.e. by the year 2026. To reduce the wide 
gap of 40% between demand and supply of natural gas and to 
augment  the  share of natural gas up to 20% in the energy sector in 
the next twenty years, the Committee note that a multi-pronged 
strategy has been adopted by GAIL  which include participation in 
NELP blocks; setting up of LNG term inals to import LNG; bringing of 
gas by transnational pipelines; extraction of gas by use of clean coal 
technology etc. The above-mentioned multi-pronged strategy 
adopted to ensure the gas security of India have been dealt with as 
under: 
The Committee note that Government has taken steps for 
importing gas through transnati onal pipelines from gas rich 
countries, namely, Iran, Myanmar and Turkmenistan and the three 
pipeline proposals are Iran-Pakist an-India pipeline, Turkmenistan-
Afganistan-Pakistan-India pipeline a nd Myanmar-India pipeline.  As 
regards Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline, Committee note the matter has 
been under discussion with Iran for the last 2 ½ years and the only 
issue which is pending resolution pertains to price at which gas is to 

be sold by Iran to Pakistan and India.  The Committee were informed 
by Secretary, Ministry of Petrol eum and Natural Gas during evidence 
on 26 th September, 2006 that he was confident that pricing issue 
would be resolved over the n ext two months. The Committee hope 
that  the stalemate with regard to  gas price issue would be resolved 
soon.  
As regards Turkmenistan - Afghanistan – Pakistan India (TAPI) 
Pipeline project, the Committee not e that Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) which is the technical sponsor of the TAPI pipeline project has 
been requested to go to Turkmenis tan and make survey about the 
adequacy of reserves to supply ga s to India, and to give the 
necessary certification. The Commi ttee have been further informed 
that discussion will start only after the certification is given by ADB 
to India.  The Committee desire that the matter may be vigorously 
pursued with ADB and based on their certification steps may be 
taken to negotiate with Turkmenistan for supply of gas.   
With  regard to gas from Myanmar, the Committee were 
informed that Myanmar has floated an international bid for the two 
blocks, and India has also put in th e bid, and if that bid is acceptable 
to Myanmar, then the negotiations would reach the final shape. The 
Committee desire that GAIL/Ministry should play more proactive role 
and make all out efforts to bring in natural gas into India through 
transnational pipelines from Iran, Myanmar and Turkmenistan. 
 
 
 

 
 
5(ii). Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
 
Import of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
 
        5(ii) (a) The Committee were  informed that LNG is emerging as a 
major source of augmented availability of hydro carbons in this country. 
LNG is the natural gas li quefied at -160 celcius in  atmospheric pressure. 
Natural gas is liquefied to facilitate  transportation in  cryogenic tankers 
across sea.  
     5(ii)(b)  On the issue of  import of LNG, Secretary, Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural gas, during hi s  evidence before the Committee 
stated as follows:  
“We are, today, importing close to 18 to 20 million cubic 
metres per day equivalent to LNG.  We are proposing to enhance it 
in order to be able to meet our energy securi ty in an effective and 
efficient manner.”  
                                                                    
         5(ii)(c)  The Committee were inform ed that an agreem ent had been 
signed with an Iranian Company NIGEC to  bring LNG from Iran to Kochi 
which however did not fructify subs equently.  When asked as to what 
steps have been taken by Ministry to speed up the LNG deal between Iran 
and India the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their written reply 
stated as follows: - 
“Minister, P&NG had a meeting with President of Islamic 
Republic of Iran on 15.6.2006 at Shanghai, China. In the meeting, 
he raised the issue of delay in the implementation of the Liquefied 
Natural Gas (LNG) contract signed by Indian companies with the 
National Iranian Gas Export Company (NIGEC) in June 2005 for 
import of LNG from Iran. The Iranian President agreed to refer the 
matter to the Parliamentary Committee in Iran for consideration.  
 
Subsequently, Minister P&NG has written to the Iranian 
President and their Petroleum Minister for expediting the 
implementation of the SPA. 
 
Our view is that the LNG Share-Purchase Agreement (SPA) 
signed between the Indian and Iranian companies in June 2005 is a 
legally binding contract. The contract has, inter alia, price revision 
clause. Both sides should be bound by the terms & conditions of 
the contract.” 

 
5(ii)(d)   Explaining the present position of deal entered into with 
Iranian Government for bringing LNG to Kochi,CMD, GAIL stated as 
under: 
“We had signed an agreement with NIGEC, an Iranian 
company, to bring five million tonnes  of LNG to Kochi. It was all 
signed, tied up and fi nalised. Unfortunately for us, there was a 
change in the Government in Ir an and the present Government 
does not appear to be in the fr ame of mind to honour that 
agreement. As a result, a question mark has got raised on the 
availability of LNG from Iran.  
 
5(ii)(e)   As regard sourcing of  LNG from Australia, CMD, GAIL 
further stated as under: 
“Petronet LNG has started discussions and advanced quite a 
bit with EXONMOBIL for supply of LNG from Australia from their 
Gorgon project. This project, unfor tunately, had some problems in 
environmental terms and the indications  are that the availability of 
LNG from this project may be del ayed by a year, but Petronet LNG 
is in an advanced stage of discussions with this supplier.” 
 
 
5(ii)(f)  On the issue of import of LNG, Secretary, Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural gas, during his evidence submitted as under: 
“….Now, when we import gas as LNG, our sources are very limited.  
There are only four or five countri es which really have the capacity 
to produce LNG.  So, the price is quoted by them.  When we have 
to buy from them we normally pr efer to enter into a long-term 
contract which sets out the provisi ons for pricing.  For instance with 
Qatar, we have entered into a l ong-term contract for 25 years in 
accordance with the pricing formula.  With Iran, now we are 
negotiating.  In fact, all the other terms have been almost finalised; 
it is the pricing which is now real ly forming the focus of discussion. 
We already had three rounds of discussions….” 
 
Setting up of LNG terminals 
 
 
LNG is received from exporting c ountries in liquefied form through 
cryogenic ships. It is converted into gaseous form at LNG terminals.  
             5(ii)(g)  The Committee were informed that as per the Xth Plan, it was 
expected that four LNG terminals would be commissioned by the end of the Plan 
period; imports in the range of 40-50 Mi llion Standard Cubic Metres Per Day 

(MMSCMD) were expected. However, onl y PLL’s 5 MMTPA Da hej LNG terminal 
and HLPL’s 2.5 MMTPA LNG terminal have been commissioned in April 2004 
and April 2005 respectively. Dabhol LN G terminal (5 MMTPA), which was also 
expected to be commissioned during the Plan period, is lik ely to be fully 
commissioned by 2009 on account of the break water requirement. Kochi LNG 
terminal (2.5 MMTPA) is projected to be commissioned during 2009-2010.  
         
 
            5(ii)(h)    Asked about the progress of work pertaining to setting up of 
LNG Terminals at Dabhol, Ennore, Mangal ore, Kochi and expansion of LNG 
Terminals at Dahej, the Secretary Minist ry of Petroleum and Natural Gas stated 
as follows:- 
“The LNG terminals are one of the ma in sources of helping us to 
meet our energy security. As I said earlier, gas can be imported in two 
forms from the neighbouring countries in the region through pipeline and 
from any source in the world thr ough an LNG terminal . The exporting 
country liquefies it. So, it has a liquefac tion facility. Then, it sends the gas 
by ship. In the importing country, we have to have the re-gasification 
facility, that is, the LNG terminal that  we are talking about in this country. 
In fact, over the past ten years, t he LNG terminals have really progressed 
phenomenally in our country .  Now, the Petronet terminal at Dahej, which 
was created with a capacity of five million tonnes, is being expanded to 10 
million tonnes. This is expected to be completed by mid-2009. 
 
  Secondly, the Dabhol LNG terminal, as the hon. Members 
are aware, was lying rusted for the past over five years. It remained 
unused. So, the whole terminal is being refurbished. Apart from that, 
certain other components are being added to it. For instance, at that time, 
there was no breakwater. Without the breakwater, you cannot really utilise 
it fully throughout the year in all weather conditions. We are adding a 
breakwater. We are also revamping the whole terminal. We are also 
thinking of expanding the capacity so that mercantile sale also can be 
facilitated at a later date. Once we tie up the necessary LNG for which we 
are in negotiations with other sources including Qatar, Oman, Yemen and 
Algeria, the situation will improve.  
 
  The third one is about the Cochin terminal. For that, tenders 
have been finalised and the work has been awarded. It is expected to be 
completed and commissioned in all respects by September, 2009. Gas tie 
up is near finalisation with an LNG source in Australia. It is expected to be 
signed over the next two or three months. 
 
  Apart from that, there is the Ennore terminal in Tamil Nadu 
and the Mangalore terminal in Karnataka. They are also emerging as 
possible LNG terminal sources. Mangalore terminal is under ONGC. It is a 

huge refinery. So, the capacity is also being expanded.  Ennore has also a 
major base. It has two major ports in the close vicinity. So, these are also 
emerging. The only thing is that gas procurement is under negotiation.  
So, the thing is that we have to finalise gas, sign the agreement and then 
start working on the terminal. Otherwise, the terminal will become an idle 
facility. So, we are very careful not to make it an idle investment.  These 
are at various stages. We are very confident that within the next six or ten 
years, India will have an LNG import handling capacity close to 40 million 
tonnes which is very satisfactory.” 
 
5(ii)(i) Commenting on the expansion pr ogramme of Petronet terminal at  
Dahej the Secretary stated as follows:- 
“Dahej was commissioned in March, 2004 with a capacity of five 
million tonnes.  It is already handling up to 6.2 million tonnes. This terminal 
is being expanded into a ten milli on capacity facility which will be 
commissioned by mid-2009. Expansion wi ll be completed by mid-2009. 
When the expansion is completed, t hey will be able to handle over 11 
million tonnes per annum.”  
 
 
 
The Committee note that country is importing close to 18-20 
million cubic meters of gas per day equivalent of LNG which is 
regasified at LNG terminals.  The advantage of LNG is that gas can 
reach through cryogenic tankers by sea to various locations on the 
coastlines. Thus there is a need to give added thrust to LNG imports.  
The Committee have been informed that GAIL has signed an MoU 
with NIGEC, an Iranian Company in June, 2005 to bring five m illion 
tones of LNG from Iran to Koch i.  The Committee desire that 
GAIL/Ministry of Petroleum & Na tural Gas should vigorously pursue 
the matter with Iranian Government so as to clinch the deal at the 
earliest possible time. The Committee also note that Petronet LNG is 
holding discussions with EXON MO BIL for supply of LNG from 
Australia. However, the project is getting delayed due to 
environmental problems. The Commi ttee desire that the bottlenecks 

that are coming in the way of supply of LNG from Australia should be 
sorted out through negotiations. To further augment the import of 
LNG, the Committee recommend that GAIL should explore the 
feasibility of import of LNG from  all other LNG producing countries.   
 Besides import of LNG, construction of LNG terminals is  
equally important because LNG wh ich comes in liquid form from 
exporting countries through ships is converted into gaseous form at 
LNG terminals.  The Committee regret  to note that as against the 
target of commissioning four LNG termi nals by the end of tenth Plan 
Period, only Petronet’s Dahej terminal and HLPL’s Hajira terminal 
were commissioned in April, 2004 and 2005 respectively and the 
construction of LNG terminals at  Dabhol, Ennore, Mangalore, Kochi 
and expansion of LNG terminal at Dahej etc., are at initial stages 
only. There are reports that the Da bhol LNG terminal is proposed to 
be handed over to some private party which may not be in the overall 
interests of the development in th e particular area. The Committee 
understand the implications of construction of LNG terminals  
without finalizing the deal for LNG imports, which would be an idle 
investment.  They would however like to emphasise the point that 
there should be no unnecessary delay in construction of LNG 
terminals in case the deal is finalised. 
 
5 (iii).Underground Coal Gasification  
 
The Committee have been informed that GAIL has taken up projects for 
production of gas from coal. 

 5 (iii).(a).   When asked as to whether the Mi nistry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas has chalked out any plans for production of  gas from coal, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as follows: - 
  “UCG is a potential economic means for extracting gas from deep 
seated and/or isolated coal deposits/ lignite resources, which may not be 
amenable to conventional physical ex traction economically. As per the 
estimates of ONGC, the recoverabl e energy from Mehsana-Ahmedabad 
block with coal reserves of 63 billion tonnes in the form of gas is estimated 
to be equivalent to 15, 000 Billion Cubic Meters (BCM) of natural gas 
(which is many times the conventiona l gas resources of the country at 
present).  Even if a fracti on of this is realized, it  will go a long way to meet 
our energy needs.  That is why UCG needs more attention as it has a 
tremendous potential and high rewards.   
 
The extraction of gas through UCG process involves drilling of wells 
and injection of air/oxygen with wate r or steam in the coal seam.  The 
companies working under MOP&NG ar e well versed with the drilling 
technology and water/steam injection process.  
 
ONGC has signed an MOU with Sk ochinsky Institute of Mining 
(SIM), Russia having expertise in the field of UCG. GAIL (India) Ltd. has 
also signed an MOU with Ergo (a Canada based company) for exploitation 
of UCG potential.”   
 
 5 (iii).(b).   Elaborating further, the Secretar y, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas submitted during their or al evidence before the Committee as 
follows:- 
  “Coal gasification is very high level of technology which very few 
countries in the world have it.  Now, ONGC and GAIL have entered into an 
agreement with agencies which are compet ent in the coal gasification.  
We are in the process of identifying f our or five coal blocks in different 
parts of the country and have a technol ogy tie up with companies, like, for 
instance, Shell, GE, Sa san of South Africa, et c.  We entered into 
collaboration with them.  We want to initiate this process because over the 
next 10-15 years, for coal rich countri es this will emerge as a very clean 
source of energy.  We are focussing on that. ONGC has tied up with a 
Russian Agency on this and GAIL also  has a tie up with M/s.Ergo Exergy 
Technologies  Inc, Canada.  We are making good progress on this.”   
 
         The Committee note that underground coal gasification is a 
potential economic means for extract ing gas from deep seated and 
/or isolated coal/lignite deposit resources which may not be 
amenable to conventional physical  extraction economically.  As per 

estimates of ONGC, the recoverable energy from Mehsana-
Ahmedabad block with coal reser ves of 63 billion tonnes in the form 
of gas is estimated to  be equival ent to 15,000 billion cubic meters 
(BCM) of natural gas. Consideri ng vast unexplored deposits of coal 
where conventional mining methods are not feasible, it is imperative 
that underground coal gasification pr ocess is used to extract gas 
which would go a long way in meeting our energy requirements.  The 
committee note that GAIL has entered into an agreement with 
agencies which are competent in coal gasification and is in the 
process of identifying 4-5 blocks in different parts of the country.  
The Committee desire that this exer cise should be completed within 
a time frame and work pertaining to extraction of gas through UCG 
be started expeditiously.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6. GAS TRANSMISSION BY GAIL 
 
6.(i). Decline in percentage share of GAIL in natural gas transmission 
business 
6.(i)(a)    As per a note furnished to the Committee, the percentage shares 
of GAIL in natural gas transmission during the last three years are given below:- 
Year   Percentage  Volume (MMSCMD) 
2003-04  90   62.84 
2004-05  87.98   71.56   
2005-06  86.07     78.87 
From the above it is noted that GAIL’s share in the Natural Gas 
Transmission business has declined from 90% to 86%  
  
6.(i)(b)    Briefing the Committ ee about the decline in transmission 
business, the CMD of GAIL, during the oral evidence submitted as under: - 
“To begin with, let me clarify t hat as far as the transmission 
business is concerned, our shar e at one time was 100 per cent 
because there was no other compan y other than GAIL which was in 
the transmission business. Now, between the time the company was 
created in 1984 and no w, a number of player s have entered this 
transmission business. We have a company in Assam. We have a 
company in Gujarat. There is go ing to be a major transmission 
activity on the part of Relianc e Industries from 2008-2009. 
Obviously, the 100 per cent share th at we had cannot remain at that 
level. It has to come down. It is coming down. It has come down to 
about 75 per cent or so, if I remember correctly.” 
 
 
 6.(i)(c)    When asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry to 
arrest the continuous declin e in the percentage share of GAIL in natural gas 
transmission business, the Ministry of Pe troleum & Natural Gas in their reply 
stated as follows: 
 
“The opening of the gas market has allowed/is likely to further allow 
the entry of multiple players in w holesale distribution, transmission and 
marketing of natural gas. This has resu lted/is likely to further result in 
decreasing GAIL’s market share in  natural gas transmission business. 

Govt. intends to have multiple players in  this sector, so that it results in 
healthy competition and better developm ent of the market and benefit to 
the consumers.  
 
While, Government has been encouraging GAIL to source gas from 
different sources so that GAIL can lay more pipelines to cater to the needs 
of different States and to expand its bus iness, it is for GAIL to tie-up gas 
on commercial considerations.”   
 
6.(i)(d)   Asked about the future pl ans for the strengthening of gas 
transmission business, GAIL in their note stated as under: 
“GAIL proposes to strengthen its core natural gas transmission 
business by building key inter-state tr unk pipelines to increase the total 
network from 5300 km to 12000 km by laying following pipelines (viz. 
Jagdishpur-Haldia Pipeline (1450 Km),  Dadri-Nangal Pipe line (600 Km), 
Myanmar-India pipeline via NE Indi an territory (1575 Km), Dabhol – 
Bangalore pipeli ne (650 Km), Koch i-Kanjirkkod-Mangalore/ Bangalore 
pipeline (900Km), Kakinada- Kolkat a pipeline (1100 Km) and Kakinada-
Chennai pipeline (550 Km) et c. over the next  8 years  at a cost of Rs. 
15000-20000 crores subject to firming up of gas supply sources.”  
   
 The Committee note that GAIL’s share in transmission 
business which was 100% at the time of setting up of company has 
plummeted to 86% mainly due to entr y of multiple players as a result 
of opening up of the gas market.  The Committee have been informed 
that subject to firming up of supply sources GAIL proposes to 
strengthen its natural gas transmission business by building key 
inter-state trunk pipelines to incr ease the total network from 5,600 
km to 12,000 km over the next eight  years at a cost of Rs. 15,000 –
20,000 crores.   
 The Committee have been apprised that GAIL is holding 
negotiations with gas rich count ries for import of LNG and import 
through transnational pipelines et c. Committee hope that with the 
firming up of these gas sources and  augmentation of GAIL’s 
pipeline infrastructure, GAIL would be able to enhance its share in 

gas transmission. Besides these step s, Committee desire that GAIL 
should negotiate with private gas producers and persuade them to 
utilise GAIL’s pipleines for transmission of gas produced by them. 
 
 
6. (ii), National Gas Grid Project 
 
 6.(ii)(a)   National Gas Grid is a netwo rk of  high pressure inter-state gas 
pipelines to provide gas to all parts of  the country, by linking sources and supply 
of Natural gas to end – subscribers, especia lly in energy deficient industrial belts 
across the country .        
 6.(ii)(b)   From the preliminary mate rial, Committee note that GAIL is the 
owner and operator of I ndia’s largest gas transmi ssion networks (5600 km 
pipelines) and company has plans to devel op Inter State Gas Grid (ISGG) under 
which gas available from sources like Dahej and Kochi terminals of Petronet LNG 
Limited (PLL), Dabhol, Ennore, Myanmar gas, Iran gas and other gas sources of 
Kakinada is planned to be conne cted to the various limbs of ISGG to cater to the 
needs of customers along the network. 
 
The limbs of Inter State Gas Grid are given below: - 
 
1)        Dahej-Vijaipur    
2) Dahej-Uran   
3) Dadri-Panipat-Nangal  (Punjab Sector)   
4) Vijaipur-Kota-Mathania(Rajasthan Sector)  
5) Kakinada-Uran             
6) Kakinada-Chennai   
7) Kakinada-Kolkata            
8) Kolkata-Jagdishpur    
9) Dabhol-Bangalore-Ch ennai-Tuticorin   
10) Kochi-Kanjirkkod-Mangalore   
11) Bangalore-Coimbatore- Kayamkulam   
12) Myanmar-Mizoram-Assam-Bihar  
13) Hyderabad-Vijaipur    
14) Vijaipur-Jagdishpur    
15) Dahej-Jamnagar-Porbandar  
16) Dahej-Panvel pipeline sector   
 
  

6.(ii)(C)   The Committee were in formed that out of the 16 limbs 
mentioned above, Dahej – Vijaipur pipeline (D VPL) has been completed 
and is presently evacuating regasified liquefied natural gas (RLNG) from 
Dahej. Dahej - Uran pipeline and Vija ipur – Kota pipeline are under 
execution. Detailed feasib ility report (DFR) for C hennai- Tuticorin section 
of Dabhol-Bangalore –Chennai –Tuticor in pipeline and Hydrabad-Vijaipiur 
pipeline are being taken up. DFRs fo r the balance limbs of ISGG have 
been completed. 
 
 The Committee note that GAIL has plans to develop inter-state 
gas grid (ISGG) under which gas ava ilable from different sources is 
planned to be connected to 16 limbs of ISGG to cater to the needs of 
customers along the network.  In view of availability of gas from 
various sources and need for distri bution to various parts of the 
country to meet requirements of the customers, it is imperative that a 
national gas grid is developed at the earliest. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the work of development of all the limbs 
should be closely monitored and co mpleted within a specific time 
frame. 
 
 
6. (III). GAS PIPELINE POLICY: 
 
    6.(iii)(a)  Regarding framew ork for laying of gas transmission 
pipelines, gas trunk pipe lines and inter-city pipe lines,  the Secretary, 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas  during his evidence stated as 
under:    
”Coming to the transportation, the natural gas pipeline policy which 
is expected to be issued within t he next two weeks, lays down the 
policy framework for the gas transmission pipelines, gas trunk 
pipelines, as well as inter-city pipeli nes, within the city , that is local 
gas distribution network.  All this and the necessary conditions 
under which these will be laid and the necessary provisions 

governing the broad policy are contained in the natural gas pipeline 
policy.  I think, this will help as  a guideline to pros pective investors 
because we need huge investment  in this sector. “  
 
6.(iii)(b)  Salient features of the pr oposed gas pipeline policy 
were stated to be as under :  
i) All the natural gas and city or loca l distribution pipelines will be laid in 
accordance with the Authorization gr anted by the Regulatory Board 
under a transparent mechanism. Dedicat ed pipelines laid to supply gas 
to specific consumers originating from regulated pipelines will not 
require the authorization. 
ii) Regulator shall develop a comprehensive set of technical standards and 
safety standards as well as a code for grid connectivity. 
iii) Progressive unbundling of common ca rrier transmission activity and gas 
marketing activity. 
iv) The designed pipeline capacity to be at least 33% percent more than the 
maximum capacity requirement of the proposer and those who tie up for 
capacity. Such capacity would be made available on ‘open access and 
non discriminatory basis at transportation rates laid down by the Board. 
v) The Board may consider different ex clusivity periods for setting up of 
City gas distribution networks and for marketing of gas by the entity 
developing such networks. 
vi) Authorization to the proposer may be cancelled with forfeiture of his 
security deposit, if the conditions of  the authorization are not adhered to 
or the project is delayed beyond the stipulated milestone (s). 
vii) Once the project is commissi oned the bid bond would convert into a 
performance bond and would provide the guarantee for satisfactory 
compliance of the conditions stated in the authorization during the life of 
the project. 
viii) The transportation tariff for the transmi ssion pipeline or city or local     
natural gas distribution network, as also the manner of determining such 
tariff will be laid down by the Board. 
ix) The Government to prepare long te rm perspective plan for creating gas 
pipeline network in cons ultation with the Board, State Governments, Oil 
and Gas industry, Gas consuming Indu stries and other stake holders. 
The Plan will be kept in view while authorizing / approving new pipelines. 
x) A National Gas Advisory Board (NGAB) shall be constituted by 
Government to advise the Government on all matters relating to this 
Policy. The advice of NGAB shall not be binding on the Government. 
xi) To compliment and supplement t he domestic investment, FDI upto 
100% is permitted in laying natura l gas pipelines under automatic 
approval route. 
xii) State Governments to ensure vari ous statutory and other clearances on 
a fast track basis. 
xiii) State Governments s hall prepare their plans for developing the city or 
local    gas distribution networks, prioritizing the cities or local areas. 
 

Views and comments of various stakeholders were invited on the 
draft pipeline policy. Two meeti ngs have also been held with the 
stakeholders in June and July 2006. Pipeline Policy is under finalization in 
consultation with the stakeholders.  
 
As the proposed policy is aimed at  facilitating open access for all 
players to the pipeline network on non-di scriminatory basis, it is expected 
to prove beneficial to all the st akeholders. It would encourage more 
investment in the sector and ens ure development across the whole 
spectrum of activities.  
 
 
 The Committee note that Government has a proposal to 
announce Natural Gas Pipeline Policy which will inter-alia lay down 
the broad frame work for laying of transmission pipelines, gas trunk 
pipelines and inter-city pipelines.  While the draft Pipeline policy has 
been prepared the Committee are constrained the note that final 
policy has yet not been announced even though Secret ary, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas during his deposition before the 
Committee in September, 2006 had stated that the policy was 
expected to be issued within two weeks.  As the proposed policy is 
aimed at facilitating open access fo r all players to the pipeline 
network on non–discriminatory basis, encourage more investment in 
this sector which in turn would he lp in speedy completion of current 
and future pipeline projects, Co mmittee desire that Natural Gas 
Pipeline Policy  should be announced without any further delay.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7. GAS STORAGE CAPACITY 
 
 Explaining the need for cr eation of gas storage capacity, the CMD of GAIL 
during the oral evidence submitted as under: - 
“As far as storage capacity is c oncerned, the ground situation is 
that today there is zero storage for natural gas in this country, with GAIL or 
anybody for that matter.  Normally, gas as  it comes out from the gas fields 
is supplied to the customers, and in t he event of any disruption, we try to 
give the quantity which is there in compressed form within the pipeline, 
which is called ‘line-pack’ .  The other option is to tell them to use other 
fuels like liquid fuels but this  is not at all in a satisfactory state of affairs if 
GAIL’s gas contribution is to go from about eight per cent to 15 per cent in 
15 years’ time.  We have stressed this point with the Government. 
 
  We have started feasibility studies because natural gas is not 
normally stored in tanks or spheres  as is done for LPG and other 
products.  It is stored under ground in salt caverns or  depleted fields or in 
aquifers.  So, that feasibility study has already been started by us, and we 
believe that, at least, three wee ks storage system shoul d be created in 
this country. And, I think, in the next four to five y ears, this storage should 
get created.  Otherwise, we have a very serious problem of industries 
having to shut down production for want of storage.   
  
The point I am trying to make is t hat we are conscious of this; we 
have raised this issue with the Government.  We have even discussed it 
with the Oil Industry Development Board to give us financial support. This 
process is being actively pursued in our company.” 
 
   
 
The Committee note that there is zero storage of natural gas in 
the country.  In the  event of any disruption in the supply of gas, 
Committee have been informed by GA IL that they supply gas which 
is there in the compressed form with in the pipeline, called line pack 
or other option is use of liquid fuel s both of which are not at all a 
satisfactory state of affairs.  
 As natural gas is stored underground in salt caverns/ depleted 
fields or in aquifers, Committ ee note that GAIL has started a 
feasibility study.  Committee d esire that GAIL should expedite 

completion of feasibility study and take steps for creation of storage 
capacity for natural gas for 2-3 weeks so that in the event of any 
energy deficit arising out of oil/ gas supply disruption, supply of gas 
to various consumers viz fertiliz er/ power plants etc., is not 
disrupted.  

  
8. GAS DISTRIBUTION BY GAIL  
 
8. (i). Distribution of Piped natural gas (PNG) to Households 
 
8.(i)(a)  The Committee desired to know about present position with regard 
to supply of piped natural gas to various cities in the country .  In reply GAIL 
stated as under: - 
 
“At present, Piped Natural Gas (PNG) is being made available by 
Indraprastha Gas Limited (IGL) a nd Mahanagar Gas Limited (MGL) in 
households in certain localities in De lhi and Mumbai respectively.   
Besides this, PNG is also being s upplied to certain areas in Gujarat 
and Assam.  The extension of PN G supplies to other areas would 
depend upon the availability of gas, setting up of infrastructure facilities 
and economic viability.”              
 
8.(i)(b)  Asked as to what are the plans to supply PNG to the entire 
household of Delhi, GAIL in the note stated as under: - 
  
“During 2006-07, IGL has pl anned to provide around 30,000 
PNG connections in various areas of Delhi.  As on August 01, 
2006, IGL has provided 53,071 domestic PNG connections. 
 
IGL has already covered a numbe r of areas in NCT of Delhi 
and proposes to cover all areas of Delhi in phases in the coming 
years.  New colonies are adde d every year depending upon the 
possibilities of expansion of PN G network and demand/ response 
from prospective customers besides the technical feasibility. 
 
Grant of permission for laying gas pipelines in the NCT of 
Delhi is the biggest hurdle in the expansion of network for providing 
PNG connections in the colonies.  However, there is a continuous 
endeavour on the part of the IGL to  expand its PNG network in 
more and more areas in NCT of Delhi in the coming years.” 
 
8.(i)(c)  As regards future plans GAIL stated  that it has identified 28 cities 
for implementation of city gas distributi on projects on the basis of most polluted 
cities identified by Supreme Court and other cities close to GAIL pipeline network 
on the basis of business need and project viability. The names of these cities are: 
-  
 
A. Cities identified by Hon’ble S upreme Court as air polluted cities: 

 
1. Agra 
2.  Lucknow 
3.  Kanpur 
4.  Varanasi 
5. Pune 
6. Faridabad 
7.  Patna 
8. Ahmedabad 
9. Sholapur 
10. Hyderabad 
11. Bangalore 
12. Kolkata 
13. Chennai 
 
B.  Business need base d on project viability: 
 
1. Allahabad 
2. Bareilly 
3. Jhansi 
4. Mathura 
5. NOIDA 
6. Navi Mumbai 
7. Gwalior 
            8. Indore 
 9 .  Ujjain 
10. Rajamundry 
11. Vijayawada 
12. Rajkot 
13. Surendranagar 
14. Kota 
15. Vadodara   
 
 
8.(i)(d)  As regards covering other ci ties, GAIL stated that other 
metropolitan cities may be considered in  future subject to viability and 
development of interstate trunk pipeline ne twork in close vicinity of the city and 
availability of natural gas.         
In a subsequent note,GAIL further stated as under: 
 
“GAIL attaches special importance to retail marketing of natural gas 
through city gas distribution networ ks and intends to cover 10-11 cities 
through joint ventures with an investm ent of Rs. 1000 to 1250 Crores 
over the next 8 years.”  
 
The Committee were also informed t hat a draft pipeline policy is being 
finalized  which interalia has detailed provisions regarding  city distribution of gas.                      

 
8.(ii). Supply of CNG (for vehicles) to cities 
The Committee note that the entire public  transport system of Delhi to day 
runs on CNG. 
During evidence, Committee referred to a Supreme Court order which 
inter alia stipulated that CNG must be s upplied to the city of Pune by the year 
2006 and asked as to what steps were bein g taken so as to start CNG supply to 
Pune.  In reply CMD GAIL during his ev idence before the Committee stated as 
under. 
“The position is to bring CNG to Pune.  We have formed a new joint 
venture company called Maharashtra  Natural Gas Limited (MNGL) with 
Bharat Petroleum Corporat ion Limited.  Our peopl e are already posted in 
the city of Pune.  I was there two weeks back; I have taken a review.  
Originally the gas was to come from  Dahej in Gujarat through Dahej-Uran 
pipeline. It is a question of 120 kilometr es to Pune.  Unfortunately, for a 
whole variety of reasons, this whole pipeline project got delayed by a year.  
Currently the project is working on a fast track.  We would not only be 
taking it to Uran but also Dabhol ci ty westward and to Pune eastward.  
The commitment is to complete the pi peline up to Dabhol by March, 2007 
and up to Pune by June, 2007.  In other words, we would very 
optimistically expect that  in the Month of July, 2007 you are expected to 
see some vehicles running on CNG in the city of Pune.  This recent delay 
was avoidable but it has happened.  As  a result, now, the date has shifted 
by a year.” 
 
Committee note that at present piped natural gas is being 
made available in certain localit ies in Delhi, Mumbai, Assam and 
Gujrat and GAIL intends to prov ide natural gas to another 10-11 
cities through city gas di stribution network in the next eight years.  
As a long-term measure, Committee have been informed that GAIL 
has identified 28 cities for implem entation of city gas distribution 
project on the basis of most pollute d cities identified by honorable 
Supreme Court and other cities clo se to GAIL pipeline network on 
the basis of business need and proj ect viability.   The Committee 
desire that GAIL should take all possible steps to achieve the 

objective of providing gas to 10-11 ci ties in the next eight years.  
Further, they should explore the feasibility of covering all the 28 
cities identified by them in the next phase. 
 Regarding the compressed natural gas(CNG), the Committee 
note that  the entire public transpor t system of Delhi today runs on 
CNG. The Committee however note that CNG distribution is not made 
available to other major cities such as Pune despite a Supreme court 
order requiring the start of CNG by 2006. The Committee recommend 
that GAIL should make efforts to see that CNG is made available to 
other major cities as well as such  a step will not only help in 
reducing the consumption of petrol which is a costlier fuel but also 
help in controlling the pollution of cities.   
The Committee would like the GAIL  authorities to expedite the 
setting up of interstate pipeline network in close vicinity of 
metropolitan cities and other industrially important centres of the 
states, and in suitable phases GAIL  should prioritise the issue of 
making available CNG in the overall in terests of rapid  and inclusive 
growth of the economy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9.SHORTAGE OF RICH GAS TO HVJ BASED PLANTS 
 
  The Committee were informed that five LPG HVJ based plants which are 
currently operating very efficiently and producing higher than their design 
conditions would be facing shortage of rich gas in future. 
 9.1. Asked to explain the reasons due to which these plants would be 
facing shortage of rich gas, GAIL in their note stated as under:  
“As per the projections of the ON GC, gas supplies from the south 
basin fields, which supply gas to the HVJ pipeline system, is projected to 
progressively go down from the level of 28. 38 MMSCMD in 2007-08 to 
3.88 MMSCMD in 2014-15, which is a 86 % decline in rich gas availability 
in seven years.   Due to such a dras tic decline in gas av ailability, the gas 
processing units along the HVJ syst em may be forced to idle one after 
another in future, if alternative supplie s of rich gas are not ensured.   It 
may be mentioned that, in order to ens ure rich gas supplies to HVJ based 
facilities, rich LNG was contracted for the Dahej project in 1999.  
Subsequently, currently, rich R-LN G from Dahej is entering the HVJ 
system.   However, there are plans by  ONGC to extract C2/C3 from rich 
LNG at Dahej from 2009 onwards.   Under such circumstances, it would 
be desirable to revise, on merit, the ear lier decision of the government to 
permit ONGC to extract C2 /C3 from LNG at Dahej.    Otherwise, a total 
investment of Rs.4, 000 cr ores on the gas processi ng facilities of GAIL 
along the HVJ system, would stand expos ed to the threat of turning into 
non-performing assets.”  
   
        9.2 GAIL in thei r subsequent note stated as follows:- 
“LNG rich in C2 & C3 was initia lly sourced from Ras Gas, Qatar 
with a view to supporting GAIL’s proc ess plants along the HVJ pipeline. 
This was specially required in view of depleting gas reserves on the 
western coast of the country. However,  Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas has subsequently decided that extraction of C2/C3 from first 5 
MMTPA of LNG at Dahej will be done by ONGC and  GAIL will utilize the 
next 5 MMTPA of LNG from Dahej for ex traction of C2/C3 at its process 
plants along the HVJ pipe line. This separation of  LNG at Dahej amongst 
ONGC and GAIL, however, may not be  technically easy. Moreover, the 
above arrangement would require sourcing of additional 5 MMTPA of LNG 
for Dahej which is yet to be accomplished. 
 
In view of the above, GAIL has r equested the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas time and again to revi ew the permission given to ONGC for 
setting up of C2-C3 extraction plant at Dahej. ONGC, it is understood, has 
not yet started physical execution of their C2/C3 extrac tion facility at 
Dahej. Reallocation of 5 MMTPA of LN G from Dahej for extraction of 
C2/C3 at GAIL’s process plants woul d definitely help GAIL to support the 

entire investment of Rs. 4000 crore made in t he process plants along HVJ 
pipeline. “ 
 
9.3  Committee asked the  Ministry  of Petroleum and Natural Gas to 
give reasons for permitting ON GC for setting up of C-2/  C-3 extraction plant at 
Dahej which as stated  by GAIL would be detr imental to their inte rest:.  In reply, 
the Ministry in their note stated as under: 
“M/s Petronet LNG Ltd. (PLL) has  been promoted by GAIL, ONGC, 
IOC and BPC. ONGC had contended that while the other promoters of 
PLL, namely GAIL, IOC and BPC, have been allocated marketing rights of 
marketing RLNG from Dahej Termi nal, giving them opportunity for 
incremental profitability, no such benefit is available to the fourth promoter 
of PLL i.e. ONGC. Further, while cons idering various measures for cost 
reduction, the Government had allo wed ONGC for setting up C-2/ C-3 
extraction facility from the first tranche of 5 MMTPA LNG; ONGC will pay 
15 Cents/MMBTU as royalty for th is. Consequent upon expansion of 
Dahej LNG terminal, the next tranc he of subsequent quantity of LNG 
brought by PLL will be earmarked to GAIL for extraction of C2/C3.”  
 
9.4 Explaining the dispute betw een ONGC and GAIL regarding the 
unequal competition with regard to the rich gas from Qatar, the representatives of 
Ministry of Petroleum clarified as under: - 
“Sir, I think, your question is r egarding dispute between ONGC and 
GAIL.  It is not for buying of the gas from Qatar but the gas which is 
coming as LNG at Dahej and after regasifying it will be transported to 
DVPL pipeline which is feeding to t he process plants and petro-chemical 
plants along with HVJ pipeline.   
  
It so happened that we already invested about Rs.4,000 crore in 
the gas extraction of LPG along with HvJ and also one petro-chemical 
plant near Pata plant and C2, C3 which are rich components which are 
coming along with LNG.  Recently, ONGC Board has cleared this project 
for extraction of C2, C3 which has just started from initial work and which 
may affect the processing plant operation.  We have also taken up the 
expansion of petro-chemical plant at Pata, which will be completed by 
March 2007.  
  
This particular issue has been discussed with ONGC and also in 
the Ministry.  The Secretary was quite  helpful in that. We had a dialogue 
with the Chairman of ONGC recently.  He  is quite considerate and he said 
we will discuss and resolve this issue.  He said, since the plants which are 
already set up along with HBJ, they are also not interested to starve those 
plants.  He said we will resolve this issue. So, we will discuss and resolve 
this issue.”  
 

   
        The Committee have been in formed that in order to ensure rich 
gas supplies to GAIL’s processing plants along HVJ pipelines, rich 
LNG was sourced from Qatar and cu rrently rich LNG from Dahej is 
entering into HVJ system.  However, in  view of Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas’s decision permitting ONGC for setting up of C2-C3 
extraction plant at Dahej which is  expected to commence from 2009 
onwards,  GAIL have informed that extraction of rich gas by ONGC at 
Dahej would lead to shortage of ri ch gas to their HVJ based plants 
and their investment of Rs. 4000 crore on the gas processing  
facilities along the HVJ system would stand exposed to the threat of 
turning into non-performing assets.   
The Committee desire that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
should hold consultation with re presentatives of ONGC and GAIL 
and take remedial steps so as to ensure that GAIL’s processing 
plants along HVJ pipeline don’t face shortage of rich gas.    

  10. GAS PRICING POLICY 
 
 10.1 The Committee note that Indi an Gas Market is governed by 
different prices regimes namely Admini stered price mechanism and free market 
price mechanism.   The Administrative price mechanism allows differential pricing 
based on end use.  Asked to give reasons for non-regulation of gas prices, GAIL 
in their note stated as under:- 
“To attract private and multinational investments in exploration and 
production, the Govt. of India has allowed, under various NELP rounds, 
gas prices to be based on market price and permitted the producers to 
negotiate with buyers. Theref ore, as on date, there is no direct regulation 
of prices for all gases other than APM regulated domestic gas produced 
by ONGC/OIL which involves a limited volume of 55 MMSCMD.”  
 
 10.2 On this issue, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
during the oral evidence before the Committee submitted as follows:- 
  “Natural gas today, as I said, is produced locally, and it is also 
imported in the form of LNG and pipeline gas.  It is di fficult to arrive at a 
uniform pricing sector-wise as well as source wise.  Last year, for 
instance, the gas price which was stated internationally was quoting 
around 9 dollars per million BTU.  T oday the price is being quoted around 
6.2 to 6.5 dollars per mill ion BTU.  Just like the international crude price, 
gas price has also really started moving in tandem now, as I said, with 
increasing mobility.  The domestically produced gas, till 1997, if I am right, 
was being supplied at the adminis tered pricing mechanism of the 
Government.  Once the New Explorat ion Licensing Policy came, since we 
had to invite a lot of investment in this growing sector, we had to come out 
with our own pricing policy according to  the provisions of the production 
sharing contract.  Now, when we import gas as LNG, our sources are very 
limited.  There are only four or five countries  which really have the 
capacity to produce LNG.  So, the pr ice is quoted by them.  When we 
have to buy from them we normally prefer to enter into a long-term 
contract which sets out the provisions for pricing.  For instance with Qatar, 
we have entered into a long-term contra ct for 25 years in accordance with 
the pricing formula.  With Iran, now we are negotiating.  In fact, all the 
other terms have been almost finalised; it is the pricing which is now really 
forming the focus of discussion. We  already had three rounds of 
discussions. When we import pipeline gas, likewise, for instance Myanmar 
just last month asked the neighbouring countries to quote a price, to give 
the  bid for the gas which they were willing to supply.  We have also put in 
our bid.  Thailand has put  in the bid, China has put in the bid and Korea 
has also put in the bid.  So, different countries have different basis for 
determination of the gas price.  Here , what we do is, we have set up a 
Committee in the Ministry to come out with a transparent policy framework 
which will provide the bas is and the guidelines for determination of price.  

We will not say that gas will be priced at  2.54 dollars or 1.86 dollars; we 
will see the basis on which the pric e is to be arrived at should be 
transparent enough.  That is  what the Committee will seek out to do.  We 
expect that the Committee’s report will  become available over the next 
one month or so.  This is based on a very widespread consultation with all 
the stakeholders.” 
 
He further added:- 
 
“The high-powered Pricing Committee which has been constituted 
is expected to come out with a clear set of guidelines.   The main idea is to 
provide and ensure that t he pricing is fixed in a transparent basis.  It 
should be clearly readable, monitorable and verifiable. I think, these are 
some of the parameters which we have to take into account”.   
 
The Committee have been informed that in view of different 
sources from where gas is made  available i.e, through domestic 
production and imports in the form of  LNG and pipeline gas, it is 
difficult to arrive at a uniform pr ice of gas sector-wise as well as 
source-wise. Thus, as on date, there is  no direct regulat ion of prices 
for all gases other than administra tive price mechanism regulated 
domestic gas produced by ONGC /OIL which involves a limited 
volume of 55 MMSCMD.   The Committe e feel that for orderly growth 
of gas market in the country, it is imperative that clear cut guidelines 
are issued for determination of gas price from different sources.  The 
Committee note that a Committee has b een set-up in the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, to come out with a transparent policy 
framework which will provide the basis and the guidelines for 
determination of gas price. The Co mmittee desire that gas pricing 
policy be evolved on the basis of  recommendation of this Committee 
so as to ensure that gas prices are fixed on a transparent basis.  

11. REGULATOR  
11.1 The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 was 
notified by the Government in April 2006. The Act interalia stipulates for setting 
up of a Regulatory Board Authority for downstream operations like transportation, 
distribution, marketing, processing, storage etc. of natural gas.  The Board is yet 
to be constituted.  
 
 11.2   When asked to state the r easons for the delay in the appointment 
of the Regulator, the Ministry in their written reply stated as follows: 
“After the notification of the Pe troleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) Act 2006 in April 2006,  the process of framing rules 
under Section 60 of the Act was init iated. Regulations on various 
issues under Section 61 of the Act were also drafted; the same may be 
considered for adoption by the PNGRB, as and when the same is 
established.  
 
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (Salaries, 
Allowances and other Conditions of Services of the Chairperson and 
the Members) Rules, 2006 were finalized in consultation with 
Department of Personnel and Tr aining, Law Department and 
Department of Expenditure. We have also prepared a note for the 
consideration of t he Cabinet Committee on Accommodation (CCOA) 
for earmarking office accomm odation for PNGRB, and making 
Chairperson and Members of the Board eligible for Government 
accommodation as per their entitlement  in terms of their pay scales. 
The CCOA is yet to consider this  proposal. In case CCOA approves 
our proposal, the rules will be modified accordingly.  
 
Thus a lot of preparatory work  was required to be done before 
notifying the Search Committee for selecting Chairperson and 
Members of the Board. The Sear ch Committee has been notified on 
31.8.2006. The Search Committee is  expected to submit its 
recommendations to the Government in near future.”             
  
 
 
The Petroleum & Natural Gas Re gulatory Board Act, 2006 which 
inter-alia stipulate for setting up of a regulatory Board Authority for 
downstream operations like transpor tation, distribution, marketing, 
processing, storage etc. of natural gas was notified by Government 

in April, 2006.  The Committee are constrained to note that though 
more than seven months have elap sed since the notification was 
issued  the Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board has not yet 
been established.  The Committee have been informed that a Search 
Committee for selecting Chairperson and Members of the Board has 
been notified on 31.08.06.  The Commi ttee desire that Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas should urge the Search Committee to 
submit their recommendations expeditiously and based on their 
recommendation Ministry should take  steps to constitute their 
PNGRB and appoint regulator without any further delay.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12. SAFETY MEASURES 
12.1 On the safety measures taken by  the Company , GAIL in their note 
stated as under:  
“The company has accorded highest  priority and importance to 
safety in pipelines, installations a nd process plants at every stage. 
GAIL continues to strive for zero  accident in all its units. GAIL 
ensures safety right from planning and design / construction stages 
to operation & maintenance and has established a Safety 
Management System which is being complied with at all the 
installations. The notable safety measures of the company are as 
follows: 
 
1. Review of safety measures at 
2.  the design stage 
3. Safe construction practice during execution of the project 
4. Pre-commissioning audit by OISD 
5. Hazop and risk analysis of plants and pipelines 
6. Emergency Response Plan established for all major 
installations 
7. Mutual aid during emergency 
8. Certification of OHSAS 18001 
9. Operation & maintenance manuals with proper safety 
instructions 
10. Availability of properly maintained safety data sheet 
11. Conducting quarterly internal safety audits 
12. External safety audit by Oil Industries Safety Directorate 
13. External safety audit thr ough reputed national/ international 
agencies 
14. Effective telecommunication system through optical fibre, 
microwave, HF, VHF, paging and cellular telephones. 
15. Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) of various 
parameters of the pipelines an d transmitting data to Master 
Control Centre (MCC) for effe ctive monitoring on real time 
basis. 
16. Remote operation of sectional izing valves (SV) provided in 
the   pipeline from MCC in case of emergency 
17. Emergency shut down of t he plants (automatic / manual) 
18. Availability of round –the- clock fire tenders and fire fighting 
crew at all  the installations 
19. Work permit system 
20. Training of employees on sa fety issues including personnel 
safety on regular basis. 
21. Conducting safety workshops 
22. Review by the top management on safety matters during 
meetings 
23. Incident investigation to  identify root cause and 
implementation of correctiv e measures to prevent 
recurrence.  

24. Adherence to established m anagement of change procedure 
for any modifications in the plants 
25. Established system for contro l of defeat and reliability of 
critical systems and devices  
26. Effective monitoring of third party services”. 
 
12.2 The Committee were also informed that GAIL has all along 
accorded highest priority to maintenance of highest standards of safety in all its 
industrial installations.  In recognition to  its efforts in this regard, the company 
has earned several safety awards and  laurels from various national and 
international bodies.  
12.3 Asked about the number of acci dents or casualties occurred during 
each of the last three years, compensati on paid to the victims,  causes of each 
accident and steps taken to obviate recurrence of such accidents in future , GAIL 
gave following details.  
 
Details of accidents occurred during 2003-06: 
 
Year No. of 
accidents/ 
causalities 
Death Injury
 Compen-
sation 
Cause Preventive 
measures taken 
2003 Fire due to gas 
leak in 
Gandhar 
Dhuwaran P/I 
on 26.04.03 
Nil Nil NA Gas leak from 
one of the 
flanges near 
pig receiving 
barrel caused 
fire 
Maintenance of Pig 
barrels, valves 
strengthened.  
History cards 
maintained.  
2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electrocution 
at LPG Plant 
Vaghodia on 
12.03.04 
 
1 
contract 
worker 
Nil Refer Note 
1 
 
 
Electrocution 
while 
checking bus 
bar of isolated 
panel 
1.Contractor to  
ensure safety  
briefing given  to all 
workers 
2. Supervision done  
by  GAIL executives 
3.  Electrical lockout  
permit system 
reviewed 
 
 Electrocution 
at construction 
site on 
Agartala on 
06.07.04 
 
 
1 
contract 
worker 
Nil Refer Note 
1 
 
Electrocution 1. Temporary switch  
boards/panels    
protected from 
rain water 
2. PPE use ensured 
3. Safety briefing 
given    to workers at 
site 

 Fire incident in 
LPG Phase 1 
Vijaipur on 
06.07.04 
Nil Minor burn 
injury of 1 
GAIL 
employee 
Rs. 
37,143/- 
Malfunctioning 
of the igniter 
of pilot burner 
leading to 
flash fire 
1. Job to be covered  
under hot work 
permit 
2. Jobs performed at 
odd hours should 
be approved by 
General Manager 
3.  Job to be carried 
in  presence of 
GAIL  executive. 
2005 Fire incident at 
Pata 
Petrochemical 
complex on 
29.04.05 
Nil Burn injury 
to 1 GAIL 
employee 
Rs. 
92,800/- 
 
 
Leakage of 
cyclohexane 
 
 
1. Proper risk  
assessment done 
before any 
hazardous job 
2. Open 
hydrocarbons loops 
avoided as far as 
possible.  If at al 
unavoidable job to be 
carried out as per 
SOP and with due 
approval of General 
Manager 
3. Jobs involving fire 
hazards, if done at 
odd hours should be 
with the approval of 
GM/OIC. 
4. Procedures 
established for all 
non routine jobs 
 
 Minor fire due 
to gas leak in 
DESU-Maruti 
P/I on 
10.08.205 
Nil Nil NA Gas leak from 
pipeline 
puncture 
caused by 
localized 
heating by 
passing 
overhead 30 
KV surge 
diverter cable 
Study carried out and 
after initial study 11 
KV cable was taken 
away by about 2 feet 
from pipeline and 6 
inches thick PCC 
slabs were 
positioned in 
between the pipeline 
and cable at the 
affected location 

 
 
 
 
Non fatal 
accident of fall 
of employee 
from monkey 
ladder of 
furnace in 
GCU Pata on 
11.09.2005 
 
 
Nil 
 
1 GAIL 
employee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 
1,25,000/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fall from 
height 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All access. ladders in 
the plant area 
audited for safety.  
System of periodic 
checking initiated for 
entire plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Non fatal 
accident of fall 
of contract 
worker from 
rooftop of C&P 
Cement 
Godown Pata 
on 30.09.05 
 
Nil 1 contract 
employee 
Refer Note 
1 
Fall from 
height 
Stringent use of 
safety belt for work at 
height 
2006 
(till 
date) 
Minor fire/gas 
leak in 8” 
diameter 
Natural Gas 
Pipeline at 
Firozabad on 
19.8.06 
Nil Nil Nil Passing of 
fault current 
through 
pipeline 
originated 
from 11 KV 
overhead 
conductor, 
puncturing 
pipeline and 
leading to fire.  
1. A Survey was 
done to locate 
erected 
electrical 
poles in close 
proximity to 
gas pipelines 
2. .Electrical 
poles shifted 
to distance 
from pipeline.  
Wherever, not 
feasible 
insulation 
provided 
between 
pipeline and 
poles.  
 Flash fire in 
HT panel & 
burn injury to 
one employee 
at IPS, 
Mansarampura 
on 24.8.06 
Nil Burn injury 
to one GAIL 
employee 
(no 
disablement)
Claim 
lodged with 
Insurance 
company 
(approx. 
Rs.30,000) 
Exposure to 
flash fire in HT 
panel while 
isolation/ 
maintenance  
1. Strict 
implementatio
n of electrical 
isolation 
procedure 
2. Provision of 
rubber mats 
on floor while 
workin
g on 

such panels 
 Minor fire/gas 
leakage in 2” 
diameter NG 
pipeline at 
Fizozabad on 
11.9.06 
Nil  Nil  Nil Passing of 
fault current 
through 
pipeline 
originated 
from 11 KV 
overhead 
conductor 
puncturing 
pipeline and 
leading to fire 
1. Close 
proximity 
electrical 
poles shifted 
away. 
2. Insulation 
provided 
between 
pipeline and 
electrical 
poles, 
wherever 
shifting was 
not feasible.  
 
 
 
The Committee have been info rmed that GAIL has always 
accorded highest priority to main tenance of highest standards of 
safety  and continue to strive for ze ro accident, in all its  industrial 
installations.   In recognition of its efforts, GAIL has earned several 
safety awards and laurels from var ious national and international 
bodies.  
 Despite all the laudable steps that have been taken by GAIL, 
Committee note that during the last three years number of accidents 
have increased year after year.  While in 2003 only one incident of 
fire due to gas leakage in Gandhar occurred, in the year 2004, three 
incidents of fire and electrocution took place.  In 2005 number of 
such incidents increased to four.  Even in the current year, i.e., 2006 
already three accidents have occurred. Although GAIL (India) Limited 
has made tall claims about their saf ety, yet they have not been able 
to achieve zero accident ra te. The Committee would like to 

emphasise that accidents are not only harmful to the workers and 
the people nearby but also cause damage to the assets of the 
company. The Committee therefore recommend that GAIL should 
further strengthen its safety measu res and ensure their strict 
compliance so that the intended objective of achieving zero accident 
rate in all its units is achieved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Historical background and present activities 
 
 GAIL (India) Limited whic h was initially known as Gas 
Authority of India Limited, was established on 16 th August, 1984 with 
the objective of creating necessary infrastructure for transportation, 
processing and distribution of natu ral gas; planning, designing and 
construction of pipelines, distri bution systems and facilities for 
extraction of LPG  and C2/C3: to operate and maintain the systems to 
be taken over from ONGC/ OIL as we ll as facilities to be set up by it 
and to liaise and coordinate with gas production organizations, 
Government and the gas users to ensure proper utilization of gas.  
The Committee are happy to note th at over the last 22 years, 
GAIL  has diversified its portfolio into a number of new areas such as 
gas processing, production of LPG, production of liquid carbons, 
gas cracking, polymer production etc. ; and today  this company is  
the owner and operator of India’s largest gas transmission network 
of about 5600 km length of pipelin es, world’s long est exclusive 
Jamnagar – Loni LPG pipeline, In dia’s largest gas based petro-
chemical complex, seven gas processing  facilities with a capacity of 
more than 1 million metric tonnes per annum(MMTPA) of LPG etc..  
GAIL has also been receiving “Excellent rating” as regards the MoUs 

signed with the Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural gas and has been 
performing extremely well so far as its financial performance is 
concerned which is evident from the fact that the company has 
added 3.7 US billion dollars to its market capitalization.  
While appreciating the above achievements of GAIL, the 
Committee find that in many other asp ects viz. capacity utilization of 
pipelines, share in natural gas transmission business, gas storage 
capacity, city gas distri bution, gas explorati on activities, bringing 
gas by trans-national pipelines, setting up of LNG terminals, 
underground coal gasification, comp letion of various limbs of the 
proposed gas grid, etc, their performance needs further 
improvement.  
After going into the working of  GAIL (India) Limited, the 
Committee are of the view that a lo t more is required to be done in 
many areas. These and other aspect s have been dealt with by the 
Committee in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.  

RECOMMENDATION NO.2  
 
ORGANISATIONAL SET-UP 
 
 The Committee note that GAIL’s activities have increased 
manifold since its setting up in 1984.  The Committee have been 
informed that the diverse business profile of company such as 
exploration & production, city gas marketing etc.,  has warranted a 
realignment of portfolio among var ious Directors which include 
creation of new directorates and accordingly a proposal for creation 
of the position of Director (Opera tions) has been put up before the 
HR Committee, a sub-committee of  Board of directors.  The 
Committee are unable to understand the reasons due to which no 
decision has yet been taken by  the HR Committee on the said 
proposal.  The Committee desire th at the proposal for creation of 
Director(Operations) be cleared exped itiously and steps be taken to 
appoint Director (Operations) with due promptitude.  
                    The Committee are also cons trained to note that Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural gas h ave not communicated any decision 
on GAIL’s proposal for requirement of additional independent 
Directors on its Board despite the fact that GAIL has taken up the 
matter with them number of ti mes.  The Committee need not 
emphasise the imperative need of  full complement of Directors on 
the Board of GAIL for the  effect ive and efficient functioning of its 
various activities.  They therefor e recommend that Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natuiral Gas should take immediate decision on GAIL’s 
proposal for appointment of addi tional Directors. The Committee 

also recommend that a comprehensive review of organizational 
setup of GAIL may be undertaken in view of its fast expanding role 
and responsibility in meeting the energy requirements of the 
country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
PERFORMANCE OF THE COMPANY  
3(i). Project appraisal 
 
  While the Committee appreciate the successful execution of 
Dahej-Vijaipur gas pipeline, which had the distinction of both cost 
reduction as well as completion of the project by 5-1/2 months ahead 
of schedule, in the case of Dahej- Uran pipeline, the Committee are 
constrained to note that only 55% of  the project had been completed 
by July 2006 and the date of commissioning has also been 
rescheduled to March 2007.  The reasons for delay in commissioning 
of the project have been attributed mainly due to non-tieing-up of the 
gas source and delay in supply of gas.  The Jagoti-Pitampur pipeline 
whose completion date has been revised from July, 2006 to 
December 2006 is further expected to be delayed by 2 months due to 
delay in award of order for procur ement of pipeline.  The Committee 
are constrained to note that desp ite revision in the completion 
schedule in case of Dahej-Uran pipeline and Jagoti-Pitampur pipeline 
they are not expected to be completed even on their revised dates of 
completion.  The Committee would like to emphasize the imperative 
need of completion of pipelin e projects on time not only for 
augmenting GAIL’s share in transm ission of natural gas which has 
declined from 90% in 2003-04 to 86.07% in 2005-06 but also to 
facilitate uninterrupted supply of gas to power, fertilizer, 
petrochemical industries located in  various States.  The Committee 

desire that the progress of work of these pipeline projects be 
monitored continuously so as to en sure that they are completed as 
per their revised schedule.  
As regards, Dadri-Panipat pipeline project, which has been put 
under hold for want of Gas Sales Agreement /Terms–Sheet 
Agreement with Indian Oil Corpor ation Ltd., the Committee desire 
that negotiations be held with IO C for signing of TSA/GSA and steps 
may be taken for early construction of Dadri-Panipat pipeline.    
         The Committee are unhappy to note that second part of the 
HDPE plant at Pata which was scheduled to be completed by 30 April 
06 has been now delayed due to non availability of process package 
in time and the project is now expected to be completed by 24 March 
07. The Committee are not convinced with the reasons cited for delay  
in availability of process package vi z, SIA (Secretariat of Industrial 
Assistance) approval for technol ogy transfer taking nearly five 
months as against normal time of 15 days as they feel that advance 
action ought to have been initiated for evaluation of different 
technologies. The Committee recomme nd that in future all these 
steps should be initiated well in advance so as to obviate any delay 
in completion of projects in time.   
 In view of undue delay that h as been taking place in execution 
of projects by GAIL, the Committee feel that the set up in GAIL meant  
for project formulation and implementation needs to be improved.  
The Committee, therefore, desire  that a stricter mechanism for 

monitoring and control of pr ojects at the formulation and 
implementation stage should be evolved.  
 
3(ii) Financial performance of GAIL 
 
The Committee note that while GAIL has been earning profits 
continuously year after year, their profitability has been affected 
adversely due to sharing of subsidy burden of downstream oil 
marketing PSUs on LPG and kerosene. Besides adversely affecting 
the profitability of the Company, the Committee note that due to 
uncertainty regarding the quantum of subsidy burden to be shared 
GAIL is not in a position to make any  realistic estimate of its profits. 
In the absence of realistic estimates of its profits, Committee have 
every reason to believe that GAIL would not be in a position to 
prepare its future plans in a fair and objective manner. The 
Committee note that Dr. Rangarajan Committee on pricing and 
taxation of petroleum products has recommended for discontinuing 
the practice of asking ONGC/OIL/GAIL to provide upstream 
assistance. They have observed that “to the extent the Government 
decides to extend subsidies, the burden should be borne entirely 
and transparently in the Union Budget and the oil marketing 
companies should be freed from the burden of subsidy.” This 
Committee has also expressed the view that if no action is taken and 
Government is unable to provide the required subsidies, the financial 
position of the public sector oil companies will deteriorate rapidly 
and jeopardize the country’s energy security. The Committee on 

Public Undertakings therefore recommend that the present 
arrangement wherein GAIL is required to share the subsidy burden 
on account of LPG and kerosene may be reviewed in the light of 
recommendations made by Dr. S. Rangarajan Committee so as to 
enable it to make realistic assessment of its profits, and to protect its 
financial as well as functional autonomy, while the Government may 
find other revenues like reduction of duties and setting up of oil price 
stabilisation fund to protect the interests of the common man, ‘aam 
admi’. 
 
3(iii). Capacity utilization 
The Committee are constrained to note that the capacity  
utilization of the existing gas transmission infrastructure for 
transportation of natural gas and LPG is merely 60-63%.  In case of 
natural gas pipelines while it is appr eciable that the main inter-state 
gas pipelines are being used to 100% capacity,  the Committee regret 
to note that the utilization of sma ller network of natural gas pipelines 
in the states of Gujarat, Andhra  Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra 
and Tripura is merely 60% mainly du e to  shortage of gas from the 
main producer ONGC. In view of  depleting gas reserves of ONGC, 
Committee desire that GAIL should explore new avenues to meet the 
deficit by sourcing additional gas/ LNG so as to ensure the optimum 
utilization of natural gas pipe lines.  The Committee have been 
informed that to improve capacity ut ilization, GAIL has a proposal to 
connect Dabhol and Hazira LNG te rminals to GAIL’s grid.  The 

Committee desire that this should be done with due promptitude.  
The Committee also recommend th at discussions which are in 
progress with major potential produ cers of gas viz., SHELL, RIL, 
GSPL, PMT, ONGC etc. for sourcing / transportation of gas from their 
new finds in future should be held to their logical conclusion so as to 
ensure utilization of natural gas pipelines capacity to optimum level.  
 As regards capacity utilisation of LPG pipelines, the 
Committee note that Vizag-Secunderabad LPG pipeline (VSPL) is 
being utilized to the level of 30 to 40 percent only due to non-usage 
of pipeline to the fullest extent by Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
who are bringing in LPG by road and rail. The Committee have also 
been informed that due to limited availability of LPG at Vizag through 
indigenous refinery production/ im ports, OMCs are sourcing part 
requirement of their bottling plants located at Secunderabad through 
alternate supply source.  The Co mmittee need not emphasise that 
under-utilization of pipelines, cons truction of which involves huge 
expenditure is a gross wastage of public funds and loss to the 
country.  It is therefore imperati ve that all efforts are made to 
augment capacity utilization of these pipelines. The Committee find 
that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has undertaken certain 
measures like setting up of LPG cavern storage at Vizag, VSPL 
connectivity to Parwada Bottling Plant of IOC and Rajmundry plant of 
HPCL etc., to increase VSPL utiliz ation.  The Committee desire that 
all these measures be implemented with due promptitude so that 
VSPL is utilized to its maximum capacity.  

  
RECOMMENDATION N0. 4 
 
GAS EXPLORATION BY GAIL 
 
          GAIL was set-up by Government of India primarily to undertake 
the activities pertaining to transmission and marketing of natural gas 
and to establish long distance gas pipelines for transportation to 
locations where gas was to be us ed as a feedstock and fuel. To 
ensure long term gas supply securi ty from multiple natural gas 
sources, the company has also ventured into exploration and 
production activities through joint ventures/equity participation 
routes. The Committee however note that GAIL’s performance in 
exploratory activities are not at all impressive which is evident from 
the fact that out of 16 blocks awarded to GAIL’s consortium so far, 
its contribution is confined to equi ty participation varying from 10-
80% and in none of the blocks GAIL has any bid as a main operator. 
The Committee are of the view that if GAIL is not an operator in any 
of the blocks, wherein it has equi ty participation, it has limited 
control over the actual cost of developing the reserves. 
              The Committee feel that if GAIL h as to actively participate in 
exploration activities, it should strive to become an operator. In view 
of qualification criteria of bidding document, under NELP-VI, 
Committee note that GAIL cannot bi d as an operator on its own as 
operatorship experience has now b een made mandatory.  It can 
however participate as a joint ope rating partner along with other 

operators. Committee desire that accordingly GAIL should strive to 
become joint operating partner along with other operators and also 
assume operator-ship on a rotati onal basis under the production 
sharing contracts with other pa rtners.  The Committee further 
recommend that GAIL should make every endeavour to become 
operator in overseas blocks.  

  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
THE ROLE OF GAIL IN INDIA’S GAS SECURITY 
          In view of steep hike in prices of crude oil in international 
market and resultant strain on foreign exchange reserves of the 
country, it is imperative that con certed efforts are made to augment 
the supply of gas which is relatively cheaper and cleaner fuel to meet 
the energy requirements of the country.  The Committee note that 
that at present natural gas meets only 8% of the energy requirement 
of our country and its share is projected to grow up to 20% in the 
next twenty years i.e. by the year  2026. To reduce the wide gap of 
40% between demand and supply of natural gas and to augment the 
share of natural gas up to 20% in the energy sector in the next 
twenty years, the Committee note th at a multi-pronged strategy has 
been adopted by GAIL which include  participation in NELP blocks; 
setting up of LNG terminals to im port LNG; bringing of gas by 
transnational pipelines; extracti on of gas by use of clean coal 
technology etc. The above-mentioned multi-pronged strategy 
adopted to ensure the gas security of India have been dealt with as 
under: 
(i). Import of gas through transnational pipelines    
       
The Committee note that Government has taken steps for 
importing gas through transnati onal pipelines from gas rich 
countries, namely, Iran, Myanmar and Turkmenistan and the three 
pipeline proposals are Iran-Pakist an-India pipeline, Turkmenistan-

Afganistan-Pakistan-India pipeline a nd Myanmar-India pipeline.  As 
regards Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline, Committee note the matter has 
been under discussion with Iran for the last 2 ½ years and the only 
issue which is pending resolution pertains to price at which gas is to 
be sold by Iran to Pakistan and India.  The Committee were informed 
by Secretary, Ministry of Petrol eum and Natural Gas during evidence 
on 26 th September, 2006 that he was confident that pricing issue 
would be resolved over the n ext two months. The Committee hope 
that  the stalemate with regard to  gas price issue would be resolved 
soon.  
As regards Turkmenistan - Afghanistan – Pakistan India (TAPI) 
Pipeline project, the Committee not e that Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) which is the technical sponsor of the TAPI pipeline project has 
been requested to go to Turkmenis tan and make survey about the 
adequacy of reserves to supply ga s to India, and to give the 
necessary certification. The Committ ee have been further informed 
that discussion will start only after the certification is given by ADB 
to India.  The Committee desire that the matter may be vigorously 
pursued with ADB and based on their certification steps may be 
taken to negotiate with Turkmenistan for supply of gas.   
 
With regard to gas from Myanmar, the Committee were 
informed that Myanmar has floated an international bid for the two 
blocks, and India has also put in th e bid, and if that bid is acceptable 
to Myanmar, then the negotiations would reach the final shape. The 

Committee desire that GAIL/Ministry should play more proactive role 
and make all out efforts to bring in natural gas into India through 
transnational pipelines from Iran, Myanmar and Turkmenistan. 
 
(ii). Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) 
 
       The Committee note that c ountry is importing close to 30-35 
million cubic meters of gas per day equivalent of LNG which is 
regasified at LNG terminals.  The advantage of LNG is that gas can 
reach through cryogenic tankers by sea to various locations on the 
coastlines. Thus there is a need to give added thrust to LNG imports.  
The Committee have been informed that GAIL has signed an MoU 
with NIGEC, an Iranian Company in June, 2005 to bring five m illion 
tones of LNG from Iran to Koch i.  The Committee desire that 
GAIL/Ministry of Petroleum & Na tural Gas should vigorously pursue 
the matter with Iranian Government so as to clinch the deal at the 
earliest possible time. The Committee also note that Petronet LNG is 
holding discussions with EXON MO BIL for supply of LNG from 
Australia. However, the project is getting delayed due to 
environmental problems. The Commi ttee desire that the bottlenecks 
that are coming in the way of supply of LNG from Australia should be 
sorted out through negotiations. To further augment the import of 
LNG, the Committee recommend that GAIL should explore the 
feasibility of import of LNG from  all other LNG producing countries.   
      Besides import of LNG, construction of LNG terminals is  
equally important because LNG, wh ich comes in liquid form from 

exporting countries through ships, is converted into gaseous form at 
LNG terminals.  The Committee regret  to note that as against the 
target of commissioning four LNG termi nals by the end of tenth Plan 
Period, only Petronet’s Dahej terminal and HLPL’s Hajira terminal 
were commissioned in April, 2004 and 2005 respectively and the 
construction of LNG terminals at  Dabhol, Ennore, Mangalore, Kochi 
and expansion of LNG terminal at Dahej etc., are at initial stages 
only. There are reports that the Da bhol LNG terminal is proposed to 
be handed over to some private party which may not be in the overall 
interests of the development in th e particular area. The Committee 
understand the implications of construction of LNG terminals 
without finalizing the deal for LNG imports, which would be an idle 
investment.  They would however like to emphasise the point that 
there should be no unnecessary delay in construction of LNG 
terminals in case the deal is finalised. 
 
 
 
 
(iii). Underground Coal Gasification 
 
 
       The Committee note that  underground coal gasification is a 
potential economic means for extract ing gas from deep seated and 
/or isolated coal/lignite deposit resources which may not be 
amenable to conventional physical  extraction economically.  As per 
estimates of ONGC, the recoverable energy from Mehsana-
Ahmedabad block with coal reser ves of 63 billion tonnes in the form 

of gas is estimated to be equival ent to 15,000 billion cubic meters 
(BCM) of natural gas. Consideri ng vast unexplored deposits of coal 
where conventional mining methods are not feasible, it is imperative 
that underground coal gasification pr ocess is used to extract gas, 
which would go a long way in meeting our energy requirements.  The 
committee note that GAIL has entered into an agreement with 
agencies, which are competent in coal gasification, and is in the 
process of identifying 4-5 blocks in different parts of the country.  
The Committee desire that this exer cise should be completed within 
a time frame and work pertaining to extraction of gas through UCG 
be started expeditiously.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
GAS TRANSMISSION BY GAIL 
6(i). Decline in percentage share of GAIL  in natural gas transmission 
business :  
 
 The Committee note that GAIL’s share in transmission 
business which was 100% at the time of setting up of company has 
plummeted to 86% mainly due to entr y of multiple players as a result 
of opening up of the gas market.  The Committee have been informed 
that subject to firming up of supply sources GAIL proposes to 
strengthen its natural gas transmission business by building key 
inter-state trunk pipelines to incr ease the total network from 5,600 
km to 12,000 km over the next eight  years at a cost of Rs. 15,000 –
20,000 crores.   
 The Committee have been apprised that GAIL is holding 
negotiations with gas rich count ries for import of LNG and import 
through transnational pipelines et c. Committee hope that with the 
firming up of these gas sources and augmentation of GAIL’s pipeline 
infrastructure, GAIL would be ab le to enhance its share in gas 
transmission. Besides these steps,  Committee desire that GAIL 
should negotiate with private gas producers and persuade them to 
utilise GAIL’s pipelines for transmission of gas produced by them. 
 
 
6(ii). National Gas Grid Project 

 The Committee note that GAIL has plans to develop inter-state 
gas grid (ISGG) under which gas ava ilable from different sources is 
planned to be connected to 16 limbs of ISGG to cater to the needs of 
customers along the network.  In view of availability of gas from 
various sources and need for distri bution to various parts of the 
country to meet requirements of the customers, it is imperative that a 
national gas grid is developed at the earliest. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the work of development of all the limbs 
should be closely monitored and co mpleted within a specific time 
frame. 
6(iii). GAS PIPELINE POLICY 
      The Committee note that Government has a proposal to 
announce Natural Gas Pipeline Policy which will inter-alia lay down 
the broad frame work for laying of transmission pipelines, gas trunk 
pipelines and inter-city pipelines.  While the draft Pipeline policy has 
been prepared, the Committee are constrained the note that final 
policy has yet not been announced even though Secret ary, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas during his deposition before the 
Committee in September, 2006 had stated that the policy was 
expected to be issued within two weeks.  As the proposed policy is 
aimed at facilitating open access fo r all players to the pipeline 
network on non–discriminatory basis, encourage more investment in 
this sector which in turn would he lp in speedy completion of current 
and future pipeline projects, Co mmittee desire that Natural Gas 
Pipeline Policy  should be announced without any further delay.  

 
  RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
GAS STORAGE CAPACITY 
        The Committee note that ther e is zero storage of natural gas in 
the country.  In the event of any disruption in the supply of gas, 
Committee have been informed by GA IL that they supply gas which 
is there in the compressed form with in the pipeline, called line pack 
or other option is use of liquid fuel s both of which are not at all a 
satisfactory state of affairs.  
 As natural gas is stored underground in salt caverns/ depleted 
fields or in aquifers, Committ ee note that GAIL has started a 
feasibility study.  Committee d esire that GAIL should expedite 
completion of feasibility study and take steps for creation of storage 
capacity for natural gas for 2-3 weeks so that in the event of any 
energy deficit arising out of oil/ gas supply disruption, supply of gas 
to various consumers viz fertiliz er/ power plants etc., is not 
disrupted.  

RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
GAS DISTRIBUTION BY GAIL  
            Committee note that at present piped natural gas is being 
made available in certain localit ies in Delhi, Mumbai, Assam and 
Gujrat and GAIL intends to prov ide natural gas to another 10-11 
cities through city gas di stribution network in the next eight years.  
As a long-term measure, Committee have been informed that GAIL 
has identified 28 cities for implem entation of city gas distribution 
project on the basis of most pollute d cities identified by honorable 
Supreme Court and other cities clo se to GAIL pipeline network on 
the basis of business need and proj ect viability.   The Committee 
desire that GAIL should take all possible steps to achieve the 
objective of providing gas to 10-11 ci ties in the next eight years.  
Further, they should explore the feasibility of covering all the 28 
cities identified by them in the next phase. 
 Regarding the compressed natural gas (CNG), the Committee 
note that  the entire public transpor t system of Delhi today runs on 
CNG. The Committee however note that CNG distribution is not made 
available to other major cities such as Pune despite a Supreme court 
order requiring the start of CNG by 2006. The Committee recommend 
that GAIL should make efforts to see that CNG is made available to 
other major cities as well, as such a step will not only help in 
reducing the consumption of petrol which is a costlier fuel but also 
help in controlling the pollution of cities.   

The Committee would like the GAIL  authorities to expedite the 
setting up of interstate pipeline network in close vicinity of 
metropolitan cities and other industrially important centres of the 
states, and in suitable phases GAIL  should prioritise the issue of 
making available CNG in the overall in terests of rapid  and inclusive 
growth of the economy.  

RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
SHORTAGE OF RICH GAS TO HVJ BASED PLANTS 
          The Committee have been informed that in order to ensure rich 
gas supplies to GAIL’s processing plants along HVJ pipelines, rich 
LNG was sourced from Qatar and cu rrently rich LNG from Dahej is 
entering into HVJ system.  However, in  view of Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas’s decision permitting ONGC for setting up of C2-C3 
extraction plant at Dahej which is  expected to commence from 2009 
onwards, GAIL have informed that ext raction of rich gas by ONGC at 
Dahej would lead to shortage of ri ch gas to their HVJ based plants 
and their investment of Rs. 4000 crore on the gas processing  
facilities along the HVJ system would stand exposed to the threat of 
turning into non-performing assets.   
The Committee desire that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
should hold consultation with re presentatives of ONGC and GAIL 
and take remedial steps so as to  ensure that GAIL’s processing 
plants along HVJ pipeline don’t face shortage of rich gas.    

RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
GAS PRICING POLICY 
 
                   The Committee have been informed that in view of 
different sources from where gas is made available i.e, through 
domestic production and imports in the form of LNG and pipeline 
gas, it is difficult to arrive at a uniform price of gas, sector-wise as 
well as source-wise. Thus, as on date, there is no direct regulation of 
prices for all gases other than administrative price mechanism 
regulated domestic gas produced by ONGC/OIL, whic h involves a 
limited volume of 55 MMSCMD.   The Committee feel that for orderly 
growth of gas market in the country , it is imperative that clear-cut 
guidelines are issued for determinati on of gas price from different 
sources.  The Committee note that  a Committee has been set-up in 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, to come out with a 
transparent policy framework which will provide the basis and the 
guidelines for determination of gas price. The Committee desire that 
gas pricing policy be evolved on the basis of recommendation of this 
Committee so as to ensure that gas prices are fixed on a transparent 
basis.  

RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
REGULATOR  
The Petroleum & Natural Gas Re gulatory Board Act, 2006 which 
inter-alia stipulate for setting up of a regulatory Board Authority for 
downstream operations like transpor tation, distribution, marketing, 
processing, storage etc. of natural gas was notified by Government 
in April, 2006.  The Committee are constrained to note that though 
more than seven months have elap sed since the notification was 
issued,  the Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Bo ard has not yet 
been established.  The Committee have been informed that a Search 
Committee for selecting Chairperson and Members of the Board has 
been notified on 31.08.06.  The Commi ttee desire that Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas should urge the Search Committee to 
submit their recommendations expeditiously and based on their 
recommendation Ministry should take steps to constitute the PNGRB 
and appoint regulator without any further delay.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
SAFETY MEASURES 
The Committee have been info rmed that GAIL has always 
accorded highest priority to main tenance of highest standards of 
safety and continue to strive for zero  accident, in all its  industrial 
installations.   In recognition of its efforts, GAIL has earned several 
safety awards and laurels from var ious national and international 
bodies.  
 Despite all the laudable steps that have been taken by GAIL, 
Committee note that during the last three years number of accidents 
have increased year after year.  While in 2003 only one incident of 
fire due to gas leakage in Gandhar occurred, in the year 2004, three 
incidents of fire and electrocuti on took place.  In 2005 number of 
such incidents increased to four.  Even in the current year, i.e., 2006 
already  three accidents have o ccurred.  Although GAIL (India) 
Limited has made tall claims about their safety,  yet they have not 
been able to achieve zero accide nt rate. The Committee would like to 
emphasise that accidents are not only harmful to the workers and 
the people nearby but also cause damage to the assets of the 
company. The Committee therefore recommend that GAIL should 
further strengthen its safety measu res and ensure their strict 
compliance so that the intended objective of achieving zero accident 
rate in all its units is achieved.  
 
New Delhi                         RUPCHANDPAL  
12 December, 2006                          CHAIRMAN 
21 Agrahayana, 1928(S)                  COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS           
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE  4th   SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  23  August,  2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1645 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN
 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS      LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4. Dr. M. Jagannath 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
6. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
7. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
  
 
MEMBERS  RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GAIL (INDIA) LTD. 
 
1. Shri Proshanto Banerjee,   Chairman & Managing Director  
2. Shri S.P.Rao,   Director (Project) 
3. Shri B.S.Negi,    Director (BD) 
4. Shri M.R.Hingnikar   Director (HR) 
5. Dr. U.D.Choubey,    Director (Marketing) 
6. Shri R.K.Goel,   Director (Finance) 
 

2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of GAIL(India) 
Ltd. in connection with comprehensive examination of GAIL (India) Limited which 
has been selected as a subject for examination during the year 2006-2007.  
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of GAIL (India) 
Ltd. Thereafter, Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the 
representatives of GAIL(India) Ltd..  Inform ation on some of the points raised by 
the Committee was not readily available wit h the representatives of GAIL (India) 
Ltd.  It was, however, prom ised by them that the same would be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thank ed the representatives of  GAIL(India) Ltd. for 
providing all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE 7th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 26th SEPTEMBER, 2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1030 hrs to 1215 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN
 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal  
 
MEMBERS - LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Mohan Rawale 
8. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
MEMBERS - RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri Shahid Siddiqui 
13 
Ram Deo Bhandari 
14. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar, Under Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
1. Shri M.S. Srinivasan Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Tyagi Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Many Srivastava Director 
4. Shri S.B. Mandal,  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Deepak Rattanpal Under Secretary 
6.     Shri S.P. Rao C&MD 
7.     Shri B.S. Negi Director (BD) 
 8.    Dr. U.D. Choubey Director (Marketing) 
 9.    Shri S.K. Vaid, DGM (Coord) 

2. The Committee took oral evidence of t he representatives of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas in connection with the comprehensive examination of 
GAIL (India) Limited, which has been se lected as a subject for examination 
during the year 2006-2007. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry and 
also drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating 
to evidence before the Parliamentary Co mmittee.  Thereafter, members raised 
queries on various aspects perta ining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were made by the representatives of 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  Information on some of the points raised by 
the Committee was not readily available with  the representatives of Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.  It was, howev er, promised by them that the same 
would be furnished to the Committee Secretariat in due course. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the represent atives of Ministry for providing 
all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings  has been kept on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE 13 th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  12th  DECEMBER,  2006 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN
 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6 Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
9. Dr. M. Jagannath 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
 
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
12. Shri Ajay Maroo 
13. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri J. P.Sharma, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDI TOR  GENERAL  OF  
INDIA 
 
 Shri A. K. Avasthi, Dir ector General(Commercial)  
 
 
 

 
 
 
2. The Committee considered the Dr aft Reports on (i) xxxxxxx  and  
(ii) GAIL(India) Limited 
3. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation. 
 4.  xxx               xxx               xxx                      xxx               xxx  
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 