1 
TR 
C.P.U.NO . 885 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2004  -  2005) 
 
( FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA ) 
 
 
 
FIRST 
STUDY  TOUR  REPORT 
 
 
 
ANTRIX   CORPORATION   LIMITED 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha on 21.12.2004 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on…21.12.2004 
 
 
 
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW  DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December,  2004  / Agrahayana, 1926 (S) 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2003-04) 
 
Composition of the Committee (2004-05) 
iii 
 
v 
 
Introduction 
 
 
vii 
Study Tour Notes on Antrix Corporation Limited (ACL) 
 
1 
Recommendation / Observation of the Committee 16 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
Annexure-I Tour programme of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings to Mumbai,  
Hyderabad  and  Bangalore from  7 th  to  
11th  October,  2003 
 
18 
Annexure-II Composition of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings which visited to Mumbai,  
Hyderabad and Bangal ore from  7 th to 
11th  October,  2003 
 
19 
Annexure-III List of offici als of the ACL who were 
present during discussion with the 
Committee on Public Undertakings at 
Bangalore on 11th October, 2003 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
COMPOSITION  OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2003 – 2004 ) 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
3. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
4. Smt. Reena Choudhary 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri C. K. Jaffer Sharief 
7. Shri K. E. Krishnamurthy 
8. Dr. Rama Krishna Kusmaria 
9. Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Prabhat Samantray 
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar 
13. Prof. Rita Verma 
14. Shri A K S Vijayan 
15. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
17. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta 
18. Shri Kalraj Mishra 
19. Shri Satish Pradhan 
20. Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao 
21. Shri Jibon Roy 
22. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
 (iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2004 – 2005 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
 
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
 
 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 
 
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
 
 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
 
 
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
 
9. Shri Kashiram Rana 
 
 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
 
 
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
 
 
13. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
 
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
 
 
17. Shri Ajay Maroo 
 
 
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
 
19. Shri Jibon Roy 
 
 
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui 
 
 
21. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri John Joseph  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Director 
3. Shri Raj Kumar  Under Secretary 
  
(V) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 In pursuance of the pr ocedure adopted under Rule 281 of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business for laying the Study Tour Reports on the 
Tables of both the Houses  of Parliament, I, Chairman, Committee on Public 
Undertakings having been authorised by t he Committee to lay the Study Tour 
Report on their behalf, lay this First Study  Tour Report of the Committee on their 
discussions with the officials of Antrix Corporation Limited. 
2. The Committee held discussions wit h the officials at Bangalore on 
11.10.2003. A copy of the tour programme is annexed (Annexure-I). 
3. The Committee considered and approved the Report at their sitting held 
on 15th December, 2004. 
4. The Committee wish to express their t hanks to Antrix Corporation Ltd. for 
providing facilities during the visit of the Committee and for supplying necessary 
material and information required in connection with the Study Tour. 
5. They would also like to place on re cord their sense of appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
New Delhi                                                                                 RUPCHAND  PAL 
15  December,  2004                                          CHAIRMAN 
 24 Agrahayana 1926 (S)             COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(vii) 

 
STUDY TOUR NOTES OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
DISCUSSION WITH THE REPRESENTATIVES OF ANTRIX CORPORATION 
LIMITED AT BANGALORE ON 11.10.2003 
 
 
 At the outset, the Convener, Committ ee on Public Undertakings (COPU) 
made opening remarks and requ ested the Chairman, Antr ix Corporation Limited 
(ACL) to introduce himself and his colleagues to the Committee. The Convener, 
COPU also requested him to give a brief account of the Company. 
2. After introduction of officers of Antrix Corporation Ltd., the Chairman, ACL 
informed the Committee that  the Antrix Corporati on was incorporated in 
September 1992 as a Corporate Front of  Indian Space Research Organisation 
(ISRO) for promotion and commercial expl oitation of space products, technical 
consultancy services and transfer of technologies developed by ISRO. Another 
major objective was to facilitate dev elopment of space re lated industrial 
capacities in India. 
 The Committee have been informed that the main mission of ISRO is self-
reliant development of space technology  and its application for a variety of 
national needs. The requirement for t he commercial arm arises from the 
specialized human resources and broad based technical infrastructure developed 
in ISRO for space technology and the excell ence it had established in this field. 
This capacity is intended to be tapped to for commercial opportunities. In the 
execution of the national space projects, a number of  Indian industries are 
developed to assist space activities. Thei r involvement for commercial activities 
at a wider international level could increase their sustainability, quality 

upgradation and global recogni tion. To address these needs Antrix Corporation 
was established. Its main mission is market ing and interfacing. Thus, by itself it 
does not invest in costly technical facilities or engage a large number of people. 
On the other hand, it effectively makes use of capacity separable from ISRO and 
industry both in terms of facilities and technical human resources. Since the 
space business such as satellite building or launch serves are highly risky 
needing large investments and long ges tation periods, this approach was 
practical to gain entry into export markets that are highly restricted. 
 The commercial opportunities in space are also strongly influenced by the 
export and import policies of advanced c ountries having regard to dual use 
concerns of space. From our stand point, space is a strategic capability and it is 
necessary to sustain our independence even while we prom ote cooperation at 
international level and pursue commercia l opportunities. Hence the interaction 
and coordination between Antrix and IS RO is crucial and important. Having 
regard to these factors Antrix is evolved as a wholly owned ent ity of Department 
of Space. 
3. The Committee have also been informed that the space infrastructure like 
satellites enable a wide range  of down stream services  by industry such as 
Television broadcasting, dedicated communi cation networks such as Very Small 
Aperture Terminal (VSAT) networks and provision of spatially referenced 
information for a variety of projects. Antr ix plays a promotive role in enabling 
growth of such industries by technolog y transfers and also by marketing the 
capacity available from Indian satellit es. As Government policy even allows 

private sector to set up I ndian satellite systems, Antr ix extends its support for 
technical consultancy, supply of satellite and launch services and the mission 
support, etc. 
 Although relatively a late entrant to the global space i ndustry, Antrix has 
made good beginning to spread Indian Spac e capabilities into  global markets. 
Today India has established a position of  pre-eminence in the World in the field 
of Remote Sensing. Antrix has successfully placed Indian Remote Sensing 
Satellites in the Global M ap along with other leaders, in collaboration with space 
Imaging Incorporated of USA. Continuous growth in t he international stations 
demanding access to IRS is a testimony to  the acceptance of the international 
community of our eminence in this field. 
 With six consecutive successes, our Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle 
(PSLV) has shown a good record of reliabi lity. While the international market 
demands a large number of  successful launches to attract customers, PSLV 
could prove worthy of the confidence placed by customers in Germany, Korea 
and Belgium by successfully launching four small satellites along with Indian 
satellites. Antrix will c ontinue to explore further  opportunities for managing 
international satellites, subject to the capa city available. Indian industry is also 
geared up to meet this challenge. 
4. The Committee have further been inform ed that recently Antrix has also 
taken up marketing of transponder capa city from INSAT to VSAT service 
providers and television channels. The le asing of transponders of INSAT 2E 
satellites by the International Televisi on Satellite Organisation had been a good 

benchmark for the quality of INSAT satellites . Antrix look forwar d to develop this 
segment further with appropriate alliances with service providers. 
 The challenges of international space markets have been tremendous in 
recent times and resulting in greater leve l of consolidation of space industries 
across the continents. The market com petition also has become intense and 
barrier for new entrants is formidable. Notwithstanding these challenges Antrix 
looks forward to grow its business taki ng advantage of new systems which are 
currently being developed in ISRO and provide scope  for marketing their 
services. 
5. As per the information furnished to t he Committee, the growth in revenues 
as well as profit over the last five years out of the commercial activities of the 
Company are as follows :- 
(Rs. In lakh) 
YEAR GROSS REVENUES PROFIT AFTER TAX 
1998-99 3258.42 769.34 
1999-00 3011.51 674.71 
2000-01 4267.40 603.31 
2001-02 6151.66 1891.09 
2002-03 10855.16 1856.56 
 
6. When enquired about t he reasons for decline in profits during 1999-2000 
and 2000-2001, the Committee have been intima ted that the marginal decrease 
in profit during 1999-2000 is mainly due to completion of IRS software supply to 
IRS Ground stations and decrease in roya lty on sale of IRS data products. The 

marginal decrease in profit during 2000-2001 is due to short provision for Income 
Tax made for earlier year. 
 When asked to state the reasons fo r sudden increase in profit during 
2001-02 in comparison to  2000-2001, the Committee have been informed that 
the increase in profit is mainly due to additional inco me from new contracts for 
establishment of IRS Ground stations at Iran and Myanmar and increase in sale 
of IKONOS Satellite products. 
7. The Company’s achievements in the areas of marketing Indian Remote 
Sensing Satellite data products and re lated hardware and software items, 
satellite launch and missi on support services, ground systems, satellite systems 
and telecommunication transponder services from 1998-99 to 2002-03 are as 
under :- 
1998-99 • International marketing of  IRS data is expanded 
through addition of three stat ions in Alaska (USA), 
Japan and Republic of Korea. 
 
• Provision of in-orbit test services to Space Systems / 
Loral of USA for American Satellite PAS-7 
 
1999-00 • Launch contracts for PROBA satellite form Belgium 
and BIRD satellite of Germany 
 
• Launch contract for ROCSAT-2 from Taiwan 
 
• Provision of Mission Suppor t for European Eutelsat W-
24 and ROCSAT-1 of Taiwan 
 
• Ground stations at Ecuador (m arket entry into Latin 
America) and Saudi Arabia added to IRS network 
 
2000-01 • Setting up of Network Monitoring Centre for Americom 
Asia Pacific, USA 
 
• Expansion of IRS network through station at Abu Dhabi 
and Mobile Station 
 

2001-02 • Successful launch of PROBA and BIRD satellites 
 
• Contract with Mitsubishi Elec tric corp (MELCO), Japan 
for supply of Solar Sail  and boom mechanism for 
MTSAT-2 
 
• Occeansat satellite access stat ions in Korea, USA and 
Europe & IRS network market entry into Russia 
 
2002-03 • Launch contract for NTU, Singapore for X-Sat 
 
• IRS Ground network expansion to Myanmar and 
National Intelligence mapping Agency stations of USA 
 
• Setting up Multi Mission Remote Sensing Ground 
Station in Iran 
 
• Transponder services to VSAT network operators 
 
 
8. The major export products of the Company include IRS data, the ground 
hardware mission support services, launch se rvices and supply of satellite parts 
to USA and Japan. 
The export earnings of the Company dur ing the last five years are as 
under :- 
                                                                                                (Rs. In lakh) 
YEAR EXPORT EARNINGS 
1998-99 2486.39 
1999-00 1526.03 
2000-01 2561.64 
2001-02 3005.06 
2002-03 3004.27 
 

9. When asked about the reasons fo r decrease in export earnings during 
1999-00 and 2002-03, the Comm ittee have been informed that the decrease in 
the export earnings during 1 999-2000 in comparison to 1998- 99 is attributed to 
stiff global competition with the entry of additional players in the remote sensing 
(IKONOS, USA and EROS, Israel) and la unch services market (Russia). The 
decrease in export earnings in 2002-03 as compared to 2001-02 is due to the 
negative growth in the overall industry itse lf. Rest of the year s, Antrix has been 
able to maintain average cumulative grow th, that is better than the industry 
average, which ranged from 5-10% for satellite hardware and about 15% for 
services. 
10. On the question of collaborative v entures the Company have undertaken 
or proposes to initiate with the Indian industry to pr ovide value added services, 
both in domestic and in international  markets, the Committee have been 
informed that the Company acti vely promotes the role of  value adding industries 
in Geo-information and Mapping and other services which have emerged with 
initial support of ISRO technology transfe rs and diversified to provide services 
with an estimated export market of 40 million US dollars. The Company has 
assisted to provide linkages for outs ourcing from Germany / US for such 
services. The Company is also in touch with VSAT service providers and their 
association to assist in their requirem ents for satellite capacities. The Company 
has organized exhibitions at Houston, USA and Bremen, Germany with 
participation of Indian Industry to promote awareness and linkages. The 
company is also in touch with various i ndustries that work on satellite data and 

those in the field of mapping for collaborat ive efforts to service future markets 
such as Urban Information Systems. 
11. When enquired about the major compet itors in the international market 
and the modalities by which the Compan y have been tackling or proposes to 
tackle the competition, the Committee have been informed that for satellite 
systems, ANTRIX competit ors include large multi- national companies from 
advanced markets of US and Europe such as Boeing Satellite systems, 
Lockheed Martin, Orbital Sciences Corpor ation, Astrium (Europe) and Alcatel. 
For Remote Sensing data products, Antrix has to compete with leaders like 
SPOT Imaging, Imagesat International an d Digital Globe. For launch services, 
Antrix competitors are Eurokot, Cosmos  International (German & Russian), 
EADS of Europe, Greatwall Industries Corporation of China, and Boeing, 
Lockheed Martin, ILS of USA and Ariane Space (partly). Hence through strategic 
alliances, products pricing and use of cooperative links with space agencies, 
Antrix aims to deal with competiti on. In addition, co ntinuous update of 
technologies by ISRO will be a favourable factor for competitive positioning. 
 The major challenges the Company had to meet in the context of global 
markets had been in (i) shrinkage of markets needs in recent years due to 
constraints on global space budgets; (ii) technology advances which increased 
satellite life and digital communication s that demand lower capacity from 
satellites; and (iii) intense competition fr om major multi nationals from USA and 
Europe and geopolitical fact ors extending influence on export / import policies 
and regulations. 

12. When asked about the steps taken or  proposed to be taken for the growth 
of export market, the Committee have bee n apprised that the Company aims to 
grow export markets in the medium term through (i) new product offerings such 
as India’s Resourcesat and Cartosat whic h are planned to be launched in 2004 
and 2005; (ii) tie ups with leaders lik e Boeing Satellite Systems for joint 
manufacturing of medium class satellite; ( iii) On orbit satellite delivery proposals 
involving GSLV; and (iv) alliances for international marketing of 
telecommunication transponders. 
13. When asked about the on-goi ng projects as well as the new activities the 
Company proposes to undertake with a view to diversify and grow, the 
Committee have been informed as under :- 
(a) Antrix is globally marketing Indi an Remote sensing satellite data in 
alliance with space Imaging of USA. The operations cover USA, Canada, 
Europe, Middle East, Russia, Asia and parts of Latin America. With the 
forthcoming launches of Resourcesat (IRS  P6) and Cartosat (IRS P5), Antrix 
expects to secure a wider market for data (including relevant hardware and 
software) and make inroads into the va lue added services market in selected 
areas. 
 With increasing competition from hi gh-resolution data service providers 
such as IKONOS, ORBIMAGE, DIGITAL GLOBE, etc., and new entrants from 
Korea and Israel, Antrix services are expected to face more competition. 
However, with unique stereo mapping features of Ca rtosat, Antrix expects to 
enhance its market. 

(b) Antrix has started supporting the l ease of transponder capacity from the 
INSAT series of satellites to VSAT serv ice providers, Satellite TV broadcasters 
and telecom operators. With the forthc oming launches of the high power 
satellites, INSAT 4A and 4E, Antrix expects to serve the high end applications 
such as DTH, HITS, etc. in addition to  the present servic es being provided. 
Further, efforts would be directed toward s expanding telecommunication service 
capabilities of INSAT system into regional markets through appropriate alliances. 
(c) Antrix has secured an internati onal launch contra ct from Nanyang 
Technological University (NTU), Si ngapore for the launch of its Earth 
Observation LEO micro-satellite, (X- SAT) onboard PSLV. Antrix is actively 
following up with prospective customer s for providing pr imary and auxiliary 
launch services through PSLV and also GS LV in the future. In the post-cold war 
scenario, availability of cheap launches converted missiles had been a threat to 
the market. Competition has become severe. Added to this, Geo-political 
considerations also have a direct bearin g on the launch market segment. Antrix 
will endeavor to overcome this with appropr iate alliances with service providers 
of advanced countries. 
(d) ISRO has pioneered the technology  of establishing TTC stations for 
tracking satellite and launch vehicles and has successfully installed indigenously 
designed stations for its various facilities in India and abroad. It is this expertise 
that was utilized in establishing the Telemetry, Command and Ranging (TCR) 
station for World Space. This station is  being used to provide audio broadcasting 
services to he African, Middle East and Asian regions. A stat e-of-the art Network 

Monitoring Station includ ing the tracking antenna wa s also established for 
monitoring the AAP-1 satellite of Americom Asia Pacifi c and services are being 
provided by Antrix. Similar ground infras tructure for satellite communication is 
also being established for national users. 
(e) Antrix has been offering technical consultancy services in several areas. 
One such project being undertaken for Ko rean Aerospace Research Institute 
(KARI) involves conducti ng a feasibility study of meteorological and Ocean 
monitoring payloads and gener ating a request for proposal for the Korean multi-
purpose satellite planned by Korea. 
(f) For future, Antrix will also actively explore possibilities for building 
satellites for operators, who play to set up their own satellite systems for services 
over India. 
14. When asked about the Satellite Communications Policy, it has been 
informed to the Committee that the Sa tellite Communications Policy of the 
Government permits private sector to establish own and operate Indian Satellite 
Systems. The Government has also liber alized its uplinking policy to permit 
Indian private companies to set up uplinki ng hub-teleports for licensing or hiring 
out to other broadcasters. This policy al so permits uplinking of any television 
channel from India and further it allo ws news agencies to have their own 
uplinking facilities for purposes of new s gathering and its furt her distribution. 
Subsequent to the adoption of Satellite Comm unications Policy initiatives, Agrani 
Satellite Services Limited (ASSL) has planned to set up a communication and 
broadcasting satellite system. Antrix is pr oviding consultancy services for this 

project and also proposed to provide training and other support services for 
satellite operations when the satellite comes up. 
15. About the Remote Sensing Centre  in Bhubaneswar, the Committee have 
been informed that the remote sensing centre facility in Bhubaneswar namely 
ORSAC, is set up by the State Government  of Orissa. This does not come under 
ISRO, although ISRO has provided some support. As regards to activities, a very 
innovative experiment in the KBK region has been taken up. When the 
programme was started, it was only three districts and now it is eight districts. TV 
sets are placed in selected villages in  these eight districts for conducting 
programmes on literacy, health, sanitation and so on. Generatio n of maps which 
indicate ground water potential in a few districts like Kalahand i, etc., has been 
taken up. 
16. Given the nature of the Company, if  a dispute arises of any kind, under 
what law it is resolved – whether under Inte rnational law or Indi an law. In this 
regard, the Committee have been intimated that since Antrix  has dealings with 
international companies, normally these ar e put in the provision of Indian Acts. 
Wherever relevant, the Company also prov ide for arbitration under international 
laws and making use of bodies like International Chamber of Commerce in Paris. 
17. On the question of maintaining the price competitivity of the Company’s 
products, the Committee have been apprised that the price competitivity is based 
on lower cost of expert hum an resources. For example, in satellite systems, the 
design, testing and integration demand fair ly large component of  labour and this 

is why our remote sensing satellites ar e cheaper by 2 to 3 times when compared 
to those of advanced countries. 
18. On the question of launching of vehicles, the Committee have been 
apprised that the launch vehicles like  PSLV and GSLV ar e carried out from 
Shriharikota and the customers bring the satellites to India for integration with the 
launch vehicle and for launch operations. 
19. On the question of vision of India to set up equilibrium in global arena and 
the role of Antrix therein, the Committee have been informed that the vision of 
India to set up equilibrium in global are na as it pertains to space competition 
encompasses several aspects such as (i) ma intaining self reliance; (ii) providing 
strategic technology capability;  (iii) applications services relevant to national 
development; (iv) Internati onal cooperation; (v) scientific exploration of space; 
and (vi) development of space industry. Among such diverse dimensions, Antrix’s 
role addresses the promotion of commercia l space activities relevant to global 
standard. The aim of Antrix is to util ize new developments in ISRO and its 
infrastructure for the commercial operat ion in the world markets while also 
promoting the role of Indian Industries in carrying out such services. The 
Company has been looking into various aspects  of policy that is relevant in the 
context of global business in matters such as  Inte llectual  Property Rights, 
Import / Export policies, etc. and will pr ovide inputs to the Government for 
maintaining global competitivity in this field. 
20. About the status of Antrix Corporation Limited in the global market, the 
Committee have been apprised that in t he highly competitive global market 

relating to Space, Antrix was able to ma ke entry into launch services for foreign 
customers for launch of small satellites  from Germany, Republic of Korea and 
Belgium. Antrix has also been able to es tablish a significant share in the global 
market for remote sensing data. Antr ix has also provided mission support 
services to international satellites fr om Europe and USA and it  has sold satellite 
parts to leading companies like H ughes Spacecraft Corporation, USA and 
Mitsubishi Electric Company of Japan. 
21. The composition of the Board of Directors of the Company is as follows :- 
 
Shri G Madhavan Nair Chairman 
Shri S K Das Director 
Dr. P S Goel Director 
Dr. R R Navalgund Director 
Dr. K Kasturirangan Director 
Shri Ratan Tata Director 
Shri Jamshyd Godrej Director 
Shri P Ravindra Reddy Director 
 
22. When asked about the modalities followed in selecting the members of the 
Board and the role played / functions discharged by them, the Committee have 
been informed that all the Directors of the company are part-time Directors. 
Keeping in view the strategic aspects  of space and special nature of the 
company as marketing arm of ISRO, performing the technology transfer and 
industry interface coordinat ion function, certain special dispensations were 
accorded by the Cabinet while approvin g the formation of the Company. The 
Cabinet approved that selection and appoi ntment of Board level functionaries 

including the Chairman by Space Commission / Department of Sp ace, instead of 
by Public Enterprises Se lection Board. The compos ition of the Board, as 
approved by the Space Commission a nd the Government comprises of 
Chairman of the Space Commission as the Chairman of the Board, the Additional 
Secretary, who is also the Internal Financial Advisor of Department of Space and 
three Directors / eminent Space program leaders of key centers of ISRO / DOS 
such as ISRO Satellite Centre, Nati onal Remote Sensing Agency and Vikram 
Sarabhai Space Centre and three external  part-time Directors from industry 
based on eminence. The necessary high level linkage, coordination and direction 
between Antrix and ISRO  and industrial experience are enabled by above 
constitution. Under the over all direction of the Chai rman, Executive Director 
guides and directs the day-to-day operatio nal functions. The Executive Director, 
a techno-managerial professional is drawn from ISRO with extensive experience 
in industrial / commercial interface and space projects. 
 

RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
NEED TO INCREASE THE SHARE OF ACL IN GLOBAL MARKET 
 
 
The Committee note that the Antrix Corporation Ltd. 
(ACL) has been constituted as th e Corporate Front of Indian 
Space Research Organisation (I SRO) for promotion and 
commercial exploitation of space products, technical 
consultancy services and transfer of technologies developed by 
ISRO.  In pursuance of this objective, ACL has succeeded in 
offering several space products and services in the highly 
competitive international markets.   ACL is marketing IRS data 
and has helped the leasing of transponder capacity of INSAT 
and VSAT to commercial users fo r TV and for other net-works. 
ACL has helped in entering into contracts with various countries 
to launch their satellites through our launch vehicles. The 
Committee further note that ACL h as supplied satellite parts to  
USA and Japan and has also helped transfer of ISRO technology 
to Indian industries to enable them to develop various 
structures for satellites. The Comp any has recorded a profit of 
Rs.18.56 crore in 2002-03 as comp ared to the profit of only 
Rs.7.69 crore in the year 1998- 99.  The export earnings of the 

Company for the year 2002-03 were  of the order of Rs.30.04 
crore. The Committee note that the Company has an ambitious 
target of increasing its global share in the imageries market 
from 15% to 20%.  The Committee recommend that ACL should 
make all-out efforts to increase th e share of India in the global 
market not only in the field of re mote sensing but also in other 
areas, such as, leasing of tran sponder capacity, contracts for 
launch of satellites, etc.  The Committee recommend that the 
Government should provide all necessary support to ACL which 
is critically required by them to achieve their target. 

 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
TOUR  PROGRAMME  OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS  
TO  MUMBAI,  HYDERABAD AND BANGALORE, FROM  7  TO  11  
OCTOBER  2003 AS ACTUALLY PERFORMED 
 
( MEMBERS ASSEMBLED  AT MUMBAI) 
DATE & DAY TIME SUBJECT 
7.10.2003 
(Tuesday) 
1730 hrs 
 
 
 
 
1845 hrs 
Discussion with the representatives of Rashtriya 
Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. 
(Audit Para No.10.3.1 of C&AG’s Report No.3 {Comml} of 
2003) 
 
Discussion with the representatives of 
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. 
(Audit Para No.11.1.1 of C&AG’s Report No.3 {Comml} of 
2003) 
 
( NIGHT  HALT  ATMUMBAI) 
 
8.10.2003 
(Wednesday) 
1100 hrs 
 
 
 
 
1430 hrs 
 
1730 
Discussion with the representatives of 
Indian Oil corporation 
(Audit Para No.17.6.2 of C&AG’s Report No.3 {Comml} of 
2003) 
 
Departure for Hyderabad by IC – 928 
 
Arrival Hyderabad 
( NIGHT  HALT  AT HYDERABAD) 
 
9.10.2003 
(Thursday) 
1100 hrs 
 
 
1245hrs 
 
 
 
 
1600 hrs 
Discussion with the representatives of 
Housing & Urban Development Corporation 
 
Discussion with the representatives of 
Food Corporation of India 
(Audit Para No.2.1 of C&AG’s Report No.4 {Comml} of 
2003) 
 
Discussion with the representatives of 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 
(Audit Para No.13.2.2 of C&AG’s Report No.3 {Comml.} of 
2003 
( NIGHT  HALT  AT HYDERABAD) 
 
10.10.2003 
(Friday) 
1530 
 
1800 hrs 
Departure for Bangalore by IC-977 (1700 hrs) 
 
Arrival Bangalore 
( NIGHT  HALT  AT BANGALORE) 
 
11.10.2003 
(Saturday) 
1000 hrs 
 
 
1115 hrs 
Discussion with the representatives of 
Antrix Corporation Ltd. 
 
Discussion with the representatives of 
Spices Trading Corporation 
 
D I S P E R S A L 
 

ANNEXURE – II 
 
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
WHICH   VISITED MUMBAI, HYDERABAD AND BANGALORE FROM 7 TO 11 
OCTOBER,  2003 
 
S. 
No. 
NAME 
 LOK SABHA 
 
1. Prof Vijay Kumar Malhotra, Chairman 
2. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
3. Smt Reena Choudhary 
4. Smt Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo. 
5. Shri C K Jaffer Sharief 
6. Sh. K.E.Krishnamurthy  
7. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria 
8. Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
9. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
10. Shri Prabhat Samantray 
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar 
12. Prof Rita Verma 
13. Shri A K S Vijayan 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Sh. Suresh Kalmadi 
15. Sh. Lalitbhai Mehta 
16. Sh. Kalraj Mishra 
17. Shri Satish Pradhan 
18. Sh.  Jibon Roy 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S Bal Shekar,  Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar,  Under Secretary 
 

ANNEXURE – III 
 
 
LIST OF OFFICALS OF ANTRIX CORPORATION LIMITED WHO WERE 
PRESENT DURING DISCUSSION WITH THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS AT BANGALORE ON 11-10-2003. 
 
 
 
 
1. Shri G Madhavan Nair  Chairman 
2. Shri S K Das    Director 
3. Shri K R Sridhara Murt hi  Executive Director 
 