 
18C.P.U.No. 907 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
HEALTH INSURANCE – A HORIZONTAL STUDY  
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
11th Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha) on – 
Health Insurance – A Horizontal Study) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.03.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.03.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
March 2007  
 
 

  
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07)  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
1
CHAPTER II Recommendation which have been accepted by 
Government 
 
9
CHAPTER III Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view  of the Government 
Replies  
 
15
CHAPTER IV Recommendation in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
20
CHAPTER V  Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
23
 APPENDICES 
 
Appendix-I Minutes of 18 th Sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings held on 19.03.2007. 
 
25
Appendix-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the 11 th 
Report of COPU (14th L.S.) on ‘ Health Insurance 
– A Horizontal Study.’ 
26
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2006 – 2007) 
 
CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. M. Jagannath 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
9. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Shri Kashiram Rana 
12. Shri Mohan Rawale 
13. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
14. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
 
16. Shri Rishang Keishing  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri. K. Chandran Pillai  
19. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
20. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
21. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
      SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director 
3. Shri N.C. Gupt a  Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings have been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the R eport on their behalf, present their 18 th Report 
on Action Taken by Government on t he recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report of the Committee on P ublic Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Health Insurance – A Horizontal Study. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report of the Co mmittee on Public Undertakings was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 9 th March, 2006.  Replies of  the Government to the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 25th September 2006.  
The Committee on Public Undertakings co nsidered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 20 March, 2007.  T he minutes of the sitting are given in 
Appendix-I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by  Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 11 th Report (2005-2006) of the Comm ittee is given in Appendix-
II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      RUPCHAND PAL 
19 March, 2007       CHAIRMAN, 
     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations c ontained in the Eleventh Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 9th March 2006. 
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 12 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 4,6,7 and 8              (Total 4) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Sl. Nos. 1,2 and 9              (Total 3) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. Nos. 3, 5,11 and 12                       (Total 4) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited     
Sl. No. 10                (Total 1) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 

  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) – Lack of Coordination 
5. The Committee note that various insu rance schemes viz. the Employee’s 
State Insurance Schemes, the Central Government Health Scheme and other 
Commercial Health Insurance schemes ar e being operated by three different 
Ministries viz. the Ministry of Labour, Mi nistry of Health & Family Welfare and 
Ministry of Finance respectively and ther e is no coordination amongst the three 
Ministries as also the IRDA in policy planning, pr ogramme implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation with regard to commercial health insurance thereby 
depriving the business of the much needed synergy which can evolve only 
through synchronization of individual efforts. 
  
 The Committee further note that the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
has proposed, through the draft National P harmaceutical Policy, to set up a new 
health insurance scheme – Rashtriya Sw asthya Bima Yojana – for the poor 
which will be funded through a 2% health ce ss.  While lauding the proposal, the 
Committee feel that an integrated approa ch involving all the above agencies 
needs to be evolved by the Government for the successful implementation of 
Health Insurance Schemes. 
  
 The Committee desire that a mechani sm for regular cross-consultation 
and coordination among thes e agencies should be put in  place to enhance the 
synchronization of efforts to promote health insurance in the country.  The 
Committee further desire that a pilot health insurance scheme involving the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,  Ministry of Financ e, IRDA and Public 
Sector Insurance Companies may be ev olved and launched within a specific 
time-frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has developed a framework for 
developing health insurance programmes in the country. Instructions have 
already been issued to all the State Gove rnments to develop innovative health 
insurance products.  This is the outcome  of a consultative process in which 
Ministry of Finance, Public Sector In surance Companies and State Governments 
actively participated.  Moreover, an Inter-disciplinary Committee has been formed 
under NRHM to monitor the progress periodically. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. No. 
12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. Observing that the lack of coordi nation amongst different Ministries 
who have been operating various insu rance schemes viz. Employees State 
Insurance Scheme, the Central Government Health Scheme and other 

  
 
commercial Health Insurance Schemes and the regulator, IRDA, was 
depriving the commercial health insurance business the much needed 
synergy, the Committee in their original report had recommended for 
setting up of a mechanism for regular cross consultation and coordination 
amongst them to synchronize the efforts to promote health insurance in 
the country.  The Committee had also desired that a pilot health insurance 
scheme involving the Ministries, IRDA and public sector insurance 
companies may be evolved and launched within a specific time frame.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry has neither taken steps 
to set up a mechanism for cross-cons ultation and coordination nor have 
they evolved any pilot health insurance scheme.  Instead, the Government 
have taken steps to add to the multiplic ity of agencies by instructing State 
Governments to develop innovative health insurance products.  The 
Committee express their apprehension about availability of expertise with 
the State Governments to undertake this task, which is a highly specialized 
one and requires professional expertise that only insurance companies are 
expected to possess.  The Commi ttee take strong exception to the 
Ministry’s indifference to their recommendations and its attempt to present 
NRHM and its programmes as adequate to address the concerns expressed 
by them.  The Committee therefor e would like to reiterate their 
recommendations and desire that steps for setting up of a mechanism for 
consultation and coordination amongst various Ministries, IRDA and the 
PSU Insurance Companies for the promotion of health insurance and the 
evolution of a pilot scheme involving all these agencies may be initiated 
without any further delay. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) – Lack of Awareness  
8. The Committee in their 11 th Report had recommended the following with 
regard to the lack of awareness about Health Insurance in the country. 
 
“The Committee are constrained to obs erve that the level of public 
awareness about the need, availability and benefits of health  insurance in 

  
 
the country is still very low despite the fact that pub lic sector general 
insurance companies have been operating in the field of health insurance 
for nearly two decades, beginning from 1986. Though efforts have been 
made at the Finance Minister and Financ e Secretary level to solicit the 
cooperation of State Government s in creating awareness amongst 
masses and about the need and importanc e of health insurance, they 
have not yielded the desired result. 
 
The Committee desire that concer ted efforts be made to create 
awareness about the need, availability and benefits of health insurance 
schemes especially in rural areas  through a multi-pronged strategy 
involving the public insurance com panies, the central Government, the 
state Governments and the Panchayati Raj Institutions as well as non-
governmental organizations so that more and more people come forward 
to adopt Health Insurance schemes.” 
 
Ministry of Finance in their Action Taken reply on the above 
recommendation has stated as follows:  
 
“Health being a State s ubject, the participation of State Governments is 
essential for the creation of nece ssary awareness.  Under NRHM, the 
Ministry of Health and Family We lfare has developed a framework for 
formulating Health Insurance Programmes in the country.  This framework 
envisages multi-pronged appr oach involving the public  and private sector 
service providers, the State Gove rnments, NGOs and other community 
groups.  It also calls for developing State-specific and District-specific 
schemes.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
9. The Committee were very well awar e of the various benefits sought 
to be made available to rural masses under the National Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM).  However, in view of th e fact that only 1% of the country’s 
population is covered under the Commer cial Health Insurance Schemes, 
the Committee had felt that the abysma lly low level of awareness about the 
need, availability and benefits of health insurance among the masses was 
one of the important factors responsible for such a limited percentage of 
the population coming under commercial h ealth insurance.  Keeping all 
these aspects in mind, the Committee had aptly recommended that the 
Ministry should chalk out  a multi-pronged strategy to create awareness 

  
 
through the coordinated efforts of various agencies like the Finance 
Ministry, the PSU Insurance Companies, the State Governments, 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, Coopera tives, Self-Help Groups, etc.  The 
Committee felt it unfortunate that the Ministry failed to address the crux of 
the issue.   
 The Committee therefore would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that steps may be taken to create awareness 
amongst the masses about the need, availa bility and benefits of Health 
Insurance Schemes throughout the country.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) – Lack of Profitability  
 10. The Committee in their 11 th Report had recommended the following 
with regard to the Lack of Profitability of Health Insurance schemes in the 
country. 
“The Committee note that most health  insurance schemes offered by 
public sector insurance companies ar e loss-making primarily due to their 
inability to insure the younger people who are relatively free from major 
diseases. Besides this, the absence of proper re-insurance facility for 
health insurance is also adversely affecting the confidence of insurance 
companies to underwrite health covers  on a large scale. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that public sector insurance companies need to take 
concerted steps to motivate and educat e the young people to take health 
insurance policies in their own inte rest. The Committee desire that the 
Government and the regulator, after due consultation, prescribe viable 
targets of health coverage to the insu rance companies, both in the public 
and private sector, and introduce incentiv es linked to their performance in 
fulfilling those targets. 
  
The Committee also desire that t he Government may give special 
attention and take time-bound action to set up a viable re-insurance 
mechanism for health insurance.” 
 
 Ministry of Finance in their Action Taken reply on the above 
recommendation has stated as follows:  
 
“For developing a balanced and viable por tfolio, it is the need of the hour 
that the insurers devise innovative pr oducts.  The Public Sector Insurance 
Companies have realized the necessity of developing long-term policies 
for the young people in order to address the adverse claim ratio of the 
health portfolio.  Besides this the insurance companies are going for 
infallible reinsurance programmes in order to minimize the financial risks.” 

  
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
11. In view of the fact  that most Health Insurance Schemes offered by 
Public Sector Insurance Companies were loss making primarily due to their 
inability to insure the younger peopl e who are relatively free from major 
diseases, the Committee had recommended that the Public Sector 
Insurance Companies need to take concerted steps to motivate and 
educate the young people to take health  insurance policies in their own 
interest.  They had also recommended that the Government and the IRDA, 
after due consultation, should prescribe viable targets of health coverage 
to the insurance companies and in troduce incentives linked to their 
performance in fulfilling those target s.  The Committee deprecate the reply 
of the Government, which has merely informed them about the realization 
by Public Sector Insurance Companies of the necessity for developing long 
term policies for younger people and does not contain any concrete steps 
taken with regard to their recommendations.  Taking strong exception to 
the casual approach of the Ministry in dealing with their recommendations, 
the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
public sector insurance companies should devise attractive policies for 
younger people so as to address the ad verse claim ratio of the Health 
Portfolio.  The Committee would also li ke that the Ministry, in consultation 
with IRDA, should prescribe viable targets of health coverage to the 
Insurance Companies and ensure their strict compliance.   
 
On their recommendation concerning setting up of a viable 
reinsurance mechanism for Health Insurance, the Committee note that the 
Ministry in their reply have stated that the Insurance Companies are going 
for infallible reinsurance programmes in  order to minimize financial risks.  
The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the details of infallible 
reinsurance programmes and their impact  in minimizing the financial risks 
of the insurance companies. 

  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) – Poverty and need for subsidy  
12. The Committee in their 11 th Report had recommended the following with 
regard to the need for subsidy in Health Insurance premium for the poor in the 
country. 
 
“The Committee note that affording the premium of health insurance 
schemes is beyond the economic capacity of people living below the 
poverty line as well as for a large section of the population living just 
above the poverty line. The Committee also note that the only way to 
ensure health insurance cover for the poor is through subsidy to be 
provided by the Government to make the premium affordable for the poor. 
The only subsidized scheme at present is the Universal Health Insurance 
Scheme launched in 2003 and it has been confined exclusively to the BPL 
segments in 2004 with enhanced subsidy. 
 
The Committee desire that subsid y for the poor and BPL segments 
be made available to all existing health insurance schemes and not 
restricted only to Universal Health Insurance Scheme. Further, the 
Committee desire that a system of differential subsidy for the poor and the 
BPL segments may be introduced acro ss the board for health insurance 
schemes and service tax for providin g health insurance may be abolished 
to increase its affordability.” 
 
 Ministry of Finance in their Action Taken reply on the above 
recommendation has stated as follows:  
  
“Under UHIS differential subsidy is being provided and this scheme is also 
exempted from service ta x.  Recently Ministry  of H&FW has issued 
guidelines for developing the insurance schemes according to which the 
State Governments have been advised to formulate insurance schemes 
for rural people based on the principle of  public-private participation.  For 
BPL families, the Ministry of H&FW has proposed providing subsidy to the 
extent of 75% of the pr emium while the remaining premium may be borne 
by the State Government and/ or the beneficiary.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee were fully aware that UHIS is the only subsidized 
commercial health insurance scheme current ly in operation.  In view of the 
fact that UHIS is restri cted to BPL segments and a large number of poor 
people just above BPL were neither able  to take advantage of this scheme 
nor in a position to pay premium for other Health Insurance Schemes, the 

  
 
Committee had desired that a system of differential subsidy for the poor 
and BPL segments may be introduced across the board for UHIS and other 
health insurance schemes because  there is a large population in the 
country who are really poor but techni cally – for the deficiency in the 
criteria of measurement of poverty line – belong to Above Poverty Line 
(APL) category or who are for some reason or other not included in BPL 
but are in fact poor who need health  insurance. Apart from this, the 
Committee had also recommended that service tax for providing health 
insurance schemes should be abolished to increase its affordability .  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry has not taken any action 
on the above recommendations of the Committee nor have they proffered 
any explanation for not considering the same.  The Committee therefore 
reiterate their recommendations and would like the Ministry to take 
concrete action on them with due promptitude.  
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) – Lack of Data  
 The Committee note that lack of adequate data on morbidity, demographic 
groups and diseases etc., is a major hi ndrance in formulating and designing new 
products in health insurance and thus affect the development and progress of 
health insurance in the country.  The Co mmittee are pleased to note that a sub-
committee constituted under the IRDA’s  Internal Working Group on health 
insurance with the objective, inter-alia, `of drawing up a road map for establishing 
a data repository and evaluating the adequacy of data elements already finalized’ 
has already submitted its recommendations. 
  
The Committee desire that the recomm endations made by this Committee 
be examined in its entirety and steps taken for their expeditious implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The report of the sub-committee consti tuted by IRDA’s Internal Working 
Group on health insurance data has been submitted to the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and the Mini stry of Finance.  The Tariff Advisory Committee has 
been identified as the custodi an of the data repository.  Data for the years 2002-
03 and 2003-04 have already be en collected from the Third Party Administrators 
(who service the Health Insurance policie s of the Insurance Companies) and the 
same is being analyzed by the Tariff Advisory Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. No. 
12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September, 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) – Lack of Adequate Health Infrastructure 
 
 The Committee note that two factor s that discourage a majority of 
potential customers from buy ing health insurance cover are (i) lack of adequate 
health care infrastructure, especially in rural areas where 75% of the country’s 
population lives, and (ii) t he consequent inaccessibility to health care for a 
majority of the population. Viewed in this context, the Committee feel that 
strengthening of the existing infrastructure for providing health care to the rural 
masses is of paramount importance. As efforts of the Government alone are not 
bringing the desired impact, the Committee feel that there is a need to involve the 
private and corporate sector in health infrastructure development and they should 
be provided with suitable incentives fo r this purpose. Further, the Committee 
desire that the possibility of channelis ing investments by public insurance 
companies to rural as well as urban heal th infrastructure be seriously examined, 

  
 
and necessary policy level initiatives and regulatory changes  be effected to 
facilitate such investments. 
  
The Committee are also aware of t he severe shortage  of manpower 
resources in the public health care system especially in the rural areas. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of H ealth & Family Welfare should take 
necessary steps to meet the huge shortfall of medical personnel and introduce 
stringent measures to enhance efficiency in health care delivery. 
  
The Committee further desire that Governments of all States and Union 
Territories may be requested to allot land for development of health infrastructure 
in rural areas at concessional ra tes to private bodies/Self-help Groups/ 
cooperatives etc. Soft loans from Life In surance Corporation of India, Banks and 
other financial instit utions should be made  available to these bodies for creation 
of rural health infrastructure.  The Committee further desire that enhanced 
budgetary support for health infrastructure should also be made available. 
  
Chairman, IRDA, had suggested befor e the Committee, a system where 
by the amount that is pai d by the insurance compani es for treatment of the 
insured should go to a pool in  that particular hospital  and the creation of a pool 
of this money for treating the insured persons.  The Committee desired that the 
suggestion should be studied in- depth and implemented to improve the 
availability of health service providers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on September, 2005, the number of Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs 
functioning in the country are 146026, 23236 and 3346 re spectively.  As per 
population norms 2001, the shor tfall in the number of S ub-Centres in the country 
is 19269, that of PHCs is 4337 and CHCs is 3206. 
 
 As far as manpower is concerned, doctors at PH Cs in position are 20308 
with shortfall of 1004 against sanctioned po sts of 24476 and 2482  vacant posts.  
The number of specialists at CHCs in position is 3550 against the sanctioned 
number of posts of 7582, 3538 vacant pos ts and shortage of 6110 posts as on 
September, 2005. 
 
Human Resource Management is a gr eat challenge under NRHM.  In 
order to make the Public Health Delive ry System fully f unctional, the NRHM 
seeks to provide for additional manpower  as well as upgradat ion of the quality 
of existing manpower.  500,000 ASHAs are to be selected and trained for 
deployment in every village of the sele cted States. Each Health Sub-Centre 
would   be provided with one additional AN M.  Similarly, to make the PHCs 
functional on round-the-clock basis, tw o additional Staff Nurses are being 
provided.  The CHCs are al so being brought on a par wi th Indian Public Health 
Standards (IPHS), which would mean sancti oning of four additi onal Specialists 

  
 
under NRHM.   The States are authorized to appoint ANMS & Specialists on 
contractual basis under the Reproductive  and Child Health [RCH] programme.  
States like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Prades h, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar 
have made good progress in that area.   
  
 It is estimated that there would be a shortfall of 84,000 staff nurses, 
2,00,000 ANMs and 5000 to 7000 Specialists  in each of the areas of the 
specialization like anesthesia, obste trics and gynaecology, paediatrics etc. 
Since the success of the Mission would ultimately depend on the success of 
efforts to mobilize additional manpower , it is necessary that the States 
undertake advance planning for setting-up / revamping ANM training schools, 
nursing colleges, setting up medical co lleges and increasi ng the seats of 
medical colleges particularly in those specialties where the needs are most 
acute.  Besides, it would also be necessary to impart specia lized abilities like 
administration of anesthesia through multi-skilling of do ctors. With the help of 
Medical Colleges and Premiu m Institutes / Organizations, the Government of 
India is helping States organize Int egrated Skill Devel opment Programmes, 
including administration of anesthesia , Skilled Birth attendance etc.  These 
measures would certainly ease the m anpower position in the long run. 
However, in the short run, the availabili ty of the health pr ofessionals could be 
improved by measures like rational transfer and posting policy, district cadre of 
doctors, and accountability through incr eased community control. Increasing 
the age of retirement on the condition t hat the additional years would be spent 
in the rural areas and incentives for rura l postings would also help to improve 
the availability.  
 
Block posting of doctors could be another solution to improve the 
situation.  For this pur pose, the States may consid er appointing a Chief Block 
Medical Officer with full powers to deploy doctors in various health facilities 
within his jurisdiction.   
 
Lack of managerial support at various le vels is one of the reasons for 
the poor performance of the public health delivery system.   For the high focus 
States under NRHM, Programme Man agement Units (PMUs) comprising 
professionals like MBAs, Finance Managers and Charte red Accountants etc at 
the State and District levels have been provided for under the RCH 
Programme.   This Ministry has helped the States to put in place 700 such 
professionals who are helping them  in management, implementation, 
monitoring and timely submission of Util ization Certificates. The other States 
also have the flexibility to set up such  units using the 6% management cost 
provided under the Reproductive and Child Health Prog ramme i.e. RCH-II.    In 
fact, it is proposed to provide 6% of the entire NRHM for meeting administrative 
costs.   
 
 Allotment of land on concessional rates and loans to private sectors is 
already in practice in urban areas.  It could be replicat ed in rural areas also, as 

  
 
shortfall of manpower in private sector  exists too.  The States would be 
requested in this regard. 
 
The suggestion of Chairman, IRDA to  utilize the amount  received from 
Insurance agencies for improving the public system is acknowledged and as and 
when required the suitable decision would be ta ken in this regard.  In this regard, 
it is mentioned that many State Gove rnment have permitted the hospitals to 
utilize the user charges received from the patients. 
 
[Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Health O.M. No. 
N.23011/37/2005-Ply/HI dated 23rd November 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) – Lack of Proper Regulations in the 
Health Sector 
 
 The Committee note that the unregulat ed mushrooming of health service 
providers across the country has resulted in escalation of health care prices, 
undependable and deteriorating qual ity of health care and rampant instances of 
under-treatment and over-treatment by doctors and hospitals / nursing homes. All 
these phenomena, besides being detrimental to the medical and financial welfare 
of the patients, also inhibit the healthy growth of health insurance sector. The 
Committee would like to emphasize th e imperative need for fixation of 
standardized and properly gr aded pricing, evolution of uniform treatment 
protocols and health service provider  should be made accountable for the 
successful functioning and hea lthy growth of health insurance sector in the 
country. 
  
The Committee, therefore, desi re that adequate steps be taken for 
evolving a comprehensive and stringent r egulatory framework to ensure – (i) 
mandatory registration and credible accreditation of health care service providers 
like hospitals, nursing homes and clinics; (ii) the establishm ent of a standard 
clinical protocol for al l treatments; and (iii) a syst ematized, standardized and 
graded pricing for medical procedures. Th e regulatory framew ork should also 
ensure that violations of such norms be made punishable as criminal offences. 
Further, the feasibility of establishing a regulatory body to oversee all these 
aspects be explored and progress thereof reported back to this Committee within 
a period of not more than 6 m onths from the date of presentation of this report to 
Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government is considering bri nging forward a Bill viz. “Clinical 
Establishments [Registration and Regula tion] Bill, 2006” for compulsory 
registration of various health care service providers like hospitals, nursing homes 
and clinics.  The Bill will also have provisions for prescribing minimum standards 
for various categories of health care service providers.  The Bill also provides for 

  
 
imposition of find on organiza tions not complying with the provisions of the 
legislation. 
 
In regard to accreditation, it has been fe lt that accreditation of health care 
service providers needs to be left to va rious accrediting bodies, which would not 
be under the control of t he Government.  There can be more than one such 
accrediting bodies functioning simultaneou sly.  The accreditation will be purely 
voluntary.  In this regard National  Accreditation Boar d for Hospitals and 
Healthcare Providers [NABH] has come up with a uniform standard for the 
hospitals throughout the country.  NABH is a constituent Board of Quality Council 
of India [QCI].  It has reportedly adopted its standards and accr editation process 
in line with worldwide accr editation practices.  The formal launch of accreditation 
was announced in February 2006.  About 20 major hospitals were reported to be 
undergoing accreditation evaluation. 
 
Other organizations like Indian Co nfederation for Health Care 
Accreditation [ICHA] have also started the process of accreditation of health 
institutions.  Financial rating organizati ons like ICRA have also started rating 
Hospitals.  
 
Clinical establishment and a ccreditation is being proc essed in Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfar e.  Under NRHM, Indian Public Health Standards 
(IPHS) for public health est ablishments such as district hospital, sub-divisional 
hospital, PHCs, CHCs and Sub-centres ha ve been formulated.  The funds have 
also been released for upgrading CHCs to IPHS under NRHM. 
 
[Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Health O.M. No. 
N.23011/37/2005-Ply/HI dated 23rd November 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) – Lack of Product Variety 
 
 The Committee have been informed that  while there are a variety of 
products in terms of the sum insured and premium costs, there is a serious lack 
of variety of health insurance products in terms of flexibility to cater to the specific 
needs of different segments of the populati on. They are constrained to note that 
all the health schemes currently offered by the public sector  general insurance 
companies are standard polic ies covering hospitaliza tion only.  The Committee 
are of the view that ther e is an imperative need to introduce long term health 
insurance products, covering out-patient  care, maternity care, pre-existing 
diseases, suitable products for the aged, abandoned women, widows, physically 
and mentally challenged, children and the rural poor.   The Committee, therefore, 
desire that in addition to the existing range of standard health insurance 
schemes, the Government and the public insurance companies should introduce 
a host of flexible and client-oriented health insurance schemes including long 
term health insurance products, maternity and out-patient covers, specific 
schemes for the abandoned women, widows, physically and mentally challenged 
and children. The Committee also desire that feasib ility of formulating a 

  
 
compulsory health insurance scheme for senior citizens as recommended by a 
sub-Committee of IRDA be examined and steps be taken with due promptitude to 
evolve such a scheme. Steps may also be initiated to include pre-existing 
diseases in all health schemes within a reasonable period after scheme initiation, 
incorporating in all such  schemes some measure of subsidy as deemed 
appropriate and required to enabl e the less privileged sections of society to 
afford the schemes. 
  
The Committee also note that covers for most major diseases are beyond 
the economic means of the poor. The Committee desire that the Government 
and public sector companies should evolve a mechanism to make such schemes 
affordable to the poor.  The Committee recommend that one or two hospitals in 
each district should be earmarked for th e treatment of major diseases like 
cancer, AIDS, organ transplants, Bypa ss surgery etc.  and Central / State 
Governments should lend adequate budgetary support   to these hospitals so as 
to enable the poor to get themselves treated. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Commercial viability of health insurance products is a major hurdle in the 
introduction of low premium based insurance schemes.  Companies have 
introduced health insurance products cove ring existing diseases in tailor made 
group polices and individual policies whic h are periodically renewed.  With the 
opening of insurance sector in 2001, produc t diversification is taking roots, 
though at a lesser pace in the health sect or.  The companies are alive to the 
need for long term health insurance produc ts with coverage starting at a younger 
age, products covering critical illnesse s and special schemes for the vulnerable 
sections like abandoned women widows, physically and mentally challenged 
children, and senior citizens. 
 
Copies of the report of the Committee of IRDA on ‘Product innovations in 
Health Insurance’ have bee n circulated to all insurers.  The report was also 
discussed in the General Insurance Co uncil.  IRDA has been encouraging 
insurers to innovate on the existing Health Insurance products and come out with 
products and schemes that would cater to the senior citizens, the poor and other 
vulnerable sections. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. 
No. 12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) – Stand Alone Health Insurance Company 
 
 In a welfare state like Indi a, it is the responsibility of the State to take care 
of the health of the na tion. But the existing public heal th infrastructure is able to 
cater to only a very small section of t he population. Supplem enting the existing 
health system which needs rapid and large-scale improvement and 
modernization, an effective Health Insur ance System appropriate to the country 
needs to be built up as early as possible.  
 
 More and more people with some kind of health insurance should be the 
goal to be achieved. While Governm ent employees and organized sector 
employees are covered under Central Go vernment Health Scheme (CGHS), 
Employee’s State Insurance Scheme (ESI S), as well as employer provided 
schemes like in the army, railways and se veral public sector undertakings efforts 
have been made to cover the rest of the populace with commercial health 
schemes. The Committee, however, note t hat only about 10% of the country’s 
one billion plus population comes under all these forms of health cover and of 
this, only about 10%, meaning  about 1% of the populat ion are covered under 
commercial health insurance. 
 
 The Committee feel that one of the primary reasons for limited spread of 
health insurance in the country is the la ck of focus on this segment by insurance 
companies, especially the public sect or general insurance companies who 
enjoyed a monopoly till recent ly and still continue to enj oy 82% of the market 
amongst themselves.  Besides the above, tariff pricing of certain general 
insurance segments like fire, motor, engineering etc. has also adversely affected 
the growth of health insurance into  an independent and sustainable business, 
forcing insurance companies to treat it  as a miscellaneous portfolio and as an 
accommodation business for more profitable tariffed portfolios like fire and other 
property insurances. The Committee hav e been informed that a separate stand-
alone company for promoting the health insurance would ce rtainly help in giving 
the due focus and in increasing the coverage, more particularly in the rural areas. 
The Committee, however, find that the emergence of st and-alone health 
insurance companies is hindered by a number of hurdles. 
 
 The Committee note that the Insu rance Regulatory and Development 
Authority has made certain recommendat ions regarding stand-alone health 
insurance companies. The same may be scr utinized keeping in view that the 
public sector has been and can play a very  important role in this regard.  Stand-
alone health insurance companies in t he Public Sector with model performance 

  
 
can encourage the Private Se ctor to perform accordingly keeping in view the 
issue of affordability of large secti ons of the needy popul ation and thus help 
create a conducive environment for spread of health insurance business. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Health insurance works best when services are available in the remote 
corners and when poor household  can actually exercise choice.  Thus the basic 
reason for limited spread of health insurance in the country is non-availability of 
proper health infrastructure.  Lack of medical history of the insured population, 
absence of standardization of hospitals,  inadequate utilization of Government 
hospitals etc. are the other  bottlenecks coming in the way of implementation of 
any health insurance programme in the country.  Government of India (Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare) has l aunched the NRHM, which seeks to provide 
accessible, affordable and quality health care to the rural population specially the 
vulnerable sections of t he society.  The mission recognizes that in order to 
reduce the out-of-pocket expenditure of the rural poor, there is an imperative 
need for setting up effective risk pooling sys tems.  The mission also emphasizes 
the need for State specific, community oriented innovative and flexible insurance 
policies.  While the first priority of the Mission is to put the enabling public health 
infrastructure in place, various innovat ive models would be pilot tested to assess 
their utility. 
 
 Thought the Insurance Act, 1938 and the IRDA Act, 1999 prescribe that 
the regulator would encourage the setting up of health insurance business on a 
standalone basis, not much interest has been shown by the industry in setting up 
exclusive health insurance companies.  IRDA has suggested some amendments 
in the Insurance Act 1938 to provide for a differential capital for setting up of 
Stand Alone Health Insuranc e Company with the sole objective of promoting 
health insurance business in India.  Government has accepted this 
recommendation and is considering proposing amendments in the Insurance Act 
accordingly. 
 
 Due to lack of entrants as standal one health insurance companies, the 
Authority has been encouraging both life and general insurance companies, to 
provide rider policies offering health covers.  It is gratifying to  note that the new 
companies have seized this opportunity and many of them have gone in for 
riders, offering a variety of health in surance products.  In addition, with the 
introduction of Third Party Administrato rs, the cashless hospitalization covers 
have been introduced for the first time in India. 
 
 Theoretically, a Stand Alone Health Insurance Company may be able to 
approach the issue in a better manner as t he organizational stru cture of such a 
company can be tailor made to suit the requirements of health insurance needs 
of the population.  The St ar Health and Allied Insur ance Company is the first 
stand-alone health insurance company, in the private sector, in India, which has 

  
 
been set up very recently with a capital of Rs. 100 crores, the minimum capital 
prescribed for general insurance compani es by the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Regulations, for registration of companies. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. No. 
12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) – Universal Health insurance scheme 
 
 The Committee note that Universa l Health Insurance Scheme was 
introduced by the Government in 2003 with a subsidy component for people 
living below poverty line.  The subsid y was subsequently enhanced in 2004 and 
the scheme was confined to the BPL segment of the population only, and in spite 
of it, the scheme failed to make much he adway. In view of the fact that the 
coverage of non BPL families was much lar ger than that of t he BPL families in 
the original version of t he scheme, the Committee feel  that the scheme ought to 
have been continued for the non-BPL  families as well, so as to achieve the twin 
objective of making this scheme more attractive to the BPL segment and to cover 
a larger segment of the poor population under the health insurance.  Besides the 
above, Committee note that another cause of limited success of Universal Health 
Insurance Scheme has been incomplete identification of BPL families. The 
Committee highly deplore the slipshod ma nner in which a l audable scheme like 
U.H.I.S has been implemented. The Committee desire that an exercise to identify 
BPL families should be initiated imm ediately and the entire exercise be 
completed within a specific time-fra me and the scheme should also be made 
applicable to lower middle class and the pe ople who are just above the Poverty 
Line. 
  
 The Committee also note that in the absence of any targets set for the 
PSU insurers in terms of the number of covers sold, the insurance companies did 
not make concerted efforts to cover larger chunks of the popul ation under health 
insurance schemes.  The Committee de sire that Government should set 
ambitious targets for the insurance companies and closely monitor their 
performance so that they strictly comply with the targets laid.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Universal Health Insurance Scheme (UHIS) was origin ally launched in 
July 2003 with a premium subsidy of Rs . 100 per family BPL families.  The 
Government of India felt that the access to medical care  is not easily available to 
the poor and the ongoi ng UHIS scheme was considered skewed in favour of the 
non-poor.  As a result, only a very small number of families below poverty line 
were covered.  Further, the BPL familie s avoid the scheme due to their inability 
pay even the very low rates of premiums  and hence, it was considered that the 
ongoing scheme may not be successful.  Keepi ng these in view, it was decided 
to make the scheme exclusively for the families below the poverty line.  

  
 
Accordingly, in 2004-05, the Scheme was redesigned restrictin g it to the BPL 
families only with an increase in subsidy to Rs. 200/- for an individual, Rs. 300/- 
for a family of 5 and Rs. 400/- for a family of 7 persons. 
 
 Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare (MoHFW) sponsored NRHM is 
trying to carry out ‘architectural correct ion’ in the basic health care delivery 
system in order to meet people’s needs.  Exploring new health care financing 
mechanism and developing credible co mmunity based health insurance 
schemes; MoHFW has suggested the following framework/steps for developing a 
workable health insurance programme. 
 
(i) To develop a range of products based on needs and specific 
requirements of the State/District ra ther than having a scheme at 
national level. 
(ii) To have service providers fr om the Government and non-government 
sectors. 
(iii) To outsource the administration of the scheme to a professional body, 
e.g., a TPA or an NGO. 
(iv) To provide for GOI support in the form of subsidy for BPL and also 
some subsidy for just above BPL. 
(v) To fund the scheme from the Nati onal Rural Health Mission (NRHM). 
(vi) To provide GOI support for capaci ty building, protecting rights of poor 
households and ensuring service guarantees. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. No. 
12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) – Claims Management & Third Party 
Administrator System 
 
 The Committee note that the Third Pa rty Administrators system had been 
introduced by all public  sector insurance companies to smoothen claims 
management and to facilitate cash-less se ttlement of medical bills for the 
insured. The Committee, however, ar e dismayed that a large number of 
complaints have been emanating from the insuring public on the procedure of 
claims management and claims disposal an d that there are serious malpractices 
involved in claims disbursement by pub lic sector insurance companies. The 
Committee are also constrained to observe  that an additional burden has been 
thrust upon the insured by increasing the pr emium costs by 6% to meet the cost 
of service rendered by TPAs. 
 
 The Committee regret to note that t he Third Party Administrators in the 
Country have been following unethical practices in co llusion with health service 
providers and insurance companies in settl ement of claims. They also lack the 
competence and necessary infrastructure to fulfill the role and functions expected 

  
 
of them.  They also note that complain ts relating to clai m settlements have 
increased considerably after the introduction of the TPA System. 
 
 In view of a plethora of complaints against TPAs and the increase in cost 
of premium as also claim costs, the Co mmittee feel that a comprehensive review 
of TPA system is imperative. The Committee note that a sub-committee of 
IRDA’s Internal Working Group on Health Insurance has, inter-alia, 
recommended that the insurance companies should take certain concrete steps 
to provide clear guidelines to enable TPAs to effectively manage and settle 
claims. The Committee desire that the above recommendation made by the sub-
committee be examined in all its ramifi cations and implemented so as to 
smoothen the system of claims management and facilitate cashless settlement of 
medical bills of the insured within a set time-frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The system of Third Party Administrato rs (TPA) in health insurance sector 
was started in the year 2002.  It is still in  its infancy.  Vari ous teething problems 
are receiving the attention of IRDA and the insurance companies.  The insurance 
companies, under the explicit guidelines of IRDA and with the cooperation from 
the various service providers, are trying to streamline the working of TPAs to 
facilitate cash less settlement of claims. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. No. 
12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) – Lack of Coordination 
 The Committee note that various insu rance schemes viz. the Employee’s 
State Insurance Schemes, the Central Government Health Scheme and other 
Commercial Health Insurance schemes ar e being operated by three different 
Ministries viz. the Ministry of Labour, Mi nistry of Health & Family Welfare and 
Ministry of Finance respectively and t here is no coordinati on amongst the three 
Ministries as also the IRDA in policy planning, pr ogramme implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation with regard to commercial health insurance thereby 
depriving the business of the much needed synergy which can evolve only 
through synchronization of individual efforts. 
  
 The Committee further note that the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
has proposed, through the draft National P harmaceutical Policy, to set up a new 
health insurance scheme – Rashtriya Sw asthya Bima Yojana – for the poor 
which will be funded through a 2% health ce ss.  While lauding the proposal, the 
Committee feel that an integrated approa ch involving all the above agencies 
needs to be evolved by the Government for the successful implementation of 
Health Insurance Schemes. 
  
 The Committee desire that a mechani sm for regular cross-consultation 
and coordination among thes e agencies should be put in  place to enhance the 
synchronization of efforts to promote heal th insurance in the country.  The 
Committee further desire that a pilot health insurance scheme involving the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,  Ministry of Financ e, IRDA and Public 
Sector Insurance Companies may be ev olved and launched within a specific 
time-frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has developed a framework for 
developing health insurance programmes in the country. Instructions have 
already been issued to all the State Gove rnments to develop innovative health 
insurance products.  This is the outcome  of a consultative process in which 
Ministry of Finance, Public Sector In surance Companies and State Governments 
actively participated.  Moreover, an Inter-disciplinary Committee has been formed 
under NRHM to monitor the progress periodically. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. No. 
12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September, 2006] 
 

  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) – Lack of Awareness 
 
 The Committee are constrained to observe that the level of public 
awareness about the need, availability and  benefits of health insurance in the 
country is still very low despite the fact  that public sector general insurance 
companies have been operating in the field of health insurance for nearly two 
decades, beginning from 1986. Though efforts have been made at the Finance 
Minister and Finance Secr etary level to solicit the cooperation of State 
Governments in creating awareness amongst masses and about the need and 
importance of health insurance, they have not yielded the desired result. 
 
The Committee desire that concerted efforts be made to create awareness 
about the need, availability and benefits of  health insurance schemes especially 
in rural areas through a multi-pronged strategy involving the public insurance 
companies, the central Government, t he state Governments and the Panchayati 
Raj Institutions as well as non-governm ental organizations so that more and 
more people come forward to adopt Health Insurance schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Health being a State subject, the participation of State Governments is 
essential for the creation of necessary awareness.  Under NRHM, the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare has developed a framework for fo rmulating Health 
Insurance Programmes in t he country.  This framework envisages multi-pronged 
approach involving the public and private sector servic e providers, the State 
Governments, NGOs and other community groups.  It also calls for developing 
State-specific and District-specific schemes 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. 
No. 12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) – Lack of Profitability  
 
The Committee note that most health insurance schemes offered by public 
sector insurance companies are loss-ma king primarily due to their inability to 
insure the younger people wh o are relatively free from major diseases. Besides 
this, the absence of proper re-insurance facility for health insurance is also 
adversely affecting the confidence of in surance companies to  underwrite health 
covers on a large scale. The Committee, therefore, feel that public sector 
insurance companies need to take concer ted steps to motivate and educate the 
young people to take health insurance policies in their own interest. The 
Committee desire that the Government and the regulator, after due consultation, 
prescribe viable targets of health cover age to the insurance companies, both in 
the public and private sector, and introduce incentives linked to their performance 
in fulfilling those targets. 
  

  
 
The Committee also desire that the Government may give special 
attention and take time-bound action to se t up a viable re-ins urance mechanism 
for health insurance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For developing a balanced and viable portfolio, it is the need of the hour 
that the insurers devise innovative produ cts.  The Public Sector Insurance 
Companies have realized the necessity of  developing long-term policies for the 
young people in order to address the adverse  claim ratio of the health portfolio.  
Besides this the insurance companies  are going for infallible reinsurance 
programmes in order to minimize the financial risks. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. 
No. 12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) – Poverty and need for Subsidy 
 
 The Committee note that affordi ng the premium of health insurance 
schemes is beyond the economic capacity of people living below the poverty line 
as well as for a large section of the popul ation living just above the poverty line. 
The Committee also note that the only way to ensure health insurance cover for 
the poor is through subsidy to be provid ed by the Government to make the 
premium affordable for the poor. The only subsidized scheme at present is the 
Universal Health Insurance Scheme la unched in 2003 and it has been confined 
exclusively to the BPL segments in 2004 with enhanced subsidy. 
 
 The Committee desire that subsidy for the poor and BPL segments be 
made available to all existing health insurance schemes and not restricted only to 
Universal Health Insurance Scheme. Further, the Committ ee desire that a 
system of differential subsidy for the poor and the BPL segments may be 
introduced across the board for health in surance schemes and service tax for 
providing health insurance may be abolished to increase its affordability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under UHIS deferential subsidy is bei ng provided and this scheme is also 
exempted from service tax.  Recently Ministry of H&FW has issued guidelines for 
developing the insurance schemes accord ing to which the State Governments 
have been advised to formulate insurance schemes for rural people based on the 
principle of public-private participation.  For BPL families, the Ministry of H&FW 
has proposed providing subsidy to the ext ent of 75% of the premium while the 
remaining premium may be borne by the State Government and/ or the 
beneficiary. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. 
No. 12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 

  
 
CHAPTER – V  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) – Rural Penetration 
 
 As more than 68 % of India’s population still live in rural area, there is no 
denying the fact that rural penetration of health insurance need to be accorded 
utmost priority. The Committee, however , note with displeasure that despite 
having a huge network of branches in all district headquarters and huge strength 
of agents, the public sect or insurance companies have not been able to sell 
health insurance into the rural and semi-urban areas in a big way. The 
Committee are further constrained to observe that there is no regulation requiring 
the insurance companies to have a cert ain minimum percentage of their total 
business to be carried out in the rural health insurance portfolio. The Committee 
are of the considered view that specific regulations should be introduced to make 
it mandatory for the insurance companies, both in the public and private sector, 
to have a fixed percentage of their entir e business done in the rural health 
insurance segment with stri ngent penalties prescribed for failure to meet such 
obligations.  
 
The Committee also recommend that appropriate incentives should be 
given to the Indian operat ors, preferably the P ublic Sector Insurance 
Undertakings, to cater to the urgent nee ds of the Health Insurance Sector, 
particularly, in favour of the weaker sections and the Rural areas and also of the 
common man through innovative, attractive and purposeful schemes. 
 
The Committee also note with concern, the lack of involvement of NGOs 
and other local institutions in the promotion of health  insurance among the poor 
and in the rural segments. The Committee apprec iate the initiative of the IRDA in 
introducing and notifying the Micro-insu rance Regulations, 2005 which will 
facilitate the involvement of NGOs, self-help groups and micro-finance 
institutions in selling health cover to  the rural areas. The Committee desire that 
the Government should take adequate steps to create awareness about the 
advantages under the new regulations and come up with a comprehensive action 
plan for capacity- building and promotion of such institutions in rural areas. 
 
The Committee also commend the decision of the IRDA’s Internal Working 
Group on Health Insurance to set up a s eparate – ‘Rural Health’ subgroup aimed 
at increased understanding of  the barriers to providing health insurance to the 
rural poor and to create a roadmap for overcoming such barriers.  The 
Committee desire that expeditious st eps may be taken for setting up of a 
separate ‘Rural Health’ subgroup. 

  
 
They also desire to see the development of a host of micro-health 
insurance products suited to local needs by  the insurance companies in a time-
bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Rural Health Insurance subgroup proposed by the Committee on 
product innovation and Health Insurance has already been set up and the group 
has had three meetings so far.  It is expec ted that the group will finalize its report 
within 2 to 3 months from now.  On the matter of obligations of insurers regarding 
the rural and social sector s, IRDA shall look into the suggestion of fixing a 
minimum percentage of business to be done by insurers in the Rural Health 
Insurance portfolio at the time of formulating comprehensive regulations for 
Health Insurance. 
 
Under UHIS the weaker sections gets s ubsidized health insurance.  The 
amount of subsidy varies according to t he size of the family.  For an individual 
insurer the amount of subsidy is Rs. 200, for a family of 5 members the amount 
of subsidy is Rs. 300 and for a family of 7 members the amount of subsidy is Rs. 
400.  Under the proposed risk-pooling schem e of Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare the GOI may bear 75% of the premium cost for covering poor people. 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Insurance Division O.M. 
No. 12013/1/2006-Ins. IV dated 25th September 2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI: RUPCHAND PAL 
_______, 2007  CHAIRMAN, 
           …. COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  

  
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 18 th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON  19th MARCH, 2007 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
5. Smt. Praneet Kaur 
6. Shri Mohan Rawale 
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
9. Shri Shahid Siddiqui 
10. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandari 
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2. Shri N. C. G upta Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report on “Action taken 
by the Government on the reco mmendations contained in the 11 th Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha) on Health Insurance – A 
Horizontal Study” with minor modification. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Ch airman to finalise the Report for 
presentation. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

  
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 11 TH REPORT OF COPU (14 TH 
L.S.) ON “HEALTH INSURANCE – A HORIZONTAL STUDY.” 
 
 
I. 
 
Total number of recommendations 12
II. Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted 
by the Government 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4,6,7 and 8) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
4
33.33
III. Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2 and 9) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
3
25
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 5,11 and 12) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
4
33.33
V. Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(vide recommendations at Sl. No. 10) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
1
8.34
 