 
12
C.P.U No. 898  
TWELFTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
POWER GRID CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. – EXTRA EXPENDITURE IN 
CONSTRUCTION OF KISHENPUR - MOGA TRANSMISSION SYSTEM – 
ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURE OF RS. 433.81 CRORE.    
 
(MINISTRY OF POWER) 
 
(Action Taken b y the  Governme nt on the recommendations contained in the 3 rd  
Report of the Committee on Public Undertaki ngs (14th Lok Sabha) on – Power Grid 
Corporation of India Ltd. – Extra expenditure in construction of Kishenpur - Moga 
Transmission system – Additional expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2006 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2006 / Phalguna 1927 (S) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
              P A G E  N O .  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06)    (iii) 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I O N          ( v )  
  
 
CHAPTER I Report                                                                              
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations that have been accepted by 
Government                                           
 
8 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
 
10 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
19 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government are still awaited 
 
23 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 I Minutes of 15 Sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings held on 20th March, 2006. 
 
30 
 II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
COPU (14th Lok Sabha) on Power Grid Corporation of 
India Ltd. – Extra expenditure in construction of 
Kishenpur - Moga Transmissi on system – Additional 
expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore) 
 
32 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Sriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
20 Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. *  Vacant  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph                Secretary 
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri N.C. Gupta  Under Secretary  
4. Shri Girdhari Lal  Sr. Executive Assistant  
 
* Smt. Ambika Soni ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon her appointment as Union 
Minister w.e.f. 29.1.2006  
(iii) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to s ubmit the Report on their behalf, present this      
Twelfth Report on Action Taken by t he Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of t he Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Po wer Grid Corporation of  India Ltd. – Extra 
expenditure in construction of Ki shenpur - Moga Transmission system – 
Additional expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore.  
2. The Third Report of the Committee on Public Undertaki ngs (2004-05) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 24 th March, 2005.  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations cont ained in the Report were received on 
6th March, 2006.  The Committee on Pub lic Undertakings considered and 
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 20 th March, 2006.  The Minutes of the 
sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report (2004-05)  of the Committee is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: RUPCHAND PAL 
20 March,2006 CHAIRMAN, 
29 Phalguna 1927(S)     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
(v)

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Commi ttee deals with the action taken by Government 
on the recommendations cont ained in the Thir d Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 
– Extra expenditure in construction of  Kishenpur - Moga Transmission system – 
Additional expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
24th March, 2005. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received  from Government in respect of all 
the 5 recommendations contai ned in the Report.  These have been categorized 
as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by 
Government  (Chapter II) 
 
 Sl. No. 5           (Total:1) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies. (Chapter III) 
 Sl. Nos. 2 and 3      (Total:2)  
 
(iii) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee. 
(Chapter IV) 
S l .  N o .  1        ( T o t a l : 1 )  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. (Chapter V) 
Sl. No.4       (Total:1 ) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendation contained in Chapter V for which only interim has been 
furnished by the Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
4. The Committee will now deal  with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendation with regard to unc ritical acceptance of loan from 
International Funding Agency in the succeeding paragraphs:- 

 
RECOMMENDATION (SI. NO. 1) 
  
UNCRITICAL ACCEPTANCE OF LOANS FROM INTERNATIONAL FUNDING 
AGENCIES 
 
5. The Committee in their third report have recommended with regard to 
uncritical acceptance of loan from International Funding Agency as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the firs t ever 800 KV Transmission system 
between Kishenpur and Moga was approv ed by the Government in May 
1993 and was scheduled to be completed in March, 1998. But the project 
could be completed only in January, 2001, which resulted in a time over-
run of 34 months. The or iginal approved cost of  the project was Rs. 
417.71 crore in May 1993. But the final executed cost of the project was 
Rs. 857.63 crore in January, 2001. The cost over-run comes to Rs. 439.92 
crore which is 100 percent more than the original approved cost.  
  
The Committee find that various factors such as unreasonable World Bank 
conditionalites/guidelines, lack of adequate initial technical scrutiny having 
been undertaken by the Powe r Grid at the techno-economic evaluation 
stage, lack of prudence in the initial planni ng and estimation, the inability 
of Power Grid to take the World Bank into confidence on various issues 
contributed significantly to the cost and time overruns in implementing the 
project.  
  
The Committee note that the sort of in firmities that were allowed in the 
bidding process while aw arding the contract for completion of KMTS 
project had actually paved the way for a foreign firm, M/ s Cobra of Spain 
to secure the contract. The Committee further note that the foreign firm 
had ‘no previous experience in designing 800 KV class transmission 
systems and also had no experience of executing projects in India’. The 
stipulations in the bidding documents prescribed that the rates for the work 
should be quoted on “per tower” basis and not on the basis of the ‘tower 
weight’ or ‘tonnage’. Thus, the firm whic h had estimated the ‘tower weight’ 
at a ‘lower level’ quot ed a ‘lesser rate per towe r’ and managed to secure 
the contract. The result was repeated failures in optimizing the tower 
designs by the successful bidder and contractual problems, which 
contributed to the significant del ay of about three years in the 
implementation of the proj ect. Despite the fact that Power Grid had the 
experience in the field of designing and building transmission tower, the 
Committee fail to understand as to why the Company could not prevail 
upon the World Bank on the need to clearly define the project scope at the 
bidding stage by suitably taking into consideration, the aspect relating to 
technical scrutiny of ‘tonnage /weight’ and also offer its in-house design for 
acceptance.  
  
The Committee also find that upon the insistence of World Bank, Power 
Grid chose to award both the packages  of KMTS to M/s Cobra of Spain 
though it had no previous experience in designing 800 KV class tower. 
The Committee feel that merely for t he sake of getting loan facilities from 

the International funding agencies, the public sector companies should not 
accept unreasonable terms imposed by them. Uncritical acceptance of 
such loans would compromise our economic interests and the sovereign 
right to get a service established at a cost advantageous to us. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the whole matter of acceptance of 
loans from World Bank and the conditi onalities attached to it, should be 
thoroughly analyzed to safeguard our sovereign economic independence 
and for this purpose, a High-powered Committee of Experts comprising of 
independent minded technocrats and economists should be formed to 
suggest suitable measures. The Committe e feel that such an analysis is 
very much necessary keeping in view the fact that PGCIL had 
implemented several other projects with World Bank funding which had 
also faced the problem of cost over-run / time over-run.”  
  
The Government (Ministry of Power) in their action taken reply on the 
above recommendations have stated as under:- 
“In the audit para no. 15.3.1 of the report of CAG for the year March, 2003 
– Union Government (Commercial) No. 3 of 2004, the Audit observed that 
Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) commissioned (January, 
2001) Kishenpur-Moga Transmission System  (KMTS) having two lines of 
800 kV each at a total cost of Rs . 847.91 crore with an overall cost 
overrun of Rs. 430.20 cror e and time overrun of 34 months.  Out of this, 
delay of 30 months was attributabl e to inexperience of a foreign 
contractor, M/s COBRA, which resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 217.22 
crore.  PGCIL invited (May, 1993) gl obal tenders for pre-qualification for 
two lines of the project and issued (March, 1994) tendered documents for 
price bids to six qualifi ed bidders, out of which five  bidders submitted their 
price bids which were opened in May, 1994.  M/s COBRA emerged lowest 
for both the lines.  Based on pre-qualif ication and evaluat ion of bidders, 
the company had assessed that M/s COBRA would not be able to execute 
both the lines in view of the tower ma terial required for both the lines and 
800 kV lines being constructed for the fi rst time in India.  Accordingly, 
PGCIL recommended award of work for only one line to M/s COBRA, 
which was, however, not accepted by the World Bank.  So, contracts for 
construction of both the lines were awarded to M/s COBRA in February, 
1995 with the completion schedule of 39 mo nths i.e. by May, 1998.  Audit 
observed that M/s COBRA had no experie nce of projects of 800 kV lines 
and had passed the pre-qualification and bid evaluation stage because no 
technical scrutiny was made by the Company with respect to weight of the 
tower.  Consequently, there were repeated failures in design and testing of 
towers, resulting in avoidable delay  of 23 months.  Further, due to 
increase in weight of the tested towers upto 46% over the estimated 
weight, M/s COBRA demanded  compensation for the increase in cost, 
which led to delay of 7 months.  This resulted in total avoidable delay of 30 
months in completion of KMTS, which increased the project cost by Rs. 
217.22 crore on account of interest on borrowed funds and escalation in 
price including exchange rate variation.   Audit also observed that Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) while revi ewing the cost an d time overrun had 
inter alia observed (July, 2001) that  original design of the firm was 
substantially below the required le vel and the firm passed the pre-

qualification stage because no technical scrutiny regarding design of the 
towers was undertaken by the Company.  Abnormal increase in the weight 
of the tested towers was considered by the CEA as the main reason for 
failure in design.   
  
PGCIL’s response, in brief, to the above audit para was that the project 
was funded by the World Bank. For the pre-qualification in the above 
mentioned project, experience of construction of 400 kV (and not 800 kV) 
transmission line was kept as a condi tion so that more  firms could be 
eligible to take part in the bidding.  It was also in accordance with the 
opinion of the consultant for this project.  In the case of tower packages for 
KMTS, PGCIL had adopted t he procurement philosophy as suggested by 
the funding agency i.e. the World B ank.  Though PGCIL took up the 
matter with World Bank for using thei r own designs for towers, the World 
Bank insisted on keeping the designs in the contractor’s scope anticipating 
optimization of cost.  The bidders were required to quote on per tower 
basis.  PGCIL have informed that the te chnical scrutiny of the bids were 
carried out both at pre-qualification and commercial bid stage strictly with 
reference to technical specification requirements and criter ia specified in 
the bid document, approved by the World Bank.  Though tower weight 
was not the evaluation criteria, the estimated weight of towers indicated by 
all the bidders was of the same order.  Regardi ng award of packages for 
both the transmission lines to M/s.  COBRA, according to the loan 
agreements with the World Bank, the pr ocurement procedures/guidelines 
of the funding agency were to be fo llowed and the concurrence of the 
World Bank with respect to bid documents and award of the contracts was 
a pre-requisite. PGCIL had selected M/s. COBRA for one package only as 
it was doubtful whether they would be able to execute both the lines 
simultaneously in time.  The independe nt consultant appointed by World 
Bank to review the same had also en dorsed the view poi nt of PGCIL.  
However, World Bank insisted that  since M/s. COBRA was the pre-
qualified least evaluated bidder for bot h the lines, the award of both the 
lines be placed on M/s. COBRA and in  case M/s. COBRA refused to 
accept both the packages, their bank guarantees be encashed by PGCIL. 
PGCIL approved the award of both the lines to M/s. COBRA in line with 
the recommendations of the World Bank.  
  
Regarding observation of the Hon' ble Committee that  the PGCIL needed 
to prevail upon the World Bank on the need to clearly define the project 
scope at the bidding stage by suitably ta king into consideration the aspect 
relating to technical scrutiny of ‘t onnage/weight’ and also offer its in-house 
design for acceptance, it is submitted that similar observations were made 
by the CEA in the year 2001 after an analysis of the time and cost overrun 
made at the instance of Ministry of  Power, CEA had also observed that 
greater attention to the technical specifications at the time of bidding could 
have helped in obtaining reasonabl e price and quality.  PGCIL was 
accordingly instructed vide Ministry  of Power’s letter dated 7.8.2001 to 
take suitable corrective action to improve the syst em and procedures in a 
defined timeframe to avoid such defici encies in the impl ementation of the 
projects.  PGCIL in their reply dated 4.9.2001 explained the circumstances 
in which the award of both the lines  had to be placed on M/s COBRA.  
PGCIL also mentioned t hat they prepared a manual  in September, 2001 

on ‘Work & Procurement Policy and Procedure’ for streamlining future 
procurements and award of contracts in a transparent manner.  All these 
facts including the reply dated 4.9.2001 of the PGCIL were placed before 
the competent authority in the Governm ent while seeking its approval to 
the revised cost estimates of the project.  The revised cost estimates were 
thereafter approved by the Government.   
  
Regarding the recommendations of the Committee for a thorough analysis 
of the whole matter of acceptance of  loans from the World Bank and the 
conditionalities attached to it to safeguard our sovereign economic 
independence, it is submi tted that Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs), which is the nodal  Ministry for negotiations/acceptance 
of World Bank loans has been reques ted for taking further necessary 
action in this regard.  After the adv ice of the Ministry of Finance is 
received, the Hon'ble Committee on Pub lic Undertakings will be apprised 
of the recommendations along with action an action taken report.”   
  
 
The remarks of office of C&AG on t he reply of the Government was as 
follows:- 
There is no change in the Status of formation of Committee 
 The Comments of the Ministry of Powe r on the remarks of C&AG office 
were as follows:- 
“Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) was requested for 
taking further action on the recommendat ion of COPU for formation of a 
High-powered Committee of Experts to analyze the whole matter of 
acceptance of loans from the World Bank and the conditionalities attached 
to it.  However, Ministry of Finance have observed t hat it would be 
appropriate that the setting up of a Committee of Experts is done by 
Ministry of Power, which may, in turn, associate any other Department as 
it considers necessary.  Accordingly, a Committee has been constituted 
under the chairmanship of Chairperson, Central El ectricity Authority with 
the following members: 
 
1. Chairperson, Central Elec tricity Authority   Chairman 
2. Joint Secretary, Deptt. of  Economic Affairs  Member 
3. Joint Secretary (Trans), Mop    Member 
4. CMD, Power Finance Co rporation   Member 
5. Director (Finance), NTPC     Member 
6. Shri Bibek Debroy, Secretary General, PHDCCI Member 
7. Dr. M. Govinda Rao, Director , National Institute  Member 
  of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) 
8. Director (Fin), PGCIL     Member-  
         C o n v e n o r  
 
            
 

6. Comments of the Committee  
 
 
 In their Original Report, the Commi ttee had noted that the first ever 
800 KV transmission system between  Kishanpur and Moga which was 
scheduled for completion in March 1998 at a cost of Rs. 417.71 crore was 
inordinately delayed by 34 months and was completed in January, 2001 
only.  The delay also led to cost overrun of Rs. 439.92 crore which was 
100% more than the original approved  cost.  The Committee had felt that 
the cost and time overrun took place mainly due to the reason that Power 
Grid chose to award this project to M/s Cobra of Spain though it had no 
previous experience in designing 800 KV class tower. Even the consultant 
appointed by the World Bank had suspected the capabilities of M/s Cobra 
to complete the project by the scheduled date.  However, upon the 
insistence of the World Bank, Power Grid awarded the contract to the 
inexperienced foreign firm.   The Committee had thus, pointed out that 
merely for the sake of getting loan fac ilities from the International funding 
agencies, the public sector companies should not accept unreasonable 
terms imposed by the funding agencies.  They had therefore, 
recommended that the whole matter of  acceptance of loan from World 
Bank and the conditionalities attached  to it should be thoroughly analysed 
to safeguard our economic independence and sovereign rights and for this 
purpose, a high powered Committee of experts be formed to suggest 
suitable measures. 
 The Committee are constrained to note that even after a lapse of 
almost one year, the Ministry of Power have merely informed that they have 
constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chairperson, Central 
Electricity Authority.  The Co mmittee take a strong note of such 

lackadaisical approach adopted by the Government while furnishing Action 
Taken reply to the Committee’ s recommendation.  As per the 
recommendation of the Committee, th e Ministry should have formed a 
Committee with due promptitude to t horoughly analyze the whole matter of 
acceptance of loans from World Bank and the conditionalities attached to it 
and to suggest suitable measures in view of the fact  that PGCIL had 
implemented several other projects with World Bank funding which had 
also faced the problem of cost and time overrun. But the Committee feel 
that the matter has been badly dela yed.  The Committee are disappointed 
to note that the Government have onl y now formed the Committee.  The 
Committee desire that the Government should ensure that the Committee 
appointed by them gives its findings  and recommendations within six 
months from the date of its constitution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI. NO. 5) 
  
NEED FOR EFFECTIVE COORDINATION BETWEEN POWER GRID AND 
ADMINISTRATIVE MINISTRY 
  
Another particularly di sturbing aspect noticed during examination of the 
related issues, was the furnishing of c ontradictory statements to the Committee. 
The Committee note that a Manual on  Work and Procurement Policy and 
Procedure for streamlining future procur ement and awards of contract in a 
transparent manner was broug ht out by Power Grid. From the information 
furnished by the Ministry of Power to t he Committee, it is seen that the said 
Manual was prepared by the Po wer Grid at the instance of the Ministry of Power 
following their instructions issued on 7 August, 2001. However, Power Grid has 
stated that the initiative for preparation of the document had formally commenced 
in Power Grid in January, 2001 and the document was finalised and approved for 
implementation by the Board of Directors of Power Grid in September, 2001. The 
Committee are constrained to note that there is no coordination between the 
Ministry of Power and Power Grid. The Committee take a serious view of this 
matter and expect that in future effective coordination and consultation should be 
held before furnishing the in formation to the Parliamentary Committees so as to 
avoid furnishing of contradictory information.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
It is submitted that in t he written reply submitted by  Ministry of Power to 
the Lok Sabha Secretariat, the following was mentioned: 
“Much before the Audit observation, while examining the revised cost 
estimates of the project in the year 2001, Ministry of Power got an analysis 
done by CEA on the time and cost overr un for this project.  On examining 
the report of the CEA in th is regard, it was observ ed that greater attention 
to the technical specifications at t he time of bidding could have helped in 
obtaining reasonable price and quality.  PGCIL was accordingly instructed 
vide Ministry of Power’s letter dated 7.8.2001 to take suitable corrective 
action to improve the system and proce dures in a defined timeframe to 
avoid such deficiencies in the implement ation of the projects.  Thereafter, 
PGCIL prepared a manual on ‘Work & Procurement Policy and Procedure’ 
for streamlining future procurem ents and award of contracts in a 
transparent manner.  These facts along with the repl y dated 4.9.2001 of 
the PGCIL explaining their stand in th is regard were also placed before 
the Cabinet Committee on Economic A ffairs while seeking their approval 
to the revised cost estimates of the project.  The revised cost estimates 
were thereafter approved by the Government.”   
  

The submission of Ministry of Powe r may give an impression that the 
‘Manual on Work & Procurement Policy and Procedure’ for streamlining 
future procurement and awards of contract in a transparent manner was 
brought out by Power Grid Corporati on of India Ltd. as a follow up of 
Ministry of Power’s letter dated 7.8.2001 to take suitable corrective action 
to improve the systems and  procedures.  Ministry of Power only intended 
to submit to the Hon'ble Committee that the above instructions were 
issued by the Ministry on 7.8.2001 and the Manual was brought by PGCIL 
in September, 2001 i.e. after the issue of the instructi ons dated 7.8.2001 
to PGCIL, even though action to bri ng out such a manual was initiated by 
PGCIL before the issuance of above instructions by the Ministry of Power.   
  
Ministry of Power has the highest regards for the Hon'ble Committee on 
Public Sector Undertakings.  It has  been the endeavor of Ministry of 
Power to give complete and correct information to the Hon'ble Committee 
on Public Undertakings and under no st retch of imagination the Ministry 
can think of giving any information to a Parliamentary Committee not 
based on facts/records.  Necessary det ails/clarifications were obtained 
from PGCIL before preparing the written replies in respect of the list of 
points for discussion during oral evidence of representatives of Ministry of 
Power before the Hon’ble Committee.  Secretary, Ministry of Power 
himself took a series of meetings with the officials of PGCIL, CEA and 
Ministry of Power before the oral evidence.  The Ministry of Power 
endeavoured to give complete and co rrect information on the audit para 
being examined by the Hon. Committee.   However, if any shortcomings 
have been found by the Hon. Committee, it is unintentional and is 
sincerely regretted. 
 
Ministry of Power apologizes for any misunderstanding caused on account 
of the above submission made in t he written reply to the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat / Hon’ble Committee.  Mini stry of Power has also noted the 
direction of the Hon’ble Committee that in future effective coordination and 
consultation should be held before furnishing the information to the 
Parliamentary Committee so as to av oid furnishing of contradictory 
information. 
  
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.12.2005  
 
 
Vetting remarks of the Audit 
 
Factual, No further comment. 
 
Further reply of the Government  
 
The reply of Ministry of Power has been accepted by CAG 
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.3.06 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE, IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES. 
  
RECOMMENDATION (SI. NO. 2) 
  
UNUSUALLY HIGH INTEREST INCURRED DURING CONSTRUCTION. 
  
The Committee have been informed that at the techno-commercial stage, 
M/s Cobra, Spain had proposed to sub-contract part of the work to the Indian 
firms. However, M/s Cobra soon faced a host of problems in finalizing the sub-
contractors in India. The company fac ed several problems such as delay in 
testing of towers, additional demand of pay ment from their sub-contractors and 
mismatch in cash flows. M/s Cobra also raised a number of disputes and claimed 
additional amount and al so sought extension of time . The direct fallout of the 
contractual problems that surfaced immedi ately after the award of the work for 
erection of the Kishenpur-Moga Transmissi on towers to the Spanish firm (M/s 
Cobra ) in February, 1995 led not only to the substantial time overrun in 
commissioning the project but also to t he huge escalation in project costs. The 
Committee find that out of t he total project cost esca lation, more than Rs.300 
crore was on account of Interest Duri ng Construction (IDC) alone. The amount 
assigned for IDC as per the approved proj ect estimate of 1993 was only to the 
tune of Rs. 2 crore. In the opinion of the Committee,  the delay of about three 
years in commissioning the project was t he main contributory factor for the 
unusually high deal, as Power Grid submissively accepted all the terms and 
conditions imposed by the loaning agency. The Committee feel that the terms for 
calculating Interest During Constructi on are very harsh and require a pointed 
review in all future financing of proj ects and desire that the government should 
examine this aspect thoroughly. The Commi ttee also recommend that it should 
be examined as to whether the matter of payment of IDC to the World Bank in 
this case may be re-opened to find out if  any claim for refund of IDC can be 
lodged on the ground that the entire delay in co mpleting the project can be 
attributed solely to M/s Cobra the agen cy thrust upon the PGCIL to execute the 
project only at the behest of the World Bank. The Committee wish to point out 
that a facility that could have been est ablished by spending Rs.417.71 crore was 
eventually got established by spending actually Rs.857.63 crore, out of which the 
interest paid during construction alone co mes to more than Rs.300 crore, thus 
making World Bank and the foreign cons truction Company, M/s Cobra, the real 
gainers in the whole.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
“In the audit para no. 15.3.1 of the report of CAG for the year March, 2003 
– Union Government (Commercial) No. 3 of 2004, the Audit observed that Power 
Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) commissioned (January, 2001) Kishenpur-
Moga Transmission System (KMTS) having two lines of 800 kV each at a total 
cost of Rs. 847.91 crore with an overall cost overrun of Rs. 430.20 crore and time 
overrun of 34 months.  Out of this, del ay of 30 months was attributable to 
inexperience of a foreign contractor, M/s COBRA, which resulted in extra 
expenditure of Rs. 217.22 cr ore on account of interest on borrowed funds and 
escalation in price including exchange rate variation. 

  
Hon'ble Committee has observed that  the delay of about 3 years in 
commissioning the project was the main contributory factor for the unusually high 
deal, as PGCIL submissively accepted al l the terms and conditions imposed by 
the loaning agency.  
  
It may be mentioned that when the matter regarding Interest During 
Construction (IDC) was raised by the Au dit at draft audit para stage, it was 
explained to the Audit that the investment approval for the project was issued by 
the Government in May, 1993 with an estimated cost of Rs. 417.71 crore 
(including an IDC of Rs. 2 cr ore) and completion schedule of 58 months i.e. by 
March, 1998.  The revised cost estima te of Rs. 938.48 crore (including IDC of 
Rs. 310.44 crore) for the project was appr oved in July, 2002.  The increase in 
cost of the project was on account of change in IDC (+ 308.44 crore), price 
change (+154.11 crore), exchange rate variation (+28.51 crore), change in 
approved quantity (+29.78 cror e), change in taxes and duties (15.41 crore) and 
change in centages (-15.49 crore).   
  
The meager IDC provision of Rs. 2 crore in the original cost estimate was 
based on project approval given at debt-equi ty ratio of 1:1 with an assumption 
that equity shall be employed first followe d by debt.  It was also assumed that 
part of the project i.e.  one circuit of Kishenpur-Moga would be commissioned a 
year before the completion of the pr oject time cycle and the revenue realized 
would go to reduce the project cost.  Howeve r, later on in line with the guidelines 
issued by Ministry of Finance, debt-equity ratio was modified to 4:1 with debt and 
equity flowing concurrently.  This, along with other factors i.e. increase in project 
cost and delay in completion of project, re sulted in an overall increase of Rs. 
308.44 crore in IDC.  
  
The recommendation of the Committ ee that the Government should 
thoroughly examine the terms for calculati ng IDC as well as the possibility of 
reopening the matter of payment of IDC to the World Bank in this case to find out 
if any claim for refund of IDC can be lodged on the ground that the entire delay in 
completing the project can be attri buted solely to M/s Cobra, has been 
considered in consultation with the Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.   PGCIL 
has clarified that Kish enpur-Moga Transmission System  (KMTS) was covered 
under basket of projects funded by IBRD  Loan No.3237-IN against project titled 
“Northern Region Transmission Project” . The loan was made available to 
Government of India (GOI) and terms & conditions were agreed under the loan 
agreement dated 3 rd October, 1990 entered betw een GOI and IBRD.  As could 
be seen from the agreement, the loan of the World Bank was extended to GOI 
with an interest rate for each quarter equal  to the Cost of Qualified Borrowings 
determined in respect of t he preceding Semester, plus one-half of one per cent.  
However, there was another subsidiary loan agreement for loan to POWERGRID 
as a rupee loan by the GOI ( Ministry of Power)  as per the po licy regime of the 
period.  According to this agreement, this  loan was extended with interest rate of 
14% which was the normal policy of Minist ry of Finance, government of India 
prevailing at that time.  
 

 The break up of estimated project cost envisaged during loan negotiation 
are as under: 
 
US $ Million 
 
Estimated Costs Local Foreign Total 
Preliminary and Civil Works 31.4 3.1 34.5 
Compensatory afforestation 1.6 0.0 1.6 
Transmission Lines 159.3 248.6 407.9 
Substations 28.1 67.5 95.6 
Tools and Equipment 1.1 4.2 5.3 
Communication Equipment 1.4 4.1 5.5 
Load Dispatch Equipment 36.3 34.1 70.4 
Training 0.6 1.7 2.3 
Consulting Services 0.0 4.5 4.5 
Engineering and Administration 66.7 0.0 66.7 
Total Base Costs 326.5 367.8 694.3 
Physical contingencies 24.4 38.1 62.5 
Price Contingencies 43.3 140.2 183.5 
Total Project Costs 394.2 546.1 940.3 
Interest During Construction  54.2 185.3 239.5 
Total Financing Required 448.4 731.4 1,179.8 
 
  
 As brought out above, the portion of the projec t cost covered under the 
IBRD finance, was worked out as US $ 546.1 million.  As against above 
mentioned project cost, IBRD had agreed for financing upto US $ 485 million with 
US $ 1.1 million envisaged fr om Japanese Grant Facility.  For the remaining part 
of the project cost i.e. US $ 60 million, GOI had stated during negotiations that it 
would seek co-financing to cover the same.  As may be seen from the above that 
the total cost of the project under NRTP (Loan No. 3237 – IN) was estimated as 
US 1,179.8 million which had inter alia included US $ 185.3 towards the interest 
during construction (IDC) on IBRD financed portion.  The Financing Plan both 
for local and IBRD financed portion includin g that of IDC component furnished in 
the Loan and Project Summary forming par t of the Staff Appraisal Report 
pertaining to the said IBRD Loan is given below:- 
 
US $ Million  
 
Source Local Foreign Total 
IBRD 0.0 485.0 485.0 
Japanese Grant Facility 0.0 1.1 1.1 
POWERGRID 86.3 0.0 86.3 
GOI 362.1 245.3 607.4 
Total 448.4 731.4 1,176.8 
 
 As brought out above, the IBRD fi nanced portion amounting to US $ 485 
million does not cover IDC component which was to be financed by GOI. 
 
 A per the terms of loan agreement, t he repayment was to be made over 20 
years including 5 years grace at the IB RDs standard variable interest rate and 

the beneficiaries of the loan were initia lly identified as Nati onal Hydro-Electric 
Power Corporation (NHPC) / CEA.  Subsequently Power Grid Corporation of 
India Limited (POWERGRID) was co-opted as  a beneficiary after de jure transfer 
of assets in 1992. 
 
 In terms of the above mentioned loan agreement, as already mentioned the 
loan in turn was lent to POWERGRID as  a Rupee loan by the GOI (Ministry of 
Power) and the loan was re-payable over the period of 15 years including 3 years 
grace period under the subs idiary loan agreement.  The IBRD loan amount was 
to be made available to POWERGRID du ring the first month of the quarter 
following the quarter in which said amount s were withdrawn by the GOI.  As per 
the Staff Appraisal R eport during the loan negotia tion and project appraisal 
stage, it was envisaged that  the project would be partl y funded to the extent of 
50.7% of the Project Cost through t he proceeds of IBRD loan (Loan No. 3237 –
In) whereas the remaining portion was to be funded by POWERGRID and GOI. 
 
 As per the terms of the Loan Agreement between GOI and IBRD, the 
principal component of the lo an was to be re-paid by  GOI w.e.f. March, 1996 
over a period of 15 years i.e. by  September, 2010, in accordance with 
amortization schedule annexed as Sched ule-3 to the Loan Agreement. The 
interest on the said loan was payable by GOI every six months on Ist March and 
Ist September respectively.  The drawl of loan as per the original loan agreement 
was envisaged upto 30 th September 1998 and thus the terms of the loan 
agreement could not be construed as strict ly linked to the project execution 
period.  
  
 As against the total Sanctioned Loan amount  of US $ 485 Million, the final 
disbursement based on the ac tual drawl consequent to actual executed cost of 
the Projects was US $ 350 million only.  The final disbursement position by 
category as confirmed by IBRD vide its letter dated April 11,  2001 is furnished 
below:- 
 
US $ 
  
SI. No. Category Disbursed 
1 Civil works and erection 47,243,904.76 
2 Equipment and materials 302,155,207.42
3 Consultants services and training 732,629.05 
4 Special account  (3,915.23) 
5 Total disbursed 350,127,826.00
6 Undisbursed balance (cancelled as of March 26, 
2001) 
99,872,174.00 
7 Cancelled as of July 15, 1999 35,000,000.00 
8 Original Loan Amount 485,000,000.00
 
 As brought out above the IBRD financed portion cost of the project had 
not included IDC component.  The IDC co mponent accrued to the Project Cost 
including that on the IBRD financed portion was financed by POWERGRID 
through various other sources including loan from GOI. 
 

 Since the IDC component has not  been covered under the IBRD 
financed portion of the project cost, incr ease in IDC due to reasons as already 
explained earlier, has not gi ven any benefit to IBRD on  account of increase in 
IDC component. 
 
 Regarding payments to the Contract or, PGCIL has clarified that under 
the contracts (LOAs) with t hem, contractor was to be paid for the supplies of the 
equipment and services to be provided by t hem which were regulated strictly in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of the LOAs. Financing cost of the 
Project was not covered un der the LOAs and payment  towards IDC component 
was not envisaged therein.  
 
 Here, it may be informed that the KM TS project was comprising of four 
type of packages for transmission lines.  These packages were for supply, 
erection & stringing of transmission lin es, supply of Conductors, supply of 
Insulators, and supply of Hardware fittings and Accessories.  While the 
Transmission Line construction packages were  awarded on different contractors.  
The increase in cost under reference pertains to the KMTS Project and not to the 
individual Packages executed by various contractors. 
 
 As submitted before Hon. COPU, as against the approved estimated 
cost of Rs. 417.71 crores (as per the Investment Approval), the actual completed 
cost is Rs. 857.63 crores registering an  increase of Rs. 439. 92 crore.  It was 
further clarified that out of the above increase, Rs. 250.31 crores is on account of 
allowable fiscal factors during Project Time Cycle.  These factors included 
general price escalation (Rs. 151.29 crores ), increase in taxes & duties (Rs. 
15.41 crores), Foreign Exchang e Rate Variation (Rs. 28.51 crores), Centages    
(- Rs. 15.21 crores) and IDC (Rs. 70.30 crores).  Further, there was approved 
quantity variation of approximately Rs. 29.78 crore.  Thus , the project cost within 
the Project Time Cycle was approxim ately Rs. 700 crores and the increase 
beyond the Project Time Cycle was abou t Rs. 157.63 crores mainly due to 
increase in IDC. 
 
 Regarding the payments to M/s Cobra under the contracts for the 
Kishenpur-Moga Transmission Line packages, it may be mentioned that the said 
contracts were awarded in Feb’ 95.  S ubsequently, based on site requirements, 
amendments to the LOAs were necessitated, and M/s. Cobra has been paid only 
the amount payable as per the LOAs. 
 
 As regards terms of calculation of IDC, PGCIL has clarified that IDC is 
calculated on the basis of ant icipated/actual cash out flows of the project with 
due regard to the extent and order of equity and various debt sources of funding. 
The calculation of IDC is undertaken initia lly during the feasibility stage based on 
the anticipated cash flows which is subsequently updat ed based on the actual 
cost, time and extent of various source s of funding of the Project Cost.  
Accordingly in case of Kishenpur-Moga Transmission System (KMTS) also the 
IDC was calculated initially at Feasib ility stage and subsequently based on the 
revised cost, time and financing pattern as approved by CCEA.  
 
In view of the position explained by PGCIL, it may not be possible to lodge 
any claim for refund of IDC by the World Bank. 
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.12.2005 

 
 
Vetting remarks of the Audit 
 
No further comments 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
The reply of Ministry of Power has been accepted by CAG 
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.3.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECOMMENDATION (SI. NO. 3) 
  
NEED FOR EXPLORING POSSIBILITY OF NEGOTIATION WITH M/S 
VATTENFALL. 
  
The Committee note that the major c ontract for erection of transmission 
towers was awarded by the Company in February, 1995 to an inexperienced 
foreign firm which faced repeated failures  in testing. Powe r Grid was apparently 
aware of this aspect of possible repeated fa ilures as they have stated that such 
failures are ‘usual’ in the tower industry. The contract for tower erection ran into 
serious difficulties subsequently and had to  be re-negotiated in October, 1998 
and the project finally was completed only in January, 2001.  
  
The Committee also note that no effort was initiated by Power Grid to 
explore the possibility of negotiation wit h M/s Vattenfall, one of the qualified 
bidders, and was the only firm with t he experience of laying the 800 KV 
transmission lines. If this option could hav e been exercised, the Committee feel 
that delay in completing the project c ould have been completely avoided and as 
a result the need for payment of high IDC to the World Bank would have never 
arisen, keeping the project within th e original time frame and cost. The 
Committee desire that while taking such critical decisions in future the 
commercial consideration and pecuniary interest of the government company 
concerned should be accorded foremost pr iority. Such options should be taken 
up for discussion with the funding agencies in  future highlightin g the merits of 
resorting to such options. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
The observation of the Hon'ble Committee that no effort was initiated by 
PGCIL to explore the possibility of negot iation with M/s Vattenfall, one of the 
qualified bidder and the only firm with t he experience of laying the 800 kV 
transmission line has been exam ined in consultation wi th PGCIL.  PGCIL have 
clarified that under any pr ocurement process adopted fo r award of a Contract, a 
qualification criteria is st ipulated. Only those parties  who meet the stipulated 
criteria are considered for award.  The criteria inter alia includes the minimum 
technical experience requirement which,  therefore, becomes the basis to 
conclude whether or not a particular party can be said to possess such 
experience. In case of KMTS too a pre- qualification criteria was specified. It 
included technical experience of 400 kV level or higher Transmission Lines, to be 
met by a bidder to pre-qualify.  
  
The pre-qualification crit eria adopted was as per RSW – the Consultant's 
advice, who had recommended “Bidder sh ould have designed tower (including 
foundations), and based thereon erecte d and strung, with tension stringing 
equipment, not less than 200 km of tr ansmission lines involving bundle 
conductors of 400 kV class or higher.” C onsultant had stated that the experience 
of 400 kV D/C transmission line was sufficient for construction of 800 kV 
transmission line considering its nature and  complexity, as the key requirement 
was that the applicant needed to have adequate experience in the stringing of 
bundles of conductors for EHV lines and also tower heights are comparable.  
Besides above, the following factors had been kept in view :- 
  

a)  In case experience of 800 kV h ad been specified, no Indian Firm 
would have qualified. 
  
 b)  800 kV or above voltage level havi ng been adopted in a limited way 
the world over, this criteria would have restricted the competition.  
  
 
COBRA met the said criteria.   
  In regard to failure of towers dur ing testing, PGCIL has submitted that 
failures during testing are a common pheno menon. Even the Contractors having 
extensive experience in design of Trans mission Line towers of a particular 
voltage level encounter failures during test ing of towers of a new design offered 
by them for a new Project.  In this c ontext, PGCIL has cited examples of leading 
Contractors, namely KEC and SAE (present ly RPG), having wide experience in 
400 kV Transmission Line but these Contractors had faced repeated tower 
failures during testing in some of the Projec ts in spite of their vast experience.  
PGCIL have mentioned that M/s Vattenfall, who stated to have experience of 800 
kV, in the event of contract having been awarded to them, would have been 
required to carry out the tower testing as  in the case of CO BRA. According to 
PGCIL, there was no certainty that M/s Vattenfall wo uld not have faced failures 
during tower testing. However, specifying su ch criteria for pre- qualification might 
have curtailed the competition. 
   
Regarding possibility  of negotiations with M/s. Vattenfall, PGCIL have  
clarified that under the proc urement guidelines applicable to IBRD loan, contract 
is to be awarded to the lowest bidder who meets the specif ied qualification 
criteria. This is also stated in the evaluation criteria spelt out in the bidding 
documents.  In KMTS, M/s. COBRA em erged to be the lowest pre-qualified 
bidder for both the Transmission Line tower packages. However, based on the 
assessment of the capacit y and capability of tower-p art manufacturers proposed 
by M/s. COBRA, PGCIL had recommended to  award only one package on them.  
The other package was recommended for awar d on the next lowest bidder M/s. 
SAE (now RPG). 
 
 According to PGCIL, under the procurement guidel ines and terms of the 
bidding documents it woul d not have been possible fo r PGCIL to negotiate with 
M/s. Vattenfall who were L4 bidder in both the packages  and lowest evaluated 
bidders were meeting the sti pulated qualification requirement s. In this context, it 
may be mentioned that both the funding a gency as well as the Central Vigilance 
Commission do not permit price negotiati ons with any bidder except with L1 
bidder under certain conditions in exceptional circumstances. Thus any attempt 
in this direction would have led the Worl d Bank to treat it as a case of mis-
procurement.  
  
PGCIL as a policy does not negotiate with any other bidder except in 
cases where L1 bidder is not qualified and has not undertaken such works. 
  
Notwithstanding the submissions made by PGCIL, Ministry of Power is of 
the view that in a situati on when PGCIL was fully conv inced about its own line of 
action and that in spite of World Bank consultant also suggesting division of 

work, if the World Bank was asking for com posite work order, it was a fit case to 
have been brought to the notice of Minist ry of Power. PGCIL was advised in 
January, 2005 that in such cases, they should bring the matter to the notice of 
Ministry of Power to take it up wit h higher level of World Bank through 
Department of Economic Affairs.   
  
The Ministry of Power had also convened a meeting of Heads of CPSUs 
which are likely to avail or are availing loans from multilatera l funding agencies. 
In the meeting, Secretary (Power) ask ed the CPSUs to make full use of the 
mechanism of quarterly review of external ly funded projects by the Ministry of 
Power. Any difficulties being faced during implementation of such projects should 
be discussed during these meetings. Ministry  of Power also em phasized that if 
any important matter needs to be brought to the knowledge of the Ministry even 
before the next review meeting, then it must be raised by the concerned CPSU.  
  
In compliance of the direction of t he Hon'ble Committee that while taking 
such critical decisions in future, the commercial consideration and the pecuniary 
interest of the Government company  concerned should be accorded foremost 
priority and that such option should be taken up for discussion with the funding 
agencies in future highlighting the merits of resorting to such options, suitable 
instructions have been issued to the P ublic Sector Undertakings under the 
administrative control of Mi nistry of Power.  These PSUs have been instructed 
that in awarding the contracts during implementation of the projects funded 
through multi-lateral funding agencies, the interest of the implementing PSU 
should be paramount. In case there is any c onflict in regard to the interest of the 
Company, the matter should be taken up by the Company with the concerned 
funding agency and the Ministry of Power at the highest level.  CPSUs have 
again been advised to make full use of the mechanism of quarterly review of 
externally funded projects by the Ministry  of Power. Any difficulties being faced 
during implementation of such projects should be  discussed during these 
meetings. If any important matter can not wait till the nex t review meeting, then it 
must be brought to the knowledge of Minist ry even before the review meeting.  
CPSUs have also been directed to scrupulously adhere to the above instructions 
and guidelines when dealing with foreign funding agencies.
  
  
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.12.2005 
 
Vetting remarks of the Audit 
 
The PSU’s have been directed by Ministry  of Power to scrupulously adhere to 
various instruction/guidelines when dealing with foreign funding agencies. 
No further comment 
Further reply of the Government 
  
The reply of Ministry of Power has been accepted by CAG 
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.3.06 
 
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI. NO. 1) 
  
UNCRITICAL ACCEPTANCE OF LOANS FROM INTERNATIONAL FUNDING 
AGENCIES 
  
The Committee note that the firs t ever 800 KV Transmission system 
between Kishenpur and Moga  was approved by the Go vernment in May 1993 
and was scheduled to be completed in Marc h, 1998. But the project could be 
completed only in January, 2001, which resulted in a time over-run of 34 months. 
The original approved cost of the proj ect was Rs. 417.71 crore in May 1993. But 
the final executed cost of the project wa s Rs. 857.63 crore in January, 2001. The 
cost over-run comes to Rs. 439.92 cror e which is 100 percent more than the 
original approved cost.  
  
 
The Committee find that various factors such as unreasonable World Bank 
conditionalites/guidelines, lack of adequate initial tech nical scrutiny having been 
undertaken by the Power Grid at the tech no-economic evaluation stage, lack of 
prudence in the initial planning and estimation, the inability of Power Grid to take 
the World Bank into confidence on various issues contributed significantly to the 
cost and time overruns in implementing the project.  
  
The Committee note that the sort of in firmities that were allowed in the 
bidding process while awarding the contract for completion of KMTS project had 
actually paved the way for a foreign firm, M/s Cobra of Spain to secure the 
contract. The Committee further note t hat the foreign firm had ‘no previous 
experience in designing 800 KV class transmission systems and also had no 
experience of executing proj ects in India’. The stipulations in the bidding 
documents prescribed that the rates for the work should be quoted on “per tower” 
basis and not on the basis of the ‘tower weight’ or ‘tonnage’. Thus, the firm which 
had estimated the ‘tower weight’ at a ‘lower level’ quoted a ‘lesser rate per tower’ 
and managed to secure the contract. The result was repeated failures in 
optimizing the tower designs by the succe ssful bidder and cont ractual problems, 
which contributed to the significant delay of about three years in the 
implementation of the proj ect. Despite the fact t hat Power Grid had the 
experience in the field of designing and building transmission tower, the 
Committee fail to understand as to why the Company could not prevail upon the 
World Bank on the need to clearly define the project scope at the bidding stage 
by suitably taking into c onsideration, the aspect relati ng to technical scrutiny of 
‘tonnage /weight’ and also offer its in-house design for acceptance.  
  
The Committee also find that upon the insistence of World Bank, Power 
Grid chose to award both the packages of  KMTS to M/s Cobra of Spain though it 
had no previous experience in designi ng 800 KV class tower. The Committee 
feel that merely for the sake of getti ng loan facilities from the International 
funding agencies, the public sector co mpanies should not accept unreasonable 
terms imposed by them. Uncritical accept ance of such loans would compromise 
our economic interests and the sovereign ri ght to get a service established at a 
cost advantageous to us. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the whole 

matter of acceptance of loans from World Bank and the condit ionalities attached 
to it, should be thoroughly analyzed to safeguard our sovereign economic 
independence and for this purpose, a High-powered Commi ttee of Experts 
comprising of independent minded technocrats and economists should be 
formed to suggest suitable measures. The Committee feel that such an analysis 
is very much necessary keeping in vi ew the fact that PGCIL had implemented 
several other projects with World Bank funding which had also faced the problem 
of cost over-run / time over-run.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
“In the audit para no. 15.3.1 of the report of CAG for the year March, 2003 
– Union Government (Commercial) No. 3 of 2004, the Audit observed that Power 
Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) commissioned (January, 2001) Kishenpur-
Moga Transmission System (KMTS) having two lines of 800 kV each at a total 
cost of Rs. 847.91 crore with an overall cost overrun of Rs. 430.20 crore and time 
overrun of 34 months.  Out of this, del ay of 30 months was attributable to 
inexperience of a foreign contractor, M/s COBRA, which resulted in extra 
expenditure of Rs. 217.22 crore.  PGCIL invited (Ma y, 1993) global tenders for 
pre-qualification for two lines of the pr oject and issued (March, 1994) tendered 
documents for price bids to six qualifie d bidders, out of which five bidders 
submitted their price bids which were  open in May, 1994.  M/s COBRA emerged 
lowest for both the lines.  Based on pre-qualification and evaluation of bidders, 
the company had assessed that M/s COBR A would not be able to execute both 
the lines in view of the tower material required for both the lines and 800 kV lines 
being constructed for the first time in India.  Accordingl y, PGCIL recommended 
award of work for only one line to M/s COBRA, which was, however, not 
accepted by the World Bank.  So, contra cts for construction of both the lines 
were awarded to M/s COBRA in February,  1995 with the completion schedule of 
39 months i.e. by May, 1998.  Audi t observed that M/s COBRA had no 
experience of projects of 800 kV lines and had passed the pr e-qualification and 
bid evaluation stage because no techni cal scrutiny was made by the Company 
with respect to weight of the tower.  Consequently, there were repeated failures 
in design and testing of towers, resultin g in avoidable delay  of 23 months.  
Further, due to increase in weight of the tested towers upto 46% over the 
estimated weight, M/s COBRA demanded co mpensation for the increase in cost, 
which led to delay of 7 months.  This resulted in total avoidable delay of 30 
months in completion of KMTS, which in creased the project cost by Rs. 217.22 
crore on account of interest on borrowed funds and escalation in price including 
exchange rate variation.  Audit also obser ved that Central El ectricity Authority 
(CEA) while reviewing the co st and time overrun had inter alia observed (July, 
2001) that original design of the firm was substantially below the required level 
and the firm passed the pre- qualification stage because  no technical scrutiny 
regarding design of the towers was under taken by the Company.  Abnormal 
increase in the weight of the tested towers was considered by the CEA as the 
main reason for failure in design.   
  
PGCIL’s response, in brief, to the above audit para was that the project 
was funded by the World Bank. For the pr e-qualification in the above mentioned 
project, experience of construction of 400 kV (and not 800 kV) transmission line 
was kept as a condition so that more firms  could be eligible to take part in the 
bidding.  It was also in accordance wit h the opinion of the consultant for this 

project.  In the case of tower pa ckages for KMTS, PGCIL had adopted the 
procurement philosophy as suggested by the funding agency i.e. the World Bank.  
Though PGCIL took up the matt er with World Bank for using their own designs 
for towers, the World Bank insisted on k eeping the designs in the contractor’s 
scope anticipating optimization of cost.  The bidders were required to quote on 
per tower basis.  PGCIL have informed that  the technical scrutiny of the bids 
were carried out both at pre- qualification and commercial bid stage strictly with 
reference to technical specification requi rements and criteria s pecified in the bid 
document, approved by the World Bank.  Though tower weight was not the 
evaluation criteria, the estimated weight of towers indicated by all the bidders 
was of the same order.  Regarding awar d of packages for both the transmission 
lines to M/s. COBRA, according to t he loan agreements with the World Bank, the 
procurement procedures/guidelines of the funding agen cy were to be followed 
and the concurrence of the World Bank with respect to bid documents and award 
of the contracts was a pre-requisite. PGCIL had selected M/ s. COBRA for one 
package only as it was doubtful whether t hey would be able to execute both the 
lines simultaneously in time.  The inde pendent consultant appointed by World 
Bank to review the same had also endorsed the view point of PGCIL.  However, 
World Bank insisted that since M/s. COBRA was the pre-qualified least evaluated 
bidder for both the lines, t he award of both the lines be placed on M/s. COBRA 
and in case M/s. COBRA refused to a ccept both the packages, their bank 
guarantees be encashed by PGCIL. PGCIL approved the award of both the lines 
to M/s. COBRA in line with the recommendations of the World Bank.  
  
Regarding observation of the Hon' ble Committee that  the PGCIL needed 
to prevail upon the World Bank on the nee d to clearly define the project scope at 
the bidding stage by suitably taking into consideration the aspect relating to 
technical scrutiny of ‘tonnage/weight’ and also offer its in-house design for 
acceptance, it is submitted that simila r observations were made by the CEA in 
the year 2001 after an analysis of the time and cost overrun made at the instance 
of Ministry of Power, CEA had also observed that greater  attention to the 
technical specifications at the time of bidding could have helped in obtaining 
reasonable price and qual ity.  PGCIL was accordingly instructed vide Ministry of 
Power’s letter dated 7.8.2001 to take suit able corrective action to improve the 
system and procedures in a defined timeframe to avoid such deficiencies in the 
implementation of the projects.  PGCIL in their reply dat ed 4.9.2001 explained 
the circumstances in which the award of both the lines had to be placed on M/s 
COBRA.  PGCIL also mentioned that they prepared a manual in September, 
2001 on ‘Work & Procurement Policy and Pr ocedure’ for streamlining future 
procurements and award of contracts in a transparent manner.  All these facts 
including the reply dated 4.9.2001 of the PGCIL were placed before the 
competent authority in the Go vernment while seeking it s approval to the revised 
cost estimates of the project.  The revised cost estimates were thereafter 
approved by the Government.   
  
Regarding the recommendations of the Committee for a thorough analysis 
of the whole matter of acceptance of loans from the World Bank and the 
conditionalities attached to it to  safeguard our sovereign economic 
independence, it is submi tted that Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs), which is the nodal Ministry for negotiations/acceptance of World Bank 
loans has been requested for taking further necessary action in this regard.  After 

the advice of the Ministry of Finance is received, the Hon'ble Committee on 
Public Undertakings will be apprised of the recommendations along with an 
action taken report.”     
  
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.12.2005 
 
Vetting remarks of the Audit 
 
There is no change in the Status of formation of Committee 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
The Comments of the Ministry of Power on the remarks of C&AG office were as 
follows:- 
”Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) was requested for 
taking further action on the recommendati on of COPU for formation of a High-
powered Committee of Experts to analyze the whole matter of acceptance of 
loans from the World Bank and the condi tionalities attached to  it.  However, 
Ministry of Finance have observed that it would be appropriate that the setting up 
of a Committee of Experts is done by Mini stry of Power, which may, in turn, 
associate any other Departm ent as it considers nece ssary.  Accordingly, a 
Committee has been constituted under the c hairmanship of Chairperson, Central 
Electricity Authority with the following members.” 
 
1. Chairperson, Central Elec tricity Authority   Chairman 
2. Joint Secretary, Deptt. of  Economic Affairs  Member 
3. Joint Secretary (Trans), Mop    Member 
4. CMD, Power Finance Co rporation   Member 
5. Director (Finance), NTPC     Member 
6. Shri Bibek Debroy, Secretary General, PHDCCI Member 
7. Dr. M. Govinda Rao, Director , National Institute  Member 
 of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) 
8. Director (Fin), PGCIL     Member- Convenor 
            
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.3.06 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
Please see paragraph No. 6 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI. NO. 4) 
  
NEED FOR EFFECTIVE MONITORING OF PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
  
The Committee note that PGCIL is a mini-ratna Company, and the 
Ministry of Power oversee the progress of the implementation of the projects 
through the Quarterly Performance Revi ew (QPR) meetings, besides having 
Government’s Directors / nominees on t he Board of Directors of PGCIL. The 
Committee also note that the issue of non-acceptance of the Power Grid’s 
recommendation by the World Bank for aw arding the contracts to two separate 
firms was not brought to the notice of t he Ministry during the QPR meetings as 
has been revealed by Secretary, Mini stry of Power during evidence. The 
Government nominees in the Board of Direc tors also did not bring the matter to 
the notice of the administr ative Ministry. The Committ ee are constrained to note 
that such a delicate issue was dealt with by Power Grid unilate rally at the Board 
level without consulting its administrative Ministry and al so the Deptt. of 
Economic Affairs which was the nodal ag ency for seeking lo ans from foreign 
funding agencies. Reacting to the Power Grid’s handling of the situation, Ministry 
of Power stated that “it was a fit case to have been brought to their notice”. The 
Committee also note that the Ministry hav e now issued instructions to Central 
Public Sector Units (CPSUs) to make full use of the mechanism of quarterly 
Committee recommend that th e Ministry and the Public  Undertakings should 
scrupulously adhere to the guidelines / instructions in this regard. The Committee 
also recommend that the Government should examine the issue of need for 
fixing of responsibility on the officials responsible for the lapses mentioned 
above. review of externally funded proj ects by the Ministry of Power. Any 
difficulties being faced during the implem entation of such projects should be 
discussed during these meetings. They al so emphasized that if any important 
matter needs to be brought to the knowledge of the Ministry even before the next 
review meeting, it must be raised by  the concerned CPSUs. The Committee 
recommended that the Ministry and the Pub lic Undertakings should scrupulously 
adhere to the guidelines/instructions in  this regard.  The Committee also 
recommended that the Government should examine the issue of need for fixing 
of responsibility on the officials responsible for the lapses mentioned above. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Ministry of Power is of the view that  in a situation when PGCIL was fully 
convinced about its own line of  action and that in spite of World Bank consultant 
also suggesting division of work, if t he World Bank was asking for composite 
work order, it was a fit case to have been  brought to the notice of Ministry of 
Power. PGCIL was advised in January, 20 05 that in such cases, they should 
bring the matter to the notice of Ministry of Power to take it up with higher level of 
World Bank through Department of Economic Affairs.   
 
Instructions have also been issued to all the Joint Secretaries in the 
Ministry of Power, who represent Gove rnment on the Board of Directors of 
various Public Sector Undertakings under the administrative control of Ministry of 
Power, that they should take note of any  such instance where the views of PSUs 
were not accepted by the World Bank.  They have also been instructed that if any 

decision which is not in the interest of the CPSU, if being insisted upon by the 
funding agency, should be reported to the Ministry so that it can be taken up with 
the funding agency through Department of Economic Affairs.   
  
The Ministry of Power had also convened a meeting of Heads of CPSUs 
which are likely to avail or are availing loans from multilatera l funding agencies. 
In the meeting, Secretary (Power) ask ed the CPSUs to make full use of the 
mechanism of quarterly review of external ly funded projects by the Ministry of 
Power. Any difficulties being faced during implementation of such projects should 
be discussed during these meetings. Ministry  of Power also em phasized that if 
any important matter needs to be brought to  the knowledge of the Ministry even 
before the next review meeting, then it must be raised by the concerned CPSU.  
  
In compliance of the direction of t he Hon'ble Committee that while taking 
such critical decisions in future, the commercial consideration and the pecuniary 
interest of the Government company  concerned should be accorded foremost 
priority and that such option should be taken up for discussion with the funding 
agencies in future highlighting the merits of resorting to such options, suitable 
instructions have been issued to the Public Sector Undertakings under the 
administrative control of Mi nistry of Power.  These PSUs have been instructed 
that in awarding the contracts during implementation of the projects funded 
through multi-lateral funding agencies, the interest of the implementing PSU 
should be paramount. In case there is any c onflict in regard to the interest of the 
Company, the matter should be taken up by the Company with the concerned 
funding agency and the Ministry of Power at the highest level.  CPSUs have 
again been advised to make full use of the mechanism of quarterly review of 
externally funded projects by the Ministry  of Power. Any difficulties being faced 
during implementation of such projects should be  discussed during these 
meetings. If any important ma tter cannot wait till the nex t review meeting, then it 
must be brought to the knowledge of Ministry even before the review meeting. 
  
The Public Sector Undertakings have been directed to scrupulously 
adhere to the above instructions and guid elines when dealing with foreign 
funding agencies.   
 
 Ministry of Power is also examining the issue of fixing of  responsibility on 
the officials responsible for not bringing the matter to the notice of Ministry of 
Power in its Vigilance Division and it will be communicated to the Hon'ble 
Committee. 
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.12.2005 
 
Vetting remarks of the Audit 
 
The matter is pending with the Ministry of Power regarding fixing of responsibility 
 

Further reply of the Government 
 
Statements of the officials concer ned have been obtained and the same have 
been referred to Central Vigilance Commission for their advice 
 
(Ministry of Power) O.M. No. 5/7/2002-PG dated 6.3.06 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: RUPCHAND PAL 
20 March,2006 CHAIRMAN, 
29 Phalguna 1927(S)     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE  15th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  20th  MARCH,  2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
8. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
9. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary  
 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA 
 
1. Ms. A.Basu Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Sunil Chander, Principal Director (Commercial) 
 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following Action Taken 
Reports without any modifications:- 
(i) Action Taken Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (2004-2005) on Power Grid Corporation of 
India Ltd. – Extra Expenditure in construction of Kishenpur Moga 
Transmission System – Additional Expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore; 
and  
 
 
(ii) Xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
 
Xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxx 
. 
 

3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation . 
The Committee then adjourned.  

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 6 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Power Grid Corporation of 
India Ltd. – Extra expenditure in construction of Kishenpur - Moga Transmission 
System – Additional expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore) 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  5 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. No. 5 
 
Percentage of total  
 
1 
 
20% 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [vide 
recommendations at Sl. Nos 2 and 3  
 
Percentage of total  
 
2 
 
 
40% 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…(vide recommendations at Sl. No. 1) 
 
Percentage of total. 
 
1 
 
 
20% 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still await ed (vide recommendations at 
Sl. No. 4) 
Percentage of total 
 
1 
 
20% 
 