 
9
C.P.U No. 895 
NINTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
OIL EXPLORATION – DOMESTIC AND OVERSEAS PROJECTS 
 
(MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS) 
 
 
(Action Taken b y th e Govern ment on the recom mendations contain ed in 
the 2nd  Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha)  
on –Oil Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Projects) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   23-12-2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   23-12-2005 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December 2005 / Agrahayana 1927 (S) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
              PAGE NO. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06)    (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION         ( v) 
  
 
CHAPTER I Report                                                                        
 
  1 
CHAPTER II Recommendation that  have been accept ed by 
Government                                           
 
  13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies 
 
  31 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which rep lies of 
Government have not been a ccepted by the 
Committee 
 
   47 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government are still awaited 
 
  56 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of 13 th Sitting of Committee on Pu blic Undertakings held 
on 21st December, 2005. 
 
60 
Analysis of the Action Ta ken by Government on the 
recommendations c ontained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha) on “Oil 
Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Projects.” 
 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Sriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri K. Chandran Pillai  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Smt. Ambika Soni  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J.P.Sharma  Director  
3. Shri N.C. Gupta  Under Secretary  
4. Shri H. Ram Prakash  Committee Officer  
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to s ubmit the Report o n their beh alf, present this       
Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Oil Exploration - Domestic and Overseas Projects.  
2. The Second Report of the Commi ttee on Public Undertakings (2004-05)  
was presented to Lok Sabha on  22nd  December, 2004.  Action Taken Replies of 
the Government to the re commendations contained in the Report were received 
on 13.7.2005.  The Committee on Public  Undertakings considered and adopted 
this Report at their sitting held on 21 st December, 2005.  T he Minutes of the 
sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
3. An analy sis of the action taken by the G overnment on the 
recommendations contained in the Second  Report (2005-06) of the Committee  
is given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: Rupchand Pal 
21st December, 2005 Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana 1927(S)            Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Commi ttee deals with the action taken by Government 
on the recommendations cont ained in the Sec ond Report (Fourteenth Lok  
Sabha) of the Committee on Pu blic Undertakings on O il Exploration which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2004. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from Government in respect of all 
the 26 recommendations contained in the Report.  T hese have been categorized 
as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been a ccepted by  
Government  (Chapter II) 
 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 12    (Total: 7) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies. (Chapter III) 
 Sl. Nos.  3,10, 11, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 25 & 26  (Total: 10) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
(Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 15, 18, & 24     (Total:5) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. (Chapter V) 
Sl. Nos. 16, 17, 22, 23      (Total: 4) 
 
3. The Com mittee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter V for which only interim / no replies  have 
been furnished by the Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in succeeding paragraphs:-  
  

 
RECOMMENDATION  SL. NO. 2 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERALOF HYDROCARBONS (DGH) 
5. The Committee in their second Report had recommended the following in 
regard to functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH).  
“The Com mittee note that Government by a Resolution in 1993 
established Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) under administrative 
control of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas with the following objectives: 
1. To provide technical advice to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s 
on exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbon in India and abroad; 
2. To review the explor ation pr ogramme of companies  engaged in 
E&P activities; 
3. To reassess the hydrocarbon re serves discovered and estimated 
by the operating companies; 
4. To advise the Government on the offering of acreage for  
exploration; 
5. To review the development plans for commercial discoveries  of  
hydrocarbon reserves and advis e Government on the adequacy of 
such plan and on future exploitation strategies; 
6. To review and audit the management of Petroleum reservoirs; 
7. To maintain the E&P data base; and 
8. To advise Government on the layi ng down of safety norms in oil 
field operations, presc ribe pollution control measures and to ass ist 
in inspection and periodic safety audit. 
 
The Com mittee have been inf ormed by some of the PSUs who have 
recently ventured into E&P activ ities t hat non availability of  data of adjoining  
blocks at the time of data viewing of a particular block on offer b y Government 
and delay in availability of  technical data of awarded blocks were some of the 
major constraints being experienced by them in undertaki ng Exploration and 
Production activities.  There is no denyi ng the fact that access to adequate dat a 
is necessary for making a proper assessment of the blocks offered. 
 
Non availability of data at the disposal of oil exploration compa nies will 
dissuade them to undertake E&P activities  in the Country.  To obviate su ch a 
situation, the Committee recommends that DGH should possess data on all 
Indian basins by obtaining it from all the explorers.  The Committee also  feels  
that there is an imperativ e need for setting up of t he National E&P data base.  
The Com mittee notes that DGH has tak en some measures in this regard by  
conducting a feasibility study.  The Commi ttee desire that based on the outcome  
of such a study, expeditious steps may be taken to set up the National data base 
and archives.  It should be made mandatory for all companies to hand over a set 
of data collected by  them to the archives,  as this will help  DGH and ot her 
companies to make a realistic assessment of the reserves of blocks offered to 
them.    
 
  

Despite being entrusted with very im portant activities of monitoring and 
regulating India’s Hy drocarbon reserves, Exploration and Production activities  
within the country and abroad, the Commi ttee note that DGH does not have a 
cadre of it s own and its manpower is  drawn from v arious PSUs, mainly  ONGC 
and OIL on deputation. ONGC and OIL ar e the tw o premier oil companies  
engaged in most of the Expl oration and Production activiti es in the country and 
abroad.  The Committee feels that the m anpower drawn on deputation from the 
same Organization, working of which DG H is mandated to review and monitor, 
can hardly provide any effectiveness to t he functioning of DG H.  Moreover, an 
Organization, solely being manned by deputa tionists cannot provide continuity to 
its functioning.  In view of the import ant role entrusted to DGH, the Committee 
recommends that DGH should have its own separate, independent cadre of staff 
and should be empowered to take all decisions on the functions assigned to it.” 
6. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Tak en Reply  
with regard to the above recommendation have stated as follows:- 
 
“In order to assess the hydrocar bon potential of the blocks being offered 
by GOI under NELP rounds, information on the regional geology of the basin,  
wherein the offered blocks are located, is essential.  T he availability of more and 
more geological dat a will definitely in crease the confidence level of  the 
companies and will help in understandi ng the geology and tectonics which 
govern hydrocarbon distribution in various areas/ basins.   
 
Regional d ata has b een made  avai lable to E&P co mpanies u nder the 
ongoing 5th round of NELP in the form of dat a packages & information doc kets. 
Data of old wells, in the adjoining blo cks, drilled prior to the award of blocks 
under Pre-NELP and NELP rounds are also provided  to the interested 
companies. In this way, it is ensured that all the related data is made available to 
E&P companies.  
 
A National Data Repository of geo-sci entific data, ac quired by different 
agencies in the count ry is proposed to be s et up by DGH. Policy  for making the 
data available in the public domain will be worked out.  It would be mandatory for 
all the E&P companies to gi ve a copy of the data to DGH.  Once the National 
Data Repository is set up an open acreage system can be adopted wherein 
companies will have the freedom to choose an area of their interest from the 
available acreages. 
 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons  (DG H) was  es tablished t hrough a 
Government Resolution in 1993 under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. DGH is carrying out its functions & res ponsibilities as 
per the terms of resolution as assigned by  the Ministry from time to time. The 
main activities include opening up of new/unexplored areas for exploration review 
of reservoir performance of major fiel ds, contract manageme nt of various  
exploration and exploitation activities of operating companies, evaluation process 
of various exploration & field dev elopment bidding rounds and rec ommendations 
to Government, implementation of NELP , monitoring of safety & environment 
aspects & other related activities. 
  

DGH does not have a cadre of its own and its manp ower is dr awn from 
various PSUs, mainly ONGC & OIL , on short term deputation. Various  
exploration blocks and discover ed fields  operated by Private Companies/Joint  
ventures are being monito red by DGH as per Produc tion Sharing Cont racts 
(PSCs). Each block/ field has  a minimu m work programme which  is  to be  
completed within the stipulat ed time frame. All the major decisions pertaining t o 
the block/field are tak en by the Management Committee of  the block /field within 
powers given to it under the PSC.  MOP&NG is in the process of rationalizing the 
staff requirements of DGH.” 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
7. The Com mittee are happ y to  note that the Government has taken 
steps to set up a National Data Reposit ory for geo-scientific data and to 
evolve a policy  on data availabili ty.  How ever, the Committee are 
disappointed that the Ministry has not given a proper reply to the other part 
of their recommendation, namel y, the need for separate independent cadre 
of staff for DGH. 
Observing that DGH had b een entrusted with very important task of  
monitoring and reg ulating India’s hydrocarbon r eserves, exploration and  
production activities within the countr y and abr oad, the Committee had i n 
their original report recommended that it should have its ow n separate and 
independent cadre of staff w hich should be empow ered to take all 
decisions on the f unctions assigned to it .  The repl y of  the Ministr y is 
vague an d inadequ ate as it merel y st ates that Ministry  o f Petroleum & 
Natural Gas is in the process of rationalizing the staff requirements of DGH.   
In the opinion of the Committee this  practice of manning of DGH b y 
deputationists mainly  dra wn from  ONGC and OIL Companies whose 
  

activities they will be supposed to re gulate is not tenabl e. The Committee, 
therefore, w hile reiterating their r ecommendation desire that the Ministr y 
should take steps to set up a separate and independent cad re of staff for 
DGH so as to bring about continuity and effectiveness in its functioning.  
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5 
UNDER ACHIEVEMENT OF SEISMIC SURVEY AND DRILLING TARGETS 
8. The Committee in their Report ha d recommended with r eference to under 
achievement of Seismic Survey and Drilling Targets as follows: 
“The Committee note that targets for se ismic survey and drillin g laid by  
ONGC during IX Plan could not be achi eved and implemented in  the States of 
Assam, Nagaland, Tripur a and Himachal Pradesh due to one reason or the 
other.  Shortfall in achievement of target s in Assam State has be en attributed to 
laying of greater emphasis on cov ering the entire area with a blanket 3D seis mic 
survey which resulted in compromising of 2D seismic survey planned targets.  In 
Nagaland, envisaged programme coul d not be implemented due to non-
availability of Production Ex ploration License (PEL). The planned contractual 
seismic survey could not be implemented in Tri pura owing to non- finalisation of 
the contract.  In Himachal Pradesh, besid es delay of PEL grant in Ganga NELP 
block, slow performance of shot-hole dr illing and farmer’s agitation have been 
cited as the reasons for non achievement of  the targets.  Shor tfall in drilling 
targets in North Eastern States and Himachal Pradesh have also been attributed 
to the delays in the exploration plan im plementation in environmentally sensitive 
and logistically  diffic ult areas, drilling of increasingly deeper  wells, less  rig 
availability, down hole complication, etc. 
 To obviate the delay on account of  non availability of PEL, the Committee 
recommend that the Union Go vernment should analyse this problem in det ail so 
that State Governments ar e made aware t hat certain blocks are proposed to be 
awarded for exploration and a way sh ould be f ound out by which State 
Governments readily  facilitate t he e xploration immediately a fter the award of a 
block to an explorer by granting the necessary approvals for land acquis ition, 
forest clearance etc. expeditiously. In grant of PEL for onland blocks, the effort of 
the Union Government should be focused on prior clearance or consent from the 
State Governments concerned at  the time of offer under NELP, so that PEL is 
granted in the shortest possible time. 
Other causes for delay as enumera ted above viz.  non finalization of 
contract, carrying out exploration in env ironmentally sensitive and logistically  
difficult areas, etc may be identified and c orrective steps be tak en to prev ent 
occurrence of delays in achievement of targets on such accounts in future. 
 
  

 From the details regarding status of Hydrocarbon finds/leads made during 
IX Plan, the Committee note that in many of the fields in western offshore, 3D 
seismic API is still in progress.  The Co mmittee desire that the survey should  be 
completed within a time bound progra mme and further steps be taken for 
interpretation of data and produc tion of blocks/fields with due promptitude.  The 
Committee also desire that the fields in  respect of which 3D surveys have been 
carried out, but which have been not yet put  on production, expeditious steps be 
taken for interpretation of the data and putting these field on production. 
The Committee note that there was a shortfall in actual achievement vis-à-
vis  targets laid by Oil for seismic surv ey and drilling, during IX Plan.  Various  
reasons which led to shortfall in achievem ent of targets stat ed are- deferri ng of 
survey for Brahmap utra River  Bed  du e to inab ility to  fin alise contract, 
environmental problems, bandhs, blockade s, land acquisition problems, poor 
state infrastructure, delay in acquisitio n of seismic data, problems pertaining to 
environmental clearance, land acquisition a nd contractors.  The Committee feel 
that these bottlenecks should be anticipated and corrective measures be taken in 
advance s o that delays on s uch accounts do not recur in future.  The 
Government should ensure that the best of state-of-the-art technology is made 
available to our oil E&P companies to enable them to achieve their targets.” 
 
9. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natu ral Gas in their Action Taken Reply on 
the above recommendation have stated as follows: 
 
“Oil PSUs are free to choos e state-of-the-art technology to be used in 
E&P. Investment decisions on t echnology are taken by respective PSUs and  
expenditure in this regard is financed through the internal resources generation 
or external borrowings.  By introducing NELP Government has tried to ensure 
that new technologies  are being inducted in E&P sector through participation of 
private/foreign companies.  The efforts have already stated yielding results as 24 
discoveries have so far been announced under NELP blocks.”   
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
10. In their original report , the Committee had noted that non-availability 
/ delay  in availabilit y of Production Exploration Licence (PEL) from State 
Governments w as one of the major causes due to w hich ONGC w as not  
able to achieve targets for seismic su rvey and drilling.  The Committe e had 
therefore recommended that the effo rts of Union Government should be 
focused on prior clearance/consent of State Governments concerned at the 
time of offer under NELP so t hat PEL was granted in the shortest possible 
time.  The Committe e had also recommended for finding a w ay b y w hich 
the State Government would facilitate the exploration immediately after the 
award of a block to an explor er by granting necessary approvals for l and 
acquisition, forest clearance etc.    
   Besides, the Committee had also recommended  that 3D surve ys 
carried out by ONGC should be comp leted within a time bound programme 
and exped itious steps be taken for interpretation of the data and putting  
those fields on production. The Committ ee are constrained to note tha t the 
Ministry has not given pointed re ply to the recommendation concer ning 
delay in availability of PEL. The Co mmittee highly deplore the approach of 
the Ministr y in  furnishing an incomp lete repl y to their recommendation.   
The Committee desire that they may be apprised of action taken by Ministry 
on their recommendation without further delay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 15 
CORPORATE AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF OIL 
11. The Committee in their second Report, in regard to the corporate plan of 
OIL had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that OIL has formulated strategic and corporate plan 
with the goal of more t han doubling the production leve l within ten year.  The 
Committee desire that adequate steps should be taken to  implement these plans 
so as to achieve the targets fixed.  The progress of the two plans should be 
monitored periodic ally to ensure their fu ll implementation.  Besides formulating 
strategic and corporate plan, OIL has als o taken in itiatives which focus  on 
intensification of explorati on and development activities  in its areas of operation 
through additional 2D and 3D Surve ys and drilling; undertaking exp loration 
activities in far-flung logistically difficult and geologic ally c omplex ar eas, 
acquisition of NELP Blocks on offer, intensif ication of drilling activities, reasoning 
of prospects, reserves assessment; optimis tic field development; revitalization of 
old and depleted fields, and development of  marginal fields.  The Committee 
desire that all these initiatives which are, in hand, be undertaken within a time 
bound programme. 
 
 The Com mittee would also lik e to be apprised of  the impact of such 
measures in additional reserve accretions and augmentation of production.”  
 
12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Tak en Reply  
have stated as follows:- 
“OIL has undertaken the following init iatives for intensification of  
exploration and development activities fo r additional reserves accretion and 
augmentation of production: 
(i) Intensification of exploration and develop ment activities through 
additional 2D and 3D seismic survey and drilling. 
(ii) Undertaking exploration activities in far-flung logistically difficult and 
geologically complex area as  Br ahmaputra River bed, Belt of 
Schuppen, Manabum and  Pasighat areas in the North-East. 
(iii) Acquisition of NELP blocks on offer through competitive bidding. 
(iv) Intensification of drilling activities, both explo ratory and  
development. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 The salient details of production (oil & gas), reserves accretion, drilling 
metreage etc. are shown below for the last three years:  
 
 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
Seismic Survey    
2D (GLKM) 1949.59 2088.22 1978.59
3D (SQKM) 349.50 352.02 889.44
    
Drilling (‘000 Mtrs)  
Exploratory   42.201 49.283 37.890
Development   87.834 59.340 115.673
Total 130.035 108.623 153.563
    
Production  
Crude Oil (MMT) 2.95 3.002 3.196
Natural Gas (BCM) 
1.743 1.887 2.009
Reserves Accretion (O+OEG) 
(In-Place) – (MMT) 
21.87 18.54 21.07
  
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
13. While taking note of the fact th at Oil India Limite d had formulated 
strategic and corporate plan w ith the goal of more than doubling the 
production level within ten y ears , the Committee had desired that 
adequate steps should b e taken  for periodic monitoring and  
implementation of these plans.  The Committee are constrained to note that 
the Ministr y instead of add ressing a ll the issues highlighted in this 
recommendation has furnished onl y th e details of initiatives taken for 
augmentation of production which is inadequate.  The Committee view this 
very seriousl y an d desire that the Mi nistry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
should apprise them of th e action taken by  Oil Ind ia Limite d for 
implementing its strategic and corporate plan.  
 
 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 18 
 
GRANTING OF INFRASTRUCTURE  STATUS TO E &P PRO JECTS/ 
ACTIVITIES  
 
14. The Committee in their second Report had recommended with regard to 
the need for grant of infrastructure status to E&P Projects / activities as follows:  
 
“The Committee note that, as of now, E &P Activities qualify only for a 7 
year tax holiday from the date of commerc ial production. But these activities do 
not qualify for infrastructure/ industry stat us to avail of tax holiday under Section 
801A and also do not have the option to ch oose the block of 10 year tax holiday  
out of 15 years, which is not necessarily  linked to commencement of commercial 
production. The Committee feel that if the 7 year tax holiday n ecessarily starts 
from the commencement of commercial pr oduction, the advantage of tax holiday 
is lost bec ause of carried forward losses of the previous years  on account of 
large inves tment. Theref ore, the Committee recomm end that the Government 
should grant infrastructure i ndustry status to E&P projects/ activities becaus e of 
the significance of oil discovery for the national economy.” 
 
15. The Ministry of Petrol eum and Natu ral Gas in their action taken reply on 
the above recommendation have stated as follows:  
 
“ONGC has been requesting the Governm ent for grant of infrastructure 
status to E &P industry, since February, 2002. This matter was also part of the 
suggestions (pre-budget) for Union Budget  2005. However, the issue has not  
been addressed in the Union Budget 2005.” 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
16. After perusing the repl y, the Committee note that although the 
Ministry had taken up the issue of gr anting of infrastructure status to E&P 
activities / projects in their pre budget suggestions of Union Budget 2005,   
the same could not be addressed in th e budget.  The Com mittee find that  
no reaso n has been furnished for the same.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, attractive incentives shoul d be pro vided to investors w ho 
invest in Oil Exploration and produ ction activities.  The Committee,  
therefore, reiterate their recommenda tion and desire that the issue of  
granting infrastructure status to E&P projects  should be forcefully pleaded 
at the appropriate level for its acceptance and implementation. 
 
  

 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 24 
 
AUTONOMY FOR OIL EXPLORING PSUs 
17. With regard to Autonomy for all exploring PSU’s, the Committee had in 
their second Report recommended as follows:  
“The Com mittee note that the oil sector PSUs have been performing 
commendably.  All the PSUs except OIL enjoy Navratna status.  The navratna 
status allows the delegati on of enhanced powers subject to certain condit ions 
and guidelines.  In an era of competition due to liberalisation polic ies, the oil 
PSUs have to compete with multinationals and private Indian companies.  As the 
PSUs operating in t he oil sec tor have to  scout globally for technology,  for 
procurement and to offer global tender fo r their works etc., these matters need 
decisions to be taken on commercial and technical aspects quickly. 
 Though the navratna status confer s certain powers on them, the 
Committee note that in actual practice , the PSUs lac k autonomy to decide on 
matters affecting their performance.  In an era where most of the oil PSUs equity 
has been divested and there are various  stakeholders, the PSUs are answerable 
to them as well.  T he Committee regr et to note that the autonomy already  
available is inadequate. 
 
 The Com mittee feel that the Go vernment should consider granting 
autonomy to the Boar d of Direct ors even to  the extent of dec iding a particular 
kind of business that they deem fit to undertake.” 
 
18. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, in their action taken reply on 
the above recommendation have stated as follows:  
“The Government has set up Oil PSUs both in Upstream & Downstream  
sectors.  These PSUs have been set up with c ertain obje ctives suc h as  
Upstream sector PSUs are required to expl ore oil & gas of the country as their 
core activity and Downstream sector is  engaged in Refining and Marketing.  The 
Government has given full financial de legation of powers as well as decision-
making powers to Navratna Oil PSUs and t here are well laid down guidelines on 
delegation.   
The Gover nment is of the view that O il P SUs first p riority shou ld b e to  
focus in their respective areas of co re competence for which they have been set 
up and in case there are surpluses and synergy then they can explore alternative 
business opportunities.” 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-
ONG/US (EO) dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
19. The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the Government on 
the issue of granting autono my to the Board of Directors of Public Sector  
Oil Companies.  The Committee are fully aware that there are well laid down 
guidelines on delegation of financial as well as decision-making powers to 
Navratna Oil PSU’s.  How ever, since these pow ers w ere inadequate, the 
Committee had desired that the Gov ernment should consider granting 
autonomy to the Board of Director s even to th e extent of deciding a 
particular kind of  business that they deemed  fit to undertake. Th e 
Committee are unhappy  to note that Mini stry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
without considering their recommendation for granting of more autonom y 
to oil PSU’s has merely informed them of the existing position.  
The Com mittee need not emphasize the fact that in an era of  
competition due to liberalisation polic ies, the oil PSUs have to compete 
with multinationals and privat e Indian companies and hen ce the question 
of grant of more autonom y specifi cally to Oil PSU’s merits serious  
consideration.  The Committee, theref ore, emphasize once again that the 
Ministry should consider de-novo th e entire matter of granting more 
autonomy to Board of Directors of Oi l Sector PSU’s and also take up this 
matter with DPE and other concerned authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 1 
 
FORMULATION / IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL INTEGRATED ENERGY 
POLICY 
 
 The Com mittee note that current le vel of per capital consumption of 
primary energy in India being at 285 kg of oil equivalent is amongst the lowest in 
the world.  However, the primary energy requirement of our country is increas ing 
year after year.  While in 1999 primary en ergy requir ement was  304.0 million 
tonnes of equivalent (mtoe) , in 2003 the requirement  increased to 345.3 mtoe 
and the energy demand is projected to be 780 mtoe in 2020, which will make us  
along with China, US and Japan amongst the largest energy consumers globally. 
 
 At present, India’s energy requirement is  mainly met by fossil fuel i.e. oil, 
gas and coal.  It is estimated that to meet its energy require ment by 2020, India 
will be required to get 730 mtoe from fossil fuels.  Amongst the three fossil fuel,  
the demand for oil and gas would be more, as  they are relatively  cleaner fuels.   
30% of current demand of oil in the country is being met through indigenous  
production and the rest i.e. 70% through imports. 
 
 As per India Hydrocarbon Vis ion 2025, 25% of total energy needs of the 
country would be met by oil sector by 2020.  The Committee note that despite the 
fact that there has been a continuous surge in demand of crude oil, its production 
has remained almost static in the last five years, thereby further widening the gap 
between demand and supply and making a big dent on country’s scarce foreign 
exchange reserves.  During  2003-04, the estimated am ount spent on import of 
crude oil was 18268 US million dollar, which was more than double of  the 
amount spent on import of crude oil in 1999-2000.  Growing dependence  on 
imported crude oil and soari ng price of crude oil in international market w hich 
touched an all time high at 55 $ per barrel, will not only drain our resources but  
also further fritter away our scarce fore ign exchange reserves.  Needless to say  
that India’s  economy is most vulnerable to  high oil prices and this vulnerability 
  

will increase as the economy grows in size  and power.  Besides the vulnerability 
of economy, huge dependenc e on imported crude oil may undermine national 
security in case of sudden disruption of  supply through import which c annot be 
ignored on account of event s and happenings in  the regions from where c rude 
supply is predominant.  Viewed in this cont ext, the energy security of the country 
is of paramount importance.  The Com mittee, therefor e, feel that a National 
Integrated Energy Policy for the c ountry should have been formulated and 
implemented long back to stem the ongoing drift towards energy crisis. 
 
 Surprisingly the issue of National In tegrated Energy Poli cy-an integrated 
approach’ is still at a nasc ent stage as on ly discussio ns, being coordinate d by 
Planning Commission, are being held.  A standing committee of Group of 
Ministers under the Chairmanship of t he Minister of Power  has also been 
constituted to study and formulate an ener gy policy , which would inc lude the 
implementation aspect also.   
 
 The Com mittee are, therefore, constrained to observe that since 
dependence, the Government had not addre ssed this issue of grave nationa l 
importance having a bearing on economy and security of the country with the 
attention it deserved. 
 
 The Committee desire that expeditious steps should be taken to formulate 
and implement a dynamic National Integr ated Ener gy Policy within a definit e 
time-frame, so that the country  move s away from excess ive dependenc e on 
fossil-fuels based ener gy.  The Committee feel that such a policy  would ens ure 
the security of our energy supplies and als o would make it sure that our country 
does not become vulnerable to the vagaries of the global oil market. 
 
  

Reply by the Government  
 
Formulation of Integrated Energy Policy 
 
The National Common Minimum  Programme of the G overnment (NCMP) 
has prioritized enhancement of country’s energy security particularly in the area 
of oil.  It intends to put in place polic ies that encourage over seas investments in 
the hydrocarbon industry.  The Governm ent also int ends to pu rsue a hos t of 
initiatives signed at ensuring the nation’s assured access to energy resources in 
view of their criticality in the econom ic growth. Rising to this call of the 
Government, the Ministry of Power under the Allocation of Business Rules 1961, 
and as per  their responsib ility fo r formula tion, acceptance, implementation  and  
reviews of any policy relating to energy se ctor which cuts across sectors like fuel 
regions, etc has set up a Task  Force fo r the purpose.  It is proposed by  the 
Ministry of Power that all aspects relating to energy security as enunciated by the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister shall be addressed by the Task Fo rce.  The results of the 
engagement of the Task Force would seek  to address the national energy  
security issues imparting their due prio rity with appropriate inputs from the 
MOP&NG.   
 
In addition, an Expert Commi ttee to formulate Energy Policy has been se t 
up under the chairmanship of Dr. Kirit Parikh, Me mber (Energy), Planning 
Commission. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.4 
SEDIMENTARY BASINS 
 The Committee note that India has  an endowment of 26 sedimentar y 
basins stretching over  an area of  1.39 mill ion sq.km on land  and 1.75 million sq 
km. offshore, including the vast stretc h of sedimentary basin area measuring 
1.35 million sq.km. in deep wa ter areas.  All these bas ins are prognosticated to 
hold abo ut 28 billion  tonnes of hydrocarbon resources.  Out o f a total of 26  
sedimentary basins, so far sev en bas ins are in commercial pr oduction stage.   
These basins categorized as category I basin  covering 16% of total basinal area,  
hold about 66% of prognosticated resour ces of the country and account for  
almost entire hydroc arbon disc overed so  far.  Be sides category I basins, 
category II basins have also got hydr ocarbon but are yet to be commercially  
exploited.  The Committee desire that concerted efforts should be made by using 
state-of-the art technology to com mercially exploit these basins as well.  Basins  
under category III & IV which ar e total 17 in number are st ill under/unexplored 
basins.  To assess and loc ate additional potential resources of these bas ins, the 
Committee note that DGH is  carrying out a number of  geo-scientific surveys, 
either alone or in c ollaboration with nat ional/international companies.  The 
Committee desire that the surveys should be completed expeditiously and efforts 
for exploration of thes e basins, be intens ified so that t heir hydrocarbon potential 
is fully tapped as early as possible. The Government should also award more 
and more blocks under NELP to various companies in the less explored areas 
and offer more incentives for the compani es who undertake exploration in these 
blocks. 
 Due to inc rease in demand for oil and persistently mounting oil prices  
which have been inflating our o il imports bill year after year , its is imperative that 
efforts should be intensified to increas e indigenous production and for thi s all 
sedimentary basins need to be fully ex plored.  T he Committee note that 
Hydrocarbon Vision 2025 envis ages tota l appraisal of sedim entary bas ins of 
India by the year 2025 and in or der to meet the objectives of the Hydrocarbon 
Vision 2025, action plans are stated to have been drawn up to achieve the 
following appraisal programme :- 
  

- 25% by 2005 
-  50% by  2015 
- 100% by 2025 
 The Comm ittee desire that progress of action plan should be m onitored 
strictly so that the targets laid down for appraisal of basins are adhered to. 
 
Reply by the Government  
In order to achieve the set goal for appraisal of Indian sedimentary basins 
as indicated in India Hydrocar bon Vision – 2025, 10 th F ive Year Plan was 
formulated to get exploration coverage upto 35% of sedimentary basins by 2006-
07. 
Government of India has so far conc luded four rounds of NELP offers, 
wherein a total of 90 exploration blocks have been awarded to various  
companies, both NOCs and private parties , which will substantially enhance the 
basin appr aisal. In the fifth round of NELP, 20 blocks  have been offered. With 
future offers of NELP blocks and impl ementation of the explorat ion programme 
chalked out by the NOCs and t he Pvt. Pa rties , the basinal  areas that are 
covered by the programme would be more than 35% by the end of the 10 th Plan 
period (2002-07). 
 
In the medium -to long-term, continuation of the efforts through NOCs and 
private parties with the firming up of the knowledge building activities in frontier 
basins will lead to further upgradation of appraised basinal areas.  
With the above efforts put in place, appr aisal of the hitherto poorly explored 
areas of the Indian sedim entary basins will gradually improve; and by 2025,  the 
total basinal area of the c ountry is likely to be apprai sed by different players in 
the Indian upstream sector.  
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
  

 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.6 
NEED FOR PERIODICAL REVIEW OF EXPLORATION PROGRAMME 
The Com mittee note that to identify more hydrocarbon reserves and to 
augment production of crude oil, ONGC  has formulated its exploration 
programme whic h is repor tedly being purs ued by it  vigorously.   The X Plan 
exploration programme of ONGC encompa sses the carrying ou t of exploratory 
activities on a time bound manner bot h in pre NELP acr eages and the 
exploration blocks acquired during the f our rounds of the NELP.  The Committee 
note that the exploration in puts put in plac e during t he first two years of X Plan 
have resulted in 12 new hy drocarbon finds which hav e opened up new se ctors 
for further exploration and a pot ential for accretion of new hy drocarbon.  The 
Committee desire that progr ess of the X Plan explor ation programme should be 
reviewed periodically to ensure that there are no slippages of targets. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The performance of ONGC is monito red and reviewed periodic ally during 
the year by DGH and MoPNG and final evaluation, in t erms of reserve accretion 
as part of the performance of ONGC, is  done at the end of year by DPE. The 
plan performance and mid- term review  is c arried out by  the Planning 
Commission. 
 
DGH monitors and reviews the explor ation performance with r espect to 
the committed work programme for the acreage during its exploration cycle.  
 
Based on the MoU by ONGC annual ly wit h MoPNG, a comprehensiv e 
performance evaluation is done by DPE in respect to different parameters, which 
include reserve accretion as explorati on performance parameter besides ot her 
physical and financ ial perfo rmance parameters, dynamic  efficiency parameters 
like HR initiatives, R&D activ ities, gas  flaring reduction, production costs, 
accident containment, process s afety audits, ISO 14001 certification, employee 
  

productivity, manpower redeploy ment plan,  IT upgradation an d modernisation,  
evolution of benchmarks, etc. 
The Mid Term Review (MTR) of the 10th Plan exploration programme has 
been undertaken considering the results obtained during first two years of 10 th 
plan (2002-2004). The exploration progra mme for the period 2004-07 has been 
drawn to optimise the efforts in acr eages under various dispens ations. During 
the remaining period of 10th plan (2004-07), certain areas of higher prospectivity 
have been accorded focused in put planning. Based on the mid-term review of 
the X-plan, the overall targets fo r physical inputs  for ONGC have been 
enhanced, so as to achieve the set objectives. 
The details  of planned exploratory inputs and those envisaged in draft 
MTR* for the period 2004-07, in ONGC operated domestic acreages are given 
below. 
First two years of X-
Plan 
(2002-04) 
Remaining three years of X-
Plan 
(2004-07) 
Exploratory Inputs and 
Accretion STP 
(Upside) Actual STP 
(Upside) MTR 
2D Seismic Data (GLK/LK) 39680 27052 6175 40505 
3D Seismic Data (sq km) 24377 28530 13732 66833 
Exploratory Wells (No.) 267 274 327 401-471 
* Note :  MTR yet to be approved by the ONGC Board. 
STP: Start of Term Project 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.7 
NEED FOR EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGIES 
The Committee note t hat ONGC has fo rmulated short, m edium and long 
term exploration and production strategies , for next 20 years, which env isage 
doubling of  in-place volume of hydrocar bons from 6BT to 12BT, improving the 
recovery factor and augmentation of prod uction.  T he Committee desire that 
  

ONGC should initiate steps with due prom ptitude to im plement these strategies 
and monit or their progress periodic ally to  ensure that achiev ements are in 
consonance with the strategies planned. 
 
Reply by the Government  
To sustain this growth, ONGC has  drawn up ambitious  strategi c 
objectives, which inc lude doubling the oil and gas in plac e volume. Having 
accreted six billion tonnes in place hydrocarbons (O+OEG) in its first 45 year s of 
operations, ONGC now aims to double the in -place volume of hydrocarbons in 
the next 15 years by 2020. The second st rategic objective is to augment the 
global recovery factor from the existing 28  per cent to the gl obal norm of 40 per 
cent in the next 20 years. 
The short -and medium - to - long term strategy of ONGC has two 
components. The short term component has been dovetailed into the X Plan and 
is under implementation. As part of 10 th Plan, stress is being laid to intensify  
exploration in hitherto  less explored/unexplored deepwater areas, have seismic  
surveys conducted in key growth areas and knowledge building in new sectors of 
producing as well as frontier basins.  
To improve the recovery factor fr om the existing fields, ONGC has 
identified 19 IOR-EOR schemes in 15 major fields which hold a major part of the 
company’s reserves. 16 of thes e schem es are already under implementation, 
including t he ambitious redevelopment of its largest field, viz., Mumbai High . 
Besides, ONGC is extending the IOR/EOR techniques to other fields as well. Six 
more fields, namely, Linch, Nandasan,Wa sna, Limbodra, Gamij and South Ka di 
have been brought  under the IOR schem es and EOR pilots are under 
implementation in Viraj, Ankleshwar, Jhalora, Becharaji, Lakwa, Padra, Badarpur 
and Kosamba fields. ONGC has been conti nuously incorporati ng new drilling , 
completion, production and work-over techniques as part of these efforts.   
 
 The programme beyond X- Plan period for ms part of  medium – long term 
strategy.  The explor ation strategy envisioned beyond 2007 will be in continuum 
with the pr esent strategy focusing more on the new sectors/basins in the y et-to-
  

be-established basins and deepwater/frontier areas/sectors. Technology will play 
a leading role in the implementation of the exploration strategy. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 8 
NEED FOR IMPROVED OIL RECOVE RY (IOR)/ENHANCED OIL RECOVER Y 
(EOR) INITIATIVES 
 
The Com mittee note that ONGC and OIL have taken up IOR/EOR  
initiatives for increasing Hydroc arbons reserves. As far as ONGC is c oncerned, 
the Com mittee note that in April 20 02, ONGC screened 41 fields for  
implementation of IOR/EOR schemes. T hough these fields were studied during 
last two years, the Committee note that the major inputs for these fields are yet to 
be firmed up. It is als o noted th at studies in respect of m any fields are either in 
progress or yet to be planned. It is  needless  to mention that without  
completion/initiation of IOR/EOR studies, it would not be possible to implement 
IOR/EOR programme and dev elop the fields as per tim e bound action plan. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the studies which ar e incomplete, and are yet 
to be carried out, should be init iated and st eps be taken for further exploration 
and development of these fields s o as to achieve the objectives laid down during 
X five year plan. 
 
Reply by the Government  
 
ONGC 
 
ONGC has firmed up plans to implement  IOR/ EOR schemes for 41 fields  
identified during April 2002. All t he fields have been taken up and studies are at 
various stages. For the following fields , inputs have already been identified and 
they are under various stages of implementation. These are: 
  
 
 
  

1) Linch 
2) Nandas an 
3) Wasna 
4) Limbodra 
5) Gamij 
6) South Kadi 
Action has already been init iated for other fields  specially to ac hieve the 
production target set forth in the five- year plan. 
 
OIL 
 
Various IOR/EOR steps whic h were im plemented by Oil India Ltd. (OIL)  
over the y ears were polymer  f looding, peripheral wate r injec tion, crystal gas  
injection, water flooding etc. 
 
At the beginning of 2005-06, water inje ction is ongoing in 13 out of 24 
identified reservoirs and it is plann ed to enhance water injection in t hese 
reservoirs. OIL also has plans t o start water injection  in 9 ne w reservoirs with  
following break up:- 
 
Field No. of new 
reservoirs 
Oil In Place  (MMT) 
Nahorkatiya 3 7.22 
Moran                 1* 14.61 
Jorajan 5 23.03 
Total 9 44.86 
 
               * Gas Injection was done in this reservoir earlier 
 
By end of X Plan, 31 reserv oirs would be subjected to IOR/EOR with total O il in- 
Place of 214.22 MMT. Water injection rate is planned to be enhanced from the 
present level of around 8,500 KLPD to 13,000 KLPD by the end of X Plan. The 
target laid out for the next two years (upto end of X Plan) is as follows: 
 
  

Year Water  Injection Target 
(KLPD) 
Financial Outlay 
(Rs. Crores) 
Total No. of 
Wells 
2005-
06 
11,200 18.00 64 
2006-
07 
13,000 8.38 77 
 
In addition, action has also been taken to improve production by 
addressing well bore problem s in producing wells pla gued with premature water  
production, sand ingression, wax deposition in production tubing etc. 
 
The services of the Institute of  Reservoir Studies (IRS), ONGC, 
Ahmedabad were requisitioned by OIL for examining the suitabi lity of Alkali-
Surfactant-Polymer (ASP) fl ooding in OIL’s fields. In the study carried out in a  
single reservoir, viz., Nahorkatiya Barail IV+V sand, Nahorkatiya well no. 1 block, 
the improvement in oil re covery with ASP c hemicals was found not encouraging 
enough to warrant a field trial.  
 
The help of IRS,  ONGC, Ahm edabad is also being taken f or 
implementation of MEOR techniques, i.e ., EOR using micro-organisms and/or 
bio-surfactants in 3 wells of OIL on an experimental basis. Field implementation 
has commenced in 2 wells and the first well has shown encouraging results. 
 
OIL also discovered heavy oil in t he Bikaner-Nagaur Basi n in Rajasthan. 
OIL has signed an agreement with PDVSA,  Intevep Venezuela on 29-11-2002 to 
assess a suitable technology and then impl ement a field scale pilot plant to 
assess techno-commercial feasibility for fi eld implementation. The Phase-I work, 
viz., selection/study of the method has been completed.  Wor ks are initiate d for 
Phase-II of the proje ct which  e nvisages drilling of t wo wells ( 1 inc lined & 1  
vertical), cyclic injection of steam (hu ff and puff) and setting up of Pilot scale 
production facilities  for expe rimental p roduction of heavy  oil/bitumen as  
recommended by PDVSA, Intevep . 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.9 
 
SCHEMES FOR REDEVELOPMENT OF MUMBAI HIGH FIELD 
 
ONGC has also drawn up plans  for redevelopment of Mumbai High field 
and implementation of Improv ed Oil Rec overy (IOR ) in 14 other major fields  
through 19 schemes, out of which 16 schemes are under va rious stages  of 
implementation. The Committee desire t hat other 3 schemes  should also be 
formulated and implemented expeditiously.  Above all,  the Committee note that 
ONGC has planned specific m easures for maintaining/enhanc ing oil and gas 
production in the fields being operated by  it. The Committee de sire that these 
measures should be finalis ed and im plemented with due promptitude. The 
Committee would als o like to be appris ed of the impact of these measur es in 
enhancing oil production. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The 16 sc hemes which have been finaliz ed as a part of IOR programme 
are at various stages of implementation. The status  of the remaining three 
schemes is as follows. 
1) North Kadi Phase-II: 
The feasibility report for Phas e-II was approved by ONGC on 30 th Dec 2004 
envisaging ultimate recovery of 21. 226 MMt oil corresponding to 0.363 MMt 
incremental oil. The inputs envi saged are 21 new wells  and scheduled 
completion is March 2007. The total cost  of the project is 32.22 Crores. T he 
project is under implementation. 
2) Additional development of Part-II Heera and South Heera: 
Two platforms, namely, HZ and HG, hav e been proposed in this project after 
completion of the reservoir simulati on s tudies by  ONGC. These projects  
envisage drilling of 12 wells at a cost of 580.27 Crores. The cumulative gain from 
HZ platform is 2.645 MMt of oil and 0. 736 BCM of gas by 2020-21. From HG  
platform the cumulative free gas is 3.017 BCM by 2015-16. The likely date of  
  

completion of inputs i s Feb. 2007. T he project has been approved by ONGC.  
However, PAC approval is yet to be obtained. 
 
3) Lanwa EOR: 
Concern f or enhancing recovery nece ssitated the identification and 
application of a s uitable thermal EOR me thod in the field. Extensive laboratory 
studies established the technical viability of thermal EOR processes like in-sit u 
combustion and steamflooding.  Howev er, in-situ c ombustion process was 
preferred over steamflood due to high dept h (1050 m), high reservoir pressure 
(105 kg/cm2) and inadequate regular source of fresh water around the field. 
An in-situ pilot was initiated in 1992. Air injection in the pilot was stopped after 
injection of 63.5 million cubic metre of air in November 1999.The performance of  
the pilot indicated that: 
• In-situ combustion process could be sustained and propagated. 
• Pilot was t echnically successful result ing in incremental oil production of  
24,000 tons by November 1999.  
• Potential of the process in terms of recovery and optimization of Air to Oil 
ratio could not be established due to operational constraints like  
o Interruption of air injection in the initia l phases du e to 
sanding in injector 
o Compressor problem resulting in inadequate air supplies as  
compared to designed rates. 
o Frequent closure of pilot pr oducers due to operational 
problems. Low liquid withdrawal rates due to problems in 
artificial lifts  
• The economics of the pilot, consideri ng all the expenditure incurred, is far  
from expectations, partly due to the extended period of the pilot project. 
 
In view of the above, an additional pi lot was approved not only to bridge 
the gap in practical knowledge & experience, but also to know the exact potential 
of the process. 
  

The additional pilot project has been approved by EC in October 2000 at a 
cost of Rs 560 lakhs. The pilot is under implementation. 
 
ISC process is under app lication on com mercial scale in the adjacent 
Balol field. As there is no geological  boundary between Lanwa and Balol fields, 
the effect of ongoing air injection in Balo l is being felt in Lanwa in terms of 
improvement in oil pr oduction. As such, it is contemplated to commercializ e the 
process in Lanwa field, dovetailing the additional pilot project.  
 
Additionally, one more IOR scheme is under implementation. 
 
1. Additional development of MHN L-II reservoir: 
The study  in respec t of additional development of MHN L-II has been 
completed by IRS and feasibility report is yet to be formulated. The inputs  
identified for this dev elopment envisages installation of two platfo rms, drilling of 
14 new wells and sidetracking of 11 wells in addition to redistribution of water 
injection by converting 4 additional producers to injector. The env isaged 
incremental oil is 2.81 MMT by 2030. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.12 
 
COST OF PRODUCTION 
 
The committee note that ONGC c ompared the cost of different oil majors,  
as reported by Deustche Bank in their r eport `Major oils 2003’  with its own cost 
for a five year period and f ound that the cost of ONGC  was quite comparable to 
international standards. The committee are of the view that there should be no 
room for complacenc y in making efforts to  further reduce the cost of production . 
The committee note that ONGC & OIL are ta king certain steps to reduce the cost 
of production. The c ommittee desire that  these steps shou ld be implemented 
expeditiously and monitored periodically to attain the desired results. 
  

Reply by the Government 
 
ONGC 
 
Steps to reduce cost  of produc tion, as noted by the Committee in its  
report, are already under im plementation in ONGC. These steps are continuous 
in nature for optimisation of cost of production and are under continuous focus of 
management for deriving maximum benefi t. Some of the major production/ 
operational related steps are outlined below: 
 
1. Enhancing oil and gas production through implementation of Improved Oil 
Recovery/Enhanced Oil Recov ery schem es, additional dev elopment of  
existing fields and putting new fields on production as quickly as possible.  
   
2. Increasing gas sa les/utilisation and re ducing ga s flaring,  thereby 
increasing revenue and reduc ing overheads & operating cost per unit of  
saleable product.    
                                                          
3. Introduction of state of the art technologies  
 
4. Operational de-bottlenecking, syst ems optimisation and efficiency 
enhancement                               
Amongst the major focus areas for reduction in c ost of production is  
continuous induction of state- of-the-art technology. Major initiatives taken, for 
induction of new advanced equipment as  well as upgradation of existing 
resources with state-of-the-art equipment, are as under: 
 
1. The offshore rigs are being sent for dry-docking at a scheduled interval for 
refurbishment and major lay up programme.  
2. ONGC has already initiated acti on to refurbish and upgrade its onland 
drilling rigs in phases. Upgradation and refurbishment of 12 onland drilling 
rigs was taken up through M/s BHEL in the first phase. Till date 11 rigs  
have been completed and put back in operation. Further, 37 drilling rigs  
  

have also been identified to be taken up in phase II & III through BHEL /  
ICB after completion of phase I 
3. Workover rigs are also being refurbished in phas es through Central 
workshops at Baroda & Sivasag ar, till date refurbishment of 08 rigs has 
been completed..  Further programme of refurb ishment of 17 rigs during 
2005-07 has also been finalized. 
4. Supply order for 25 new state-of -art rigs was placed to M/s UPET,  
Romania. Delivery of  these rigs  has commenced from Feb’04. T ill date 5 
rigs have been received and are in operation. Delivery of remaining rigs is 
scheduled to be completed by Dec’2005.  
5. 6 No. High pressure advanc ed Ce menting units  with state of art 
equipment have been purchased and commissioned.  
6. Refurbishment & upgradation of cem enting units through internal/external 
agencies is in hand apart from replacem ent of old Cementing units with 
new high- pressure Cementing units. Till date 23 c ementing units have 
been refurbished, another 10 units would be refurbished by March’2006 . 
Plan has also been drawn for taking up remaining 24 units through ICB.  
7. New state-of-art logging units are also being procured for replacing ol d 
onshore units. Supply order has already been placed for 5 open-hole units 
and 10 cased-hole units. Units are ex pected by December 2005. Supply  
order has also been placed for 4 offshore logging units; Units are 
expected by March 2006. 
8. Supply order for 33 new  stimulation units has also been placed during the 
year; units are expected by end 2005. 
 
ONGC is also taking steps to optimize the Human Resources so as to reduce 
the cost of production and remain competitiv e.  In this regard, ONGC has taken 
several initiatives: 
a) Introduction of Voluntary Retirement Scheme  
b) Redeployment of surplus manpower fr om one discipline to another based 
on organizational need in addition to t he job rotation and transfer policy of  
the organization.   
  

c) In order to facilitate r edeployment of surplus manpo wer in c ertain cadres 
due to changes in tec hnology and improv ed work processes, an initiative 
has been t aken to revise the manning norms for vari ous activities/work  
processes under ARCUBE (R3) Project encompassing three Rs as Role, 
Roster and Respon sibility.  A consultant of In ternational repute has  
been hired for this purpose.   
 
The study is under pr ogress and final  recommendations are expected by  
end of August, 2005.  The im plementation of the same shall be carried out 
through out the organization within one year of approval of the recommendations.  
The identified surplus manpower shall be trained for their gainful utilization for the 
categories where shortages are there 
 
There is a conscious effort in all activities to keep costs to the minimum so 
as to achieve the best possible lowest uni t cost of production. However, due to 
aging of fields, more efforts are requi red to maintain/augment production level 
resulting in increased cost of operation.  
 
It may also be added that globally, the cost of oil field services (like drilling 
rigs, logging services, etc.,) normally mo ves in tandem with oil prices. Sin ce the 
global oil prices are at present  at a very high level, the cost of oil field services  
has also gone up. T his has an upward impact on the cost of production of 
ONGC.  
 
Further, it may be brought out that effo rts to improve the ‘Recover y factor’ 
of fields lead to higher per unit cost of  production. Similarly, production from 
marginal fields has higher per unit cost of production. Such efforts are, however, 
undertaken in the economic inter ests of the country, because of th e even higher 
cost of oil imports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

OIL 
 
Oil India Ltd. has identified the following key steps for reducing the cost of 
crude oil production : 
 
i) Technology induction for production au gmentation to increase 
employee productivity. 
ii) Outsourcing of operational ser vices for water injection stations, 
scrapping of wells etc. 
iii) Switching over from road transportation mode to pip eline mode in 
remote areas for crude transportation. 
iv) Judicious utilization of  infrastructure facilities to share cost of 
exploration and production activities.  
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
  

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.3 
NEW EXPLORATION LICENSING POLICY (NELP) 
The Committee note that India today remains one of the least explored 
regions with well density per thousand sq. km being among the lowest.  To boost 
the level of exploration activity in the country so that  new finds can be made and 
level of cr ude oil and gas  produced ma y be increased, the New Exploration 
Licensing Policy (NELP) was formulated by  Government of India in 1997.  NELP 
was operationalised in 1999.  The Committee have been informed that NELP has 
considerably increased the exploration ac tivities of Indian sedim entary basins.  
However, from the details of wor k pr ogramme and ac hievement of exploration 
blocks offered under NELP-I to IV, the Committee note that there was a huge 
shortfall in achievem ent of target perta ining to seismic survey and drilling of 
blocks awarded under  NELP-II, III and IV.  As  against the targets of conducting 
10415, 16320 and 12655 sq.kms of 3D seis mic survey the actual achievem ents 
were 11752 and 8072 and NIL sq. km. respectively .  Position with regar d to 
drilling of wells is n o better either.  As  against the targets of drilling  of 52 and 57 
wells under NELP II & III the actual num bers of exploratory wells drilled were 34 
and 1 respectively.  The Com mittee ar e unhappy  over the slow pace of work  
being  und ertaken in seismic survey and drilling activities, and desire that DGH 
which is mandated to monit or and revi ew the exploration programme of 
Companies engaged in E&P activities, shou ld closely  monitor the progress of 
exploration of all the blocks offered under  NELP-I to IV and suggest corrective 
measures so that targets laid are achieved. 
 
 On NELP, Public sector compani es engaged in E&P activ ities have 
informed the Committee that they are exper iencing certain difficulties due to its  
present provisions.  They have suggested certain changes like providing of more 
incentives for fronti er basins, more  powers for approval t o Manage ment 
Committee related t o phase extens ion a ssignments, special incentiv es for 
development of marginal fields, timely availability of data of blocks offered, 
according infrastructure industry status  of E&P projects, granting of PEL in 
shortest possible time, environmental clea rance, and awarding of blocks on the 
basis of minimum work programme carried out. 
 
The Committee desire that Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should 
review all the suggestions with an o pen mind and take appr opriate steps to 
modify NELP so as to make it more attractive and conducive to the needs of the 
companies engaged in E&P activities.  The Committee also de sire that N ELP 
should be r eviewed and modified periodically to ensur e that terms of Production 
  

Sharing Contract (PSC) are comparable to the best of terms of PSC offered by  
any country in the world-so that more  and more companies from India and 
abroad could be attracted to bid for exploration blocks offered under NELP. 
 NELP should be rev iewed in such a way that all PSUs engaged in E&P 
activities should be given preference over  other companies in  the bidding taking 
into account their capabilities t o undertak e the vent ure.  Thereafter preference 
may be accorded to domestic private sector E&P companie s over foreign  
companies in the matter of awarding of blocks under NELP. 
 
Reply by  the Government 
 
Under New Explorat ion Licensing Policy (NELP), the minimum work 
programme (MWP) is committed by the operators to be completed in t hree 
phases. Phase-I is of 3 to 4 years of durat ion while phases II and III are of 2 to 3 
years duration.  Operator has the option of enteri ng the next phase based on the 
results of the previous phase. T hus, it  may not be appropria te to compare the 
total work committed in all three phases of all the blocks wit h the actual work 
carried out, as the op erator may not enter  Phase II and III in all the blocks. The 
actual work of a phase is to be com pared with work commitment only for that  
particular phase.  
 
Also, in the initial years of the first phase, the oper ator mainly interprets, 
reinterprets and does  special processing of the existing data. Thus a true 
comparison can be made only after the completion of that phase.  
 
If the committed work programme is compared in the above m anner, it is  
observed that phase wise work progress is satisfactory. 
 
It may be noted that most of th e NELP II blocks are still in phase I and 
only two blocks have entered phase II. None of the NELP II blocks have entered 
phase II. 
 
All the NELP III blocks are in explor ation phase I. The e xploration phase I 
is upto December 2006 for onland blocks, April 2006 for shallow water block s 
and April 2007 for deep water blocks.  
 
At present, all the NELP IV bloc ks are also in e xploration phas e I. The 
exploration phase for a majority of NELP IV blocks is upto March 2007 for onland 
blocks and March 2008 for deep water blocks.   
 
The work progress in the bloc ks is satisfactory and committed work is  
expected to be carried out before completi on of respective phases. Exploratory 
drilling work would be at a faster pace in t he final ye ars of the phases, as  the 
interpreted data will be available for deciding the drilling locations.  
DGH closely monitors the work progress of each block and endeavors that 
the committed work programme of every phase is completed within the stipulated 
time. It may also be noted that as per  the terms of the Production Sharing 
  

Contracts, contractors cannot enter th e next phase of ex ploration without  
completing the Minimum Work P rogramme of the previous phase.  Also they are 
bound to c omplete the MWP co mmitments under the  contract failing  which they 
have to pay the Government for the uncompleted part of the MWP. 
 
Review of NELP to provide preference to PSUs : 
Government of India formulated New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) 
in the year 1997 with attractive terms and conditions for global bidding.  Basic  
thrust of NELP is to prov ide a level play ing field so that global technology  and 
knowledge is made available for explorat ion and exploitation of  hydrocarbons in 
India.  Under the NELP rounds, the blo cks are being offered by Government of 
India through international competitive bidding, where all the companies whether 
Indian or f oreign, private or NOC, have to submit their bids in the for m of 
Minimum Work Programme (MWP) commit ment and fiscal terms. The bids carry 
different marks for onland, shallow water and deep water blocks. The blocks  are 
awarded to the successful bidders irrespecti ve of  their status as PSU’s as  or  
national or international companies. NE LP round V h as been offered with more 
attractive terms and transparent evaluation criteria.  In NELP-V,  69 bids were 
received for the 20 exploration blo cks on the bid closing day i.e. 31 st May, 2005. 
The bids evaluation is in progress. 
After each round of NELP the terms are reviewed with inputs from all 
potential bidders.  Such inputs are also invi ted from the PSUs.  This exercis e will 
also be undertaken for the next round and feedback from all companies  will 
definitely be valuable in further improving the quality of future rounds. 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 10 
NEED TO ENHANCE THE RECOVERY FACTOR BY ONGC 
The Com mittee note that current av erage recovery factor from the 
producing fields of ONGC is 28%. T hough the recovery factor of ON GC is 
comparable to the recovery factor being achieved by oil companies in USSR and 
China, it is well be low the recovery factor  of US whic h is of the order of 32% to 
33% and Norwegian Companie s which have the rec overy factor of the or der of 
45% to 55%.  The Committee note that  ONGC has set a goal to inc rease 
average recovery factor from 28% to 40% by 2020.  The increase in the average 
recovery factor from the current 28%  to 40% will appreciably augment India’s  
hydrocarbon reserves and will help in reducing the wideni ng gap between oil 
supply and demand.  The Committee desire t hat ONGC should not only strive to 
achieve the laid down objective of achiev ing recovery factor of 40% by 2020 but 
also analysis the field cycle concept which have helped Norwegian Companies to 
achieve a recovery factor of the order  of 45% to 50% and follow a suit able 
concept to achieve the recovery factor of the order of 45% to 50%. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Recovery f actor is dependent on seve ral parameters. So me of the key  
ones are: 
 
• Reservoir rock, its property, heterogeneity, etc. 
• Properties of reservoir fluids. 
• Energy system operating in the r eservoir which is responsible in expulsion of 
the oil. 
• Depth, logistics. 
• Techno-ec onomic consideration. 
In fact, no two reservoirs are identical  in nature and, ther efore, it is not 
possible to draw a corollary between t hem. The study by National Petr oleum 
Council of USA in 1984 has  concluded “Really defina ble correlation of recovery 
efficiency cannot be provided as  quantification of reservoir heterogene ity is not  
possible”. 
  

Even among ONGC’s assets from some of the fields like Ankleshwar and 
Narimanam recovery  ex pectation is of the order of 60%. ONGC is formulating 
IOR and EOR plans f or achieving the overa ll corporate goal of 40% recovery by 
2020. However, a few of the fields have been analyzed for the field cycle concept 
and inputs  are being continuously planned and production plans drawn up to 
2030. ONGC is not restricting itself to 40%  recovery but all out efforts are being 
made to achieve a recovery of more than 40%. For example, in some of the pays 
of Gandhar Field more than 40 % recovery is already expected. In GS-12 sand of 
Gandhar field, the recovery expecte d is  around 58% and efforts are still 
continuing to further improve this figure. Major Fields  of ONGC will be tak en up 
for field cycle concept in due course of ti me. The concept involv es identification 
of inputs, application of suitable EOR methods and other technology induction for 
achieving optimum recovery. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 11 
DEEP WATER EXPLORATION 
The Committee note that the deep water basinal area constituting about  
43% of the sedimentary area of the Country  is estimated to contain about seven 
billion tons of hydroc arbon resource.  So  far India’s  exploration and production 
activities were concentrated mainly on category I basins which have almost fully 
been exploited by now.  Obviously, ther e is no choic e but to change the present 
exploration strategies and c oncentrate on deep wat ers whic h hold a large 
potential of hydrocarbons.  The Committ ee note that though ON GC started its  
deep water exploration programme during seventies but  success has been 
eluding it so far.  To give an impetus to its deep water exploration, ONGC 
launched ‘Sagar Sammridhi’ project in A ugust, 2003.  The Committee find tha t 
after the launch of this project, ON GC has achieved success by finding 
hydrocarbons from on of the two wells, discovered so far. ONGC has set a target 
of achiev ing another 6 billion tones of hydrocarbons  by 2020, and 2/3 of t he 
reserves are expected to be discovered from deep waters.  As exploration in 
  

deep water basins involve huge expenditu re, it should be ensured that  
exploration activities in deep waters do not slow down for want of funds. 
 
Reply by the Government  
The exploration progr amme of ONGC is being imple mented as per the X-
Plan exploration programme (2002-07). The deepwater component of the total X 
Plan progr amme includes acquiring 14000 LK of 2D, 17900 sq km of 3D and 
drilling of 34 exploratory wells. Of these envisaged inp uts, as on 1.04.2005, 
ONGC has already completed acquisition of 19348 LK of 2D   and 17141 sq km of 
3D seismic data and drille d 21 wells. Additi onally, three wells (G-4-4, L-1-1A an d 
Vashista-2) were under drilling as on 01.04.2005.  
ONGC currently holds 28 deepwater PEL acreages, of which 19 have been 
awarded under the four rounds of new exploration licensing policy (NELP). ONGC 
has completed the minimum work progr amme under Phase-I in three deepwater 
blocks, namely, KG-DWN-98/4, KG-DWN -98/5, MN-DWN-98/ 3, awarded under  
NELP-I and has entered the Phase-II of e xploration in these blocks. ONGC has 
completed the seismic data acquisition in the six deepwater blocks awarded under 
NELP-II within the timeframe as per  the Phase-I  committed minimum work  
programme. In the two blo cks awarded under NELP-III and  five blocks awarded 
under NELP –IV, seis mic data acquisition is in full swing to fulfill the committed 
work programme. The drilling in deepwater  exploration campaign is progressing  
with 3 drill ships, Belf ord Dolphin, Discoverer Seven Seas and ONGC’s own rig  
Sagar Vijay.   
The New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) of the Government has given 
a spec ial thrust to deepwater exploratio n by putting in plac e special terms for 
deepwater blocks.   
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 13 
 
SHORTAGE OF FUNDS 
 
The Committee have been informed that ONGC propose to rais e the 10 th 
plan outlay  as the funds init ially provided are likely to  fall short for the more  
intensified plan activities  likely to be undertaken by  it. The Committee, however, 
note that the extent of s hortage of funds is yet to be firmed up. The Committee 
desire that ONGC should make an assessm ent of its additional requirement of 
funds during 10 th plan and find ways and means to meet the requirement of 
funds. The Committee recommend that the Government and the Planning 
Commission should allocate fully  the additi onal funds r equired by ONGC during 
the Mid-Term Review of the Plan without making any cuts in the propos als of 
ONGC. 
 
Reply by the Government  
 
The exerc ise for mid-term review of 10 th P lan i s i n p rogress. O n 
finalization of the same, exact quant um of funds requir ement shall be 
ascertained. ONGC does not  require any allocation of funds by either the 
Planning Commission or the Government.  Any additional requirement of funds, if 
any, can be met through internal accr uals or though commercial borrowings  
without seeking budgetary support from the Government. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 14 
 
LIMITED HORIZON OF OIL 
 
Oil India Limited was incorporated as a joint venture company between 
the Government of India and Burmah Oil Company  (BOC) with equal s hare 
holding in the year 1959.  T he compan y was nationalised in 1981.  The 
Committee note that despite being one of the two premier national oil companies  
engaged in the work of exploration and production, OIL does not have a 
presence at all India level which a national company is  expected to have, and its 
most of the exploration and  production operations are mainly confined to No rth-
East part of the country.   
 
 One of the main reas ons for OIL’s li mited operations wa s on ac count of 
awarding of most of the blocks to OIL in North-East region before nationalisation 
on the ground that BOC, w ho was 50% owner of OIL, was already operating in 
North-East, therefore, new  exploration acr eages cont iguous to BOC’s area o f 
operations in the region were awarded to OIL. 
 
 The Com mittee, however, note that even after nationalisation of OIL in 
1981, a step-motherly treatment was met ed out to OIL, and they were awarded 
blocks in North-East coast and in Mahanadi offshore basins, Ganga Valley basin, 
Andaman offshore and Saurasht ra basin wh ich were r elinquished by ONGC for 
lack of commercial prospectivity.  Thus, it  is noted that OIL did not get blocks of 
their choic e even after nationalisation.  The Committee feel that in the era of 
global competition, stifling the operations of a company by thrusting upon it 
blocks which had earlier been relinquishe d by another company for lack of 
prospectivity is least desirable.  Before awarding a block, the Government should 
also take into consideration the choi ce of companies and their capability to 
undertake exploration and production activiti es in such blocks so as to ena ble 
them perform optimally.  After advent of  NELP, the Committ ee hope that all the 
companies will be treated on equal footing and OIL  would be able to enlarge its 
operations uniformally all ov er the countr y which will make it  a national oil 
company in true sense.   
  

Reply by the Government  
 
In order to broaden its horizon, Oil I ndia Ltd. is undertaking the following 
initiatives: 
 
i) Participation in the NELP Expl oration blocks, offered in various 
competitive rounds of bidd ing. At present OIL has participating interest in 
13 NELP blocks with operatorship in 5 onshore blocks. 
 
ii) OIL is putting emphasis to ventur e into overseas oil/gas exploration 
blocks, production / acquisition of produc ing properties in consortium with 
other partner’s or independently. 
 
iii) Joint bid ding, both with foreign  E&P c ompanies as well as In dian Oil 
PSU’s, for joint operation both in Indi a and overseas. OIL entered into a 
Strategic Alliance with I ndian Oil Corporation on  08.12.2004 for pursuing 
E&P opportunities overseas. 
 
iv) Equity participation in downstream industries. OIL intends to enhance its 
equity in Numaligarh Refinery Limited from the existing 12.35%. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
RECOMMENATION SL. NO. 19 
 
SPECIAL TRANS PARENT PROCUR EMENT PROCEDURES FOR OIL 
EXPLORING COMPANIES 
 
The Committee note that exploration activities r equire c utting edge 
technology for certain goods  and servic es and hardware/ software. It has been 
brought to the notice of the Committee that by fo llowing the normal procurement 
procedures it has not  been feas ible for the oil c ompanies to source the best 
technology because of the implicit increm ental cost. The Committee feel that if 
normal procurement procedure is dis advantageous t o be followed, then the oil 
exploring PSUs s hould be allowed to  evolve a special mechanism for 
procurement of cutting edge technology, as  long as the new procedure sought to 
  

be followed is  characterized by t ransparency, equity and fairness  which are the 
underlying principles of the usual procedure. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
Exploration activities require cu tting edge technology  for certain goods  
and servic es and hardware/ software and it  may not be feasible to source the 
best in class technology by following the normal procurement  procedure where 
the lowest bidder has to be the proposed one.   
 
ONGC has  been ask ed to suggest al ternative procurement procedures  
which can be fair, equitable and t ransparent while addressing its concerns in this 
area. 
  
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 20 
ONGC VIDESH LIMITED 
 
 ONGC Videsh Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of ONGC is engaged in 
overseas exploration and production of oil and gas to supplement the reserves of 
the parent company i.e. ONGC  and to augm ent the national energy security.  
The company was incorporated on 5th March, 1965 as Hydrocarbon India Private 
Limited and renamed as “ONGC Videsh Limited” (OVL) in 1989.  The Committee 
are, however, constrained to note that despite being in operation for almost three 
decade, now OVL’s share in World’s oil and gas r eserves is  minuscule being 
0.0825 percent only.  The Committee are constrained to note that OVL’s share in 
oil rich Middle East region which have rese rves to the tune of 63% is zero.  The 
position is  equally bad as regard to t he share in North, South and Central 
American regions, which have a total of 14.40% of the world reserves.  Needless 
to mention that OVL’s efforts in suppl ementing countries oil reserves have been 
highly pathetic.   
 While the world’s  major oil compani es like Shell and B.P. have operating 
in 80-100 countries, OVL’s E&P activities are confined to only 10 countries.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that des pite being in overseas  E&P activities 
for the last three decades, OVL has not done much to acquire oil fields overseas.   
  

Reply by the Government  
Till financial year 2003-04, ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) had presence in 8 
countries.  In 2004-05 OVL acquired expl oration bloc ks in another 4 cou ntries, 
thus taking the total to 12 countries, vi z., Russia, Sudan, Vietnam, Egypt, Cote’ d 
Ivoire, Australia, Libya, Iran, Iraq, Qatar, Syria and Myanmar.  In addition, OVL is 
also pursuing its efforts for acquisition of E&P assets in 47 countries.  In effect 
OVL’s efforts only took real shape in the beginning of the century with the 
acquisition of interest in Sakhalin-I in Russia, as the c ountry’s foreign exc hange 
reserves were not of the magnitude they are looking.  For most of its earlier  
history OVL had to operat e in an environm ent where foreign exchange reserves 
were not available to f und an aggressive overseas programme.  Being a late 
entrant into the field of equity oil, OV L has to compete aggressively with other 
international companies and has achiev ed a fair measure of success in a 
relatively short time in view of this.   
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 21 
 
ASSOCIATION OF MINISTRY  OF EXTE RNAL AFFAIRS FOR OIL RELATE D 
ECONOMIC DIPLOMACY 
 As our domestic reserves are limit ed and present proven fields have been 
developed to optimal levels, there is no alternative but to be in the forefront in the 
race for acquiring equity oil from abroad. 
 The Committee note that OVL is  fa cing stiff competition from oil 
companies of Malaysia and Chin a in its bid to acquire overseas oil equity.  The 
Companies from developed world such  as USA, Canada & Europe are also 
posing competition to OVL.   OVL recently  lost two good oil and gas acquisition 
opportunities in Suda n and Angola.  While Sudan bl ock was lost on account of 
delay in obtaining dec ision of CCEA, Ango la deal c ould not be ac quired, as the 
deal was pre-empted and given to China.  
  

 The Committee recommend that the system of single window clearance 
through ECS should be reoriented in a manner that would ensure that no delay is 
caused in securing the oil deals. 
 To obviate loss of deals on suc h accounts , the Committee recommend 
that OVL’s efforts should be supplemented by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas and by Ministry of External Affairs.   
 To clinch big deals in its quest for global energy, Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas should work in close tandem with the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 The Com mittee understand that for extending guidance and advice t o 
Indian oil companies in their efforts to acquire equity oil abroad, the Government 
have constituted an advisory Committee on Oil Dip lomacy for E nergy Sec urity 
comprising experts with specializ ed knowledge of the countries  and regions with 
whom the oil companies are expected to interact.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and other PSUs involved in E&P activities 
abroad should maintain a regular liaison with this Committee, apprise them about 
their future plans/ proposals for acquiring oil equity ab road and seek their help to 
clinch the deals. 
 
Reply by the Government  
 
Given the increasing  gap betw een demand and domestic availabilit y 
of crude oil, besid es taking appropriat e measures to acce lerate exploratory 
activi ties for enhancing domestic oil and gas production, i t has become 
essential, for enhancing our e nergy securi ty, to step up efforts overseas in 
search of equity oil  and suppl ementary  sources of oil and gas. 
 
Towards this end, and in keeping with the relevant obje ctives of the 
National C ommon Mi nimum Programme, ON GC Vi desh Ltd. (O VL), as well 
as other national oi l compani es such  as IOC, OIL and GA IL, have been 
pursuing the acqui sition of  equity oil abroad, as  well as the acquisi tion 
abroad of oil and gas exploration acreages and produci ng properties.  
These companies have Participating Interests i n oil and gas projects 
  

located in Vietnam, Sudan , Russia, Iraq, Iran, My anmar, Libya, S yria, 
Australia , Ivo ry Coast, Qa tar and Egyp t.      
           
OVL, in association with other o il sector PSUs, is  aggressively 
scouting for E&P opportunities in countries such as Venezuela, 
Kazakhstan, Kuwai t, Yemen, Chad, Nig er, Nigeri a, Angola, Cuba, Sierra 
Leone and Ecuador i n addi tion to efforts  to acqui re mo re E&P  assets in the  
countries where it is operating currently.  
 
For ex tending guidance and advice to  the Indian o il companies in 
their efforts to acqui re equi ty oil abr oad, Government ha ve constituted an 
Advisory Commi ttee on Oil Diplomacy fo r En ergy Sec urity co mprising  
experts wi th speciali zed knowl edge of  the countries and regions with w hom 
the oil companies are expected to interact. 
 
Discussions about possible areas of collaboration between India and  
Russia have been held at ministerial , official and commerci al levels, and 
the progress has been encouraging. 
 
Besides, negotiations have been ope ned with Iran for supply of 
natural gas by a transnat ional  pipeline through Pakist an.  Also, a trilateral  
Ministerial  meeting in Yangon in J anuary, 2005 agreed in principle on 
import of gas from  Myanmar to India through Bangladesh. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 25 
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING MECHANISM FOR OIL IMPORTING COUNTRIES 
 Currently oil markets are supply-led market and prices are determined by  
market forces.  The oil producing count ries have formed an ORGANISATION OF 
PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPEC) which cater to the interests of 
the oil producers.  It is seen that no fo rmal mechanism for collective bargaining 
exists among the oil importing countries.  The Committee desire that Government 
may initiate steps to form an understanding with major oil impor ting countries to 
create a forum to get reasonable prices for oil imports from OPEC and to protect 
the oil importing countries from being hit by high oil prices. 
 
Reply by the Government  
 
 With Asian destinations emerging as  the principal c onsumers for Asian 
production and the share of Asia in gl obal production and cons umption likely to 
progressively increas e, cooperation bet ween As ia pr oducers and consumers is 
crucial to ensuring stability, security and sustainability.  The fundamental to such 
cooperation must include moderation, dialogue, mutual understanding and 
respect, security of international supplies, demand supply equilibrium  and 
strategic partnerships based on reciprocit y of interests.  In vi ew of above,  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas had initiated an Asian dialogue aimed at 
evolving and elaborating an As ian cons ensus through the first Round Tab le of  
Asian Oil Ministers held in January, 2005 at New Delhi. 
 
 During the bilateral meeting held on the sidelines of the Round Table of  
Asian Oil Ministers held in January, 2005 c haired by the Minist er of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, the chairman had emphas ized the need for an effective buyer s 
forum where the buyers of Asia particularl y, China, Japan, India and Korea c ould 
get together to develop common approac h and uniform underst anding.  He had 
suggested that this forum could start wit h an informal gathering in Seoul in the 
near future.  The visiting Minister from Korea took note of  the suggestion and 
assured that the matter would be considered with k een indulgence.  It is,  
  

therefore, expected that the major oil importers will continue to meet to exchange 
information and work in a concerted manner.  
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 15th July, 2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 26 
ALTERNATE SOURCES OF ENERGY 
Primary energy requirement of our c ountry is growing continuous ly.  A s 
noted earlier, energy requirement which wa s 304.0 mtoe in 1999  rose to 345.3 
mtoe in 2003.  The energy dem and is expected to grow at the rate of 4.1% over 
the next two decades.  At present, India’s main sources of energy are fossil fuels 
i.e. oil, gas and coal.  India has only 0.4%  of oil and gas reserves of world.  In 
view of increasing demand for oil and gas wh ich is projected to go to 350 MT by 
2025 from the present level of  120MT, it seems that it  may not be possible for 
India to become self reliant in oil and gas .  To meet the country’s growing need 
for energy, the only alternative is  to develop energy from other sources like coal 
hydel, nuc lear, solar and other non conv entional sources of energy.  The 
committee note that two unc onventional sources of hydr ocarbons viz. Coal Bed 
Methane and Gas Hydrate have been identified by DGH for development.  The 
Committee hope that  these sources woul d improve our ener gy requirement 
considerably. 
 
 Besides development of alternate s ources, measures pertaining to energy  
conservation are equally im portant.  The Committee, th erefore, desire that the 
policy for energy conservation and their efficient use, should be brought out 
within a definite time frame so as to reduce the country’s dependence of 
Hydrocarbons to the barest minimum. 
 
 
 
 
  

Reply by the Government  
 
Govt. has till date a warded 16 CBM bloc ks through internationa l bidding 
for exploration and production of CBM in the country.  Total CBM resources in 16 
awarded blocks under CBM-I & CBM-II Rounds and on Nomination basis are 
assessed at 820 BCM and expected total pr oduction from these blocks  at 23 
MMSCMD at their peak production level. The commercial production from coal 
bed methane (CBM) is expected to commence from the year 2007. 
 
 As far as gas hydrat es are concerned, this source of energy is still in the 
R&D stage in the world and  India is an active parti cipant in this research 
programme internationally.  In addition  ONGC and GAIL ar e also exploring 
possibilities in the area of Underground Co al Gassific ation (UCG). Commercial 
production from gas hydrate in India is not envisaged in the near future. 
 
Thus, it may be stat ed that alt hough s incere efforts are being made to 
harness the alternate sources of ener gy like UCG & Gas Hydrate, the 
commercial production of gas in s ufficient quantities from these sources will take 
several years to commence. In view of  the above, it  seems that although the 
availability of alternate sources of energy will improve our energy requirement as 
expected by the committee, it would take some time. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
  

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  SL. NO. 2 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERALOF HYDROCARBONS (DGH) 
 The Committee in their second Report had recommended the following in 
regard to functioning of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH).  
“The Com mittee note that Government by a Resolution in 1993 
established Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) under administrative 
control of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas with the following objectives: 
1. To provide technical advice to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s 
on exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbon in India and abroad; 
2. To review the explor ation pr ogramme of companies  engaged in 
E&P activities; 
3. To reassess the hydrocarbon reserves discovered and estimated 
by the operating companies; 
4. To advise the Government on the offering of acreage for  
exploration; 
5. To review the development plans for commercial discoveries  of  
hydrocarbon reserves and advis e Government on the adequacy of 
such plan and on future exploitation strategies; 
6. To review and audit the management of Petroleum reservoirs; 
7. To maintain the E&P data base; and 
8. To advise Government on the layi ng down of safety norms in oil 
field operations, presc ribe pollution control measures and to ass ist 
in inspection and periodic safety audit. 
 
The Com mittee have been inf ormed by some of the PSUs who have 
recently ventured into E&P activ ities t hat non availability of  data of adjoining  
blocks at the time of data viewing of a particular block on offer b y Government 
and delay in availability of  technical data of awarded blocks were some of the 
major constraints being experienced by them in undertaki ng Exploration and 
Production activities.  There is no denyi ng the fact that access to adequate dat a 
is necessary for making a proper assessment of the blocks offered. 
 
Non availability of data at the disposal of oil exploration compa nies will 
dissuade them to undertake E&P activities  in the Country.  To obviate su ch a 
situation, the Committee recommends that DGH should possess data on all 
Indian basins by obtaining it from all the explorers.  The Committee also  feels  
that there is an imperativ e need for setting up of t he National E&P data base.  
The Com mittee notes that DGH has tak en some measures in this regard by  
conducting a feasibility study.  The Co mmittee desire that based on the outcome  
  

of such a study, expeditious steps may be taken to set up the National data base 
and archives.  It should be made mandatory for all companies to hand over a set 
of data collected by  them to the archives,  as this will help  DGH and ot her 
companies to make a realistic assessment of the reserves of blocks offered to 
them. 
 
Despite being entrusted with very im portant activities of monitoring and 
regulating India’s Hy drocarbon reserves, Exploration and Production activities  
within the country and abroad, the Commi ttee note that DGH does not have a 
cadre of it s own and its manpower is  drawn from v arious PSUs, mainly  ONGC 
and OIL on deputation. ONGC and OIL ar e the tw o premier oil companies  
engaged in most of the Expl oration and Production activiti es in the country and 
abroad.  The Committee feels that the m anpower drawn on deputation from the 
same Organization, working of which DG H is mandated to review and monitor, 
can hardly provide any effectiveness to t he functioning of DG H.  Moreover, an 
Organization, solely being manned by deputa tionists cannot provide continuity to 
its functioning.  In view of the import ant role entrusted to DGH, the Committee 
recommends that DGH should have its ow n separate, independent cadre of staff 
and should be empowered to take all decisions on the functions assigned to it.” 
 
Reply by the Government 
 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Tak en Reply  
with regard to the above recommendation have stated as follows:- 
 
“In order to assess the hydrocar bon potential of the blocks being offered 
by GOI under NELP rounds, information on the regional geology of the basin,  
wherein the offered blocks are located, is essential.  T he availability of more and 
more geological dat a will definitely in crease the confidence level of  the 
companies and will help in understandi ng the geology and tectonics which 
govern hydrocarbon distribution in various areas/ basins.   
 
Regional d ata has b een made  avai lable to E&P co mpanies u nder the 
ongoing 5th round of NELP in the form of dat a packages & information doc kets. 
Data of old wells, in the adjoining blo cks, drilled prior to the award of blocks 
under Pre-NELP and NELP rounds are also provided  to the interested 
companies. In this way, it is ensured that all the related data is made available to 
E&P companies.  
 
A National Data Repository of geo-sci entific data, ac quired by different 
agencies in the count ry is proposed to be s et up by DGH. Policy  for making the 
data available in the public domain will be worked out.  It would be mandatory for 
all the E&P companies to gi ve a copy of the data to DGH.  Once the National 
Data Repository is set up an open acreage system can be adopted wherein 
companies will have the freedom to choose an area of their interest from the 
available acreages. 
 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons  (DG H) was  es tablished t hrough a 
Government Resolution in 1993 under the administrative control of the Ministry of 
  

Petroleum & Natural Gas. DGH is carrying out its functions & res ponsibilities as 
per the terms of resolution as assigned by  the Ministry from time to time. The 
main activities include opening up of new/unexplored areas for exploration review 
of reservoir performance of major fiel ds, contract manageme nt of various  
exploration and exploitation activities of operating companies, evaluation process 
of various exploration & field dev elopment bidding rounds and rec ommendations 
to Government, implementation of NELP , monitoring of safety & environment 
aspects & other related activities. 
 
DGH does not have a cadre of its own and its manp ower is dr awn from 
various PSUs, mainly ONGC & OIL , on short term deputation. Various  
exploration blocks and discover ed fields  operated by Private Companies/Joint  
ventures are being monito red by DGH as per Produc tion Sharing Cont racts 
(PSCs). Each block/ field has  a minimu m work programme which  is  to be  
completed within the stipulat ed time frame. All the major decisions pertaining t o 
the block/field are tak en by the Management Committee of  the block /field within 
powers given to it under the PSC.  MOP&NG is in the process of rationalizing the 
staff requirements of DGH.” 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Please see paragraph 7 of Chapter I of the Report 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5 
UNDER ACHIEVEMENT OF SEISMIC SURVEY AND DRILLING TARGETS 
 
 The Committee in their Report ha d recommended with r eference to under 
achievement of Seismic Survey and Drilling Targets as follows: 
“The Committee note that targets for se ismic survey and drillin g laid by  
ONGC during IX Plan could not be achi eved and implemented in  the States of 
Assam, Nagaland, Tri pura and Himachal Pradesh due to one reason or the 
other.  Shortfall in achievement of target s in Assam State has been attributed to 
laying of greater emphasis on cov ering the entire area with a blanket 3D seis mic 
survey which resulted in compromising of 2D seismic survey planned targets.  In 
Nagaland, envisaged programme coul d not be implemented due to non-
availability of Production Ex ploration License (PEL). The planned contractual 
seismic survey could not be implemented in Tri pura owing to non- finalisation of 
the contract.  In Himachal Pradesh, besid es delay of PEL grant in Ganga NELP 
block, slow performance of shot-hole dr illing and farmer’s agitation have been 
cited as the reasons for non achievement of  the targets.  Shor tfall in drilling 
  

targets in North Eastern St ates and Himachal Pradesh have also been attributed 
to the delays in the exploration plan im plementation in environmentally sensitive 
and logistically  diffic ult areas, drilling of increasingly deeper  wells, less  rig 
availability, down hole complication, etc. 
To obviate the delay on account of non availability of PEL, the Committee 
recommend that the Union Go vernment should analyse this problem in det ail so 
that State Governments ar e made aware t hat certain blocks are proposed to be 
awarded for exploration and a way sh ould be f ound out by which State 
Governments readily  facilitate t he e xploration immediately a fter the award of a 
block to an explorer by granting the necessary approvals for land acquis ition, 
forest clearance etc. expeditiously. In grant of PEL for onland blocks, the effort of 
the Union Government should be focused on prior clearance or consent from the 
State Governments concerned at  the time of offer under NELP, so that PEL is 
granted in the shortest possible time. 
Other causes for delay as enumera ted above viz.  non finalization of 
contract, carrying out exploration in env ironmentally sensitive and log istically 
difficult areas, etc may be identified and c orrective steps be tak en to prev ent 
occurrence of delays in achievement of targets on such accounts in future. 
From the details regarding status of Hydrocarbon finds/leads made during 
IX Plan, the Committee note that in many of the fields in western offshore, 3D 
seismic API is still in progress.  The Co mmittee desire that the survey should  be 
completed within a time bound progra mme and further steps be taken for 
interpretation of data and produc tion of blocks/fields with due promptitude.  The 
Committee also desire that the fields in  respect of which 3D surveys have been 
carried out, but which have been not yet put  on production, expeditious steps be 
taken for interpretation of the data and putting these field on production. 
The Committee note that there was a shortfall in actual achievement vis-à-
vis  targets laid by Oil for seismic surv ey and drilling, during IX Plan.  Various  
reasons which led to shortfall in achievem ent of targets stat ed are- deferri ng of 
survey for Brahmap utra River  Bed  du e to inab ility to  fin alise contract, 
environmental problems, bandhs, blockade s, land acquisition problems, poor 
state infrastructure, delay in acquisitio n of seismic data, problems pertaining to 
environmental clearance, land acquisition a nd contractors.  The Committee feel 
that these bottlenecks should be anticipated and corrective measures be taken in 
advance s o that delays on s uch accounts do not recur in future.  The 
Government should ensure that the best of state-of the ar e technology is made 
available to out oil E&P companies to enable them to achieve their targets.” 
 
Reply by the Government 
 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natura l Gas in their Action Taken Reply on 
the above recommendation have stated as follows: 
“Oil PSUs are free to choos e state-of-the-art technology to be used in 
E&P. Investment decisions on t echnology are taken by respective PSUs and  
expenditure in this  regard is financed through t he internal resour ces generation 
or external borrowings.  By introducing NELP Government has tried to ensure 
that new technologies  are being inducted in E&P sector through participation of 
  

private/foreign companies.  The efforts have already stated yielding results as 24 
discoveries have so far been announced under NELP blocks.”   
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
Please see paragraph 10 of Chapter 1 of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 15 
CORPORATE AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF OIL 
 
 The Committee in their second Report, in regard to the corporate plan of 
OIL had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that OIL has formulated strategic and corporate plan 
with the goal of more t han doubling the production leve l within ten year.  The 
Committee desire that adequate steps should be taken to  implement these plans 
so as to achieve the targets fixed.  The progress of the two plans should be 
monitored periodic ally to ensure their fu ll implementation.  Besides formulating 
strategic and corporate plan, OIL has als o taken in itiatives which focus  on 
intensification of explorat ion and development activities  in its areas of operation 
through additional 2D and 3D Surve ys and drilling; undertaking exp loration 
activities in far-flung logistically difficult and geologic ally c omplex ar eas, 
acquisition of NELP Blocks on offer, intensif ication of drilling activities, reasoning 
of prospects, reserves assessment; optimis tic field development; revitalization of 
old and depleted fields, and development of  marginal fields.  The Committee 
desire that all these initiatives which are, in hand, be undertaken within a time 
bound programme. 
 
 The Com mittee would also lik e to be apprised of  the impact of such 
measures in additional reserve accretions and augmentation of production.”  
 
Reply by  the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Tak en Reply  
have stated as follows:- 
“OIL has undertaken the following init iatives for intensification of  
exploration and development activities fo r additional reserves accretion and 
augmentation of production: 
(i) Intensification of exploration and develop ment activities through 
additional 2D and 3D seismic survey and drilling. 
  

(ii) Undertaking exploration activities in far-flung logistically difficult and 
geologically complex area as  Br ahmaputra River bed, Belt of 
Schuppen, Manabum and  Pasighat areas in the North-East. 
(iii) Acquisition of NELP blocks on offer through competitive bidding. 
(iv) Intensification of drilling activities, both explo ratory and  
development. 
 
 The salient details of production (oil & gas), reserves accretion, drilling 
metreage etc. are shown below for the last three years:  
 
 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
Seismic Survey    
2D (GLKM) 1949.59 2088.22 1978.59
3D (SQKM) 349.50 352.02 889.44
  
Drilling (‘000 Mtrs)  
Exploratory   42.201 49.283 37.890
Development   87.834 59.340 115.673
Total 130.035 108.623 153.563
  
Production  
Crude Oil (MMT) 2.95 3.002 3.196
Natural Gas (BCM) 
1.743 1.887 2.009
Reserves Accretion (O+OEG) 
(In-Place) – (MMT) 
21.87 18.54 21.07
  
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Please see paragraph 13 of Chapter 1 of the Report. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 18 
 
GRANT OF INFRASTRUCTURE STATUS TO E&P PROJECTS/ ACTIVITIES 
 
The Comm ittee note that, as of now, E& P Activities qualify only for a 7 
year tax holiday from the date of commerc ial production. But these activities do 
not qualify for infrastructure/ industry status  to avail of tax holiday under Section 
801A and also do not have the option to ch oose the block of 10 year tax holiday  
out of 15 years, which is not necessarily  linked to commencement of commercial 
production. The Committee feel that if the 7 year tax holiday ne cessarily starts 
from the commencement of commercial pr oduction, the advantage of tax holiday 
is lost bec ause of carried forward losses of the previous years  on account of 
large inves tment. Theref ore, the Committee recomm end that the Government 
should grant infrastructure i ndustry status to E&P projects/ activities becaus e of 
the significance of oil discovery for the national economy. 
 
Reply by the Government  
 
ONGC has been requesting the Government  for grant of infrastructure 
status to E &P industry, since February, 2002. This matter was also part of the 
suggestions (pre-budget) for Union Budget  2005. However, the issue has not  
been addressed in the Union Budget 2005. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see paragraph 16 of Chapter I of the Report.) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 24 
AUTONOMY FOR OIL EXPLORING PSUs 
 The Com mittee note that the oil se ctor PSUs have been performing 
commendably.  All the PSUs except OIL enjoy Navratna status.  The navratna 
status allows the delegati on of enhanced powers subject to certain condit ions 
and guidelines.  In an era of competition due to liberalisation polic ies, the oil 
PSUs have to compete with multinationals and private Indian companies.  As the 
PSUs operating in t he oil sec tor have to  scout globally for technology,  for 
procurement and to offer global tender fo r their works etc., these matters need 
decisions to be taken on commercial and technical aspects quickly. 
 Though the navratna status confer s certain powers on them, the 
Committee note that in actual practice , the PSUs lac k autonomy to decide on 
matters affecting their performance.  In an era where most of the oil PSUs equity 
has been divested and there are various  stakeholders, the PSUs are answerable 
to them as well.  T he Committee regr et to note that the autonomy already  
available is inadequate. 
 The Com mittee feel that the Go vernment should consider granting 
autonomy to the Boar d of Direct ors even to  the e xtent of dec iding a particular 
kind of business that they deem fit to undertake. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The Government has set up Oil  PSUs both in Upstream & Downstream 
sectors.  These PSUs have been set up with c ertain obje ctives suc h as  
Upstream sector PSUs are required to expl ore oil & gas of the country as their 
core activity and Downstream sector is engaged in Refining and Marketing.  The 
Government has given full financial de legation of powers as well as decision-
making powers to Navratna Oil PSUs and t here are well laid down guide lines on 
delegation.   
  

 
The Gover nment is of the view that O il P SUs first p riority shou ld b e to  
focus in their respective areas of co re competence for which they have been set 
up and in case there are surpluses and synergy then they can explore alternative 
business opportunities.   
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see paragraph 19 of Chapter I of the Report.) 
 
  

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 16 
REVIEW/ REASSESSMENT OF IN-PLACE RESERVE  
 The Com mittee in their second R eport on Oil Exploration in regard to 
Review/Reassessment of in place reserves have noted that:- 
“The Committee note that both ONGC and OIL have contractual system to 
review/releases the in place hydr ocarbon reserves every year.  B esides internal 
review, ONGC has als o taken a decision to have its reserve base audited by  an 
internationally reputed independent exter nal agency  once in every five years.  
However, OIL has not so far adopted the s ystem of regular audit of its reserves 
from independent agencies, though they inte rmittently undertake such au dit by 
commissioning the s ervice of internationa lly reputed consulting firms.  The 
Committee note that while no significa nt variations  have been found in the 
reserve base of ONGC by ext ernal audit or, in case of OIL there has been a 
variation to the extent of 10-15% which is quite signific ant.  The Committee feel 
that to have a realistic assessment of its reserve, it is imperative that besides  
internal audit, audit by independent agenc ies should be made a re gular feature.  
The Com mittee, therefore,  desire that OIL on the lines of ONGC also s hould 
evolve a system to have a regular external audit of its reserve base.” 
 
In their Action Taken Reply dated 13 th July, 2005.  The Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas have replied as follows:- 
“In order to carry out audit of the hydrocarbo n reserves by an 
internationally reputed independent ex ternal agenc y and to carry out re-
assessment of its reserves, Oil India Ltd. in March, 2005 engaged the services of 
Reserve Audit firm, M/s. Gaffney, Cline & Associat es, Singapore for external 
audit of oil and natural gas reserves of OIL ’s such reserves in Ass am, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Rajasthan. LOI w as issued on 09.03.2005. Work is in progress  
since 5th April, 2005 and report is expected by Sept, 2005.” 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RECOMENDATION SL. NO. 17 
 
OIL EXPLORATION BY ALL PSUS 
The Committee while examining the iss ue of oil explor ation came across 
the interest of PSU’s like HPCL, BPCL, IOC, GAIL in pursuing oil exploration as a 
strategy to diversity their operat ions and al so to maximize their  profit.  In this  
contest, the Committee in the Report stated as follows:-  
“The Com mittee note that bes ides ONG C and OIL which have been 
undertaking exploration and production activities for more than half a century, the 
following PSUs which were hithe rto performing activities pertai ning to marketing 
of crude oil and supply of gas, have als o made forays  into the Exploration and 
Production activities: 
 
1. GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL); 
2. Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC);  
3. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL); and 
4. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) 
The Committee note that thes e com panies have entered into upstream 
activities to have their own equit y oil so as to safeguard their business interests 
against the highly volatile oil market, to have reasonable supply security and to 
achieve greater stability of revenues/profits.  The Committee note that due to lack 
of exp erience in un dertaking E&P activ ities, most of these companies  have  
collaborated with experienced companies like ONGC, OVL and OIL. 
 
 The Committee have been informed by one of the down-stream company 
i.e. IOC that from the ve ry beginning, it wa s working with OVL for the over seas 
E&P business activities.  However, the current participation is not commensurate 
with IOC’s upstream business  aspirations.  OVL has been de signated as nodal 
agency by  Ministry of Petroleum and Na tural G as for overseas upstream 
opportunities and IOC participation is limited to equity only.  IOC has desired that 
it should be allowed t o pursue E&P o pportunities independently, while av oiding 
any competition/ conflict of interests with other PSUs.  It has further sugges ted 
that to avoid conflict/ competition OV L, the regions /countries where the two 
entities will pursue opportunities, may be divided, based on geograp hical 
boundaries.  The Committee desire that the suggestions of IOC should be 
examined by Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas,  and appropriate steps be 
taken to pr ovide some form of independen ce to other  companies in undertaking 
their overseas E&P activities. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that to meet the aspirations and interests 
of other companies, feasibility of forming a new joint venture in which equity may 
be held by  all the PSUs, may be explored.   It should also be examined as to 
whether the consortium approach, where all the players in oil market would hav e 
stakes, could provide better results in pursuing overseas E&P activities.”   
  
  

The Minist ry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in their Action Tak en Rep ly 
stated as follows:- 
“Oil India Limited (OIL) and Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) have entered into 
an alliance to pursue overseas E&P activ ities jointly.  The consortium has taken 
one exploration block in Libya OIL-IOC has approached to Ministr y of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas (MOP&NG) for the similar powers as available with ONGC Videsh 
Limited (OVL).  The proposal in this re gard is being cons idered for Cabinet 
approval.”   
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 22 
 
NEED OF STRENGHTEN THE POWERS OF OVL 
 On the need to strengthen the powers of ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL), the 
Committee in their Second Report have recommended the following:  
“Besides lack of diplomatic supp ort, the Committee have been informed 
that OVL is facing c onstraints in under taking activ ities due to less number of 
Directors in its Boar d, less financia l powers, and non confid entiality of the 
acquisition. 
 To enable OVL to establis h its signifi cant presence in upstream activities  
abroad, it is imperative that OVL be strengthened both in administrative and 
financial terms.  The Committee,  therefore, desire that Mi nistry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas should analyse the problems of OVL and take remedial steps  to 
remore them.” 
 
 In the Action Taken Reply on the above Re commendation, the Ministry of  
Petroleum and Natural Gas have stated as follows: 
 
“The issue of enhancing financia l power was brought before the 
Government and in February  2005, th e Government has enhanc ed the 
empowerment of OVL.  Earlier the Board of Directors of OVL was empowered to 
approve projects involving investments upto Rs 200 crores, which has now been 
enhanced to approve projects upto 300 crores. 
For the manpower requirement s of OVL, OVL and ONGC are working 
towards suitably manning OVL for its international busines s. The matter 
pertaining to creation of posts of Directors in OVL is under consideration.” 
  
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
  

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 23 
ECS MECHANISM FOR CLEARANCE TO ALL OVERSEAS E&P PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee while examining the ECS mechanism f or clearance to all 
overseas E&P Projects have recommended in the ir Second Report as give n 
below:  
“The Committee are of the view t hat ECS (Empowered Com mittee on 
Secretaries) mechanism which is a single window clearance for OV L for  
overseas projects should also cover all ot her PSUs as well immediately, so that 
any overseas E&P projects by any PSU is routed through ECS for faster decision 
making in order to avoid losses due to procedural limitations/delays. 
 They desir e that the  system o f single window clearance thro ugh the 
empowered Committee of Secretaries should  be reoriented in such a manner so 
that no delay is caused in securing the oil deals.” 
 
 In their Action Taken R eplies, on the above reco mmendation, the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas have stated the following: 
“Oil India Ltd. has  been making conc erted efforts to acquire E&P 
opportunities overseas. OIL signed Memor andum of Understanding with I ndian 
Oil Corporation on 08.12.2004 to jointly pursue E&P opportunities overseas.  It  
may be mentioned that OIL-IOC combin e has been successful in bidding and 
being awarded Block-86 in Libya in EPSA-IV, Bid Round-1, 2005.  The proposal 
for ECS mechanism  for OIL-IOC allianc e is under  the consideration of the 
Government.” 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. O-27012/1/2005-ONG/US (EO) 
dated 13th July, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: Rupchand Pal 
21st December, 2005 Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana 1927(S)            Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX –1 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  13th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  21st DECEMBER,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1550 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
6 Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
7. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale 
10. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
11. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
12. Shri Ajay Maroo 
13. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
14. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri J. P.Sharma, Director 
3. Shri N. C. Gupta, Under Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA 
 
 Shri Sunil Chander, Principal Director (Commercial) 
 
  

 
 
 
 
2. The Committee considered the Draft Action Taken Report (ATR) on action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 2 nd Report of 
the COPU (14th Lok Sabha) on Oil Exploration – Domestic and Overseas projects 
and adopted the same with minor modifications. 
XXXX    XXXX    XXXX 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation. 
4. XXXX    XXXX    XXXX 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Oil 
Exploration – Domestic and Overseas Projects.” 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  26 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos I, II and 
III(i)] 
 
Percentage of total  
7 
 
 
     26.9% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. No  III(ii)] 
 
Percentage of total  
10 
 
 
 
38.4% 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…(vide recommendations at Sl. No IV) 
 
Percentage of total. 
5 
 
 
 
19.2% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  
Percentage of total 
4 
 
15.5% 
 
 