 
3 C.P.U No. 889 
THIRD REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2004-2005) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
POWER GRID CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.- EXTRA 
EXPENDITURE IN CONSTRUCTION OF KISHENPUR-
MOGA TRANSMISSION SYSTEM-ADDITIONAL 
EXPENDITURE OF RS. 433.81 CRORE. 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  24.3.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.3.2005_ 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March 2005 / Chaitra 1927 (S) 
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Composition of the Committee (2004-2005)  
Introduction   
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
 
A. Background  
 
 
B.
  
Genesis of the Kishenpur- Moga Transmission System  
C  Funding of KMTS Project 
 
 
D  Qualification of bidders and pre-qualification  
 
 
E. Award of contract to M/S Cobra 
 
 
F. Dispute of Power Grid with M/S Cobra 
 
 
G. Role of Ministry of Power 
 
 
H.
  
Revised cost estimates  
I.
  
Lesson learnt and remedial measures proposed to be taken  
J.
  
World Bank Loan to Power Grid for other projects  
PART – II 
 
  RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Audit Para No. 15.3.1 of Report N O. 3 (2004) of C&AG Titled “Extra 
expenditure in construction of  Kishenpur- Moga Transmission 
System-Additional Expenditure of  Rs. 433.81 crore”  
 
 
II. Reply to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2488 dated 18.12.2003 
regarding World Bank Loan to PGCIL 
 
 
III List of the World Bank Funded Projects having time & cost overrun.  
 
IV Minutes of the sittings of the Committee  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2004 – 2005 ) 
 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
9. Shri Kashiram Rana 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
13. Shri Rajesh Verma 
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17. Shri Ajay Maroo 
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
19. Shri Jibon Roy 
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui 
21. Smt. Ambika Soni 
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri John Joseph  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J.P.Sharma  Director  
4. Shri Raj Kumar  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal  S enior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                      
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present  
this Third Report on Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.- Extra 
expenditure in constr uction of Kishenpur-Moga Transmission System-
Additional Expenditure of Rs.433.81 crore. 
2. The Committee’s examination of the subject was based on Audit 
Paragraph 15.3.1 contained in the Report on Union Government 
(Commercial) of the Comptroller & Auditor Genera (No.3 of 2004) of India. 
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of Power Grid 
Corporation of India Ltd. on 1 st October, 2004 and 7 th February, 2005.  
The Committee took evidence of the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Power on 18th January, 2005. 
4. The Committee on Public Undert akings (2004-05) considered and 
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 22 March, 2005. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to Power Grid 
Corporation of Indi a Limited and the Ministry of Power for placing before 
them the material and information they wanted in connection with 
examination of the subject.  They also wish to thank in particular the 
representatives of the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited and 
Ministry of Power, who appeared for evidence and assisted the Committee 
by placing their considered views before the Committee.

 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the 
assistance rendered by the Comptroller & Auditor General of India. 
7. They would also like to place on record their appr eciation for the 
invaluable assistance render ed to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               RUPCHAND  PAL 
22 March, 2005                         CHAIRMAN 
1 Chaitra, 1927(S)    COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
PART – I 
REPORT 
A. BACKGROUND 
1. The Audit Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India – Union 
Government (Commercial) – No. 3 of 2004 in Para No. 15.3.1 contained an audit 
observation highlighting the extra ex penditure incurred by Power Grid 
Corporation of India Limited in c onstruction of Kishenpur-Moga Transmission 
System.  As per Audit, the Company in curred an extra expend iture of Rs.217.22 
crore due to an avoidable delay of 30 months attributable to inexperience of a 
foreign contractor.  Further, the excess capacity which has been created at an 
additional expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore would remain grossly under-utilized  in 
near future due to non-execution of identified generation projects. 
 
2. The main features of the observations  made by Audit in the Para can be 
delineated as under: 
(i) Investment approval for the World Bank funded Kishenpur-Moga 
Transmission System (KMTS) comprisi ng two single circuit lines was 
accorded by the Government in Ma y, 1993.  The estimated cost for 
executing the project at the time of approval was Rs. 417.71 crore with the 
commissioning schedule being 58 months  from the date of approval, that 
is, completion by March, 1998. 
 
(ii) Power Grid in May, 1993 invited global tenders for pre-qualification and 
issued tender documents in March, 1994 for price bids to six qualified 

 
 
 
bidders, out of which five bidders submitted price bids, which were opened 
in May, 1994. 
 
(iii) Based on pre-qualific ation and evaluation of bi dders, the Company had 
assessed that M/s Cobra which emerged as a lowest bidder for both the 
lines of KMTS, would not be able to ex ecute both the lines in view of the 
tower material required for bot h the lines and 800 KV lines being 
constructed for the first time in India and recommended World Bank to 
award only .one line of work to M/s C obra.  However, World Bank did not 
agree and so contracts for both lines  were awarded to  M/s Cobra in 
February, 1995 with the completion schedule of 39 months i.e. by May, 
1998. 
 
(iv) Audit observed that M/s Cobra, had no experience of ex ecution of project 
of 800 KV lines and  had passed the pre-qualif ication and bid evaluation 
stage as the Company made no technica l scrutiny with respect to weight 
of the tower. Consequently, there we re repeated failures in design and 
testing of towers, resulting in avoidab le delay of 23 months. Further, due 
to increase in weight of the tested towers up to 46 per cent over the 
estimated weight, M/s Cobra demanded compensation for the increase in 
cost, which led to delay of 7 months. This resulted in total avoidable delay 
of 30 months in completion of KMTS, which increased the project cost by 
Rs.217.22 crore on account of interest on borrowed funds and escalation 
in price including exchange rate variation. 

 
 
 
(v) The Audit also observed that both the lines were commissioned in May, 
2000 and January, 2001 respectively. Howe ver, as no generation project 
except Dulhasti and C hamera (Stage II) was taken up for execution, 
KMTS could not be put to use at its rated capacity and chances for 
evacuation of power at 800kV level in near future were remote. In fact, the 
KMTS was initially to be operated at 400 kV and transmission of power at 
800kV was required only after commi ssioning of Sawalkot, Baghlihar, 
Ratle,Dulhasti and Chamera (Stage II) generation projects. 
(vi) According to Audit, a World B ank supervision mission had suggested, 
(July, 1993) construction of two 400 kV double circuit lines initially instead 
of two 800kV lines, so as to defer t he 800kV conversion investment till 
2015-20. Nonetheless, the Company w ent ahead with the construction of 
two 800kV transmission lines on the gr ounds of difficulties in acquiring 
right of way and prolonged Government clearance procedure. Additional 
cost of construction of two 800kV li nes as compared to two 400kV lines 
worked out to Rs.433.81 crore. 
(vii) In reply to the Audit observati on, the Management of the Power Grid 
stated (May, 2002) that no technical compromise was made in adopting 
qualifying requirement for selection of  M/s Cobra and t he delay was not 
attributable to its inexperience, but to actual failure of towers during testing 
and limited availability of test beds in India. 
(viii) In this connection, the Ministry added that overall cost overrun was 
contributed to factors like change in debt -equity ratio, escalation in  price 

 
 
 
index etc. Further, while  stating that construction of 800kVlines was a 
prudent decision in view of severe right of way problem and was not linked 
to commissioning of all the generat ion projects, they endorsed the 
Management’s reply that KMTS has im proved reliability of the Northern 
region grid and as such should be viewed as a system improvement 
project. 
(ix) The Audit did not find the reply tenabl e, as the Central Electricity Authority 
while  reviewing the cost and time overrun had, inter-alia observed in July, 
2001 that original design of the firm was substantially below the required 
level and the firm passed the pre-qualification stage  because no technical 
scrutiny regarding design of the towers was undertaken by the Company. 
Abnormal increase in the weight of the tested towers was considered by 
the CEA as the main reason for failure in design. As regards considering  
KMTS as  a system impr ovement project, benefit stream of KMTS has 
deviated from the originally envis aged benefit for the investment, as 
observed by Public Investment Board. 
(x) The Kishenpur-Moga Transmission Syst em having two lines of 800 KV 
each was commissioned in January, 2001 at a total cost of Rs.847.91 
crore with an overall cost overrun of Rs.430.20 crore and time overrun of 
34 months. 
A copy of the Audit Para as contained in the C&AG’s Report is given at 
Annexure-I. The various acts of omission  and commission revealed by the Audit 
have been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 

 
 
 
B. GENESIS OF KISHENPUR-MOGA TRANSMISSION SYSTEM (KMTS) 
3. According to Audit, the Government of India sanctioned in May, 1993 the 
scheme of KMTS at an estimated cost of Rs.417.71 crore wit h the completion 
schedule of March, 1998. The scheme wa s conceived to transfer power from 
various generation Projects in Jammu & Ka shmir to the load ce ntre at Moga in 
Punjab.  
4. About the genesis of the Kishen pur-Moga Transmission System (KMTS), 
Power Grid informed the Committee as under :- 
 
“The State of J&K has installed capacity of 1657 MW. The following 
projects amounting to 5640 MW has bee n identified for implementation by 
XI Plan : 
 
 
PROJECT CAPACITY AGENCY STATUS EXPECTED 
SCHEDULE
DULHASTI 390 MW NHPC ADVANCED STAGE OF CONST. DEC’2004 
BAGHLIHAR-I 450 MW J&K ADVANCED STAGE OF CONST. 2004-05 
SEWA-II 120 MW NHPC Under Construction 2007 
KISHENGANGA 330 MW NHPC TEC RECD. AUGUST’03 
COMM. 82 MONTHS FROM CCEA 
2011-12 
BURSUR 1020 MW NHPC DPR under preparation 2009-10 
PAKULDUL 1000 MW NHPC --do-- 2008-09 
URI-II 280 MW NHPC TEC Approved, Pre-PIB held Feb 04 2008-09 
SAWALKOT 600 MW J&K - 2009-10 
BAGHLIHAR-II 450 MW J&K - 2011-12 
 5640 MW      
 
 
As per 16th EPS the Load vs Demand scenario for J&K by XI Plan is given 
below:- 
 
 
Estimated Demand in    J & K  by 
XI Plan 
Existing 
Capacity 
Estimated 
capacity 
addition by 
XI plan 
Winter Summer 
(Off peak) 
Estimated Surplus 
by XI Plan 
(Summer-Off peak)
1657MW 5640MW 2560MW 1500MW 5797MW 
 

 
 
 
 As per the above load demand scenario, by XI Plan, during summer off 
peak conditions, power of about 5500 MW from the existing/proposed 
projects would be required to be transfe rred to other parts of the Northern 
region Grid from J&K. Keeping in view the ex isting transmission system 
capacity of 1000 MW (excluding KMTS) between J&K and the rest of the 
region, additional evacuation capacity for about 4797 MW was required to 
be created from Jammu and Kashmir by XI Plan.” 
 
“Considering the power supply scenario  and surplus power of J&K, 2 
numbers of 800 kV lines (initially charged at 400 kV) were planned by 
National Hydro-electric Power Co rporation and Cent ral Electricity 
Authority. As there would have been phased development  of generation 
projects in J&K resulting into the phased increment of power flow on the 
Kishenpur-Moga transmission lines, it  was planned that the Kishenpur – 
Moga line would be initially charged at 400 kV level and subsequently with 
increase in power flow requirement, these lines were envisaged to be 
charged at 800 kV level.  The trans mission scheme was agreed by the 
constituents of Northern Region in  the Standing Committee Meeting of 
Northern Region Transmission Planning  held on 22 and 23 December 
1987. Accordingly, NHPC submitted the Feasibility report to CEA for their 
approval. CEA accorded the Techno -economic Clearance to the 
Kishenpur-Moga transmission schem e in August 1989. It may be 
mentioned that that funds for KMTS was envisaged to be funded by World 
Bank (Loan No. 3237), which was appr oved by Govt of India in October 
1990. Subsequently, after the formation of Power Grid, the project was 
dejure transferred to Power Grid.” 
 
5. Detailing as to how 800 KV transmission system was conceived to be 
introduced in India, the Secretary, Ministry of Power, informed during the 
evidence that:- 
 “………..At that time, the idea was t hat of these power projects, which 
were being conceived and for which techno-economic studies were done 
by the Central Electric ity Authority in many cases, techno-economic 
clearances were given by the Central Electricity Authority – were to be 
commissioned, then the power would be used not only in Jammu and 
Kashmir but also in other Northern St ates of the country like, Rajasthan, 
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and UP.  These are the States, which were to use 
this power.  Therefore, 800 KV trans mission system was conceived to be 
introduced in the country.” 
 

 
 
 
6. When asked the reasons for goi ng ahead with 800 kV in stead of 400 kV 
for evacuation of the power, the Committee were informed that : 
“For evacuation of above power usin g 400 kV D/C lines, it would have 
required at least six (6) lines requiring six corridors of width 52 metres 
each (totaling to 312 metres) and would have posed a serious right of way 
(ROW) problem besides being unecono mical. Appreciating the ROW 
problem, two lines of 765 kV  S/C li nes, initially to be charged at 400 kV 
level to be upgraded to 765kV S/C to  match the phased development of 
capacity addition, were planned by NHPC in 1989  (approx. length 275 
kms each) and obtained techno-economic  clearance in March, 1989 from 
CEA.” 
 
7. Elaborating further about the ROW problems, the Chairman PGCIL during 
briefing stated as under :- 
 “As Punjab is a agriculture orie nted State, and as forest area was 
also involved.  About 40 KMs of forest was involved with 20,000 trees from 
the forest area were required to be cut for this purpose.  If we had gone for 
400 kV lines, then we would have required a corridor of 312 metres, as 
against 170 metres for 800 kV lines. So , cutting of trees would have been 
40,000 trees instead of 20,000 trees  if we had gone for 400 kV 
lines…………. 
 
 …………In Punjab also we faced some problem, but in J&K we 
faced the maximum problems.  They used to say that we are passing 
through their land, and the value of their land is coming down.  So, the 
Hon. Committee can imagine that if we had gone for six lines, then nobody 
would have permitted us the ROW.” 
 
8. When asked whether the right of way problem could not be resolved by 
securing the cooperation of the St ate Government and other agencies 
concerned, the Committee were informed that:- 
“Co-operation & support from State Authorities and other concerned Govt. 
agencies is always taken for obtai ning right of way & line access 
clearances required for construction of transmission lines.” 
 
9. On being asked as to how the PGCI L’s decision for the construction of 
800 kV lines instead of 400 kV lines in view of right of way problem can be 

 
 
 
justified, the Ministry in their written reply stated that regarding the justification for 
implementation of 800 kV transmission line s (instead of 400 kV  lines), one of the 
most important parameters in developi ng and expanding trans mission system is 
voltage.  The basic idea behind going  for higher and higher voltage for 
transmission of AC power is to reduc e transmission losses and transmit bulk 
power over long distances with optimiz ed cost of inve stment and operation 
(without jeopardizing the stability of the system).  Limitation of length of line in 
case of AC transmission and Right of Way (ROW) are major constraints which 
force to go for higher and higher voltage level. 
 
The prime advantage of 800 kV class transmission system over the 400 
kV class transmission system is that, it facilitates transmission of power at higher 
power density for a given evacuation corri dor.  For bulk power transmission of 
the order of 2500 MW or more, 800 kV system has merit over 400 kV system in 
terms of offering optimized solution.   Also, 800 kV system has lesser 
transmission losses as compared with the 400 kV system. 
 
Keeping in view the future requirement, Ministry of Energy (now Ministry of 
Power), Government of I ndia, in 1987, had consti tuted a Sub-Group under the 
chairmanship of Chairman, Central Electric ity Authority (CEA) to arrive at the 
next higher AC transmission voltage.  The Committee, after deliberations, had 
recommended 800 kV (with 765 kV as the nom inal voltage) as the next higher 
AC transmission voltage in the country.  Report on “Standard Parameters of 800 
kV Transmission System in India” was brought out in 1990 based on 800 kV 

 
 
 
operating experience of utilities abroad.  Two revisions in the report have already 
been undertaken. 
10. When asked to know how much tr ansmission loss after the introduction 
800 kV  lines is expected to go down, Secr etary, Ministry of  Power, during the 
evidence stated as under :- 
“On the 800 kV transmission system, we  expect the transmission loss of 
the order of 2 – 2.5 per cent and on 400 kV system we have the 
transmission loss of the order of 3 – 3.5 per cent.” 
 
11. When enquired how mu ch maximum power (in MW) can be evacuated 
through these two lines by operating it at 800 kV level and 400 kV level in each 
year, the Committee were informed that:- 
“The Kishenpur-Moga lines at 800 kV level can carry approx. 2500 MW 
per circuit depending upon the system conditions. At 400 kV level these 
can carry approx. 500 to 550 MW per circuit depending upon system 
conditions.  The lines are presently operated at 400 kV as planned. Power 
to the extent of 500-550 MW has alr eady been transferred over the lines 
from the generation projects in operation in J&K state (viz. Salal-I&II-690 
MW, Uri-I-480MW, Chamera-I&II-840MW).” 
 
12. On being queried about  the additional annual ta riff being recovered from 
SEB’s on account of creati on of this capacity, the Committee were informed that 
the annual tariff being recovered from the SEBs as notified by CERC for KMTS  
for the Tariff  Block 2001-2004 are : 
Year      Rs.  (in Crore) 
  2001-02    176.65 
  2002-03    143.55  
  2003-04    156.65  

 
 
 
Annual Tariff for the Tariff Block 2004-2009 is under finalisation with 
CERC. 
13. Audit pointed out that the World B ank Supervision Mi ssion in July, 1993 
had suggested construction of two 400 kV doubl e circuit lines initially instead of 
two 800 kV lines so as to defer 800 kV  conversion investment till 2015-2020.  
However, the Company went ahead with t he construction of the two 800 kV 
transmission lines on the ground s of difficulties in acqu iring Right –Of-Way and 
prolonged Government clearanc e procedure.  Additional cost of construction of 
two 800 kV lines as compared to two 400 kV lines worked out to Rs.433.81 crore. 
14. The Committee noted that if PG CIL had accepted this suggestion and 
reviewed its transmission requirements, the additional investment on which the 
State Electricity Board (SEBs) had to bear tariff burden without deriving any 
benefit could have been avoided.   
When asked the reasons for not accepting the suggestion of the World 
Bank Supervision Mission of 1993 by PGCIL and the compelling circumstances 
which led the Company to go ahead with the construction of the 800 kV lines 
which was contrary to the suggestion of the World Bank Supervision Mission, the 
Power Grid in a written reply informed as follows :- 
“It may be mentioned that Kishenpur-Moga Transmission System 
formulated by NHPC and CEA and approved by GOI was of two single 
circuit 800 kV Lines. The World Bank  supervisory mission in July 1993 
suggested that the Power Grid’s consultant RSW may examine the 
feasibility of use of 400 kV D/C lines convertible to 800 kV, however 
Power Grid should continue with the acti vities for 800 kV going on at that 
time.  
 

 
 
 
Based on the studies carried out by the consultant as per the Banks 
suggestion mentioned above,  the overall cost of 400 kV D/C (convertible 
to 800 kV S/C) line was estimated to be more than that of 800 kV S/C line 
(though the initial cost was approx. 2 % less, the subsequent conversion 
cost was estimated to be approx. 20% of the initial cost). Further to 
convert 400 kV to 80 0 kV necessitates prolonged shutdown of about 18 
months. It was discussed with the Consultant RSW, the World Bank 
Mission in December 1993, the Worl d Bank Consultant Mr. Elias 
Ghannoum as well as CEA and it emerged that standard 800 kV as 
approved by the Government is the best suited solution. Power Grid, 
therefore has gone ahead with the Government approved transmission 
system. 
 
 Therefore, the conclusion drawn in the background para is not correct that 
additional cost of construction of two 800 kV lines as compared to two 400 
kV lines worked out to be Rs.433.81 crore.” 
 
15 According to PGCIL in order to operat e these lines at 800 kV level, the 
related terminal sub-stations would have to be  upgraded.  Thus, PGCIL planned 
to use these lines at 400 kV level abinitio. 
 In reply to the query whether PGCIL has taken up the upgradation work 
for the terminal sub-stations, the Company informed the Committee as under :- 
“Operation of the Kishenpu r-Moga lines at 800 kV level and upgrading of 
the terminal sub stations has not been taken up due to delay in completion 
of hydro projects (viz Dulhasti, Baglihar etc.) as well as non 
commencement of implementation of other planned pr ojects (viz. Uri-II, 
Baglihar, Kishenganga, Swalkote, Ra ttle, Bursar, Pakul Dul etc.). 
Operation at 800 kV level is envis aged to be taken up in the XI Plan 
depending upon the progress of the above projects.” 
 
16. When sought to know what effort s have been made by the Ministry to 
simplify the clearance procedure of the project funded by international funding 
agencies, the Committee were informed as follows :- 
 “In accordance with the guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE), the Board of Directors of Powe r Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 
(PGCIL) (being a Categor y-I Miniratna Corporat ion) is empowered to 
approve the investment propos als for projects costi ng upto Rs.300 crore.  

 
 
 
These guidelines, however, provide that the delegation of power would be 
subject to the condition that no financ ial support or cont ingent liability on 
the part of the Government should be involved and that these Public 
Sector Enterprises shall  not depend upon budgetary support or 
Government guarantees. Accordingly, a ll such investment proposals in 
respect of the projects of PGCIL which are funded by an international 
funding agency like World Bank, ADB,  etc. (involving Government 
guarantee) require approval of Government  irrespective of the fact that 
their estimated cost is less than Rs. 300 crore. 
 
A proposal was taken up with Minist ry of Finance and Department of 
Public Enterprise for delegating the power to Power Grid’s Board of 
Directors for according investment approv al for all projects costing up to 
Rs. 300 crore notwithstanding the fact t hat the project involves funding 
from Multilateral funding Agencies like World Bank, ADB, etc. backed by 
Government guarantee. 
 
 In this connection, DPE has observ ed that it may not be appropriate for 
individual administrative Ministries /Department to amend the miniratna 
scheme in order to give further enhanced power to PSUs under their 
administrative control. Any amendm ent to the scheme can be made by 
DPE only, with the approval of the competent authority.  Ministry of 
Finance have also not agreed to the proposal.” 

 
 
 
C. FUNDING OF KMTS PROJECT 
17. The Kishenpur-Moga Transmission Syst em was stated to be covered for 
funding under World Bank Loan No.3237-IN and the Agreement for the Loan was 
signed on October 3, 1990 between Government of India and the World Bank.  
 When asked to state the sources  from  where the fund was raised for the 
project, the Committee were informed that  the proportion of the cost of the 
project funded through World Bank Loan and other sources from where the funds 
were raised are given hereunder: 
 
      Amount in Indian Rupees Percentage 
       ( i n  c r o r e )  
 
(a) World Bank Loan     434.79   50.70% 
(b)  Domestic Loan 
(i) Issue of Bonds by Power Grid  157.71   18.39 % 
(ii) Loan from Domestic Financial   121.99   14.22 % 
    Institution/Banks 
(c)  Power Grid Internal Resources  143.14   16.69 % 
   Total    857.63    
 
18 To a question whether the economics of loan provided by the World Bank 
was ascertained, the Committee have been informed that Kishenpur-Moga 
Transmission. System (KMTS) was cove red under the World Bank loan (Loan 
No. 3237-IN) routed through Government of India and NHPC had entered into an 
agreement on 9 th November, 1990 in this  regard before dejure transfer of the 
said Project to Power Grid. Regarding the economics of the loan it may be 
mentioned that during ear ly nineties when this Pr oject was approved for 
implementation, the funds from the domestic market were not forthcoming and 
were expensive. It is evident from the fa ct that Power Grid’s bonds issued during 

 
 
 
the said period were under-subscribed. Power Grid was unable to raise even the 
matching funds for the component of the Project not covered under World Bank 
funding. Further in Domestic Market only short tenure loans  of 5 to 7 years, that 
too at very high premium, were av ailable which were not suitable for 
infrastructure projects like transmission lines. On the other hand the World Bank 
loan tenure was for 15 years includin g moratorium period besides being 
substantially economical. In the context of the above constraints Power Grid was 
not left with any other alte rnatives than to avail t he World Bank Loan already 
signed by the Government of India. 
19 When the Committee desired to know abou t the role played by Ministry of 
Power in respect of multilateral agencies’ funded project, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as under :-  
“The loans availed by Public Sector Undertakings from the multi-lateral 
funding agencies like the World Bank , ADB, etc. require sovereign 
guarantee by the Government  of India. The loan ne gotiations are carried 
out under the leadership of Depar tment of Economic Affairs and 
representatives of Ministry of Po wer and the organizations concerned are 
also members in such negotiations.     
 
In accordance with the guidelines of  Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE), the Board of Directors of Powe r Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 
(PGCIL) (being a category-I Minirat na Corporation) is empowered to 
approve the investment proposals for projects costing upto Rs. 300 crores.  
These guidelines, however, provide that the delegation of power would be 
subject to the condition that no financ ial support or cont ingent liability on 
the part of the Government should be involved and that these Public 
Sector Enterprises shall  not depend upon budgetary support or 
Government guarantees. Accordingly, a ll such investment proposals in 
respect of the projects of PGCIL which are funded by an international 
funding agency like World Bank, ADB,  etc. (involving Government 
guarantee) require approval of Government  irrespective of their estimated 
cost.” 
 

 
 
 
20 When asked whether any gu idelines have been issued by the Ministry of 
Power to the Public Sector  Undertakings seeking to f und their projects through 
World Bank, ADB, etc., the Ministry in a written communication informed the 
Committee as follows :- 
“As funding from the multi-lateral f unding agencies like World Bank, ADB, 
etc. is availed by many Departments/Or ganizations, no specific guidelines 
have been issued by Ministry of Powe r in this regard. The terms and 
conditions of every loan is negotiated between Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Power and t he CPSU with the concerned funding 
agency. Most of the loan conditions ,  procedure for procurement and 
environmental guidelines are st andard operating proc edures of any 
particular external funding agency.” 
 
21 When asked about the procedure follo wed by PGCIL whil e seeking loan 
assistance from World Bank, the CMD, Po wer Grid during briefing informed the 
Committee as under :- 
“Whenever we negotiate a loan with ADB or World Bank, the Government 
of India and the borrower that is the Power Grid or NTPC – sign an 
agreement.  As per that agreement t he procurement procedure is to be 
adhered to therefore, whoev er contractor is approv ed by the Board is 
forwarded to the World Bank for their concurrence.  This is the procedure.” 
 
22 When enquired about the norms / regul ations followed by the Company in 
the process of bidding for project executio n of KMTS, the Power Grid in its reply 
informed the Committee that in line with the bidding procedure agreed to with the 
World Bank two-stage bidding  i.e. pre-qualification followed by detailed technical 
and commercial bid, as briefly menti oned below, was followed by the Company 
for award of Kishenpur-Moga Transmission Line Contracts:  
 
(i) Pre-qualification applicat ions on global (ICB) basis were invited through 
Invitation For Pre-qualification (IFP) published in May 1993.  A copy of the 

 
 
 
IFP was sent to Embassies/High Co mmissions of Member countries of 
IBRD and Taiwan, China. 
(ii) The pre-qualificat ion documents and the qualif ication criteria were 
finalised with concurrence of the World Bank.  
(iii) The Pre-qualification Evaluation R eport was sent to the World Bank and 
the Bank conveyed its ‘No Objection’  in January, 1994.  
(iv) The Bidding Documents for inviti ng Bids from pre-qualified applicants 
were approved by the World Bank in  March, 1994  and  invitation were 
issued thereafter to the pre-qualified firms for submission of their detailed 
technical and commercial bids. 
(v) The Bids submitted by pre-qualified firms were opened in May, 1994. The 
Evaluation of bids was completed in August, 1994 and the Evaluation 
Report with recommendations to Awards was forwarded to the Bank in 
August, 1994.  Based on the concurrence as conveyed by the World Bank 
in January 1995, the Contracts were awarded in Feb. 1995.   

 
 
 
D. QUALIFICATION OF BIDDE RS AND PRE-QUALIFICATION  
23 In the Brief submitted to the Comm ittee, the Company has informed that 
for pre-qualification, Global invitation was issued in May 1993 and Twenty-eight 
(28) firms/Joint Ventures purchased the pre-qualification documents and only 
twelve (12) submitted thei r applications. Six (6) Firms/J Vs were pre-qualified (for 
both the Packages A & B indi vidually as well as comb ined), with the approval of 
the World Bank (Jan’ 94).  
24 When asked about the pre-qua lification criteria fixed, both in technical and 
financial terms for inviting tenders fr om the bidders, the Committee were 
informed that the details of Qualification Criteria for Applicants as stipulated in 
the Pre-qualification document  are given hereunder:  
Technical 
A minimum qualifying requirement fo r qualification will be to have 
successfully carried out as a prime contractor the execution of at least two 
projects of a nature  and complexity comparable to the proposed 
contract(s) within the last five years; this experience should  include: 
 
For Package-A and Package-B individually or combined 
 
a) Surveyed, optimized tower locations and tower design (including 
foundations)  and based thereon, er ected and strung with Tension 
Stringing Equipment (TSE) no t less than 200kms of D/C 
Transmission Line involving  bundle c onductors  at 400kV class or 
higher 
 
b) Designed constructed 400kV River crossing with a minimum towers 
height of at least 80mtrs and minimum span of 800 mtrs. 
 
Financial 
(i) The applicant shall meet the crit eria of minimum  Average Annual 
Turnover over the last five years of US$ equivalent  as indicated 
below: 
 
For package A :  US$  15 million or Indian Rs.30 Crores   
 

 
 
 
For Package B :  US$  15 million or Indian Rs.30 Crores  
 
 If the applicant proposes to pre-qualif y for more than one package, his  
annual turnover shall be not less than t he sum of the  A nnual Turnover of 
the packages  he  proposes to qualify. 
 
(ii) The applicant should demonstrat e that he has access to, or has 
available,  Liquid Assets, unencumbered real assets, lines of credit, 
and other financial means sufficient to meet the construction cash 
flow  for a period of 3 months , estimated as US$ 3 Million 
equivalent  for each of the packages A & B;  net of the applicants  
commitment for other contracts.  
 
If the applicant proposes to qualify  for more than one package, his 
contract and cash flow shall  not  be  less than the sum of  the  
packages he proposes to qualify. 
 
25 It was informed to the Committee that besides Consultant’s 
recommendations, the factors which finally  led to adoption of 400 kV for pre-
qualification instead of 800KV experience were based on the following:  
 
a) In case of following 800 kV ex perience criteria, no Indian Firm 
would have qualified. 
 
b) 800 kV or above voltage level ha ving been adopted in a limited way 
the World over, this criteria w ould have limited the competition 
implying higher costs to Power Grid. 
 
It was also informed that had 800 kV experience been kept as pre-
qualification criteria, there would have been only one bidder i.e. M/s Vattenfall, 
Sweden and no Indian as well  as other international firms would have had the 
opportunity to participate. 
 
 
 
 
26 in this regard, Secretar y, Ministry of Power during evidence stated that  

 
 
 
 “…….. In the whole world, hardly a couple of parties existed with the 800 
kV transmission system design experience. As a matter of fact, in this very 
tender, out of a dozen par ties who participated,  only one had the design 
and construction experience in 800 kV transmission system. Therefore, in 
retrospect, if I try to analyse, 400 kV experience prescribed here gets 
vindicated, because had we put 800 kV, perhaps we would have no 
competition or if there was, then one party would have quoted in the 
manner the party wanted. Secondly,  in the country, we had three 
agencies having experience of transmissi on system and  all of them had 
experience only up to 400 kV.  Such pre-qualification terms for technology 
introduction was also required because it provided opportunities to Indian 
agencies in engineering, in construction,  in operation and maintenance, in 
manufacturing so that while we introduce the technology, we do not totally 
depend on outside agency. 
 
27 Regarding the qualif ied bidders to whom tender documents were issued 
and the response alongwith the prices quo ted by each of them, Power Grid 
furnished the following information :- 
 
Quoted Prices in Equivalent 
Indian Rupees 
No
. 
Name of Bidder Response 
Package-A Package-B 
1 M/s. Cobra SA, Spain Quoted for Pkg-A 
and Pkg-B 
108,87,27,626 104,93,14,364 
2 M/s. KEC India Ltd Quoted for Pkg-A 
and Pkg-B 
108,59,26,934 117,62,05,178 
3 JV of M/s. SAE(India) 
& M/s. ABB, Italy 
Quoted for Pkg-A 
and Pkg-B 
118,39,42,224 112,76,93,168 
4 M/s. Vattenfall, 
Sweden 
Quoted for Pkg-A 
and Pkg-B 
118,09,79,175 113,92,03,426 
5 Hyundai, Korea Quoted for Pkg-A 
and Pkg-B 
120,27,96,959 115,67,45,564 
6 Balfour Beatty, UK Not Quoted - - 
 
28 On the question of exper ience of each qua lified bidder in laying 800 KV 
lines, it was informed that the experience of each qualified bidder in laying 800 
kV Transmission Lines is given below :- 
 

 
 
 
No Name of the qualified Bidder Experience in laying 800 kV Line 
1. M/s. Cobra SA, Spain No 
2. M/s. KEC India Ltd No 
3. JV of M/s. SAE(India) & M/s. ABB, 
Italy 
No 
4. M/s. Vattenfall, Sweden Yes (Line for 800 kV Swedish 
system) 
5. Hyundai, Korea No 
6 Balfour Beatty, UK No 
 
 

 
 
 
E. AWARD  OF  CONTRACT  TO  M/S  COBRA 
 
29 As per the Audit Para, the contracts for construction of both the lines were 
awarded to M/s Cobra in February, 1995  with the completion schedule of 39 
months i.e. by May, 1998. 
 When asked whether M/s Cobra, wh ich emerged as a lowest bidder for 
both the lines of KMTS, had any experience of stringing 200 circuit km of 3 phase 
bundle conductors for 400 kV or a higher  voltage, the Company informed the 
Committee that M/s Cobra had such experience. The details of information / data 
as furnished by M/s Cobra are as under : 
 
No Name of the Project Client Line 
Len
gth 
Year/P
eriod of 
executi
on 
1. GILLENA-DON 
RODRIGO 400 kV 
D/C Tr. Line 
Sevillana De Electricidad, S.A. Av. De 
la Borbolla, 5 Sevilla – Spain. 
15 
km 
1989/ 
1990 
2. Rodrigo-Pinar Del - 
Rey (P-II) 400 kV 
D/C Tr. Line 
Sevillana De Electricidad, S.A. Av. De 
la Borbolla, 5 Sevilla – Spain. 
71 
km 
1990  
 
3. Aragon-Cazaril 400 
kV D/C Tr. Line. 
Ree, Red Electrica De Espana, S.A. 
P0 Conde de los Gaitanes, 177, La 
Moraleja, Alcobendas (Madrid) – 
Spain. 
74 
km 
1990  
 
4. Meson-Lindoso (P-
III) 400 kV D/C Tr. 
Line. 
Union Electrica Fenosa, S.A. 
C/Capitan Haya, 53,Madrid–Spain. 
40 
km 
1990  
 
 
30 To a question whether M/s Cobra had the experience of designing and 
constructing 400 kV river crossings with a minimum tower height of 80 metres 
and minimum span of 800 metres,  the Committee were informed that Cobra had 
executed River Crossing with a span of 800 M in 400 kV Valdecabcaballeros - 

 
 
 
Guadama Transmision Line. The height of river crossing tower was not indicated 
in their application for Pre- qualification. However, from the details furnished by 
other applicants as well as from the exper ience of Power Grid  of executing a 
number of major river crossings for 400 kV lines, it was obvious that tower height 
for 400 kV river crossing with 800 m span shall be more than 80 m. Therefore, 
M/s Cobra was considered m eeting stipulated qualifying requirement in respect 
of river crossing. 
 
31 When enquired whether any Indian Company po ssessed the capabilities 
as were possessed by M/s Cobra, the Company in a written reply informed that 
the Indian companies possessed the capabilities. The details of experience of 
KEC India and SAE (India) with respect to the stringing 200 circuit km of 3 phase 
bundle conductors for 400 kV are as under: 
KEC India 
No Name of the Transmisión 
Line 
Length of  Line(Kms) Year/Period of 
execution 
1. 400 kV D/C Karhal -Agra 
T/L 
106 km Mar 1990 
2. 400 kV D/C Bhagalpur – 
Biharshariff 
165 km June 1990 
 
 Name of River Crossing Span (M)  Height (M)  Year 
1. Yamuna River 840 M 95.50 M 1988 
2. Sone River 1070 M 135.06 M 1988 
 
SAE(India) 
 
No Name of the Transmisión 
Line 
Length of  Line(Kms) Year/Period of 
execution 
1. 400 kV D/C Kahalgaon-
Maithon T/L 
173 km Feb 1993 
2. 400 kV D/C Moga-Bhiwani 
T/L 
120 km Mar 1993 

 
 
 
No Name of River Crossing 
Project 
Span (M) 
 
 Height (M)  Year 
1. Nagarjunasagar-Gooty 
400 kV T/L 
800 M 100 M April 1991 
2. Etah-Ballabgarh 400 kV 
T/L 
1150 M 175 M June 1988 
 
32 On being inquired the grounds on which the Indian firms M/s KEC India 
and M/s SAE (India) who pre-qu alified in the bidding were not found suitable for 
award of the work, the Committee were informed that the evaluated prices of 
KEC and SAE (who had submi tted the bid as a JV with ABB, Italy) were higher 
than the lowest bidder, i.e. M/s Cobra, as indicated hereunder: 
 
Evaluated Prices in Equivalent 
Indian Rupees 
No
. 
Name of Bidder 
Package-A Package-B 
1 M/s. Cobra SA, Spain 1,147,986,466 1,113,634,919 
2 JV of M/s. SAE(India) & M/s. 
ABB, Italy 
1,223,245,351 1,170,526,463 
3 M/s. KEC India Ltd 1,231,140,909 1,359,340,901 
 
 Power Grid had, based on the assessm ent of the capacity of Cobra’s 
proposed sub-contractors for tower s upplies, recommended award of Package-A 
on Cobra and Package-B on the JV of SAE & ABB.  
 
33 When sought to know about prices  quoted by M/s Vattenfall for the 
complete execution of the project, it was informed to the Committee that the 
package wise quoted as well as the evaluated prices of M/s Vattenfall, Sweden 
for the complete scope of work are as under: 
 
 

 
 
 
Quoted Prices in Equivalent Indian 
Rupees 
Evaluated Prices in Equivalent 
Indian Rupees 
Name of 
Bidder 
Package-A Package-B Package-A Package-B 
Vattenfall, 
Sweden 
1,179,179,175 1,139,203,426 1,278,906,645 1,248,556,095
 
34 The Audit pointed out that based on pre-qualification and evaluation of 
bidders,  the Company had assessed that  M/s Cobra would not be able to 
execute both the lines in view of the tower material required for both the lines and 
also due to the fact that 800 kV lines ar e being constructed for the first time in 
India.   Accordingly, the Company recommended the award of work for only one 
line to M/s Cobra, which was, however, not accepted by t he World Bank.  So, 
contracts for construction of both the lines were awarded to M/s Cobra in 
February, 1995 with the completion schedule of 39 months i.e. by May, 1998. 
 
35 When desired to know whether Power Gr id can not go for the selection of 
contractor without the World Bank concurrence, the CMD, PGCIL during briefing 
stated that  “It is like that.” 
 
36 In this connection, the Ministry of Power in their written reply stated that 
most of the loan conditions and procur ement, environment guidelines are 
standard operating procedures of a particu lar external funding agency. Once a 
particular project is taken up by the ex ternal funding agency for consideration, 
interaction takes place between the f unding agency and the borrowing CPSU in 
several stages during which in-depth discu ssions take place to finalise precise 
scope of work, year wise funding requireme nts, loan conditions and also include 

 
 
 
sectoral as well as project specific issues.  The guidelines for procurement and 
implementation of projects are also discussed during these interactions.   
 
 After every such interaction, the external funding agency normally sends a 
draft Aide Memoire on which DEA seeks comments of the line Ministry and the 
proposed borrower.  Ministry of Power wh ile sending its comments to DEA also 
takes into account the comments of the concerned CPSU.   
 
 If the project is short-listed for loan  negotiation after these interactions, the 
loan negotiation is held between the external f unding agency and DEA during 
which line Ministry assists DEA and the borrowing CPSU also participates.  The 
loan conditionalities, phasing of expenditure and r equirement of compliance with 
procurement guidelines, envir onment guidelines etc. is finalised on the basis of 
which loan agreement is signed. 
37 In the background note furnished by Power Grid, it is stated that earlier as 
per the practice in vogue in NTPC, bi ds for Transmission line Packages are 
invited on per ton basis and the pa yments were accordingly released 
progressively on supply of tower material.  However, in such cases the payments 
made to the contractors were not ma tching with the physical progress for non-
receipt of sequential erectable material and delaying the project execution.  In 
this case, World Bank had suggested to invite the bids on per tower basis of 
contractor’s design in place of tonnage basis and weight of the tower was not the 
basis for evaluation as contractors could optimise tower weight using various 

 
 
 
types of steel. Accordingly, bidders had quoted their prices on per tower basis 
irrespective of the weight of the tower to be designed / tested by them. 
 
38 In a written reply furnished by the Ministry of Power about the 
procurement philosophy, the Committee were informed as under :- 
“In the case of  tower packages  for KMTS, PGCIL had adopted the 
procurement philosophy as suggest ed by the funding agency i.e. the 
World Bank.  Though PGCIL took up t he matter with World Bank for using 
their own designs for towers, the World Bank insisted on keeping the 
designs in the contractor’s scope antic ipating optimisation of cost.  The 
bidders were required to quote on per tower basis.  PGCIL have informed 
that the technical scrut iny of the bids were carried out both at pre-
qualification and commercial bid stage stri ctly with reference to technical 
specification requirement s and criteria specified in the bid document, 
approved by the World Bank.  Though tower weight was not the evaluation 
criteria, the estimated weig ht of towers indicated by  all the bidders was of 
the same order.” 
 
39 When asked how the World Bank antic ipated that contra ctor would be 
able to optimise the cost and whether the optimisation of  the cost has actually 
been achieved at the cost of quality and time, the Company in  a written reply 
stated as under :- 
The World Bank opined that keepi ng tower and foundation designs in the 
contractor’s scope would facilitate utilization of gl obally available design 
experience/practices, selection and use of most efficient grades of 
internationally available steel to yield the lowest combined tower and 
foundation cost and thereby most competitive bid price under international 
Competitive Bidding. It is to be ment ioned that there ar e many grades of 
steel with varying strength av ailable in the international market at different 
price levels. The expectation was tha t, having given freedom of selection 
of most efficient grades of steel inter nationally available, the Bidder from 
any country might explore globally ava ilable options to se lect structural 
steel for towers which would give the lowest overall cost of towers.  
   
  Accordingly, in technica l specification it was sti pulated that the contractor 
can select the most efficient grades of  steel available internationally for 
design of towers so as to yield t he lowest in place combined tower and 
foundation cost. 

 
 
 
   
  It is expected that cost optimization would have been taken care by the 
Bidder while submitting the Bid. Howe ver, it may be m entioned that the 
expected result did not happen due to de lay in testing, non-availability of 
Indian test bed, dispute of Cobra with its sub-contractor s & poor project 
management by them. However, it ma y be mentioned that  there was no 
sacrifice on specified quality aspects.  
   
  It may also be mentioned that Power Grid subsequently took up the matter 
with the World Bank and convinced them that the tower design should rest 
with Power Grid. The same was agreed by the World Bank and are being 
implemented in all its tr ansmission line projects including those funded by 
World Bank/ADB etc.  
 
40 On being asked whether PGCIL had an in-house capability of designing 
such types of towers at that time espec ially when it was executing the 800 kV 
lines for the first time in India, the Company in a written reply furnished to the 
Committee intimated as follows :- 
“Power Grid had in-house design capabilit ies at that time for design of 
towers for 400 kV as well as 800 kV to wers as structural complexities are 
generally same. However, 800 kV towe r designs had not been developed 
in-house as there was no requirement of  these towers earlier. Power Grid 
insisted the World Bank to accept us e of in-house designs for the lines 
funded by the Bank.  However, the Bank did not agree this for the projects 
funded by them at that ti me anticipating possible optimization of cost 
through more cost effective designs by  utilization of globally available 
design experience/practices, selection and use of most efficient grades of 
internationally available steel to yiel d the lowest in place combined tower 
and foundation cost.” 
 
41 To a query as to why the Company had not prescribed any time frame in 
the agreement for finalisati on of the design by the C ontractor, the Committee 
were informed that Power Grid did spec ify time period/schedule for tower design 
and testing  by the contractor in the Bid Documents as well as in the Letter of 
Award. 

 
 
 
42 As per the criteria sti pulated in the bidding documents for evaluation of the 
bids, the tower weight were not to be fa ctored, however, it was stated that the 
weight of the towers as furnished by the bidders in their bids were comparable, 
as can be seen from the following :- 
Tower Type Estimated total approx. tower weight(MT) 
 COBRA SAE(RPG) KEC VATTENFALL 
A 15.09 14.35 15.52 16.21 
B 17.7 17.72 16.68 19.06 
C 22.15 20.97 21.66 22.29 
D 24.73 23.55 23.02 26.30 
E 35.73 35.44 35.65 34.39 
 
43 Elaborating further, CMD during briefing stated as under :- 
“If you take a look at the weight quot ed by various bidders, estimations of 
them are within 10% to 15%. Therefore, it cannot be said so. However, no 
tenderer would do detailed design his to wer or design his project before 
project is awarded  to him because designing involves a lot of expenditure, 
and the tower has also got to be tested because without testing, a tower is 
not accepted, then it means crores of rupees would have to be spent by 
these  contractors before bidding and nobody does like that”. 
 
44 When enquired what was the towe r tonnage estimation in the tender 
based on which M/s Cobra was awarded the contra ct, the Committee were 
informed that as per the Bidding Document s the Bidders were to quote prices for 
entire scope of work including towers on  number basis and the lowest evaluated 
& qualified bidder was to be considered for award. Accordingly, Cobra was 

 
 
 
considered for award on lowest evaluat ed Bid and not on the basis of tower 
tonnage indicated in the bid. 
45 When asked what was the total towe r weight of each approved design for 
each type and which type of Tower (A, B,  C or D) was finally approved, the 
Committee were informed that the weight s of the towers as per successfully 
tested and approved designs are as follows :-  
 
Tower Type (Std.) Tested Tower Weight (MT) 
A 16.99 
B 21.86 
C 26.30 
D 33.69 
E 52.29 
 
All the 5 type of towers were approved as per specification requirements. 
 
46 On the question of variation in tonnage  of the successfully tested towers 
with respect to that in tender estimates by PGCIL, the Company in a written reply 
informed as under :- 
“As per the provisions of bidding doc ument, Cobra was required to supply 
successfully tested towers on number basis and not tonnage basis. The 
tonnage for each type of tower indicated in the Bid was only for 
information purpose and any variation w. r.t. successfully tested tower to 
meet the specification requirements was the sole responsibility and liability 
of Cobra. Hence the va riation analysis in tonnage of successfully tested 
towers vis-a-vis tender estimates of Cobra was not called for.” 
 
47 As per the information furnished by Audit, PGCIL has stated that besides 
designs deficiency, the other major constr aints in modification of the design was 
that the contractor cast the tower foundation works even before freezing the 
tower design. 

 
 
 
 When the Committee desired to know  whether the Contractor took 
approval of PGCIL for the same  , it was informed that it  is a normal practice in 
the transmission line construction Industry to commence casting of foundations 
as soon as the tower geometry and theor etical designs of towers through 
structural analysis are completed. This approach in the industry enables effective 
use of time available between completion  of tower designs and its testing and 
also facilitates commencement  of tower erection as soon as towers are tested 
and supplied. Power Grid allowed M/S Cobra to follow the above mentioned 
practice at their request to expedite project execution. However, any liability 
arising out of this was to the account of M/S Cobra only. 
 
48 Audit has observed that M/s Cobr a had no experience of execution of 
projects of 800 KV lines and had passed th e pre-qualification and bid evaluation 
stage because no technical scrutiny was made by the Company with respect to 
weight of the tower.  C onsequently, there were repeat ed failures in design and 
testing of towers, resulting in avoidable  delay of 23 months.  Further, due to 
increase in weight of  the tested towers up to 46 per cent over the estimated 
weight, M/s Cobra demanded compensation for the increase in cost, which led to 
delay of 7 months.  This resulted in total avoidable delay of 30 months in 
completion of KMTS which increased t he project cost by Rs.217.22 crore on 
account of interest on borrowed funds and escalation in price including exchange 
rate variation. 
 

 
 
 
49 To a query why there were repeated failures of the tower, CMD Power 
Grid while deposing before the Committee stated as follows :- 
 
 “This transmission structure is a unique structure. It is having more than 
1500 members. There are several joints  which are tied up  with the bolts 
and nuts. Theoretical analysi s alone does not reflec t structural behaviour 
of members / joints in all the three directions. Therefore, proto type testing 
is conducted. There are 1500 members and each member is having joints. 
There will be load at every joint; ther e will be movement in the joint. So, it 
is a very complex analysis and that is  how all over the world tower testing 
is carried out. It is a common pr actice. Failures have been observed 
during testing of towers designed by other contractors, as well as by 
Power Grid. Whatever the design be ing developed so far, in earlier 
projects also, failures had been seen.  Recently, Power Grid has been 
developing the designs, and there are also a number of failures. 
 
 I just give examples of N.Jhak ri-Nalagarh 400 KV D/C Transmission Line 
where SAE (presently RPG), who is one of the leading contractors, had 
five(5) failures in DD tower. In Ita rsi-Dhule 400 transmission line where 
KEC, who is also one of the major contractors, had three (3) failures in DB 
tower etc. 
 
 In Power Grid lines, we have East-South Connector 500 KV HVDC, 
Talcher-Kobra – line – the failures are 1 each in A and B tower and 2 in C 
tower. Similarly, Tala 400 KV D/C (Q uad), there are three (3) failures in 
DC towers. Recently, in Sipat 765 KV S/C – Power Grid has just 
developed a design where t he failures are 2, 2, 3 and 1 in A, B, C and D 
towers respectively. Likewise, in Si pat 400 KV Quad, there are five (5) 
failures in DC towers. Thus quite a number of failures are there during 
testing. I think, failures during testing is a common phenomenon.” 
 
50 The Committee pointed out that the contractor demanded compensation in 
violation of terms of the contract which stipulated that variation in tonnage (which 
is 12 to 46% higher) of the successfully tested tower with respect to that in tender 
estimates be absorbed by the contract or. When asked to state the reasons 
advanced by the contractor for demand of such compensation, the Company in a 
written reply furnished to the Committee stated as under :- 

 
 
 
“As per the provisions of the Contra ct, the contractor was required to 
supply successfully tested towers  on number basis and not on tonnage 
basis. Similarly, the Contract also st ipulated that payment for towers be 
made on number basis and not on tonnage basis. Therefore, any increase 
in weight of the successfully test ed tower with respect to that in the 
contractor’s tender estimates was the sole responsibility and liability of the 
contractor.  
 
 The Contractor claimed that the payment should be  made for the towers 
as per actual weight of the towers which was contra ry to provisions of the 
contract as explained above and therefore was not tenable. The claim was 
turned down by the Dispute Review Panel (DRP) also.” 
 
51 It has been stated that at the techno- commercial stage, M/s Cobra, Spain 
which participated in both packages and emerged the lowest responsive bidder 
in both the packages, had proposed to sub-contract part of the work to the Indian 
firms. 
 When asked as to whether the Co mpany carried out any assessment of 
the fabricators capabilities of the tower identified by M/s Cobra, the Committee 
were informed that assessment was carried out. The Assessment Committee, 
constituted for this purpose, concluded in  its report that Cobra’s ability based on 
the three fabricators falls short with respect to the full fabricat ion quantity (30,000 
MT) under the package and the three fabr icators combined may be able to 
execute a quantity of about 1000 – 1100 MT per month which qualifies them for 
one package only out of the two packages. It has also been informed that the 
fabrication facilities avail able with the identified sub- contractors of M/s Cobra 
were not found adequate for implementing both the packages in time. Hence, 
Board of Directors of Powe r Grid approved award of one package on M/s Cobra 
and second package on second lowest bidder i.e JV of M/s.SAE. 

 
 
 
 The award recommendations were forwarded to the World Bank in 
August, 1994 for their concurrence, whic h was pre-requisite for awarding the 
contract. The Bank, however, did not agree with the award recommendation of 
Power Grid and appointed an independent Consultant, Mr. E.Ghannoum (of 
Hydro Qubec, Canada) to examine recommendations of Power Grid. 
52 When inquired about the opinion of the consultant Mr. E. Ghannoum 
appointed by World Bank for review of  the Evaluation Report, the Company 
furnished the relevant extracts of the fi ndings of the Consultant in regard to 
award of both the packages to M/s Cobra given hereunder: 
“The award of both packages to Cobra appears to be the most economical 
solution to Power Grid, although by a small margin, compared to the 
combination of Cobra (Package-A) and SAE (Package-B), i.e., Rs. 2,261 
million  Vs. Rs. 2,318 million.” 
 
Based on the facts that Cobra is a new comer to the Indian scene and that 
Power Grid has found Cobra steel sub-contractors capable to fulfill the 
Tower needs for both packages, t he Writer subscribes to the 
recommendation of Power Grid to aw ard Package-A to Cobra and B to 
SAE.  This might result in 2.5% additional cost compared to award of both 
packages to Cobra, but appears to be the only reasonable solution under 
the said circumstances, given the ri sk involved, the importance of the 
Project and the deficiency in steel supply of both contracts by Cobra. 
 
This decision of the OPRC to ask fo r a confirmation by Cobra regarding 
their capability of supplying towers  for only one package will hopefully 
shed all doubts regarding award of only one contract to Cobra.” 
 
53 When asked the reasons why the Company could not prevail upon the 
World Bank to accept its recommendati on of awarding only one line to M/s 
Cobra, the Company in a written reply to the Committee informed as follows:- 
“According to the World Bank Loan agreements signed by Government of 
India/Borrower, the procurement pr ocedures/guidelines of the funding 

 
 
 
agency were to be followed, and  the c oncurrence of the World Bank was 
a pre-requisite  for Award of the contracts. Power Grid’s recommendations 
were for award of only one line to Cobr a. All efforts were made by Power 
Grid in this regard and even a team was deputed to the Bank for the 
same. The Team took up the matter with the Consultant appointed by the 
World bank to review the evaluation and with Operat ing Procurement 
Review Committee (OPRC) of the Bank, which is its highest decision 
making body on procurement matters. However, the Bank did not agree 
with Power Grid’s recommendations, though the Bank’s consultant had 
agreed with it. The situation encountered  was deliberated by the Board of 
Directors of Power Grid. Finally, Power Grid had to award the Contract  for  
both the packages on Cobra, approved  by Power Grid’s Board of 
Directors. 
 
Under the situation, the other alternative with Power Grid could have been 
to take out the package from the Worl d Bank funding and fund it through 
internal resources/domestic borrowing. Po wer Grid at that time was not in 
a position to raise the required f unds on its own through internal 
resources. Further, the funds from  the domestic market were not 
forthcoming and were expensive. It is  evident from the fact that Power 
Grid’s bonds issued during the said period were under-subscribed. 
Besides the above, in Domestic Market  only short tenure loans of 5 to 7 
years, that too at very high premiu m, were available which were not 
suitable for infrastructure projects like transmission li nes. On the other 
hand the World Bank loan tenure wa s for 15 years including grace period 
besides being substantially economic al. In the context of the above 
constraints Power Grid was not left with any other alternatives than to 
avail the World Bank Loan.” 
 
54 On being asked if it was obligatory to accept the decision of the World 
Bank in the selection of bidders ev en though responsibility for the project 
execution lies with PGCIL and not with the Bank , the Po wer Grid in its written 
reply stated that to avail  the  World bank Loan, as  per the Loan Agreement 
signed between Govt. of India and the World Bank it was  obl igatory for Power 
Grid to conduct the procurement as per  the terms and conditions of the Loan 
Agreement. As per the conditions stipulated  in the Agreement,  the  procurement 
was required to be  undertaken through International Competitiv e Bidding (ICB)  
in accordance with procedures  set forth in  Sections I & II of the “Guidelines for 

 
 
 
Procurement under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits” published by the Bank in May, 
1985. 
 Regarding role of the B ank in project execution,  it may be mentioned that 
the physical progress as well the progress in financial disbursement of each 
package under a project is monitored by  the Bank through Quarterly Progress 
Report to be sent by Power Grid. Further the Bank also deputes its missions to 
the projects from time to time.  
 
55 In this regard, the Ministry of Power in a written reply informed the 
Committee as under :-  
“Regarding award of packages for both the transmission lines to M/s 
Cobra, according to the loan agreements with the World Bank, the 
procurement procedures/ guidelines of the funding agency were to be 
followed and the concurrence of t he World Bank with respect to bid 
documents and award of the contract s was a pre-requisite. PGCIL had 
selected M/s. COBRA for one package only as it was doubtful whether 
they would be able to execute both t he lines simultaneously in time.  The 
independent consultant appointed by World Bank to review the same had 
also endorsed the view point of PGCIL.   However, World Bank insisted 
that since M/s. COBRA was the pre- qualified least evaluated bidder for 
both the lines, the award of both the lines be placed on M/s. COBRA and 
in case M/s. COBRA refused to accept both the packages, their bank 
guarantees be encashed by PGCIL. PGCI L approved the award of both 
the lines to M/s. COBRA in line wit h the recommendations of the World 
Bank.” 
 

 
 
 
F. DISPUTE  OF  POWER  GRID  WITH  M/S  COBRA 
 
56 In the background note furnished by  Powe r Grid, it is stated that initially 
M/s Cobra, faced problems in finalising their sub-contractor s in India. By the time 
they could resolve these issues, they fa ced serious difficulties in testing of 
towers. In the process of their efforts to optimise tower weights the towers initially 
designed by the Contractor repeatedly fail ed in testing. Consequently, as the 
dates for testing in India were not available, they were, thus, forced to shift the 
testing venue to a test bed in Spain. T he testing could be successfully completed 
in July, 1997. This resulted in a delay of  almost two years consequently delaying 
supply of towers and erection thereof.  
The actual weight of the tested to wers had gone up, over the estimated 
weight in the bids. Since Cobra had finalized with thei r sub-contractors payments 
on per ton basis, they demanded additiona l payments on account of change in 
weight of towers from Cobr a. This apparently had resulted in additional cost to 
Cobra as under the respective contra cts between Power Grid and Cobra the 
payment was to be made on per tower basis irrespective of weight of towers, 
hence no additional payment  was payable on this account to Cobra..  Moreover, 
Cobra was to pay to its sub-contractor s progressively on tonnage basis whereas 
Cobra were eligible for  payments from  Power Grid only on completion of the 
tower resulting in mis-match in cash flows at their end. 
 
57 When asked what were the problems faced by M/s Cobra in designing and 
testing of 800 KV class towers, Power Grid  in a written reply to the Committee 

 
 
 
stated as under:- 
“There were no problems in designing of  towers by Cobra. Proto-type 
testing of first tower (A type) was arranged by Cobra in Indian testing 
stations. During testing, premature failures were observed necessitating 
retesting after suitable reinforcements in the existing designs to meet the 
provisions of the technical specificat ions. Due to limited number of test 
beds and many projects concurrently  under execution in the country, 
suitable time slots for retesting of the A type tower & testing of balance 
four towers in Indian testing stat ions could not be obtained by Cobra. 
Therefore, the tests were  arranged by Cobra in testing station in Spain. 
Pre-mature failures of proto-type towe rs were observed during testing in 
Spain also as the contractor was requi red to reinforce the towers without 
affecting its compatibility with foundations. The successful testing of all the 
towers  in the above manner prol onged the testing process and its 
completion.  
 
58 On the issues which resulted in th e disputes between Power Grid and M/s 
Cobra, it has been stated that plagued with delay in testing of towers, additional 
demand of payment from their sub-contra ctors and mis-match in cash flows, 
Cobra had raised number of disputes and cl aimed additional amount (to the tune 
of Rs.150 crore) including seeking time extension, which was not agreed by 
Power Grid as the same was not tenabl e under the contracts. The issues had 
been deliberated at various levels and despite Power Grid’s best efforts Cobra 
did not reconcile resulting into a dispute which is required to be dealt as per the 
provisions of Contract. 
 
59 It has also been informed that M/s C obra raised disputes on  25 issues 
and additional claims to t he tune of about Rs.1500 milli on besides claim for time 
extension of 36 months with price variation. These disputes and claims were 
referred to Dispute Resolution Panel (D RP), comprising of members one from 
Cobra, second from Power Grid and th ird Mr. E. Ghannoum of Hydro Qubec, 

 
 
 
Canada (who is an internat ional reputed transmission line expert) was appointed 
as Umpire with the approval of other two members of DRP. 
Out of the 25 issues, the DRP could co mplete its hearings in 13 issues 
involving a claim of about Rs.800 million by M/s Cobra. The outcome of the same 
is briefly summarised below: 
a) The award / interim award of DRP was against Cobra in 9 issues, 
which involved claim of about Rs. 700 million. These issues inter 
alia included the issues of A dditional Tower Weight (Rs.430 
million), Foundation Volume (Rs.125 million) and Change in Design 
Concept (Rs.73 million). 
b) In the remaining 4 issues, the aw ard/ interim award of DRP was in 
favour of Cobra. These issues inter alia included the issues of Price 
Variation and Deductions towards nuts and bolts.    
The remaining issues, which included the issue of time extension (claim of 
Rs.641 million), could not be heard by DRP.   
 
Even before all claims could have  been deliberated by DRP, M/s Cobra 
issued suo-moto notice  of termination of contracts in DRP proceedings.  
Immediately, Power Grid to protect its interest lodged clai m for encashment of 
bank guarantees of M/s Cobra. Power Grid, in consultation with the Solicitor 
General of India, took appropriate acti on to safeguard the interests of the 
Corporation and terminated the c ontracts in July, 1998. As a result of the above 
stand taken by Power Grid and its skillful handling of the situation had forced M/s 

 
 
 
Cobra to withdraw its claim and opt for an amicable settlement. The then 
Ambassador of India in Spain had also mediated for amicable settlement.   
 
60 After termination of the original  contract, Power Grid signed a 
supplementary agreement in October, 1998 reviving the earlier contract. When 
the Committee desired to know what led the Power Grid  to sign a supplementary 
agreement in October, 1998 reviving the earlie r contract after termination of the 
original contract, the Company in a written reply furnished to the Committee 
informed as follows :- 
“M/s Cobra on 1 July, 1998 issued a notice for termination of the Contracts 
and also obtained injunction from H on’ble Delhi High Court prohibiting 
Power Grid from encashment of Cobra’s Bank Guarantees. As per the 
contract, Cobra needed 30 days notice to terminate whereas Power Grid’s 
notice period was 15 days.  To safeguard the intere st of the Corporation 
and the Project in the best possible manner, Power Grid was compelled to 
issue Notice dated 14 July , 1998 for termination of the Contracts. Against 
injunction from encashment of bank  guarantees, Power Grid had also 
taken up the case in the court. In the meantime, Cobra had sent a letter to 
Power Grid indicating that they wish to seek an amicable resolution. 
 
The legal actions were taken in c onsultation with and advice of eminent 
legal experts, Dr. L. M. Singhvi and Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, Attorney General 
of India who had also advised that communication channel for 
negotiations be kept open. 
 
For further decision in r egard to the course of action to be followed in the 
situation encountered, a Committee was constituted to submit a detailed 
proposal analyzing various al ternatives/options available for completion of 
the balance works considering the pros  and cons and cost benefit of each 
option. After detailed analysis of the alternatives which could be 
considered for getting the balance work executed, considering the cost 
benefit of the alternatives  and keeping in view the least cost option, the 
committee recommended settlement of issues and negotiations with 
Cobra. The recommendations of the aforesaid committee were considered 
by a High Level Review  Committee of Directors/Executive Directors of 
POWER GRID who agreed with the same and this line of action was also 
considered appropriate by the Board of Directors of Power Grid. 

 
 
 
The High level Review Committee hel d several rounds of “with out 
prejudice” discussions with Cobra for reaching a negotiated settlement. 
The Board of Directors of Power Grid also directed that the ongoing 
negotiations be concluded with Cobra and an agreement, legally 
enforceable, may be entered into with them based on the broad terms / 
understandings so reached, on overall basis, with Cobra. 
 
While the discussions were in progress, Cobra, on 13.08.98, the date fixed 
by Hon’ble Delhi High Court for de livering the decision on bank guarantee 
issue, withdrew its case and the stay on encashm ent of Bank Guarantees 
was vacated. Thereafter, almost all the major issues with Cobra were 
settled and the Supplementary Agreement reviving the Contract was 
signed in Oct’ 98. The Board of Directors of Power Grid had also approved 
and ratified the execution of the Supplementary Agreement. The World 
Bank  was kept fully apprised of the developments.” 
 
61 When enquired about t he new terms of the Supplementary Agreement, 
the Committee were informed that the terms of the Supplementary Agreement 
signed with M/s Cobra briefly summarized are given below :- 
a) “The Notices of Termination issued by both the parties shall stand 
withdrawn. 
 
b) All the issues which were raised before DRP, including those on which 
DRP awards have been given, stand withdrawn without any extra 
financial compensation to  COBRA and shall be deemed finally settled 
except the one pertaining to price adjustment which shall be dealt as 
per the point (c) given below. 
 
c) The respective price adjustment provisions as stipulated in the 
Principal Agreement shall remain unchanged and the same shall be 
applicable and governed only by th e work schedule as per the 
Principal Agreement.  No  additional Price Adjustment shall be payable 
to Cobra by Power Grid on acc ount of extended period under the 
Principal Agreement and the Supplementary Agreement. Further, Price 
adjustment on Ex-works portion of supply contracts shall be payable to 
Cobra as per the provisions of the respective Principal Agreement in 
accordance with the work schedule and in line with the enclosed 
methodology for price adjustment calculation. 
 
d) The Time Extension, without additional PV, shall be re-fixed to March 
2000 for CKT-I & to Dec. ‘2000 for CK T-II.  However, price variation 

 
 
 
provisions shall contin ue to be governed by original schedule given in 
respective LOAs. 
 
e) Time is the essence of the Cont ract and the same shall be strictly 
construed according to the re-fixed schedule given above. LD for delay 
shall be applicable with respect to re-fixed schedule. 
 
f) Insurance policies shall be obtai ned by COBRA for extended period at 
no extra cost to Power Grid.  Howe ver, the insurance charges towards 
owner’s supplied material shall continue to be on Power Grid’s 
account. 
 
g) Two nos. expired BGs towards final payment shall be renewed by 
Cobra.  CPG and BG for advance shal l also be extended by them in 
accordance with the revised schedule at no extra cost to Power Grid. 
 
h) No further portion of payment s hall be made in Spanish Peseta.  No 
amount can be expatriated to Spain ti ll completion of contract.  Any 
additional fund, if requi red, to complete the project shall be made 
available by Cobra. 
 
i) Consent of Power Grid to Cobr a for engaging KEC and Kalpataru as 
subcontractors, as per the provisions of the Contract. 
 
j) Cobra shall continue to fulfill its obligations und er the Principal 
Agreements as well as the Supplem entary Agreement and not stop or 
interrupt the execution of the works notwithstanding any dispute 
between the parties.” 
 
62 When asked whether any compromise was made with regard to the 
interpretation of price variation clause of the contract, the Committee have been 
informed that as per the original Contra ct, the price variation provision for Ex-
works portion of supply Contra cts (applicable on fabric ated tower parts), was as 
specified under Clause 6.0 of  the Letter of Award  fo r ‘Supply Portion’ of the 
packages. The formula for this purpose wa s inter-alia based on the indices for 
raw material (i.e., steel and zinc) and labour. As per the Supplementary 
Agreement, the respective price adjustm ent provisions as stipulated in the 
original Contract remained unchang ed except for change in calculation 

 
 
 
methodology for Ex-works portion of supply Contracts (applicable on fabricated 
tower parts). This change was included in the Supplementary Agreement due to 
the following:  
i) On interpretation of the method ology, prior to the Supplementary 
Agreement, there were differences between Power Grid and Cobra 
in regard to two of the components / factors to be used in the price 
variation (PV) formula in the original Contract. The two components 
/ factors were (i) P 0 - Ex-works price component less advance for 
completed towers, and (ii) f - Exchange rate correction factor. 
 
ii) As per the Contract, some portion  of the total ex-works price (which 
was in Rupees) was payable in Sp anish Peseta at the exchange 
rate given in the Contract. 
 
iii) Regarding ‘P 0’, Power Grid’s interpretation was that it did not 
include Spanish Peseta portion of the ex-works price as the same, 
as per the Contract, was for engi neering, design, financial cost, 
project management etc., and therefore would not be applicable for 
the purpose of PV for raw material/ labour of tower parts. Cobra’s 
view was that ‘P
0’ is the Ex-works price as indicated in the original 
Contract less advance, and no deduc tion for the Peseta portion 
was applicable.  
 
iv) Regarding the exchange rate correcti on factor ‘f’, Power Grid’s view 
was that the same will not be ap plicable as Cobra did not furnish 
supporting documents in respect of  import expenditure in foreign 
currency for raw materials. Cobra,  however, contended that for the 
‘f’ factor as per the formula given in the original Contract, no proof 
of import was required.  
 
v) Cobra had referred the aforesai d dispute to the Dispute Review 
Panel (DRP) who by a majority decision, decided the issue in 
favour of Cobra. DRP held that the correct interpretation of ‘P
0’ was 
the unit ex-works price given in or iginal Contract less advance and 
‘f’, the exchange rate correction fa ctor, was clearly defined in the 
original Contract and asking for documentary proof of imports is not 
within the scope of the Co ntract. Thus, as per DRP, price variation 
was applicable on total ex-works price less advance irrespective of 
the Rupee or the Peseta portion wit h ‘f’ factor applicable on the 
entire value of ex-works price less advance.  
 
vi) The matter regarding the DRP award on price variation had been 
considered by the Board of Directors of Power Grid who had inter-

 
 
 
alia noted that, if needed, the DRP award can be reviewed 
subsequently keeping all the relevant aspects in view, for a 
negotiated settlement. During t he process of arriving at a 
settlement with Cobra, different issues including those referred to 
the DRP were discussed. After lot of deliberations and continued 
stalemate, the methodology for calc ulation of Price Variation (as 
given in the supplem entary agreement) was agreed to during the 
negotiations on an overall basis. The Board of Directors of Power 
Grid had directed that the ongoing negotiations be concluded with 
Cobra and a legally enforceable agreement may be entered into 
with Cobra on overall basis, and had subsequently approved and 
ratified the execution of the Supplementary Agreement. 
 
 It has also been informed that methodology finally adopted in 
supplementary agreement is in line with Power Grid’s interpretation on the PV for 
Rupee component. On the Spanish Pe seta component, the amount of PV 
worked out based on the methodology is 87. 5% of the amount worked out as per 
the DRP decision.  
 
63 When asked whether any financial implication of the decision was 
assessed keeping in view the expenditure in terms of interest on borrowings, 
change in price level index, etc., the Company in a written reply intimated as 
follows :- 
“Consequent to the notice of terminat ion of Contract  dated 01.07.98 of 
Cobra and the litigation brought in by them, POWER GRID was compelled 
to terminate the Contract vide its No tice dated 14.07.98. The legal actions 
were taken in consultation with and advic e of eminent legal experts, Dr. L. 
M. Singhvi and Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, A ttorney General of India who had 
also advised that communication c hannel for negotiations be kept open. 
Cobra had sent a letter to Power Grid i ndicating that they wish to seek an 
amicable resolution. 
 
 For further decision in r egard to the course of action to be followed in the 
situation encountered, a Committee was constituted to submit a detailed 
proposal analyzing various al ternatives/options available for completion of 
the balance works considering the pros  and cons and cost benefit of each 

 
 
 
option. It was opined by the Commi ttee that under the circumstances, 
three alternatives which could be considered for getting the balance work 
executed were :  
 
(i) Alternative I - Work execution through other agency selected 
under World Bank Funding; 
 
(ii) Alternative II - Work execution through other agency selected 
under Domestic Funding. 
 
(iii) Alternative III - Work execution through Cobra itself (by 
negotiations).  
 
The factors considered for analysis by the committee are briefly 
mentioned below :- 
a) Time schedule for execution of balance works:-  
Alternatives I & II were estimat ed to take additional period of 
around 9 months for finalising a new agency. 
b) Cost Benefit Analysis:- 
Alternative III was found to be the least cost option. The analysis 
took into account inter-alia the cost e ffect of various ta xes & duties, price 
variation, deemed export benefits under World Bank funding, insurance 
premium on project cost for the extended period and miscellaneous 
expenditure towards stor es and watch & ward durin g the period for fixing 
up a new agency. 
c) Analysis of issues involved in  execution of balance works through 
other agencies:- 
 
 The issues analysed inter-alia included  reconciliation and taking over of 
stores from Cobra & its sub-contractors, likely change of tower fabricators 
which would affect the supplies, hi ndrance due to pending litigation/court 
stay if taken by Cobra and their cost, remobilization at site by the new 

 
 
 
agency, delayed availability of transmission system, liabilities of Cobra’s 
sub-contractors to be borne by Powe r Grid as Principal Employer, non-
acceptance of warranty obligations by the new agency for the works 
already executed by Cobra,  time and cost overrun and additional liability 
due to aforesaid in case of new agency.  
 
 The Committee recommended negotiations with Cobra under Alternative 
III above. 
 
The recommendations of the aforesai d Committee were considered by a 
High Level Review Committee of Directo rs/Executive Directors of Power 
Grid who agreed with the same. T he line of action was considered 
appropriate by the Board of Directors of Power Grid who inter alia directed 
that the negotiations be concluded with Cobra.   
 

 
 
 
G. ROLE  OF  MINISTRY  OF  POWER 
64 During the deposition befor e the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of Power 
while discussing the role of the Ministry with regard to the projects funded by 
multilateral agencies stated as under :- 
 “………….So far loan negotiations and terms and conditions of the loan, 
we are involved; for project appraisal, Public Investment Board, Ministry of 
Power and Ministry of Finance are associated; for sanctioning of the 
projects, Cabinet Committee on Ec onomic Affairs is the empowered 
group.  But, in tendering evaluation and  award, it is the Board of the 
Company.” 
 
65 When the Committee desired to know  whether the Ministry has an 
exclusive Monitoring Cell for overseeing  the implementation of project of the 
PSUs under their aegis and for taking remedial measures where necessary, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
a) A Project Monitoring Cell exclusiv ely to monitor the externally aided 
projects was established by Ministry of Power in October, 1996. 
 
b) A mechanism of quarterly review of  externally aided projects by the 
Ministry of Power has been started sinc e April, 1998. Any difficulties or 
other implementation issues as we ll as the progress is reviewed in 
these meetings. 
 
c) Since 2003, a mechanism of bi -monthly meetings  with Heads of 
CPSUs in Ministry of Power has also been started.  The agenda for 
these meetings is suggested by t he CPSUs and, therefore, this 
meeting also gives a platform to Heads of CPSUs to bring to the notice 
of Ministry of Power any important implementation problem like the one 
in this particular case. 
 
d) The progress of implementation of various  power projects under 
Ministry of Power is also review ed in the Quarterly Performance 
Review meetings taken by Secretary, Ministry of Power. 
 
e) Ministry of Power does not monito r the matters relating to award of 
contracts for implementation of the pr ojects as such matters are within 
the purview of the Corporation. 

 
 
 
 
66 After noting that M/s Cobra was able to execute only one line, Power Grid 
recommended World Bank to award one of the lines to M/s Cobra and the other 
one to SAE. However, upon World Bank’s insistence, both the packages were 
awarded to M/s Cobra. When asked why the matter was not taken up with higher 
level of World Bank by the Ministry of  Power, the Ministry, in their written 
communication stated as follows :- 
“Ministry of Power is of the view t hat in a situation when PGCIL was fully 
convinced about its own line of action and that in spite of World Bank 
consultant also suggesting division of work, it was a fit case to have been 
brought to the notice of Mini stry of Power to take it  up with higher level of 
World Bank through Department of Ec onomic Affairs.  This approach 
could perhaps in such cases would have been better for PGCIL.” 
 
67. On enquiry by the Committee in response to Ministry of Power’s 
observation, Power Grid in written communication have stated as follows:- 
“The responsibility for award of contracts in  a  Company, registered under 
the Company Act, vests with its Board of Directors. Power Grid’s Board of 
Directors at that point of time, when the award of KMTS contracts were 
finalized, had two Government Direc tors one being Joint Secretary & 
Financial Advisor from MoP  and other  Member (Power Systems), CEA. 
On procurement related issues, ther e was no practice of taking-up  the 
matter formally to MoP. The same has also been confirmed by the then 
CMD and Executive Director (Contract Services & Personnel) with whom 
the issue was taken-up. 
 
The then CMD and the then Executive Director (Contract Services & 
Personnel) who were in offi ce at that time,  have st ated vide  their letters 
dtd 03.02.05  that making formal refe rence to MoP in procurement cases 
was  not a practice and  complicated purchase cases used to be 
discussed only informally with MoP at  different levels. The Executive 
Director  has also mentioned  that, ‘ the decisions were taken by the Board 
of Directors after due deliberatio ns which also comprised of 
representatives from MoP Govt of India.’  
 
The then CMD has  also stated that, ‘ in this particular case there was 
delay in final decision in view of prolonged discussions with World Bank, 

 
 
 
the issue came for informal discussions in the Ministry both at Secretary 
and Minister level’. The same could further be  noted   from  the Agenda 
Note  of KMTS contracts that was put up by the then Executive Director 
(Contract Services & Personnel) to the Board of Directors of Power Grid in 
Jan 1995, wherein the fo llowing has been br ought out: Subsequent to the 
visit of team, CMD, Power Grid as  well as Secretary (Power) requested 
Bank to expedite their concurrence as all the queries/ clar ifications further 
sought by the Bank were replied by Power Grid. 
 
It may be seen that the case  has been dealt with in line with the prevailing 
practices at that point of time.” 
 
68 The Committee pointed out that Deptt of  Public Enterprises has prescribed 
a Quarterly Performance Review (QPR) system by which the performance of 
each public enterprise particularly the mi niratnas and navratnas are reviewed by 
the Secretary himself. When asked why dur ing the QPR this fact could not be 
brought out, the Secretary, Ministry of Power during the evidence stated that :- 
“………………We do have system of quarterly performance review. For 
every three months, we review the performance of the public 
undertakings. In retrospect, one would see that when the contract 
discussion was going on in the Boar d, it might be that during the 
intervening period, it might have happ ened. We can also appreciate that 
this was going on. Obviously this it em did not figure in the quarterly 
performance review”. 
 
69 In reply to a specific question w hether the responsibility lies with the 
Power Grid Corporation for the excess expenditure, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Power during evidence stated as under :- 
“In the Ministry’s view the responsibi lity lies with the Power Grid for extra 
cost”. 
 
70. Power Grid in their briefing to the Committee in response to Ministry of 
Power’s observation have stated that w hosoever will execute the project, the 
pain and pleasure of the proj ect would come to that agency only.  Power Grid 

 
 
 
further stated that it should be seen as to under what circumstances, Project has 
been commissioned.  PIB and inter-ministerial group have examined in detail and 
have complimented the effort made by Powe r Grid to bring t he project back on 
rails. 
71 When asked about the Government nominees’ role on the Board, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence stated as under:- 
“We have gone into detail as to who we re the members from the Ministry. 
From the Ministry we had only one member and one from the Central 
Electricity Authority. It so happened that one member  of the Ministry who 
was the then Joint Secretary – this happened to be just the first meeting – 
I can only report what happened then. Obviously, this point has been 
raised by another hon. Mem ber whether this was brou ght to the notice of 
the Ministry. We have examined the w hole file. No member of the Board 
from the Ministry or from  the Central Electricity Authority brought it to the 
notice of the Ministry that such and such thing is happening and that follow 
up is required to be done………………..”. 
 

 
 
 
H. REVISED COST ESTIMATES (RCE) 
72 In regard to Original Approved Cost, Revised Cost Estimate, Price 
Escalation, IDC etc., the information furnished by Power Grid to the Committee is 
as under :- 
 
  Original Approved Cost 
 
 Ministry of Power, Govt. of Indi a had approved the construction of 2x800 
KV single Circuit Kishanpur  –Moga Tr. Lines as a part of Northern Region 
Transmission Project at an estimated cost  of Rs.417.71 Crore (at Q2/1992 Price 
Level). The implementation schedule for the Project was March, 1998. The broad 
break-up of the approved Project cost estimates are as follows:- 
                                                              (Rs. in Crore) 
i) Transmission lines          321.02 
ii)   Sub-Station               32.71 
iii)  Civil Works                                                      7.40 
      iv)  PLCC Equipments                  1.46 
       v)  Others                                           53.12 
      vi)  IDC                                2.00 
                                                                                           ------------- 
 Total                                   417.71 
                                ------------- 
 
 
 Revised Cost Estimate 
 
As per the FR approval, the projec t was scheduled to be completed in 
March 1998.  In view of the difficult situation confronted during the project 
execution for a number of reasons whic h were beyond the control of POWER 
GRID as explained, the project implement ation was delayed. The administrative 
approval for Revised Cost Estimate (R CE) for the project was given at an 
estimated cost of Rs.938.48 crore includi ng IDC  of Rs.310. 44 crore (Q4/1999 

 
 
 
Price Level). The revised implementat ion schedule as per said approval was 
March, 2000 for one Circuit and January, 2001 for another Circuit.  
 
The total increase in cost in RCE was worked out to Rs.520.77 Crore with 
respect to original FR cost of Rs.417.71 Crs.  During the process of GoI approval 
for RCE, the project time and cost over run were analyzed in detail by Inter – 
Ministerial GOI Standing Committee on Time  and Cost over run comprising of 
members from MOP, Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance & Ministry of 
Program Implementation.    
The said Standing Committee had examined  the attributable reasons of 
cost variation. The Committee observed t hat out of total increase of Rs. 520.77 
crore, the increase on account of allowa ble fiscal factors within the Project Time 
Cycle (i.e. GOI approved schedule of Marc h ,1998) is Rs. 250.31 crore i.e. 
59.92% of the sanctioned cost as per the breakup given hereunder :- 
 
i.  Price Escalation  
 
This increase was due to general price escalation during the intervening 
period from 1993 to 1999.  There has been increase of 26% to 75% 
change in various raw material and w holesale price indices. The total 
increase in cost due to price change is Rs.151.29 crores. 
 
 ii. Taxes and Duties 
 
There had been an increase of  Rs.15.41 crore in t he project cost due to 
the changes in the taxes and duties applicable on the supply items. 
 

 
 
 
iii. Foreign Exchange Rate Variation 
 
Due to the increase in the Foreign Exchange Rate of various currencies 
against Rupee, there is an increase in project cost by Rs.28.51 crore. 
 
iv. Centages 
 
The centages on the project was init ially considered on the basis of the 
percentage of the equipm ent cost whereas in the RCE, centages had 
been worked out on actual and the same was less by Rs.15.21 crore than 
the estimates. 
 
v. IDC 
 
There had been increase in IDC of Rs. 70.30 crore during the Project Time 
Cycle. In the initially approved project cost, a  provision of Rs. 2 crore was 
kept towards IDC based on the D ebt Equity ratio of 1:1 with the 
assumption that equity shall be empl oyed first, followed by debt. It was 
also assumed that part of the project i.e., one Ckt. of Kishanpur– Moga will 
be commissioned within the PTC and the revenue realized will be charged 
to the project cost.   However, dur ing the execution of the project, the 
debt: equity ratio became even higher than 4:1 with debt and equity 
flowing simultaneously resulting in increase in IDC. Further, no revenue of 
any circuit was charged to Project Cost. 
 
 The Power Grid also stated that  the increase in cost beyond Project Time 
Cycle (PTC)  due to non allowable fiscal fa ctors was then worked out to 
Rs.270.46 Crore, mainly on account of change in IDC of Rs.238.14 crore 

 
 
 
and quantity variation of Rs.29.78 cror e. Remaining amount of Rs.2.54 
crore was due to price escalation and change in centages. 
 
Final Executed Cost 
 
Both the circuits have since been commissioned in May, 2000 and 
January, 2001  respectively at a total cost of Rs.857.63 crore, which is 
lower than approved RCE cost  of Rs.938.48 Crore. 
 
After offsetting Rs.250.31 Crore   towards  allowable fiscal factors within 
Project Time Cycle (PTC) as per RCE as brought out above, it may be observed 
that the increase in actual project cost beyond Project Time Cycle (PTC)  works 
out to Rs.189.61 Crore only, which is mainly attributable to increase in IDC.  
73 When sought to know whether the matter of delay and increase in Interest 
During Construction (IDC) came to the notice of the Government nominees in the 
Board of Directors, the Ministry of Power in their written reply stated that  
“The matter regarding delay in implem entation of the project was brought 
to the notice of the Board of Directors of PGCIL in the 71 st meeting of the 
Board  held on 9 th March, 1998 which was a ttended among others by the 
then Government nominees on the Board of PGCIL.  In the same meeting, 
the Board decided to engage two eminent experts (a retired Judge of 
Supreme Court/High Court or Senior Advocate of Supreme Court/High 
Court and another expert in the field of financial or commercial matters) to 
advise and render opinion to PGCIL on the Dispute Review Panel (DRP)’s 
awards in the subject contract.  A ccordingly, opinions were sought by 
PGCIL from Shri S.R. Singh, Ex. Addl. Secretary,  Ministry of Finance and 
Shri K. Parasaran, Ex. Attorney General.  Based on the opinions of these 
experts, PGCIL took decisions regar ding acceptance or otherwise of the 
recommendations of DRP.” 
 
74 In reply to the question whether any  time and cost overrun analysis was 
done by CEA, the Ministry stated as follows:- 

 
 
 
“Much before the Audit observation, while examining the revised cost 
estimates of the project in the year 2001, Ministry of Power got an analysis 
done by CEA on the time and cost overr un for this project.  On examining 
the report of the CEA in th is regard, it was observ ed that greater attention 
to the technical specifications at t he time of bidding could have helped in 
obtaining reasonable price and quality.  PGCIL was accordingly instructed 
vide Ministry of Power’s letter dated 7.8.2001 to take suitable corrective 
action to improve the system and proced ures in a defined time frame to 
avoid such deficiencies in the implement ation of the projects.  Thereafter, 
PGCIL prepared a manual  on ‘Work & Procurement  Policy and 
Procedure’ for streamlining future pr ocurements and award of contracts in 
a transparent manner.  These facts al ong with the reply dated 4.9.2001 of 
the PGCIL explaining thei r stand in this regard were also placed before 
the Cabinet Committee on Economic A ffairs while seeking their approval 
to the revised cost estimates of the project.  The revised cost estimates 
were thereafter approved by the Government.” 
 
75 According to Audit Para, the Centra l Electricity Authority (CEA) observed 
that the original design of  the tower of the firm was substantially below the 
required level. 
Commenting on the observation of the CEA, Power Grid  in its reply stated 
as under :- 
“The observation of CEA that the origi nal design of tower of the firm was 
substantially below the required level is not correct as the tower weights of 
Cobra was comparable to the other bi dders who were in the consideration 
zone including Vattenfall who had experience of design & construction of 
800 kV towers.” 
 
 
76 In the Brief submitted to the Committee it has been inform ed that the Time 
and Cost overrun (Revised Cost Estimate) was also examined by an 
Independent Committee on Time & Cost Over  Run set up by GOI comprising of 
Members from MOP, Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of 

 
 
 
Program Implementation and their releva nt observations are reproduced as 
under: 
“The Committee observed that in the difficult situation confronted, all 
possible efforts have been taken by Powe r Grid which led to resolution of 
disputes and revival of t he contract.  Although, in the process, the project 
suffered a time overrun of 39 months with respect to orig inally approved 
time cycle… .. The Committee also feel s that the delay was beyond the 
control of Power Grid.” 
 
77 The Committee observed that pursuant  to the letter dated 7 August, 2001 
of the Ministry of Power to take suit able corrective action to improve the system 
and procedure in a definite time frame to  avoid deficiency in the implementation 
of the project, Power Grid prepared a m anual on Works and Procurement Policy 
& Procedure for streamlining future proc urements and award of contracts in a 
transparent manner. However, the CMD,  Power Grid claimed during the 
evidence that it was only afte r the initiative taken by t he Power Grid, the Ministry 
of Power have suggested to incorporate certain changes in the draft Works and 
Procurement Policy & Procedure of the Power Grid. 
Clarifying the position further in the ma tter, Power Grid in a written reply 
informed the Committee as under :- 
“Power Grid’s initiative for preparation of Works & Procurement Policy had   
formally commenced  by January  2001. The appointment of  Shri B.K. 
Banerjee, ex- Executive Director (C ontracts and Material Management), 
Power Grid, the Advisor for this purpose was approved by Power Grid’s 
Board of Directors  in 113
th meeting held on 24.01.2001. In the 
corresponding Background note put up to the Board it has been noted 
that, ‘Power Grid, immedi ately after its formati on , had adopted NTPC’s 
policies on procurement as well as ot her policy document of NTPC for its 
Corporate functioning. These have s ubsequently been rationalized to suit 
the requirements of the Corporation. However all these need a re-look 
after our experience as transmission or ganization and moreover the Work 
& Procurement policy for Power Grid is yet to be evolved (presently  

 
 
 
NTPC’s policy in this r egard are being followed). … Keeping in view Shri 
Banerjee’s above background and experience,  it is felt that his services 
may further be gainfully utilized for reviewing and preparation/ redrafting of 
various Policies and Manual for Power Grid.’ 
 
In May 2001, the 1 st complete draft of the document covering  the 
Introductory chapter and  the  Pr e-award Section was ready. The 
aforesaid draft was circulated on 23.05. 2001 to all the Ex ecutive Directors 
including the Regional and other  Departm ental  Heads  of Power Grid for 
their comments.   After taking into  account the comments received, the 
revised draft of the document was  discussed in detail on 11.07.2001 at 
Corporate Centre with  representative s of all the concerned departments. 
Various  suggestions that emerged out of the discussions were 
incorporated in the draft  and the same was circulated for  perusal and 
feed back.  Thereafter, on 18.07.2001,  a presentation on the draft  
document  was made before the CMD, Director (Finance), Chief Vigilance 
Officer, Executive Director (Engineering) & Executive Director  (Contracts) 
of Power Grid. 
 
The draft document so finalized was placed before the Board of Directors 
of Power Grid in July 2001 for consideration and deliberations. The Board, 
in its 119th  meeting held on 13.08.2001,  a fter  a detailed presentation on 
the document by the Advisor before t he Board, decided that the draft 
policy be further discussed with MOP and CEA members on the Board  
i.e. with Joint Secretary(S), JS&FA, MOP and Member (G &O), CEA,  and 
any further suggestions given by them be incorporated in the Policy.  The 
Board further  directed that thereafte r the policy as finalized be put up for 
approval to the Board. 
 
After the discussions as directed by the Board  and incorporating the 
suggestions of the Direct ors, the document was put  up to the Board for 
approval. The Board in its 121st meeting held on 17.09.2001 & 24.09.2001 
inter-alia approved the adoption of  the aforesaid document for  
implementation in Power Grid. The document, under the title Works and 
Procurement Policies & Procedures, Vol.-I (September 2001),  was 
thereafter  issued in October 2001 for implementation in Power Grid.  A 
copy of the same was also forwar ded in October 2001 to the Central 
Vigilance Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General of India, PMO,  
Secretary (Power) Government of India and  the World Bank and 
subsequently, it  was  uploa ded on Power Grid’s web site so as to make it 
accessible to all those  concerned with Power Grid’s business. 
 
It may be seen that Power Grid had taken initiative for preparing the 
Works and Procurement Policy & Procedure, Vol-I in January 2001 and 
the document was finalized and approved for implementation by the Board 
of Directors of Power Grid in September 2001.” 

 
 
 
 
78 As regards considering KMTS as a system improvement project, benefit 
stream of KMTS had devia ted from the originally envisaged benefit for the 
investment, as observed by Public Investment Board. 
  CMD, PGCIL, commenting on this observation, stated during briefing as 
under :- 
“This project, right from the begi nning has been a system improvement 
line to evacuate pooled power from Kishenpur in J&K and evacuate it 
further. It was plann ed that about 5500 MW to 6000 MW power will be 
pooled at Kishenpur and then further evacuation will take place”. 
 

 
 
 
I. LESSON LEARNT AND REMEDIAL  MEASURES  PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN 
79 With regard to the lessons learnt  and subsequent directions issued, 
Secretary, Ministry of Power during evidence stated as follows :- 
“We have learnt a number of less ons and those lessons have been 
translated into some definite actions too.  Like in this case, this was first 
800 KV system in India. It depended on the provisions or stipulations, 
which were being suggested by the Consultant and by the World Bank. A 
definite provision – relating to the des ign, supply and construction – came 
under the total jurisdiction of the supplier. Now, there, one can say, the 
problem lies – should the design hav e been within the purview of the 
supplier ? Since it was in the purview  of the supplier, they got into 
problems between mismatch of foundation, the prof ile of foundation, the 
weight of the tower. This  contract was on the basis of rate of the tower. 
Tower will have a weight depending upo n what type of foundation and 
what type of spread of foundation is chosen, the type of tower and the 
weight of steel that goes  into the making of the tower. It was from there 
that the project started getting into di fficulties. This gave us a big lesson. 
This was the first project but it gave us a hard lesson. It gave a lesson to 
the Power Grid also ; which gave t he feedback to the World Bank. At the 
instance of the Ministry of Power, the Power Grid took up the matter with 
the World Bank. The Ministry of Power also took it up with the World Bank. 
It was finally accepted by the World Bank that the design would not belong 
to the supplier. So, thereafter, for each and every project of 800 KV being 
built in the country, irrespective of the source of funding, the foundation 
design and the tower desi gn do not belong to the s uppliers. That is a big 
lesson that has been drawn. 
 
Another lesson that has been drawn – and that ag ain in retrospect – is 
that in future, if any of the sponsor ing organisation or project organisation 
faces any difficulty – where they feel that their view is not being properly 
entertained or apprecia ted by the funding agen cy – it can raise the 
problem to the Ministry of Power and through the Ministry of Power, the 
Department of Economic Affairs. T he DEA in turn can take up those 
problems at the appropriate level of funding agency. As a matter of fact, 
arising out of this case, since 1999,  the Department of  Economic Affairs 
has institutionalised a mechanism w herein every three months of post-
negotiations and post-disbursement, it evaluates each project. If the 
project-implementing agency has any diffi culty, it can use this forum to 
bring that difficulty out so  that it may be taken up at  appropriate levels. In 
the Ministry of Power too, we have a mechanism in which a meeting is 
held after every three months. We have an International Co-operation 
Group, which deal with funding by the ADB or the World Bank or JBIC, 

 
 
 
etc. and this three monthly meeting takes care of problems that are 
brought to its notice by the implementing agency. 
 
80 Adding further in this regard, the Mini stry of Power stated in their written 
communication as follows - 
PGCIL based on its past experience of using standardised tower 
and foundation designs, took up the matter with the World Bank for 
adoption of standard in- house design which has since been agreed by 
them.  Presently, PGCIL in vites the bids and implements the transmission 
system both in domestic and external f unding, based on the standardised 
and tested in-house tower designs and a ssociated foundations.  This has 
resulted in advantages like shorter project implementation schedules, 
better definition of the project scope at  the time of bidding, reduction of 
inventories for O&M, participation from bidding community leading to 
competitive prices and less unforeseen contingencies during the execution 
etc.   
 
81 When asked what action has been taken by the Ministry of Power to avoid 
recurrence of such happenings, the Committee were informed as under :- 
“The Ministry of Power had recently convened a meeting of Heads of 
CPSUs which are likely to avail or are availing loans from multilateral 
funding agencies. In the meeting, Se cretary (Power) asked the CPSUs to 
make full use of the mechanism of quar terly review of externally funded 
projects by the Ministry of Power.  Any difficulties being faced during 
implementation of such projects should be discussed during these 
meetings. Ministry of Power also em phasised that if any important matter 
needs to be brought to the knowledge of the Ministry even before the next 
review meeting, then it must be raised by the concerned CPSU.” 
 
82 When asked to give suggestions about the remedial measures to be taken 
in the matter and to ensure that such happ enings do not recur, the Ministry in a 
written reply informed as follows :- 
The following remedial measures are suggested in this regard: 
(1)  In awarding the contracts dur ing implementation of the projects 
funded through multi-lateral funding age ncies, the interest of the 
implementing Public Sector Undertaking should be paramount. 

 
 
 
(2)  In case there is any conflict in regard to the interest of the 
company, the matter should be taken up by the Company with the 
concerned funding agency and the Minist ry of Power at the highest 
level. 
 
(3)  There should be a separate Cell in the Public Sector Undertaking 
for monitoring of the projects f unded through multi-lateral agencies. 
The implementation of projects, particularly those funded through 
multi-lateral agencies, should be monitored regularly and any 
bottlenecks in implementation of the project should be immediately 
brought to the notice of Ministry of Power by the implementing 
PSU/agency.  The Ministry of Powe r will immediately take up the 
matter with the concerned Minist ry/Department/agency for taking 
remedial action. 

 
 
 
J. WORLD BANK LOAN TO POWER GRID FOR OTHER PROJECTS 
83 The Committee noted that apart from  KMTS project, there were many 
other such projects which were implem ented with World Bank assistance (Reply 
to Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No .2488 dated 18.12.2003 enclosed 
Annexure-II). 
84 On the question of time overrun and cost overrun in implementation of 
these projects, the information which wa s furnished to the Committee by Power 
Grid about the World Bank Funded Projects having time & cost overrun alongwith 
the reasons for time overrun is given in Annexure-III. From t he Annexure it has 
been stated that all the listed projects were completed within the contractual 
schedule agreed to with the Contractors except the Kayamkulam Transmission 
System which had suffered due to RO W problems and in the case of 
Kayamkulam however, the line comple ted ahead of schedule of generation 
Project. 
 In reply to the same question, the Mi nistry of Power stated as under :- 
“The implementation of the externa lly aided projects is monitored 
periodically in the Ministry of Power by  the Project Monitori ng Cell as well 
as in the Quarterly Performance Review meetings taken by Secretary, 
Ministry of Power.  PGCIL has  informed that the progress of 
implementation of various projects  funded under PSDP-II loan 4603 – IN 
is satisfactory, and no time overrun in  this regard is anticipated by PGCIL 
till date.” 
 
85 The details of joint ventures enter ed into by the Power Grid with the 
national and internat ional companies in the last  three years and the PGCIL 
personnel inducted into the Board of Directors of each such joint venture have 
been indicated below :- 

 
 
 
“During the last 3 years Power Grid has entered into Joint Venture 
for the implementation of transmissi on lines associated with Tala HEP, 
East-North Inter Connector and Northern Region Transmission System.  
This is the first transmission project being implemented on Joint Venture 
Route by the Joint Venture Company viz. Powerlinks Transmission Ltd. 
Power Grid and TATA POWER are the Joint Venture Partners and hold 
49% and 51% equity respectively.  Ap proval of Govt. of India for 
investment in this project and forma tion of Joint Venture Company was 
accorded on 02.7.03 and the Joint V enture Company was formed on 
03.7.03.  Various Agreements (Shar eholders Agreement, Implementation 
Agreement & Transmission Service Agr eement) were signed  on 04.7.03.  
The project cost estimate as per investment approval accorded by GOI is 
Rs.1099.64 crores.” 
 
A total debt amount of Rs.980  crore has been tied up with the 
consortium of multilateral and domesti c financial institutions viz. IFC 
(Washington), ADB (Manila), SBI & IDFC. Loan Agreements were signed 
in January 2004.  Financial closure of the project took place in May, 2004.    
 
All major contracts have been awarded by the Joint Venture 
Company and the project is successf ully under implem entation.  The 
schedule date of completion of the above project is June, 2006. 
 
The following transmission lines ar e being executed by the Joint 
Venture Company which start from Siliguri (WB) and go via Bihar upto 
Mandola (UP): 
 
Transmission Line Route length 
(approx.) 
i)   Siliguri-Purnea 400 kV D/C (Quad. Conductor) 
ii)  Purnea-Muzaffarpur(New) 400 kV D/C (Quad. Conductor) 
iii)  Muzaffarpur(new)-Gorakhpur(New) 400 kV D/C (Quad. 
Conductor) 
iv)  Muzaffarpur(new)-Muzaffarpur(BSEB) 220 kV D/C 
v)  Gorakhpur(New)-Lucknow(New) 400 kV D/C 
vi)  Bareilly-Mandola 400 kV D/C 
162 Kms. 
242 Kms. 
233 Kms. 
 20 Kms. 
277 Kms. 
      237 Kms 
 

 
 
 
Presently, the POWER GRID nominee Directors in Powerlink Ltd., 
are the following :- 
 
1. Shri R.P. Singh, CMD, POWER GRID  } Part time 
2. Dr. V.K. Garg, Director(Fi nance), POWER GRID } Directors 
3. Shri V.M. Kaul, ED(JV&HR), POWER GRID  } 
4. Shri Suresh Sachdev a, ED(CMG ), POWER GRID } Full time Director 

 
 
 
PART – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / CONCLUSIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
 
UNCRITICAL ACCEPTANCE OF LOANS FROM INTERNATIONAL 
FUNDING AGENCIES  
 
 The Committee note that the first ever 800 KV Transmission 
system between Kishenpur and Moga was approved by the 
Government in May 1993 and was sch eduled to be completed in 
March, 1998.  But the project could be completed only in January, 
2001, which resulted in a time over-run of 34 months.  The original 
approved cost of the project w as Rs. 417.71 crore in May 1993.  
But the final executed cost of th e project was Rs. 857.63 crore in 
January, 2001.  The cost over -run comes to Rs. 439.92 crore 
which is 100 percent more than the original approved cost. 
 The Committee find that vario us factors such as unreasonable 
World Bank conditionalites / guidelin es, lack of adequate initial 
technical scrutiny  having been undertaken by the Power Grid at 
the techno-economic evaluation stag e,  lack of prudence in the 
initial planning and estimation, the  inability of Power Grid to take 
the World Bank into confidence on various issues contributed 
significantly to the cost and time  overruns in implementing the 
project. 
 The Committee note that the sort of infirmities that were 
allowed in the bidding process wh ile awarding the contract for 

 
 
 
completion of KMTS project ha d actually paved the way for a 
foreign firm, M/s Cobra of Spain to secure the contract.  The 
Committee further note that the foreign firm had ‘no previous 
experience in designing 800 KV  class transmission systems and 
also had no experience of executing projects in India’. The 
stipulations in the bidding documents prescribed that the rates 
for the work should be quoted on “per tower” basis and not on 
the basis of the ‘tower weight’ or ‘tonnage’. Thus, the firm which 
had estimated the ‘tower weight’ at a ‘lower level’ quoted a ‘lesser 
rate per tower’ and managed to secure the contract.  The result 
was repeated failures in optimiz ing the tower designs by the 
successful bidder and contractual problems, which contributed to 
the significant delay of about thr ee years in  the implementation 
of the project. Despite the fact that Power Grid had the experience 
in the field of designing and bu ilding transmission tower, the 
Committee fail to understand as to  why the Company could not 
prevail upon the World Bank on the need to clearly define the 
project scope at the bidding stag e by suitably taking into 
consideration, the aspect relati ng to technical scrutiny of 
‘tonnage /weight’ and also offer its in-house design for 
acceptance.   
 The Committee also find that upon the insistence of World 
Bank, Power Grid chose to award both the packages of KMTS to 

 
 
 
M/s Cobra of Spain though it had no previous experience in 
designing 800 KV class tower. The Co mmittee feel that merely for 
the sake of getting loan facilities from the International funding 
agencies, the public sector companies should not accept 
unreasonable terms imposed by th em. Uncritical acceptance of 
such loans would compromise our economic interests and the 
sovereign right to get a ser vice established at a cost 
advantageous to us.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommend that 
the whole matter of acceptance of loans from World Bank and the 
conditionalities  attached to it, should be thoroughly analyzed to 
safeguard our sovereign economic independence and for this 
purpose, a High-powered Committ ee of Experts comprising of 
independent minded technocrats and economists should be 
formed to suggest suitable measu res. The Committee feel that 
such an analysis is very much necessary keeping in view the fact 
that PGCIL had implemented sever al other projects with World 
Bank funding which had also faced the problem of cost over-run / 
time over-run. 
 

 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION 2 
 
UNUSUALLY HIGH INTER EST INCURRED  DURING 
CONSTRUCTION. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that at the techno-
commercial stage, M/s Cobra, Spain had proposed to sub-
contract part of the work to the Indian firms.  However, M/s Cobra 
soon faced a host of problems in finalizing the sub-contractors in 
India. The company faced several  problems such as delay in 
testing of towers, additional de mand of payment from their sub-
contractors and mismatch in cash flows. M/s Cobra also raised  a 
number of disputes and claimed additional amount  and also 
sought extension of time. The dir ect fallout of the contractual 
problems that surfaced immediatel y after the award of the work 
for erection of the  Kishenpur-Moga Transmission towers to the 
Spanish  firm (M/s Cobra ) in February, 1995 led not only to the 
substantial time overrun in commissioning the project but also  to 
the huge escalation in project costs.  The Committee find that out 
of the total project cost escalation, more than Rs.300 crore was 
on account of Interest During C onstruction (IDC) alone.  The 
amount  assigned for IDC as per th e approved project estimate of 
1993 was only to the tune of  Rs. 2 crore. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the delay of about three years in commissioning the 
project was the main contributo ry factor for the unusually high 

 
 
 
interest incurred during construction on this project.  The  
Committee wish to point out that a facility  that could have been 
established by spending Rs.417. 71 crore was eventually got 
established by  spending actually  Rs.857.63 crore, out of which 
the interest paid during construc tion alone comes to more than 
Rs.300 crore, thus making World Bank and the foreign 
construction Company, M/s Cobra, the real gainers in the whole 
deal, as Power Grid submissivel y  accepted all the terms and 
conditions imposed  by the loan ing agency.  The Committee feel 
that the terms for calculating Interest During Construction are 
very harsh and require a pointed revi ew in all future financing of 
projects and desire that the government should examine this 
aspect thoroughly.  The Committe e also recommend that it 
should be examined as to whether the matter of payment of IDC 
to the World Bank in this case may be re-opened to find out if any 
claim for refund of IDC can be  lodged on the ground that the 
entire delay in completing the proj ect can be attributed solely to 
M/s Cobra  the agency  thrust upon the PGCIL to execute the 
project only at the behest of the World Bank. 

 
 
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
NEED FOR EXPLORING POSSIBILITY OF NEGOTIATION WITH  
M/S VATTENFALL. 
 
 The Committee note that the major contract for erection of 
transmission towers was awarded by the Company in February, 
1995 to an inexperienced foreign firm which faced repeated 
failures in testing.  Power Grid  was apparently aware of this 
aspect of possible repeated failures as they have stated that such 
failures are ‘usual’ in the tower industry.  The contract for tower 
erection ran into serious difficul ties subsequently and had to be 
re-negotiated in October, 1998 and the project finally was 
completed only in January, 2001. 
 The Committee also note that no effort was initiated by Power 
Grid to explore the possibility of  negotiation with M/s Vattenfall, 
one of the qualified bidders, a nd was the only firm with the 
experience of laying the 800 KV tr ansmission lines. If this option 
could have been exercised, the Committee feel that delay in 
completing the project could have been completely avoided and 
as a result the need for payment of high IDC to the World Bank 
would have never arisen, keeping th e project within the original 
time frame and cost.  The Commi ttee desire that while  taking 
such critical decisions in future the commercial consideration 
and pecuniary interest of the  government company concerned 
should be accorded foremost priority.  Such options should be 

 
 
 
taken up for  discussion with the funding agencies in future 
highlighting the merits of resorting to such options.

 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
NEED FOR EFFECTIVE MO NITORING OF PROJECT 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 The Committee note that PGCIL is a mini-ratna Company, and  
the Ministry of Power oversee th e progress of the implementation 
of the projects through the Quarte rly Performance Review (QPR) 
meetings, besides having Government’s Directors / nominees on 
the Board of Directors of PGCIL.   The Committee also note that 
the issue of non-acceptance of the Power Grid’s recommendation 
by the World Bank for awarding the contracts to two separate 
firms was not brought to the notice of the Ministry during the QPR 
meetings as has been revealed by Secretary, Ministry of Power 
during evidence. The Government nominees in the Board of 
Directors also did not bring th e matter to the notice of the 
administrative Ministry. The Co mmittee are constrained to note 
that such a delicate issue w as dealt with by Power Grid 
unilaterally at the Board l evel without consulting its 
administrative Ministry and also the Deptt. of Economic Affairs 
which was the nodal agency for seeking loans from foreign 
funding agencies. Reacting to the Power Grid’s handling of the 
situation, Ministry of  Power stated that “i t was a fit case to have 
been brought to their notice”. The Committee also note that the 
Ministry have now issued instructions to Central Public Sector 
Units (CPSUs) to make full use of  the mechanism of quarterly 

 
 
 
review of externally funded projects by the Ministry of Power. Any 
difficulties being faced duri ng the implementation of such 
projects should be discussed duri ng these meetings. They also 
emphasized that if any important  matter needs to be brought to 
the knowledge of the Ministry even before the next review 
meeting, it must be raised by the concerned CPSUs.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry and the Public 
Undertakings should scrupulously adhere to the guidelines / 
instructions in this regard. The  Committee also recommend that 
the Government should examine the issue of need for fixing of 
responsibility on the officials responsible for the lapses 
mentioned above. 

 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
 
 
NEED FOR EFFECTIVE COORDINATION BETWEEN POWER GRID 
AND ADMINISTRATIVE MINISTRY 
 
 
 Another particularly dist urbing aspect noticed during 
examination of the related issues, was the furnishing of 
contradictory statements to the Committee. The Committee note 
that a Manual on Work and Procurement Policy and Procedure for 
streamlining future procurement and awards of contract in a 
transparent manner was brought out by Power Grid. From the 
information furnished by the Minist ry of Power to the Committee, 
it is seen that the said Manual was prepared by the Power Grid at 
the instance of the Ministry of Po wer following their instructions 
issued on 7 August, 2001. However, Power Grid has stated that 
the initiative for preparation of the document had formally 
commenced in Power Grid in January, 2001 and the document 
was finalised and approved for implementation by the Board of 
Directors of Power Grid in Se ptember, 2001. The Committee are 
constrained to note that there is no coordination between the 
Ministry of Power a nd Power Grid. The Co mmittee take a serious 
view of this matter and expect that in future effective coordination 
and consultation should be held before furnishing the information 

 
 
 
to the Parliamentary Committees so  as to avoid furnishing of 
contradictory information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi           RUPCHAND PAL 
22 March, 2005           CHAIRMAN 
1st  Chaitra, 1927(S)   COMMIT TEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE –I 
 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 
 
15.3.1 Extra expenditure in construc tion of Kishenpur- Moga Transmission 
System 
 
Due to avoidable delay of 30 months attributable to inexperience of a 
foreign contractor, the Company incurre d extra expenditure of Rs. 217.22 
crore on execution of a transmission system.  Further, excess capacity 
created at expenditure of Rs. 433. 81 crore would remain grossly 
underutilized in near future owing to non-execution of generation projects. 
 
 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (Company) commissioned (January 
2001) Kishenpur – Moga transmission system (KMTS) having two lines of 800 kV 
each at a total cost of Rs. 847.91 crore with an overall cost overrun of Rs. 430.20 
crore and time overrun of 34 months.  Out of this , delay of 30 months was 
attributable to inexperience of a foreign contractor, which resulted in extra 
expenditure of Rs. 217.22 cr ore.  Besides, excess capa city of 800 kV created at 
an additional expenditure of Rs. 433.81 crore would remain grossly under-utilised 
for years to come due to non materialisat ion of expected generat ion of power as 
most of the identified generation projects were not taken up for implementation.  
A review of execution and implementation of the KMTS revealed the following  
 
Government of India sanctioned (Ma y 1993) the scheme of KMTS at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 417.71 crore with the completion schedule of March 1998.  
The scheme was conceived to transfer pow er from various generation projects 
(Jammu and Kashmir) to the load centre  at Moga (Punjab).  The Company 
invited (May 1993) global tenders for pre- qualification and iss ued (March 1994) 
tender documents for price bids  to six qualified bi dders, out of which five bidders 
submitted their price bids, which were opened in May 1994. 
 
M/s Cobra emerged lowest for both t he lines of KMTS.  Based on pre-
qualification and evaluation of bidders, the Company had assessed that M/s.  
Cobra would not be able to execute both t he lines in view of the tower material 
required for both the li nes and 800 kV lines being constructed for the first time in 
India.  Accordingly, the Company recommended award of work for only one line 
to M/s Cobra, which was, however, not  accepted by the World Bank.  So, 
contracts for construction of both the lines were awarded to M/s. Cobra in 
February 1995 with the completion schedule of 39 months i.e., by May 1998. 
 
It is observed that M/s.  Cobra had not ex perience of execution of projects of 800 
kV lines and had passed t he pre-qualification and bid evaluation stage because 
no technical scrutiny was m ade by the Company with re spect to weight of the 

 
 
 
tower.  Consequently, there were repeated  failures in design and testing of 
towers, resulting in avoidable delay of 23 months.  Further, due to increase in 
weight of the tested towers up to 46 per cent over the estimated weight, M/s. 
Cobra demanded compensation for the increase in cost, which led to delay of 7 
months.  This resulted in total avoidabl e delay of 30 months in completion of 
KMTS, which increased the project cost  by Rs. 217.22 crore on account of 
interest on borrowed funds and escalati on in price including exchange rate 
variation. 
 
Both the lines were commissioned in May 2000 and January 2001 respectively.  
However, as no generation project exc ept Dulhasti and Ch amera (stage II) was 
taken up for execution, KMTS could not be  put to use at its rated capacity and 
chances for evacuation of power at 800 kV level in near future were remote.  In 
fact, the KMTS was initially to be oper ated at 400kV level and transmission of 
power at 800 kV was required only afte r commissioning of Sawalkot, Baghlihar, 
Ratle, Dulhasti and Chamera (stage II) generation projects.  A World Bank 
supervision mission had suggested (July 1993) construction of two 400 kV 
double circuit lines initially instead of two 800 kV lines, so as to defer the 800 kV 
conversion investment till 2015-20.  No vetheless, the Company went ahead with 
the construction of two 800 kV transmission  lines on the grounds of difficulties in 
acquiring right of way and prolonge d government clearance procedure.  
Additional cost of construction of two 800 kV lines as compared to two 400 kV 
lines worked out to Rs. 433.81 crore. 
 
The Management stated (May 2 002) that no technical compromise was made in 
adopting qualifying requirement for selection of M/s. Cobra and the delay was not 
attributable to its inexperience, but to ac tual failure of towers during testing and 
limited availability of test beds in India.  The Minist ry added that overall cost 
overrun was contributed to factors like cha nge in debt-equity ratio, escalation in 
price index, etc.  Further , while stating that construction of 800 kV lines was a 
prudent decision in view of  severe right of way pr oblem and was not linked to 
commissioning of all the gener ation projects, they endorsed the Management’s 
reply that KMTS has improved reliability of the Nort hern region grid and as such 
should be viewed as a system improvement project. 
 
The reply is not tenable as the Central El ectricity Authority (CEA) while reviewing 
the cost and time overrun had, inter alia , observed (July 2001) that original 
design of the firm was substantially below the required level and the firm passed 
the pre-qualification stage because no technical scrutin y regarding design of the 
towers was undertaken by the Company.  A bnormal increase in the weight of the  
tested towers was considered by the CEA as the main reason for failure in 
design.  As regards cons idering KMTS as a system improvement project, benefit 
stream of KMTS had devia ted from the originally envisaged benefit for the 
investment, as observed by Public Investment Board. 
 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF POWER  
 
LOK SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO 2488 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 18.12.2003  
 
WORLD BANK LOAN TO PGCI  
 
2488.  SHRI SULTAN SALAHUDDIN OWAISI  
  
 Will the Minister of POWER  
be pleased to state:-  
 
(a) whether the Power Grid Corporatio n of India received $450 million loan 
assistance from the World Bank for various projects;  
 
(b) if so, the details thereof;  
(c) whether projects for which loan wa s sanctioned have been completed;  
(d) if not, the reasons therefor and the present status of these projects; and  
(e) the time by which these projects are likely to be completed?  
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF POWER  
 
( SHRIMATI JAYAWANTI MEHTA )  
 
(a) & (b) : Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) signed an agreement with World Bank on 13th 
June, 2001 for a loan of $ 450 million (PSDP-II Ln.4603 IN). The loan has become effective from 
21.11.2001 and will close on 30.06.2006.  
 
(c) to (e) : Some of the projects covered by this loan have been completed. The status of the projects 
implemented/being implemented by PGCIL under this loan is indicated at Annex.  
 
****** 

 
 
 
  
ANNEX REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS(C0 TO (E0 OF UNSTARRRED 
QUESTION NO. 2488 TO BE ANSWERED IN THE LOK SABHA ON 18.12.2003. 
***** 
 
Status of projects implemen ted / being implemented by Power Grid Corporation of 
India Ltd. (PGCIL) under PSDP-II Loan 4603 IN. 
 
S.No.  Description  Present status 
1. East – North Interconnector –I Project (Sasaram 
HVDC B/B Project) 
Completed 
2. System Coordination & C ontrol Project in Eastern 
Region 
Under implementation.  The project 
is expected to be completed by 
March, 2005 
3. System Coordination & C ontrol Project in Western 
Region 
Under implementation.  The project 
is expected to be completed by 
March, 2006 
4. PGCIL’s Diversification into Telecom Under implementation.  The project 
is expected to be completed by 
December, 2004 
5. High capacity East-North Interconnector-II Under implementation.  The project 
is expected to be completed by June, 
2006 
6. National Load Despatch Centre Detailed Project Report has been 
submitted by PGCIL for investment 
approval  by the Government  
7. System Strengthening-III in Southern Region Grid. Detailed Project Report has been 
submitted by PGCIL for investment 
approval  by the Government 
8. Balance work in respect of the following projects 
which were being executed under earlier World 
Bank loans (No. 3577-In & No. 3237-IN): 
i) Moga-Hissar-Bhiwani Transmission System 
ii) Kishenpur-Moga Transmission System 
iii) Nthpa-Jhakri Transmission system 
iv) SC&C project in Northern Region 
v) Vindhyachal-Dhule Transmission system 
vi) Ramaguandam-Hyderabad Transmission 
System  
vii) Central Power Transmission  Project-I 
viii) Rihand Power Transmission Project 
ix) Transmission System associated with 
Kayamkulam GBCC 
x) SC&C Project in Southern Region. 
Completed  
 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
PROJECT FUNDED BY WB HAVING TIME & COST OVERRUN 
 
Cost (Rs. In crore) Time Sl. 
No.  
Name of Project Funding 
Org./ 
latest 
appd.  
Actual  Cost 
overrun  
Org. / 
latest 
appd.  
Actual  Time 
overrun 
(in 
months) 
1 Nathpa – Jhakri Trans. System  WB 889.95/
1561.63 
 
1446.01 556.06/0 April’97/
May’01 
May’01 49/0 
2 Vindhyachal addl. Trans. System WB 339.69/
707.40 
 
707.4 367.71/0 Dec’97 Dec’97 0 
3 ULDC NR WB 479.51/
658.92 
 
658.92 179.4/0 March’00/
July’02 
July’02 28/0 
4 ULDC SR WB 621.57/
683.8 
 
683.8 62.23 March’02/ 
Jun’02 
Jun’02 27/0 
5 ULDC ER WB 282.49/
387.41 
 
387.41 104.92 Sept’03/ 
Jun’05 
Jun’05 21/0 
6 Sasaram HVDC WB 671.56 529.74 0 Dec’01 Sep’02 9 
7 Kayamkulam Trans. System WB 83.0 / 
204.41 
 
204.41 121.41/0 March’99/
Sept’99 
Sep’99  6/0 
 
Note: The reasons for the time overrun have been en umerated in the subsequent pages.  All the 
listed projects were completed within the contractual schedule agreed to with the Contractors except 
the Kayamkulam Transmission System which had suffered due to ROW problems and even in the 
case of Kayamkumlam the same was completed ahead of schedule of generation Project. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Reasons for Time & Cost Over-run for WB funded Projects 
 
1. Nathpa-Jhakri Trans. System: 
 
Reason for Time Over run- 
i) Signing of loan agreement by GoI with  WB in Oct’90(i.e., 18 months after 
investment sanction) 
ii) Appointment of consultant by NHPC in Nov’91 (i.e., 30 months after 
investment sanction) 
iii) Delay in preparation of tech specif ication (i.e., in Feb’94 due to delay in 
approval of WB & review of tech. parameters by CEA) 
iv) Delay in generation project fr om Apr’97 to Mar’02.  However, 
POWERGRID has completed lines from Jul’97 to May’01, i.e., much 
ahead of Gen. Project. 
 
Reason for Cost Over-run- 
i) Increase in price indices 
ii) Exchange rate variation 
iii) Change in scope  
iv) Centages 
 
2. Vindhyanchal addl. Trans. System – Although the project was sanctioned in 
May’89 work could not be started till Mar’93 due to non-finanlisation of funding 
agency. 
3. ULDC NR- 
 
Reason for time Over-run- Initial delay in award of contract due to complexity 
involved in finalisation of BOQ/Scheme catering to the need of different SEBs & 
Central Sector Utilities. 
 
Reason for Cost Over-run- 
i) Price change due to escalation 
ii) Change in scope 
iii) New additions/deletions 
iv) Change in taxes & duties 
v) Increase in Centages & IDC 
 
4. ULDC SR- 
Reason for time Over-run - I) Initial delay in award of contract due to complexity 
involved in finalisation of BOQ/Scheme catering to the need of different SEBs & 
Central Sector Utilities.  
 
Reason for Cost Over-run- 
i) Price change due to escalation 
ii) Change in scope 
iii) New additions/deletions 

 
 
 
iv) Change in taxes & duties 
v) Increase in Centages & IDC 
 
5. ULDC SR- 
Reason for time Over-run- 
I) Placement of award delayed due to  non-signing of MOU by BSEB despite 
constant persuasion at va rious levels by POWERGRI D, CEA & MoP.  BSEB 
signed MOU during Dec’00 &  award placed in Dec’00 itself. 
 
Reason for Cost Over-run- 
i) Price increase due to escalation 
ii) Change in quantity of approved items  
iii) FERV 
iv) Increase in Centages & IDC 
v) Change in  scope (Creation of Jharkhand State ) 
 
6. Sasaram HVDC: 
Reason for Time over-run 
 
i) Delay in notification regarding Custom Duty waival delaying HVDC Package 
tendering & award (notification issued in  Jun’99 against project approval of 
Sep’98 
ii) Delay in effectiveness of World bank funding due to Economic Sanctions 
imposed in Jun’98. 
iii) Delay in issue of PAC due to delay in issuance of “Deemed Export Status” to 
the Project-tower pkg. awarded in Feb’99, PAC could not be issued till Jul’99 
which delayed the supplies. 
iv) Law & order problems at Sasaram – Two of the employees of the HVDC 
Package Civil Contractor were kidna pped by anti-social elements affecting 
erection activities for more than a month. 
 
7. Kayamkulam Trans. System 
 
Reason for Time Over-run-   Completion delayed as line passing through 
thickly populated & dense rubber plantation ar ea.  Most of the line in low lying 
marshy land with treacherous soil conditi on resulting in collapsing of pits for 
foundation.  Un-precended rain fall leading to flooding & submergence of 
locations.  However, Kayamkulam – Endmon D/C Line alongwith GIS 
Switchyard at Kayamkulam was test char ged in Aug’98 much ahead of schedule 
of generation project.  There was no evacuation problem. 
 
Reason for Cost overrun 
i) Price change due to escalation 
ii) Change in scope 
iii) New additions/deletions 
iv) Change in taxes & duties 
v) Increase in Centages & IDC 

 
 
 
ANNEXURE IV 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  3rd   SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  
PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  1st   OCTOBER,  2004 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1315 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
 
3. Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
4. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
5. Shri Kashiram Rana  
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
9. Shri Ajay Maroo  
10. Shri Jibon Roy  
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar, Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
 REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA . 
 
1. Shri T.G.Srinivasan Deput y C & AG (Commercial)  
2. Shri Sunil Chandra Principa l Director (Commercial)  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 REPRESENTATIVES OF POWER GRID CORPORATION OF 
INDIA LIMITED. 
 
1. Shri R.P.Singh Chai rman & Managing Director 
2. Dr. V.K. Garg Director (Finance) 
3. Shri R.N.Nayak Executive Director (Engineering) 
4. Shri V.L.Dua Addl. General Manager (Finance) 
5. Shri M.K.Krishan kumar Addl. General Manager (Engineering ) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, COPU welcomed the Officials of 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited and asked  the Chairman & 
Managing Director, Power Grid Corporation of India Lt d. to give a briefing 
on the functioning of the Company and also on Audit Para No. 15.3.1 of 
Report No. 3 (Commercial) of C&AG (E xtra expenditure in Construction of 
Kishenpur – Moga Transmission Syste m-Additional Expenditure of Rs. 
433.81 crore).  Thereafter, the Committee were briefed by the 
representatives of Power Grid Corporation of I ndia Limited.  Members 
raised the queries which were replied to  by the officials of Power Grid 
Corporation of India Ltd. 
3. ********* ********** ******** *****  *********************** 
********** ********** ************.********* *********** 
4. A copy of the verbatim pr oceedings has been kept on record 
separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  9th  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  18  JANUARY,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs to 1700 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
6. Shri Kashiram Rana  
7. Shri Mohan Rawale  
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
9. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
10. Shri Rajesh Verma  
11. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
   
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
12. Shri Ajay Maroo  
13. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
14. Shri Jibon Roy  
15. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. G upta Under Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri T. G. Srinivasan Dy C&AG (Comml)-cum Chairman 
2. Shri Sunil Chander  Principal Dir (Comml) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
1. Shri R. V. Shahi   Secretary 
2. Shri A K Jain    Special Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Shankar   Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Gireesh B. Pradhan  Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Mrutunjay Sahoo  Joint Secretary & FA 
6. Shri Jiwesh Nandan   Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPTT. OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 Shri Ranjit Bannerji   Joint Secretary 
 
2. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Power in connection with ex amination of Audit Para No.15.3.1 
of C&AG’s Report No.3 (Commercial)  of 2004 on Power Grid Corporation 
of India Ltd. – Extra ex penditure in constructi on of Kishenpur – Moga 
Transmission System – Additional expenditure of Rs.433.81 crore. 
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedi ngs of the sitting of the Committee 
has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  10th  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  
PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  7 FEBRUARY,  2005 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
6. Shri Kashiram Rana  
7. Shri Mohan Rawale  
   
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
8. Shri Ajay Maroo  
9. Shri Jibon Roy  
10. Smt. Ambica Soni  
11. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. G upta Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Assistant Director 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri T. G. Srinivasan Dy C&AG (Comml)-cum Chairman 
2. Shri Sunil Chander  Principal Dir (Comml) 
3. Smt. Revathi Bedi  Principal Dir (Comml) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF POWER GRID CORPORATION LTD. 
1. Shri R. P. Singh   Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Dr. V. K.Garg   Director (Finance) 
3. Shri S. C. Mishra   Director (Projects) 
4. Shri Anand Mohan   Executive Director (Contracts) 
5. Shri R. N. Nayak   Executive Director (Engineering) 
 

 
 
 
 
2. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limi ted in connection with examination of 
Audit Para No.15.3.1 of C&AG’s Report No.3 (Commercial) of 2004 on 
Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. – Extra expenditure in construction of 
Kishenpur – Moga Transmission System  – Additional expenditure of 
Rs.433.81 crore. 
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedi ngs of the sitting of the Committee 
has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  11th  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  22  MARCH,  2005 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
 
3. Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
4 Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
6. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
7. Shri Rajesh Verma  
   
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
 
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
9. Shri Ajay Maroo  
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
11. Shri Jibon Roy  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph Additional Secretary 
2. Shri J. P. Sharma, Director 
3. Shri Raj Kumar, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft Report on `Power Grid 
Corporation of India Limited – Extra expenditure in construction of 
Kishenpur – Moga Transmission System  – Additional expenditure of 
Rs.433.81 crore’ and adopted the same. 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee to 
finalise the aforesaid Report and to present the same to the Parliament. 
4. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
C:\My Documents\Girdhari\PGCIL-FINAL.doc 