 
C.P.U. No. 925  
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
OIL AND NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LIMITED – LOSS DUE TO 
SALE OF CRUDE CONTAINING BASIC SEDIMENTS AND WATER 
CONTENT ABOVE THE NORMS 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16-12-2008 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16-12-2008 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2008 / Agrahayana 1930 (S) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32  

 
CONTENTS  
 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
PART  A  
REPORT  
A.     Overview 1 
B.     Delay in upgradation of facilities 2 
C.     Revision of BSW level in crude oil 5 
D.     Delay in signing the Crude Oil Sale Agreement 7 
 
 
 
PART  B 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 9 
Annexure-I – Para 14.7.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 11 of 
2008 (Commercial) 
 
14 
Annexure-II – Minutes of Sittings of Committee 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
C O M P O S I T I O N  O F 
 
T H E  C O M M I T T E E  O N  P U B L I C  U N D E R T A K I N G S  
(2008-2009) 
 
 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal         -       Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5. Shri Francis K. George 
6. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
7. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale 
10. Shri K.C. “Baba” Singh 
11. Smt. Pratibha Singh 
12. Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
13. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
14. Shri Rajesh Verma 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Rahul Bajaj 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
20 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
21 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
22 *Shri Amar Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar  - Deputy Secretary-II 
4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Executive Officer 
 
* Ceases to be Member of the Committee consequent on his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
(iii) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their beh alf, present this Thirty Second 
Report on “Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited – Loss due to sale of crude 
containing basic sediments and water content above the norm” resulting in a loss of 
revenue of Rs. 96.96 crore. 
 
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2008-2009).  The Committee’s examinat ion of the subject was based 
on Paragraph 14.7.1 of the Report on Union Governme nt (Commercial) of the 
C&AG of India No. 11 CA of 2008. 
 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of representati ves of the ONGC on 2 
nd  
June, 2008.  The Committee then sought written repl ies from the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas to a list of questionnaires.  
 
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2008-09) c onsidered and adopted 
the Report at their sitting held on 2 
nd  December, 2008.  The Committee feel obliged 
to the Members of the Committee on Public Undertaki ngs (2008-09).  They would 
also like to place on record their deep sense of ap preciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by officials of Lok Sab ha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Lim ited for placing before them 
the material and information they wanted in connect ion with examination of the 
subject.  They also wish to thank in particular the  representatives of the Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited who gave evidence a nd placed their considered 
views before the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                          RUPCHAND PAL  
 2 December, 2008                             CHAIR MAN 
11 Agrahayana 1930                COMMITTEE ON PUBL IC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(v) 

 1
 
 
PART A 
 
 
A. Overview  
 
 Para No. 14.7.1 of Comptroller & Auditor General’s  Report (Commercial) No. 
CA 11 of 2008 contained an observation highlighting  loss due to sale of crude oil 
containing basic sediments and water (BSW) content above the norms in Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC). As per the audit observation, failure to 
upgrade and create facilities to contain the Basic sediments and water content in 
the crude oil supplies within limits resulted in loss of revenue of Rs. 96.96 crore.  
 
2. The main contentions made in the audit observati on are; 
 
(i) ONGC entered into a Memorandum of understanding  (MOU) with 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) in April 2002 for sale of crude oil 
from April 2002 to March 2004, under which the sale price was subject 
to discount at slab rates in case BSW content in th e crude exceeded 
0.2 percent by volume. 
 
(ii) Prior to the dismantling of the Administered P rice Mechanism (APM) 
in March 2002, the admissible level of BSW in crude  oil supplies was 
one percent, and the infrastructure facilities esta blished by ONGC 
were designed to meet this level. 
 
(iii) Though ONGC entered into an MOU in April 2002  requiring higher 
quality crude oil with BSW content of less than 0.2  per cent for 
realizing full sale price, it did not upgrade its f acilities in time to bring 
the BSW level down to 0.2 percent or less in its cr ude oil, resulting in 
supplies of crude oil to IOCL in the following five  years generally 
exceeding the benchmark 0.2 percent in BSW content. 
 
(iv) As a result, ONGC sustained loss of revenue of  Rs. 107.41 crore 
between April 2002 and October 2007. 
 
(v) The Company initiated action for upgradation of  its facilities in north 
Gujarat only in February 2004, after a time lapse o f about two years 
from entering into the MOU, by making a reference t o its internal 
institute viz., Institute of Oil and Gas production  Technology (IOGPT). 
It directed all assets to take action to reduce BSW  content in 
December 2005, which was reiterated in June 2006 an d November 
2006 due to continuing upward trend in discount all owed for BSW 
content above 0.2 percent. 
 
(vi) The claim of ONGC Management that action had b een taken to 
upgrade facilities is untenable because even after four years from the 

 2
date it claims to have taken action, the company ha d not been able to 
contain BSW content within stipulated levels. 
 
(vii) The reference to IOGPT was made only in Febru ary 2004 i.e., after 
two years from signing the MOU. Even after reckonin g two years from 
April 2002 for upgradation of facilities, the facil ities could have been 
put in place by April 2004 and the company could ha ve avoided 
discount allowed to IOCL to the extent of 96.96 cro re from April 2004 
to October 2007. 
 
(viii) Thus, ONGC by failing to take corrective act ion within reasonable time 
for reducing BSW content, to the agreed level, in t he crude oil it sells 
to IOCL sustained avoidable loss of revenue of Rs. 96.96 crore for the 
period April 2004 to October 2007. The losses are continuing. 
 
 
B.  Delay in upgradation of facilities 
 
3. Asked as to whether timely steps were initiated to upgrade infrastructure 
facilities to meet reduced levels of BSW content in  crude oil as stipulated in the 
MOU with IOCL, the company in their reply stated; 
 
“Suitable plans were made to achieve BS&W less than  0.2% to realise the 
full price of crude. However, the end results would  have varied depending on 
the actual quantity and quality of water produced f rom the reservoir and 
operational upsets and shutdowns.  Name of the majo r facilities, which have 
come up after 2002 or in the process of implementation, are: 
 
o Process facilities under Assam Renewal Package 
o Revamping of Nawagam process facilities in WR 
o MH & NH revamping facilities including revamping at  Uran w.r.t. some 
of the process vessels.”  
 
4.  Regarding the steps involved in upgradation of facilities to meet the 
stipulated content of BSW in crude oil at 0.2% and whether or not ONGC have the 
capability to affect the required upgrade, the company in their reply submitted; 
 
“Steps involved are continuous monitoring of reserv oir behaviour, estimation 
of produced fluid and its quality. It is a general practice in offshore during 
formulation of Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) project & related redevelopment 
plan, handling such capacity of water is always pla nned and taken care of. 
Based on the above, retrofitting / addition of syst ems like increased 
tankages, heater treaters, revamping of Group Gathe ring Stations (GGSs), 
adopting suitable chemical treatment are planned fo r implementations. 
ONGC institutes namely IRS (For Reservoir Studies),  IOGPT (For production 
and process facilities), IEOT (For Offshore install ations, marine environment 
etc) are capable of identifying and suggesting such  upgrade requirements. 

 3
ONCG has the capability to effect such upgradation through its in-house 
Engineering Services.”  
 
5.  On whether the company has worked out the estim ated costs likely to be 
required for the upgrade project, the company stated; 
 
“Many upgradtion jobs, like, in North East through Assam Renewal Package, 
in WR through revamping of Nawagam Desalter plant a nd in MH through 
revamping project etc. are taken up. These upgradti on jobs are meant for all 
technical requirements including BS&W reduction. Si nce these jobs are 
integrated with many other process facilities, sepa rate costing of such 
facilities has not been done.” 
 
6.  The Committee desired to be informed on the lat est status of facilities 
upgrade and the date of commencement of operation o f upgraded facilities. They 
also desired to know the BSW content in crude oil p rocessed from such upgraded 
facilities. The company in their written reply submitted thus; 
 
“Some of the required facilities have already been upgraded in some areas 
and, in other areas, facilities are in the process of being upgraded as per the 
revised technical requirements. Efforts are always made to keep the BS&W 
under the prescribed limits. However due to unpredi ctable properties of the 
produced fluids and operational exigencies, occasio nal spikes in BS&W 
beyond 0.2% do happen.” 
 
7.  Asked to present the company’s take on audit’s observation regarding the 
loss incurred by the company by way of discounts gi ven for their non-upgradation of 
facilities within reasonable time and consequent in ability to meet the defined BSW 
level of 0.2%, the CMD of ONGC during evidence stated; 
 
“Here I would like to submit before this august bod y, whereas that C&AG are 
very right in their observation, I will put it that  from the larger implications it 
should be treated as a notional loss.  The reason f or my calling this a 
notional is that we knew about it even before we ha d signed this MOU with 
the refineries.  As the hon. Members know, the Admi nistered Pricing 
Mechanism for crude oil was dismantled with effect from 1 
st  April 2002.  Prior 
to that ONGC used to get about 16 to 16.5 dollars a  barrel under the APM 
mechanism.  When it was given that after dismantlin g ONGC will start getting 
international parity prices, we had more than one y ear long negotiations with 
the three companies – IOC, HPC and BPC – about the modalities of the 
pricing which would be done for this crude.  First of all the benchmarking of 
the crude, and it was with great effort ONGC was ab le to convince them to 
agree the benchmark as the Bonny Light, which is th e sweet crude from 
Nigeria, similar to the crude which ONGC produces.  Then there were other 
issues also. 
 
While the companies logically raised the issue that  when they import 
the crude the BSW content limit is 0.2 percent.  Th ey would like to put the 

 4
same condition for us also.  ONGC knowing fully wel l that our BSW content 
was higher than one per cent, we willingly signed t he MOU in the larger 
interest that we were getting a much higher price.  Immediately from 1 st  April 
02, we started getting 23 to 24 dollars a barrel.  Let me also share that not 
only we agreed for BSW content to be high, with reg ard to the Central Sales 
Tax which is always recoverable from the buyer, we agreed with them that 
we will do fifty percent sharing.  As against four per cent, they will not bear 
four per cent they will bear only two per cent and ONGC will bear two 
percent.  So, this agreement was done taking the ov erall macro level picture 
into view that ONGC starts getting those prices.  T hey also looked for the 
best deal.  So it was more of a bargain done.  So, this was consciously done, 
knowing fully well that we were not complying with BSW norm of 0.2%. 
 
Also, I would like to submit that for reaching thos e compliance levels, 
ONGC was required to make large investments at all work centers into 
putting up more crude oil storage tanks, into putti ng more chemicals, and 
revamping our group gathering stations, and heater treat facilities, etc.  So, 
much more stabilization process would be required b efore we supply.  We 
knew this.  And we knew that we would be required t o give a discount.  So, it 
is not that we were not aware of these things.” 
 
8.  Considering the fact that the MOU was signed in  April 2002 and ONGC has 
not been able to contain the BS&W within the norm e ven up to April 2008, thereby 
rendering itself liable to sustain revenue loss in terms of discounts, the Committee 
wanted to know whether any instructions / advisorie s were issued by the Ministry to 
ONGC impressing upon the need for putting up the fa cilities expeditiously. The 
ministry in their reply simply stated; 
 
 “Though MOU for crude oil sale with IOC is effecti ve from April’ 2002, it was 
signed in Feb’ 2003. Since then, ONGC took up vario us projects for 
replacement / revamping of its crude handling facil ities….  The 
implementation of these projects has a very long le ad-time in view of steps 
like conceptualization of the project, firming up i ts design & engineering 
aspects, procurement of equipments and their instal lation. However, it may 
be noted that already completed projects have start ed showing the results 
and accordingly BS&W content from such producing lo cations is well within 
control except for few spikes due to process upsets.”   
 
9.  As to why the infrastructure facilities not bei ng put in place by ONGC in time 
to bring the BS&W within agreed limits and the cons equential loss of revenue of 
Rs.166.22 crore (April 2002 to April 2008) should n ot be treated as avoidable 
discounts allowed to IOC and on whether or not the Ministry had been apprised of 
the matter, and whether any, and if so what, correc tive steps had been initiated by 
them, the Ministry vaguely replied stating; 
 

 5
“Fresh commercial terms including price adjustments  for BS&W (for excess 
BS&W beyond internationally traded levels) came int o being only after 
signing of MoUs with PSU refiners around Feb’ 2003.  
 
Since then, ONGC has been making efforts on a conti nuous basis to 
replace / revamp its infrastructure facilities for handling of crude oil. Here, it 
may be noted that the Reservoir characteristics are  changing with the 
maturity of the fields leading to increased water c ut in the crude. The 
installed facilities have not been able to cope up with such high water cut in 
the crude, resulting in increased levels of BS&W an d consequential 
discounts.  
 
For handling of such crude oil, ONGC has already in itiated further 
revamping of its facilities, which is expected to t ake care of the increasing 
water cut. Such revamping / replacement jobs have a lready started giving a 
positive result in curbing higher BS&W, especially in North & South 
Gujarat…. The status of MOU/COSA (Crude Oil Sales A greement) and 
related issues has been apprised to ONGC Board, whi ch includes Govt. 
representatives also. The Ministry was apprised of this issue by the ONGC in 
the Quarterly Performance Review Meeting. In order to control BS&W, Crude 
Oil Sales Agreement specifies the allowable limit for Buyer and Seller.”   
 
10.  Asked whether the Ministry would, and if so wi thin what time frame, ensure 
that ONGC would achieve the stipulated level of BSW  and avoid recurrence of 
revenue loss to the company, the ministry replied stating; 
   
“ONGC has been continuously revamping its infrastru ctural facilities for 
handling of crude oil from its fields and to achiev e the stipulated levels of 
BS&W. However, due to maturity of producing fields,  there had been a 
change in the Reservoir characteristics leading to increased water cut in 
the crude. The present installed facilities may not  have been able to cope 
up with such high water cut in the crude, resulting  in increased levels of 
BS&W and consequential discounts. To tackle this si tuation of increasing 
water cut in the crude and handling of crude based on future production 
profiles, ONGC has already initiated the revamping of its facilities for 
handling of crude which is expected to take care of  the increasing water 
cut.  With the implementation of these projects, is sue of higher BS&W is 
expected to be resolved.”     
 
C.   Revision of BSW level in crude oil 
 
11.  The Committee desired to know the basis and ra tionale for the revision of 
BSW level in crude oil to 0.2 percent in the MOU si gned with IOCL, and why the 
company agreed to such revision, beyond which perce ntage of BSW content in 
crude oil they are required to give discounts at di fferent slabs, when they have 
facilities to meet a BSW level of only 1 per cent. The company in their reply stated; 
 

 6
“As a result of deregulation of petroleum sector, i t was essential to migrate 
from Administered Pricing Mechanism to Market deter mined Pricing 
Mechanism w.e.f. April 01, 2002. Agreeing to BS&W c ontent of crude oil at 
0.2% was the best negotiated term to obtain the max imum worth of crude 
oil. The MOU effective from April, 2002 envisaged p ricing based on import 
parity principle which includes quality norms. Thou gh there is no set BS&W 
norms for international crude contracts trades, ONG C appointed consultant 
M/s PEL, UK, indicated that the international norm for BS&W in crude oil 
would be 0.1 / 0.2 % maximum and virtually all larg e deliveries met this 
norm.”   
 
12.  The Committee also wanted to know global best practices in determining 
acceptable levels of BSW content in crude oil sale agreements. The company in 
their reply stated; 
 
“The international norm regarding the level of BS&W  content in crude is only 
based on major trades taking place between buyers a nd sellers (majority of 
the contracts being spot ones with confidentiality clause). However, it may 
vary from country to country/type of crude and many  other factors. As stated 
above, ONGC appointed consultant, M/s PEL, UK, had also indicated the 
international norm for BS&W in crude oil as 0.1 / 0 .2 % maximum. The 
practice of using discounts in price vis-à-vis BS&W  is not uniform 
internationally. There is no internationally accept ed mechanism for adjusting 
crude prices for higher quantity of BS&W. The metho dology of price 
discounts vis-à-vis BS&W is usually finalized betwe en the buyer and the 
seller.  Taking into account the then quality of ON GC crude from different 
locations various slabs for discounts were decided based on the negotiations 
with IOC and included in the MOU to have least impa ct on ONGC crude 
prices.” 
 
13.  Clarifying on the issue of ONGC’s decision to enter the MoU with a revised 
BSW level of 0.2 percent while having facilities ca pable of attaining crude quality of 
only 1 percent BSW content, the CMD of the company stated during evidence; 
 
  “To begin with, let me submit very candidly that we respect the views 
expressed by C&AG. In fact, at the outset, I would like to agree with the 
observation of the C&AG that due to the fact that b ottom sediments and 
water content (BSW) being more than 0.2 per cent in  the crude oil supplied 
by ONGC to the three PSU refinery companies-IOC, HP CL, and BPCL and 
later on to MRPL also-we were subjected to give dis counts to these 
companies which, as per observations of the Audit, resulted in a loss of 
revenue realization by ONGC….. While the companies logically raised the 
issue that when they import the crude the BSW conte nt limit is 0.2 percent.  
They would like to put the same condition for us al so.  ONGC knowing fully 
well that our BSW content was higher than one per c ent, we willingly signed 
the MOU in the larger interest that we were getting  a much higher price.  
Immediately from 1 
st  April 02, we started getting 23 to 24 dollars a barrel.  Let 
me also share that not only we agreed for BSW conte nt to be high, with 

 7
regard to the Central Sales Tax which is always rec overable from the buyer, 
we agreed with them that we will do fifty percent s haring.  As against four per 
cent, they will not bear four per cent they will be ar only two per cent and 
ONGC will bear two percent.  So, this agreement was  done taking the overall 
macro level picture into view that ONGC starts gett ing those prices.  They 
also looked for the best deal.  So it was more of a  bargain done.  So, this 
was consciously done, knowing fully well that we we re not complying with 
BSW norm of 0.2%.” 
 
14.  Appraising the Committee on the latest achieve ments of the company in 
upgrade of infrastructure and explaining how the de cision to revise BSW content to 
0.2 was commercially more prudent for the company d espite the fact that they 
would not be able to meet that level from their exi sting facilities and would be 
required to give discounts, the CMD during evidence stated; 
 
“I am happy to share with this august Committee tha t I have the latest data 
available with me which shows that we have more or less achieved this level.  
Over 60 per cent of crude oil supply takes place at  Mumbai High.  The BSW 
in April 2008 was 0.09.  In North Gujarat and South  Gujarat it is 0.23 and 
0.31, marginally higher;  Krishna Godavari’s BSW li mit is 0.05;  Kaveri is 
0.07.  Only in Assam this continues to be higher.  In Assam renewal plan we 
knew that that would be required to make large inve stments.  So, 
commercially by having given a discount rather than  putting up immediate 
facilities, I do not think ONGC is a loser in a big  way.  Secondly, we knew 
that we are dealing with other PSU refineries.  So, it is that the gain has gone 
to the other PSUs and loss happening to other PSUs.   The national 
economy, the national exchequer, the public sector per se is not put to loss.” 
 
D.   Delay in signing the Crude Oil Sale Agreement (COSA) 
 
15.  The Committee desired to know the reasons for the failure of the company to 
finalize the Crude Oil Sale Agreement (COSA) within  a reasonable time from the 
expiry of the MoU in March 2004, and the latest dev elopment on the issue. The 
company in their reply submitted; 
   
“The MOU of crude oil sales was signed in February,  2003 for the effective 
period of April, 2002 to March, 2004. COSA with OMC s could not be signed 
due to differences persisting on various issues. Al l PSU refiners wanted to 
negotiate jointly with ONGC / OIL for all crude. ON GC was not ready to 
negotiate in the proposed manner. Also, negotiation s with them could not 
proceed further because of Government decision on s haring of under 
recoveries of downstream companies. Further, non ag reement on the pricing 
method to be followed i.e. whether to follow Import  Parity or Export Parity, 
also resulted in hampering negotiations.  In the ab sence of MoU/COSA, 
ONGC even suggested to MoPNG to allow auctioning of  ONGC crude to 
PSU refineries.   This issue had been taken up by O NGC with MoPNG in 
various meetings including QPRM, Strategy Meet etc.  Accordingly, it was 
decided that pending agreement on pricing and under  recoveries, existing 

 8
arrangement of billing based on earlier MoUs   to b e continued with 
adjustments for discounts for under-recoveries as a dvised by MoPNG on 
quarterly basis. An in-house approved draft COSA ha s been prepared and 
forwarded to OMCs in April 2008 inviting them to di scuss and finalize the 
same.” 
 
16.  MOU for crude sale between ONGC and IOC stood expired in March’ 2004 
and was to be replaced, as a term of the MoU, by Cr ude Oil Supply Agreement 
(COSA). ONGC in their reply stated that they are no t getting adequate response 
from the oil marketing companies and it has apprise d the MOP&NG about these 
issues. The Committee desired to be informed on whe ther the Ministry are aware of 
the problems faced by ONGC and if so, what interven tion was made at the Ministry 
level to ensure early signing of COSA. The Ministry in their reply stated; 
 
“Issues related to MoU/COSA have been discussed in many forums like 
QPRM, Strategy Meets, etc. The Ministry has advised  ONGC and IOCL to 
sign COSA with the mutually agreed commercial terms  and conditions. 
Discussions have been held by ONGC with HPCL and BP CL towards 
finalization of COSA. The disagreement with these c ompanies still persists 
over marker crude, pricing basis, which include quality aspects. However, the 
issue is under negotiation with them. Meeting of ON GC with IOC on COSA 
has not yet taken place as they have conveyed that the document is under 
their in-house discussion.” 

 9
PART B  
 
Observations and Recommendations 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Delay in facility upgrade 
  
 The Committee note that after dismantling of the A dministered Price 
Mechanism (APM) with effect from 1 
st  April, 2002, the Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited (ONGC) entered into a Memorandu m of Understanding 
(MoU) with Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) in  February, 2003 for sale of 
crude oil valid for April 2002 to March 2004. The M oU stipulated that the sale 
price was subject to discounts at slab rates if the  crude oil supplied by ONGC 
contained basic sediments and water (BSW) above 0.2  percent by volume.  In 
this regard, the Committee note that prior to the s igning of this MoU, the 
ONGC had infrastructure facilities to contain BSW c ontent only to 1 percent 
per unit volume.  The contention of the Audit is th at though the said MoU 
required BSW content less than 0.2% for realizing f ull sale price, the ONGC 
failed to timely upgrade its facilities to meet thi s requirement leading to 
supplies of crude oil to IOCL exceeding the benchma rk of 0.2% thereby 
resulting in a loss of revenue of Rs.96.96 Crore to  ONGC by way of discounts 
to IOCL during April, 2004 to October 2007. 
 As per the justification put-forth by the ONGC, th e Committee note that 
Company initiated the action immediately after signing the MoU to achieve the 
stipulated BSW norms for realizing the full price o f the crude. The Committee 
have been informed that efforts have continuously b een made by the 
company to upgrade their desalting, filtering and t anking facilities to achieve 

 10 
the international norm of 0.2 percent BSW content i n the crude oil. In this 
regard, the Committee further note that as per the latest position, the BSW 
level in the other assets of the company barring As sam have largely been 
contained to 0.2 percent and below. As regards the financial loss incurred by 
the Company because of discounts given to IOCL on a ccount of supplying 
crude with higher BSW content, the company has trie d to justify the same by 
terming it as a notional loss only. According to th e company representatives 
during their deposition before the Committee, by of fering such discounts the 
Company was able to bargain and get international p arity price for the crude 
which was much higher than the crude oil price unde r the APM regime. Thus, 
it turned out to be a profitable proposition for ON GC to allow discounts 
particularly in view of the fact that upgradation o r creation of infrastructure 
facilities for bringing down the BSW are long drawn processes integrated with 
many other process facilities involving huge investments.   
 After careful consideration of the Audit objection s and the justification 
furnished by the Company, the Committee while givin g some weightage to 
macro economic considerations adopted by the compan y, feel that despite 
claiming to have taken steps to upgrade their facil ities for reducing the 
presence of basic sediments and water to below 0.2 percent, ONGC has not 
made adequate and timely efforts. This is evident f rom the fact that now even 
after a lapse of 5 years from the date of signing t he MoU in February, 2003, 
some of the facilities of the Company have yet to a chieve the desired 
international norm of BSW content. The Committee ar e of the opinion that 
having committed themselves to the task of attainin g a BSW level of 0.2 

 11 
percent, and that being the global norm, ONGC could  have acted more 
promptly in upgrading their facilities to meet the stipulated quality of crude 
oil. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the c ompany should enhance 
their efforts to achieve the desired BSW level unif ormly across all its assets 
within the shortest possible duration and apprise t he Committee of the 
progress made.  
 

 12 
Recommendation No. 2  
 
Failure to finalize the Crude Oil Sale Agreement (COSA) 
 
 The Committee note that the MoU entered into by ON GC with IOCL was 
effective for the period April, 2002 to March 2004 and thereafter it was to be 
replaced by ‘crude oil sale agreement’ (COSA) which is a guiding document in 
specifying crude oil price at a allowable limit of BSW. The COSA however 
could not be signed by the ONGC with the oil market ing Companies due to 
various persisting differences such as – government  decision on sharing of 
under recoveries of downstream Companies, non-agree ment on pricing 
method including quality aspects etc. As a result, the ONGC continued to 
supply crude oil under the terms and conditions of MoU signed in 2003 which 
otherwise stood expired in March, 2004. In this reg ard, the Committee note 
that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on i ts part has advised the 
ONGC and the Oil Marketing Companies to sign COSA o n mutually agreed 
commercial terms and conditions. The Committee have  been informed that 
presently the draft agreement has been forwarded to    the Oil Marketing 
Companies for negotiations. 
 The Committee are constrained to note that no sinc ere efforts have 
been made either by the company or the Ministry to have the agreement 
signed. In the opinion of the Committee, instead of  blaming the Oil PSUs for 
not reaching a final agreement mutually, the Minist ry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas should have played an active and decisi ve role to take the matter 
to a logical conclusion. The Committee therefore re commend that the 

 13 
negotiations should be taken up in good earnest and  the prevailing adhocism 
be brought to an end at the earliest.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                          RUPCHAND PAL  
 2 December, 2008                                  CHAIRMAN 
11 Agrahayana 1930                COMMITTEE ON PUBL IC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
 

 14 
ANNEXURE-I 
14.7.1   Loss due to sale of crude oil containing b asic sediments and water 
content above the norm 
 
Failure to upgrade and create facilities to contain  the basic sediments and 
water content in the crude oil supplies within limi ts resulted in loss of 
revenue of Rs.96.96 crore. 
 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (Company) e ntered (April 2002) into a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Indian Oil C orporation Limited (IOCL) 
for sale of crude oil from April 2002 to March 2004 . The sale price was subject to 
discount at slab rates in case ‘basic sediment and water’ (BSW) content in the 
crude oil exceeded 0.2 per cent by volume. The MOU was to be replaced by ‘crude 
oil sale agreement’ (COSA), which however, was not signed and the Company 
continued to supply crude oil under the terms and c onditions of the MOU (October 
2007). 
 
Till March 2002 when the administered price mechani sm was dismantled, the 
admissible level of BSW in crude oil supplies was o ne per cent and the 
infrastructure facilities established by the Compan y were designed to meet this 
level. In the absence of adequate facilities to con tain the level of BSW at 0.2 per 
cent or below, crude oil supplied by the Company from it s western onshore field 
(North and South Gujarat) to IOCL contained BSW ran ging between 0.212 per cent 
to 1.378 per cent during the period from April 2002 to April 2007 and  IOCL received 
a discount of Rs.107.41 crore from the Company on this account. 
 
Audit observed (November 2006) that though the Comp any had entered into the 
MOU in April 2002 requiring higher quality specific ations of crude oil for realising full 
sale price, it did not upgrade its facilities in time to contain the level of BSW upto 0.2 
per cent in the crude oil. Supplies of crude oil, in the fiv e years following the signing 
of MOU, generally exceeded this bench-mark. The sup plies from North Gujarat 
onshore during the period exceeded this limit in 57 of the 67 months from April 2002 
to October 2007; and the BSW content in the crude o il supplies from South Gujarat 
onshore of the Company exceeded 0.2 per cent in 48 of the 58 months (from April 
2002 to October 2007*). The Company 
* sustained loss of revenue of Rs.107.41 
crore between April 2002 and October 2007 due to it s failure to maintain the BSW 
level within 0.2 per cent . Audit observed that Eastern and Mumbai Regions of  the 
Company also gave discount of Rs.53.32 crore to var ious refineries on account of 
high level of BSW in the crude oil during the perio d from April 2002 to September 
2006. The Company initiated action for upgradation of its facilities in North Gujarat 
only in February 2004 by making a reference to its internal institute viz., Institute of 
Oil and Gas Production Technology (IOGPT). The Comp any directed (December 
                                                 
* *The Company was able to maintain BSW level within the agreed limit in the crude supplies from South G ujarat onshore 
during the period August 2006 to April 2007 by clos e monitoring, increasing the Report No. CA 11 of 20 08 frequency of 
collection of samples and giving more retention tim e in the tanks for settling of water and reprocessi ng the bottom crude. 
However, the level of BSW exceeded 0.2 per cent from May 2007 to October 2007 (except June 2007). 
 

 15 
2005) all Assets to take appropriate action to redu ce BSW content. These 
instructions were reiterated in June 2006 and Novem ber 2006 due to continuing 
upward trend in discount allowed for BSW. As the co rrective action was yet 
(October 2007) to be taken, the Company continued t o sustain losses due to higher 
BSW levels.  
 
The Management stated (May 2007) that in view of the high level of water content in 
crude oil, IOGPT conducted a study on a reference m ade by its Ahmedabad Asset 
and the Institute submitted its report in December 2004. However, before receipt of 
the report, action for construction of one 30,000 c ubic metres tank had been 
initiated by the Asset which as per policy decision  was referred to the Offshore 
Design Group, Baroda for preparation of bid documen t and cost estimates. Thus, 
the Company claimed, action had been taken to meet revised standards of BSW. 
The Ministry replied (November 2007) on similar lin es. As regards Mumbai Region, 
the Ministry stated that in the given field conditi ons total BSW content could not be 
removed due to process limitations, both at offshor e and at Uran plant but by and 
large offshore fields were able to maintain the BSW  in the requisite range. In 
respect of Eastern Region, the total BSW content co uld not be removed due to 
process limitations. The Ministry added that the CO SA could not be finalised due to 
various reasons. Pending fresh MOUs, existing arrangement was continued. 
 
Reply of the Management/Ministry was not tenable, a s even if we accept the claim 
that steps were initiated in time, fact remains tha t even after four years, the 
Company had not been able to maintain the stipulate d level of BSW. The reference 
was made to IOGPT only in February 2004 i.e., after two years from signing of 
MOU. Even after reckoning two years from April 2002  i.e. , the date of signing MOU, 
for upgradation of facilities, the facilities could  have been put in place by April 2004 
and the Company could have avoided the discount all owed to the extent of 
Rs.96.96 crore 
* from April 2004 to October 2007. Timely finalisati on of COSA for 
replacing the MOU which expired in March 2004 would  have provided an 
opportunity to the Company to review and, if possib le, revise the stipulation of BSW 
and the attendant discount. The corrective action taken by the Management was not 
effective as BSW continued to be above stipulated level in all Regions. 
 
Thus, after signing of MOU, the Company failed to t ake corrective action for 
reducing the BSW content in crude oil to the agreed  level resulting in a loss of 
revenue of Rs.96.96 104 crore from April 2004 to Oc tober 2007. As the facilities 
were yet (September 2007) to be upgraded in all the  Regions, the Company 
continued to sustain loss of revenue.  
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
* * Gujarat: Rs.66.84 crore (April 2004 to October 2007 ); Eastern and Mumbai Regions: Rs.30.12 crore (Apri l 2004 to 
September 2006) Report No. CA 11 of 2008. 
 

 16 
ANNEXURE-II  
MINUTES OF THE 3 rd  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 2 nd JUNE, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1315 hours to 1400 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Chairman 
 
   Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo  
5 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6 Shri Harikewal Prasad 
7 Shri Kashiram Rana 
8 Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
9 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
10 Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
11 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
12 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
13 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1  Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
4 Shri N.S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
 
1. Shri E.R. Solomon  Director General (Commercial)  
2. Shri K.P. Sasidhar  Principal Director (Commerci al) 
 
Representatives of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited  
 
1. Shri R.S. Sharma Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri N.K. Mitra Director (Offshore) 
3. Shri P.K. Ghosh GGM 

 17 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation Ltd. (ONGC) in connection with exam ination of Para 14.7.1 of 
C&AG Report No. CA 11 of 2008 (Commercial) relating  to loss due to sale of crude 
oil containing basic sediments and water content above the norm. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of ONGC and 
drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directi ons by the Speaker relating to 
evidence before the Parliamentary Committee.  Then,  the representatives of ONGC 
made a brief presentation on the subject before the  Committee. Thereafter, 
Members raised queries on various issues pertaining  to the subject. Clarifications 
on some of those issues were made by the representa tives of ONGC.  Information 
on some of the points raised by the Committee not r eadily available was, however, 
promised by them that the same would be furnished t o the Committee Secretariat in 
due course.   
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  ONGC for providing 
information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
********** 

 18 
MINUTES OF THE 12 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 2 nd  DECEMBER, 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hours to 1500 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2 Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3 Shri N. S. Hooda Deputy Secretary 
4 Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II    
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
   Shri P.K. Mishra   Principal Director (Commercia l) 
 
2. The Committee considered two draft reports on th e following subjects and 
adopted both without any modification: 
 
(i) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
(ii) Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited – Loss  due to sale of crude 
containing basic sediments and water content above the norm” resulting 
in a loss of revenue of Rs. 96.96 crore. 
 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
3 Shri Francis K. George 
4 Shri Harikewal Prasad 
5 Shri Kashiram Rana 
6 Shri Mohan Rawale 
7 Smt. Pratibha Singh 
8 Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
9 Shri K.V. Thangkabalu 
10 Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
11 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
12 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 

 19 
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finali ze the Report for 
presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
 