 
5 C.P.U.No.891 
FIFTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
HPCL. – INFRUCTUOUS EXPENDITURE ON CREATION OF A 
PIPELINE  
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the recommendations contained in the 12 th 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (13th Lok Sabha) on - HPCL.  – 
Infructuous expenditure on creation of a pipeline) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  12-05-2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  12-05-2005 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May 2005 / Vaisakha 1927 (S) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-2006)   
 
INTRODUCTION   
 
CHAPTER   l Report .  
 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government . 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view  of the Government’s 
replies.  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in re spect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of  sitting of COPU   
 
 II   Analysis of the Action Taken by Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report of Committee on Public 
Undertakings (13 th Lok Sabha) on “HPCL. –
Infructuous Expenditure on Creation of a 
pipeline” 
 
  
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Sriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri Jibon Roy  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Smt. Ambika Soni  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri John Joseph  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J.P.Sharma  Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Assistant Director  
5. Shri Bala Guru G  Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit t he Report on their behalf, present this 
Fifth Report on Action Taken by t he Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) – 
Infructuous expenditure on creation of a pipeline. 
 
2. The Twelfth Report of the Commi ttee on Public Undertakings (2003-2004) 
was presented to Lok Sabha on  19 th December, 2003.  Action Taken Replies of 
the Government to the re commendations contained in the Report were received 
on 4.4.2005.  The Committee on Public Undertakings consi dered and adopted 
this Report at their sittings held on 10.5. 2005.  The Minutes of the sitting are 
given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 12 th Report (2003-04) of  the Committee  is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: Rupchand Pal 
10 May, 2005 Chairman, 
20 Vaisakh 1927(S)            Committee on Public Undertakings 

  
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report 
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings  (2003-2004) 
on “HPCL –Infructuous expenditure on creation of a pipeline” which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2003 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received  from Government in respect of all 
the recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows : 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the  
Government : (Chapter II) 
 
Sl. Nos. I,  II and III (i)     (Total 3) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies :(Chapter III) 
 
Sl. Nos.  III (ii)      (Total 1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee : (Chapter 
IV) 
 
Sl. No. IV       (Total 1) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the  Government are still awaited : (Chapter V) 
 
S l . N o .   N I L        ( N I L )  
 
3. The Committee will now de al with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. IV 
Policies of the Government on oil industry 
 
 The Committee in their Twelfth R eport have recommended with regard to 
the policies of the Government on oil industry as follows: 
 
“The Committee find that the deregulation of APM in re spect of FO/LDO in 1998 
is the main reason for under-utilisation of the Mumbai-Vashi pipeline.  In this 

regard, the Committee further note that though Government of India 
contemplated restructuring of oil industry  around 1995, the actual details of the 
phased dismantling of the APM were announced by the Government only in 
November, 1997 and hence could not be ta ken into account for reviewing the 
economics of the pipeline project whic h was already at an advanced stage of 
construction at that time. 
 
The Committee desire that before taking  such major policy decisions in the 
future, the Government should also take in to consideration their likely impact of 
those policies on the on-going projects of  the PSUs and make all possible efforts 
to minimise any adverse effect on the per formance of such projects by virtue of 
such decisions.  The instant case reflects a total lack of such far-sighted 
consideration on the part of the Government. 
 
As regards the remedial steps to be taken in the matter to ensure that such 
happenings do not recur, the Committee not e that the Government has notified 
guidelines on 20th November, 2002 for la ying petroleum product pipelines post 
APM.  The guidelines facilitate laying of optimal size pipelines by proposer 
company taking into account the interest  of other interested companies.  The 
Committee trust that these guidelines wo uld ensure proper utilization of the 
pipelines in the future and desire that there should be periodical review of the 
guidelines to enable the Government to ta ke timely corrective action keeping the 
economics of the venture in view.” 
 
 The Government (Ministry of Petroleum & Na tural Gas) in their action taken reply   
dated 4.4.2005 on the above recommendation have stated as follows: 
 
“In a deregulated scenario, t he market forces would ensu re that the investment 
made by the oil companies in pipeli ne infrastructure is on commercial 
considerations. 
 
Supplementary Guidelines for Laying Petroleum Product Pipelines have been 
notified on 26.10.2004. Guidelines for Laying Petroleum Product Pipelines and 
Supplementary Guidelines thereto will remain in force till the proposed Petroleum 
Regulatory Board is constituted. After the constitution of this Board, the right of 
user in land for laying petroleum product pi pelines will be granted by this Ministry 
subject to fulfilment of requirements under the Petroleum Regulatory Law.” 
 
 The  remarks of Office of C&AG on the reply of the Government was as 
follows:- 
 
1. The deregulated scenario has not resulted in what  the government envisaged and 
this has been due to shift in Govt. pol icies, resulting in excess creation of 
infrastructure requiring heavy investment. 
 
 

2. For instance, in 1998, Government formulated a common carri er policy where Oil 
Companies pool their resources and creat e pipelines across the country for 
movement of POL products.  Accordingly, a Company, viz. Petronet India ltd., (PIL) 
was formed and PSU Oil marketing companies contributed Rs.50 crores as equity 
participation.  PIL took up a few pipeline projects forming separate joint venture 
companies with the help of oil marketi ng companies.  Many of these JVCs have 
stopped their operations and PIL is in red within a period of 6 years.  This was 
mainly due to a shift in Govt. Policy in 2002, whereby oil companies can 
independently implement their own pipelines across the country subject to certain 
conditions. 
 
3. Due to this, 
 
• HPCL put up a pipeline project, Mundra-De lhi pipeline with an investment of 
Rs.1623.84 crores. 
• BPCL extends their Mumbai-Manmad pipeline to Piyali, near Delhi. 
• Recently, Govt. approved six pipeline projects  of Reliance Industries Limited, one of 
which connects Panipat to RIL’s refinery at Jamnagar. 
 
 If all these projects materialize Nort hern Region may have surplus products and 
therefore, the optim um utilization of the two ongo ing pipelines of HPCL and 
BPCL would be effected. 
 
4. Oil Companies go ahead with their own projects without co nsidering similar 
projects of other companies and various a ssociated issues in its totality.  On 
implementation of these pipeline proj ects, there may be a scenario where IOC 
may transport their excess products at Northern Region by their own pipelines. 
 
5. The comments of the Ministry on  the above mentioned remarks of the 
C&AG is as follows:- 
 
“The guidelines for laying petroleum product pipelines, issued on 
20.11.2002 and supplementary guidelines thereto, issued on 26.11.2004, do not 
envisage non-duplication in pipelines but allow a free regime. 
 
On 11.03.2002 IOC had issued notice to  HPCL on their conversion of 
Kandla-Bathinda Pipeline (KBPL) to crude service w.e.f. August, 2004 and 
advised HPCL to plan their affairs. With the conversion of KBPL to crude service, 
the vital coastal pipeline link to large f uel market around nati onal capital in north 
zone is missing. HPCL’s proposed Mundra  Delhi Pipeline will give product 
sourcing flexibility and economics of distribution cost to HPCL. Both are critical in 
current competitive scenario for retaini ng HPCL’s market share and profitability. 
HPCL’s existing market in north zone is almost fully dependant on product 
sourcing from others. Mundr a Delhi Pipeline will lead  to reduced dependence on 
competitors. Continuous upgradation of Auto fuel st andards and absence / delay 
of production capability to meet the demand from inland refineries, highlights this 

necessity of coastal inputs at western ports and product movement through 
pipeline to northern market. In case of any exigency with any of the IOC 
refineries in west or north zone, large volumes will be required to be moved by 
conventional rail / road movements at a short notice after positioning at western 
port locations or from Jamnagar. Ou t of 5.8 MMTPA pipeline capacity of 
proposed Mundra-Delhi Pipelin e project, 80% i.e. 4.64 MMTPA is considered 
based on HPCL’s demand in 2016-17. Hence, any underutilization of the pipeline 
is not foreseen. Further, the rate of return  for this project considering only HPCL 
volumes is very attractive and cannot be ov erlooked. This pipeline would give a 
possibility for linkage with Vadinar-Kandla Pipeline (VKPL) in future, if necessary, 
thereby preventing the investment in VKPL becoming infructuous after 
conversion of IOC’s KBPL to crude service. 
 
Thus, Mundra-Delhi Pipe line will not only be ut ilized in an optimum 
manner but will also give HPCL the required flexibility and support to position the 
product in north in the mo st competitive manner. The project will remove the 
Company’s dependence on its co mpetitors and will also serve as an alternate 
source of product to industry in case of problems in the inland refineries.  
 
BPCL‘s existing pipeline from Mumbai to Manmad is fully utilized as 
envisaged. The same line is being exten ded to Piyala due to the following 
reasons : 
  
(a) Product availability to BPCL in northern region from other sources 
is inadequate to meet own demand. 
   
(b) BPCL’s Mumbai Refinery is being expanded to 12 MMT. This line 
will facilitate proper evacuation of  refinery in most efficient manner 
to meet the demand in northern region.  
 
Out of six new proposed product pi pelines, M/s Gas Transportation & 
Infrastructure Company Limited (GTICL), a special purpose v ehicle promoted by 
M/s Reliance, intend executing the Ja mnagar–Patiala pipe line as the first 
pipeline. The remaining pipelines will be taken up subsequently in stages.” 
 
 
6. Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee in th eir above recommendatio n had observed that 
deregulation of the Admini stered Price Mechanism(APM ) by the Government in 
1998 had resulted in  under-utilisation of Mumbai – Vashi pipeline of HPCL.  In 
view of this, the Committee had recommended that  before taki ng such major 

policy decisions in future , the Government should ta ke into consideration the 
likely impact of such decisions on the ongoing projects of the PSUs and make all 
possible efforts to minimize any adverse effect on them. 
 
The Committee are, howeve r, not satisfied with the vague action taken 
reply furnished by the Government stat ing that ‘in a deregulated scenario, the 
market forces would ensure  that the investment made  by the oil companies in 
pipeline infrastructure is  on commercial considerati ons.’ The recommendation of 
the Committee pertains to policy decisions to be taken by the Government in 
future, which necessarily shou ld take a critical look at  the on-going projects from 
the point of view of the impact of the ne w proposed policies. But the reply of the 
Government does not speak about this re quirement for taking a critical view.  
Instead it talks about the Post APM regime which is not relevant.  The Committee 
note that the real spirit of the re commendation was to minimize the losses 
towards the investments made by the PSUs, whenever new policy decisions  are 
taken. This aspect of the recommendation has not at all been commented upon 
by the Government in their action taken note.   Th e Committee, therefore, find 
the reply of the Government vague and evasive.  
 
In view of the above, the Committee while disapproving the reply of the 
Government, strongly reit erate their recommendation that before taking any 
major policy decisions of this nature in future, the Government should assess the 
likely impact of such deci sions on the ongoing projects  of the PSUs so as to 
minimize adverse effect, if any, on such projects.  

 
 
CHAPTER –II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT . 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL. NO. I)FULF ILLMENT OF PRE-CONDITION LAID 
DOWN BY THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS   
 
 
 The Committee note that Hindustan Petr oleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), with 
a view to maximizing the production of High Viscosity Index (HVI) based lube oils, 
sought clearance from the Ministry of Environment and Forests for setting up a Lube 
Based Oil Augmentation Project at its Mumbai refiner y. While granting environmental 
clearance in May, 1989, the Ministry of  Environment and Forests stipulated a pre-
condition that “ all bulk quantities of  refinery requirements/products should be 
transported (Ex-Mahul Termi nal, Chembur) through a well designed pipeline to avoid 
road congestion and hazards through road transportation". Simultaneously, the State 
Government of Maharashtra, while according environmental clearance for the said 
project stipulated a pre-condition that "for  all practical purposes, Chembur is a 
residential area and should be treated as such”. To fulfill the said pre-conditions to its 
Lube Augmentation Project, HPCL undertook t he project of laying a 22 Km pipeline for 
transportation of Black Oil from  Mumbai Re finery to Vashi. The Detailed Feasibility 
Report for the pipeline project was pr epared in February,1995 and the project was 
commissioned in April,1998 at a cost of Rs.42.30 crore. 
 
  While considering this issue as to whether the purpose of laying the pipeline has 
been achieved, the Committee note that after la ying of the pipeline in  April,1998, there 
has been some gradual reduction  in the volu me of black oil being transported by road 
and it might have helped in dec ongestion of the roads and re sultant reduction  in air 
pollution. The Committee are, however, constr ained to note that the pipeline project has 
failed to yield  the desired results upto the  expected extent. In this regard, the 
Committee note that the Ministry of Envir onment and Forests while laying down a pre-
condition for evacuation of FO/LDO through a pipeline so as to decongest the Chembur 
area, failed to issue similar directions to  the other industries namely BPCL, RCF, Tata 
Electrics etc. functioning in the Chembur ar ea. If the real spirit of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests was to decongest t he Chembur area, some directions on 
restricting the use of road transport woul d also have been issued by them to other 
industries operating in that area. The Co mmittee further note that HPCL has been 
sending compliance reports every six mont hs to the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests regarding meeting the pre-condition fo r the project imposed by the Ministry. 
However, the documents which have been made available to the Committee do not 
reflect any effort of the part of  the Ministry of Environment & Forests to suggest that the 

Ministry has ever verified the compliance report or monitored the decongestion of the 
area after setting out the pre-condition. 
 
  The Committee desire that the Ministry of Environment & Forests should keep a 
strict vigil by conducting surprise on-the-spot visits to check compliance of their 
directions on decongestion and also the veri fication of the comp liance reports being 
sent to them by the HPCL. The Ministry of Environment & Forests should also issue 
appropriate directions to t he other industries operating in  the Chembur residential area 
to take appropriate steps to minimize t he road traffic in the Chembur residential area 
and constantly monitor the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Environment and Forest s (MOE&F) while granting environmental 
clearance vide its letter dated 19.5.1989 to Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
(HPCL) for setting up a Lube Oil Base Augm entation Project at its Mumbai Refinery, 
stipulated a precondit ion that “All bulk quantities of refinery requirements/ products 
should be transferred through well designed pipeline to avoid road congestion and 
hazards through road transportation.”  
 
 Compliance of the stipulated condition is being regularly monitored by the 
Regional Office of MOE&F at Bhopal through site inspection and verification of the six 
monthly compliance reports submitted by HP CL. As per the Moni toring Report of the 
Regional Office of MOE&F dated 5.4.2002 about 90% of the product movement is 
through pipeline.    
 
 To verify the status of the complian ce by HPCL for transportation of FO/LDO 
from the pipeline and its impact on decongestion of the area, MOE&F constituted a 
small group on 28.5.2004 comprising of member s from the Central Pollution Control 
Board, Maharashtra  Pollut ion Control Board and Regional Office, Bhopal of this 
Ministry. 
 
The group has made the following observations:- 
 
(i) The major industries operating in Chembur area are  Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL),  Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL), Rash triya Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Limited (RCF), Tata Power Company  Limited (Tata Power),  Aegis 
Logistics Limited (Aegis) and P epsi Co. India Holding  Pvt. 
Ltd.(Pepsi). Besides these, there are three marine container service 
facilities that have significant contribution to road traffic in the area. 
 
(ii) There is only  one corridor r oad (about 6.0 km in length stretching 
from  Tata Power to Chembur Naka)  for transportation of material 
of these industries. The traffic from  Chembur Naka follows Eastern 
Express Highway,  Western Express Highway or eastern side of 

V.N. Purav Marg for going out side  the Mumbai.   The  traffic from 
Chembur Naka follows western side of V.N. Purav Marg and 
various roads further down for mo vement of materials inside 
Mumbai region. 
 
(iii) The segment of corridor road adjacent to industries is in bad 
condition and affects easy movement  of traffic causing increased 
congestion. 
 
(iv) The volume of traffic for transporting FO and LDO from HPCL 
refinery has reduced from about 216 vehicles/day during year 
1997-1998 to 46 vehicles/day during the year 2000-2001.  Similarly, 
traffic volume for transportation of Naphtha has been reduced from 
about 270 vehicles/day to 18 vehicles/day.  After commissioning of 
LPG Bottling Plant at Usar, Alibag in April, 2000, traffic movement 
(120 vehicles/day) for transport of LPG has been completely 
eliminated.  However, there is in crease in traffic flow (from 78 to 
120 vehicles/day) for transportation of lube oil/gas products. 
 
(v) With regard to BPCL Refinery, total volume of traffic, is reduced 
from about 954 vehicles/day (1997- 1998) to 834 vehicles/day in 
2002-2003 and 778 vehicles/day in  2003-2004.  The same in 
respect of transportation of LDO and FO has come down from 205 
to 148 vehicles/day during the per iod and 82 vehicles/day in 2003-
2004. 
 
(vi) Still, both the refineries namel y HPCL and BPCL are evacuating 
some quantity of LDO and FO through road. 
 
(vii) RCF is mostly using railways as mode of transport for its materials.  
The volume of road traffic is about 160 vehicles/day.  However, 
RCF, normally, does not use the corridor road.  As per data 
provided by Pepsi  and Tata Power,  traffic flow due to Pepsi and 
Tata are about 42 and 8 vehicles/day respectively. Traffic volume, 
due to Aegis's operations is about 150 vehicles/day. 
 
(viii) Three companies namely M/s Indo Marine Container yard, M/s 
Maritime Transportation Tech Services and M/s D.R containers 
exists in Chembur area covering  an area of 37 acres, 75,000 sq 
feet and 35 acres respectively. Traffic movement due to three 
marine container facilities is subs tantial (about 350 vehicles/day).  
These facilities are essentially related to port activities and have 
nothing to do with other industrial operations in Chembur.    
 

(ix) There are few more industries (e .g. Indian Oil Blendi ng Unit, Indian 
Oil Treading Ltd. etc.) locat ed in Chembur area, but their 
contribution to traffic in the area is minimum (41 truck /lorries /d). 
(x) M/s Chemicals Terminal Trom bay Limited transport their raw 
materials through trucks at the rate of 45 trucks/d. However, trucks 
are not parked on Municipal Road. These are parked on terminal 
private road just before loading and move out immediately after  
finishing  loading operations. 
 
(xi) Most of the vehicles coming to industries for lifting products are 
parked along the roadside, thereby, reducing effective utilization of 
road and in turn causing traffic c ongestion.  Most of these vehicles, 
in the absence of organized park ing place in the area or due to 
economic and other reasons, come much in advance prior to 
loading of the products and stay  parked on the road unnecessarily 
for longer duration.  This, further , results in traffic congestion and 
air pollution. 
 
(xii) The congestion of traffic not only poses great risk by making 
emergency response operations more difficult if a major 
catastrophe takes place but also cause air pollution.  
 
Based on the above observations the group has suggested certain measures for 
decongestion of traffic in Chembur. These include the following:- 
 
(i) HPCL, BPCL, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC) and ot her oil companies 
should work out an action plan within a month and submit it  to the MOE&F to 
ensure that no quantity of FO and LDO ar e dispatched from refineries through 
road transport after 30.11.2004. 
 
(ii) HPCL, BPCL, IOC and other oil companies would also wo rk out  within a month, 
feasibility to minimize dispatch  of  products other than FO and LDO through road 
and implement this by 30.11.2004. 
 
(iii) Other industries viz. RCF, Aegis, Tata  and Pepsi would  also work out similar 
action plans, within a month, for  mini mizing movement of  their product and raw 
materials through road. 
 
(iv) Marine container facilities may be asked to shift outside the Chembur area. They 
have large traffic volume and these activi ties, being related to port , need not  be 
continued in Chembur. 
 
(v) The Mumbai Municipal Corporation, Traffic Police etc. may be requested to 
implement the following measures:- 
 

• Parking of goods vehicles on the (a) Corridor road (b) from Chembur Naka 
to Chagan Mitha Petrol (western side) ; and (c) from Chembur Naka to RK 
Chowk (eastern side) may be banned with immediate effect, except for  200 
meter stretch from gates of loading ar ea/refinery  in  respect of both 
refineries to facilitate immediate avai lability of tankers for loading the 
products. 
 
• An organized parking place needs to be developed. 
 
• The condition of corridor road adjac ent to the industries needs to be 
improved (possibly through construction of  cemented road) so  that it could 
sustain heavy traffic load. This would ease out traffic movement on road. 
 
Based on the suggestions of the abov e group, MOE&F has written to the 
Maharashtra State Environment  Department to issue directions under Section 5 of 
Environment (Protection)  Act, 1986 to all the oil companies loca ted  in Chembur area 
viz., HPCL, BPCL, IOC and other oil companies  to work out an action plan to ensure 
that no quantity of FO and  LDO are dispatc hed through road transport from refineries.   
For other products and raw materials, the oi l companies and other industries viz RCF, 
Aegis, TEC, Pepsi and Chemicals Terminal Trombay Limited to work out an action plan 
for minimising the material movement thr ough road.  Also to the marine container 
facilities to shift outside Chembur area to r educe large volume of traffic due to their 
activities.  
 
The State Environment Department has also been requested to issue similar 
directions to the Mumbai Municipal Corporati on and Traffic Police to take measures for 
decongestion of Chembur area by banning par king of goods vehicles on the Corridor 
road, from Chembur Naka to  Chagan Mitha Petrol (Weste rn side) and from Chembur 
Naka to RK Chowk except for 200 meter stre tch from gates of loading area/refinery in 
respect of both refineries (HPCL and BPCL)  and also to develop an organized parking 
place and improve the condition of the Corridor road adjacent to the industries.   
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated 24.1.2005)  
 
Remarks of Audit  
 
• HPCL implemented the project of laying a black oil pipeline to Vashi while setting up 
the lube base oil augmentation project in Mumbai Refinery. 
 
• Monitoring Report of the Regional Offi ce of MOE&F was related to product 
movement of HPCL Refinery only. 
 
• As stated in the Study Group’s observations, there has been reduction in the 
movement of black oil products by road.   Though the commissioning of LPG bottling 
plant at Usar, Alibag has hel ped in reducing the movement of packed LPG in the 

Chembur area, the shortage in the availability of bulk LPG from GAIL at Usar has 
forced the company to transport bulk LPG from Refinery by road. 
 
• Considering the heavy expendi ture in transporting bulk LPG from Refinery at Usar 
and bringing the packed LPG back to Mumbai market, HPCL Management is 
implementing an LPG Plant near Refinery.  This may again cause traffic congestion 
and environmental problems in the Chembur belt in future. 
 
• The details of black oil movement by road from Mahul Terminal are as follows : 
  
Product   2003-04       2004-05 (Upto  Jan.05) 
LDO       7032 KL      24602 KL 
FO        21896 KL      53955 KL 
LSHS    71929 MT     57971 MT 
CBFS    28625 MT     25285 MT    
 
• There has been abnormal increa se in black oil movement by road during the year 
2004-05 compared to the previous years. 
 
• HPCL & BPCL could not finalise an agreement  regarding product sharing at HPCL’s 
Vashi Terminal & Refinery/ Sewree Terminal so far.  
 
Further reply of the Government  
 
Due to shortage of  bulk LPG with GAIL, Us ar, requirement of  Usar LPG Plant is being 
met from HPCL’s Mumbai Refinery, transporting bulk LPG by road.  
 
Even in case of availability of bulk LPG at GAIL, Usar there will be need of road 
transportation to evacuate  LPG produced in HPCL’s  Mumbai Refinery @ 500 MT per 
day i.e. around  40 tank trucks per day.  
 
On commissioning (expected by September, 2005) of the bottling plant near HPCL’s 
Mumbai Refinery, LPG from refinery to the ex tent of  300 MT per day  will be filled  in 
cylinders and marketed  in  Mumbai city and 200 MT will be dispatched outside refinery  
by road from current level of 500 MT per day  i.e. the bulk tanker movement from the 
plant will come down from curre nt level of 40 tanker per day to 12 tankers per day. This 
will ease the traffic congestion in the area.  There will be movement of  around 70  
packed LPG trucks during 16 hours of working in a day. Currently 40  tankers are 
moving out  with bulk LPG in around 9 to 10  hours operation.  Movement of  around 80 
trucks per day ( bulk and packed put together ) fr om the plant under construction will be 
evenly distributed in 16 hours duration. Thus  di stribution of traffic will remain the same  
during the day and there will not be any ad ditional traffic due to commissioning of the 
bottling plant near the refinery.  
 

Further, transportation of packed cylinders are  safer than transportation of bulk LPG in 
tanker.  Thus safety in transportation will improve with commissioning of the plant near 
refinery without addition of traffic on Mahul road  
 
Moreover, around one acre of the land has been developed as truck parking area which 
will accommodate 30 trucks. This will help  in reducing number of parked trucks on 
roadside and substantially reducing the congestion on Mahul road. 
 
There has been increase in black oil mo vement by road dur ing the year 2004-05 
compared to the previous year due to change in excise rules w.e.f. 6.9.2004.  As per the 
revised excise rules, the “warehousing facili ty for removal of petroleum products without 
payment of duty from refineries” has been withdrawn. The consumers find it economical 
to uplift from refinery/terminal  adjacent to refineries.  HP CL is examining pricing to 
assess the financial implication/outgo so t hat customers can be  compensated and are 
requested to uplift from Vashi instead of Mahul to enable HP CL to meet objective of 
decongestion of Chembur area. 
 
Black oil tank lorry movement in BPCL’s ac count (all products put together) has shown 
a reduction of 10% on daily movement in the current year as compared to 2003-04.  
However, there has been a marginal increase in FO lorry movement in the current year 
primarily due to change in excise rules. Cust omers can derive tax benef its only if it is 
taken from bonded locations i.e. only from refineries. 
 
HPCL/BPCL have agreed in principle to exchange product. However, commercial terms 
(payment) for utilisation of pipeline and terminal facility have yet to be agreed to. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated  4.4.2005) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. II  DECONGESTION OF CHEMBUR AREA- SUPPLY 
OF FO/LDO WITHIN THE MUNICIPAL LIMITS OF MUMBAI  
 
 The Committee note that in view of va rious industries operating in the Chembur 
residential area, there is a hea vy traffic congestion in that area. As mentioned above, in 
addition to the two refineries of HPCL and BP CL, there are other industries also which 
are all located on a single corridor road. A lot of lorry movement is  there from the two 
refineries and many a times, it is even difficult to approach the refineries. In this regard, 
the Committee note that as things st and today, in the case of a major 
disaster/catastrophe, it would be very difficu lt to evacuate people es pecially in the two 
refinery areas. This fact has been admitted by the CMD, HPCL during his evidence 
before the Committee. 
 
 The Committee feel that there should be consideration in the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas as how to minimi ze the traffic congestion in the Chembur 

area. The Committee, therefore, recomme nd that the whole issue of decongestion 
should be considered by the Government in a broader perspective. The safeguard of 
the larger public interest which is being ad versely affected by the hazardous effects of 
air pollution/road congestion, should take pr ecedence over the commercial interests of 
few customers and oil companies. In this  direction, the Committee desire that there 
should be a complete stoppage of evacuation of any oil by r oad transport from any of 
the refinery location in the Chembur area for supply to customers who are located 
outside Mumbai municipal limits. 
 
 Towards this end, the Committee desire th at for achieving reduction in pollution 
level and decongestion of city traffic, the Central Govern ment may issue appropriate 
directions to the Ministry of  Environment and Forests  / 
 
 State Government of Maharashtra to make it mandatory through a statutory order 
issued in public interest to the effect that no FO/LDO loadi ng will be allo wed within the 
Municipal limits of Mumbai for consumer s located outside the Municipal limits of 
Mumbai, by any supplier including IOCL, HPCL, BPCL and private companies/traders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has requested Government of 
Maharashtra to consider initiating acti on for removal of tra ffic congestion along the 
roads approaching HPCL and BPCL refineries in Mumbai including other installations 
such as Tata Electric, IDBL, BARC etc., and regulating construction of residential 
colonies in the vicinity of the above facilities. 
 
MOE&F in its letter addressed to the Government of Maharashtra as indicated in 
reply to recommendation Serial No.1 has r equested the State Government to issue  
necessary directions in public interest in exercise of the powers vested in it under 
Section 5 of the Environment (Protection)  Act, 1986 to every supplier  banning loading 
of FO/LDO within municipal limits of Mumbai for consumers outside Mumbai from 
1.12..2004 onwards. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated 24.1.2005) 
 
Remarks of Audit  
 
Nil 

RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. III(i) 
 
III(i) UNDER-UTILIZATION OF THE PIPELINE PROJECT 
 
 As regards the commercial viability of the pipeline project, the Committee 
observe that there has been the under-utiliza tion of the pipeline.   The Committee note 
that the pipeline project commissioned at a cost of Rs.42.30 crore has a designed 
capacity of 1.5 Million Metric Tonne (MMT) with the estimated thruput of 1 MMT.  As per 
the data furnished by the HPCL regarding pe rcentage utilization of the pipeline capacity 
in terms of its estimate thruput of 1 MMT, the Committee note that it was 9.82% in 1998-
99 and has gradually increased to 28.28% in the year 2002-03.  It is, therefore, evident 
to the Committee that after commissioning of the pipeline project in April, 1998, the 
pipeline has remained grossly under- utilized.  The various reasons which have come to 
the notice of the Committee for under utiliz ation of the pipelin e mainly include the 
following: 
 
(i) Dismantling of Administered Price Mechanism (APM) 
 
 The Committee note that upto Marc h, 1998, the oil industry was under 
Administered Price Mechanism and the Oil Coordination Committee (OCC) coordinated 
industry logistics and product movements.  Effective 1st April, 1998, all petroleum 
products except petrol, diesel, LPG, Ke rosene and ATF were decontrolled.  This 
dismantling of APM in April, 1998 coincid ed with the commissioning of the pipeline 
project of the HPCL.  As a result of this, the manner and production of black oil products 
such as Furnace Oil (FO), LDO, Naphtha etc. which was earlier under the supervision of 
Oil Coordination Committee (OCC)  got decontrolled.  In t he decontrolled scenario the 
Oil Companies got a free hand to make thei r own logistic planning on product supply 
and movement depending on the companies market conditions, demand supply 
scenario, optimum utilization of their own infrastructure and smooth supply to customers 
etc.  According to HPCL, the dismantling of APM has resulted in  non-participation of 
other industry members namely IO CL and BPCL which were init ially stipulated to move 
their products to Vashi through the pipeline as well as catering to their customers from 
the Vashi Terminal of the pi peline.  Instead, they are now dispatching their products 
from their existing installations in Mumbai for optimizing their infrastructure.  As a result, 
the Vashi facility which was in itially envisaged to cater the supplies to the customers of 
BPCL and IOCL besides HPCL go t reduced to cater only to the HPCL customers.  In 
addition, the dismantling of APM has also al lowed the customers to procure products 
through the imports of the black oil. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee note t hat though there was no written agreement 
between HPCL and BPCL for use of the pipeline, a direction was, however, issued by 
the then Oil Coordination Committee (OCC) stating that both BPCL and HPCL would 
deliver their products to their customers from Vashi.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommend that no one should take unfai r advantage that there was no written 
agreement when pipeline project was envisaged.  However, it should remain a solemn 
commitment and should be honoured for all time s to come irrespective of deregulation 

or dismantling of APM. The Committee, further, recommend that  the Government 
should arrange coordination between the HPCL, BPCL and the IOCL to work out a plan 
for moving the FO/LDO  products through the pipeline and their feeding to the 
customers through the Vashi Termi nal of the pipeline.  This would result not only in the 
better utilisation of the pipeline but would also help towards reduction in the road 
congestion and the associated hazards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IOC, BPCL and HPCL were requested to jointly work out a plan for moving 
FO/LDO thru Mumbai-Vashi pipeline of HPCL and their feedi ng to the customers 
through the Vashi terminal of the pipeline.  HPCL and  BPCL were also requested to 
take steps to reduce evacuation of petroleum products from their refinery at Mumbai by 
road transport. 
 
IOC was willing to take 20 TMT of FO ex HPCL’s Vashi Black Oil Terminal for 
feeding their customers outside Mumbai city.  This was in addition to the volume, 
currently being uplifted by IOC from HPCL’s Sewree  installation. However, HPCL does 
not have surplus FO ex-Mumbai Refinery to m eet this additional requirement of IOC.  
BPCL also confirmed non- availability of surplus FO at its Mumbai Refinery.  Due to 
severe tankage constraints at its Refinery, HP CL is not in a position to receive coastal 
inputs into its Refinery tanks for onward pumpi ng to Vashi, even if IOC was to bring FO 
coastally to meet its requirements.  Henc e it was decided that IOC would continue to 
receive coastal parcels at JNPT and meet it s requirements of Vashi fed locations ex 
JNPT. 
 
It was also decided that BPCL would uplift around 15 TMT of product from 
HPCL’s Vashi Black Oil Terminal for feed ing its customers outside Mumbai.  An  
equivalent quantity of FO would be given to HPCL by BPCL, either at the Refinery or at 
Sewree Wadala Terminal, so that there would be no change in material balance for both 
BPCL and HPCL. Product specifications were  compared and found acceptable by both 
the companies. Once this is implemented,  the expected throughput of the pipeline 
would be in range of 0.5 to 0.6 MMTPA. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated 24.1.2005) 
 
 
Remarks of Audit 
 
• The Navratna status granted to the Oil Cos.  by Govt. has resulted in more powers 
related to decision making and approval of capital expenditure in the PSUs. 
 
• In their zeal to be self sufficient in infras tructural facilities, Oil Cos. have put up/are 
putting up many projects which ma y not be optimally utilized on their 
implementation. 

 
• HPCL and BPCL could not finalise an  agreement regarding product sharing at 
HPCL’s Vashi Terminal and Refinery/Sewree Terminal so far. 
 
Comments of Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
HPCL/BPCL have agreed in principle to exchange product. However,  
 
commercial terms (payment) for utilisation of pipeline and terminal facility have yet to be 
agreed to. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated  4.4.2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE C OMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES  
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. III(ii)    IOTL project of IOCL  
 
 Another factor, which the Committee note as responsible for under-utilisation of 
the pipeline is the commissioning  of Indian Oil Tanking Ltd. (I OTL) project at Mumbai in 
1998.  The storage tankages built under the pr oject at Mumbai provide for storage of 
FO/LDO amongst other products.  As a result of this IOTL project, the FO/LDO is being 
fed from these tankages to some of the cu stomers in Vashi area who were originally 
supposed to be fed through the HPCL pipeline te rminal.  In this regard, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natu ral Gas while clearing the IOTL project in 
1996 did not take any cognizance of the HPCL pipeline project which was already under 
construction since 1995.  As a result of simultaneous commissioning of the IOTL project 
with the pipeline project in 1998, the utilisation of the HPCL pipeline project has been 
adversely affected.  The Committee cannot help observing that t he adverse impact of 
new facility of IOTL was not surprisingly considered by the Minist ry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas while giving clearance to t he IOTL project alt hough both HPCL and IOCL 
function under the same Ministry.  T he Committee, therefore, recommend that 
whenever the Government give clearance for a fresh project, it should also give due 
consideration to the impact of such projects on the projects alr eady under construction 
so as to ensure their optimal utilisation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government in July, 1997 had delegated decision making authority to 
approve capital expenditure on purchase of new items or for replacement without any 
monetary ceiling, technology joint venture or strategic alliances, technology and know-
how arrangements etc., to the Board of P ublic Sector Enterprises (PSEs) which have 
been granted Navratna status. ONGC, IOC, BPCL, HPCL and GAIL fall in this category. 
The Navratna companies, under  enhanced delegation of power , are approving projects 
with the approval of their Boards. 
 
Further, the PSEs, having Miniratna status, can incur capital expenditure on new 
projects etc. upto Rs.300 crore (PSEs in Ca tegory I) / Rs.150  crore  (PSEs  in  
Category II).  
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated 24.1.2005) 
 
Remarks of Audit  
 
Nil 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL No.. IV PO LICIES OF THE GO VERNMENT ON OIL 
INDUSTRY 
 
 The Committee find that the deregulation of APM in respect of FO/LDO in 1998 is 
the main reason for under-utilisation of the Mum bai-Vashi pipeline.  In this regard, the 
Committee further note that through Government  of India contemplat ed restructuring of 
oil industry around 1995, the ac tual details of the phased di smantling of the APM were 
announced by the Government only in No vember, 1997 and hence could not be taken 
into account for reviewing the economics of the pipeline project whic h was already at an 
advanced stage of construction at that time. 
 
The Committee desire that before taking  such major policy decisions in the 
future, the Government should also take into  consideration their likely impact of those 
policies on on-going projects of  the PSUs and make all possi ble efforts to minimise any 
adverse affect on the performance of such pr ojects by virtue of such decisions.  The 
instant case reflects a total lack of such  far-sighted consideration on the part of the 
Government. 
 
As regard the remedial steps to be tak en in the matter to ensure that such 
happenings do not recur, the Committee not e that the Government has notified 
guidelines on 20th November, 2002 for laying petroleum produ ct pipelines post APM.  
The guidelines facilitate laying of optimal size pipelines by proposer company taking into 
account the interest of other interested co mpanies.  The Committee trust that these 
guidelines would ensure proper ut ilization of the pipelines in  the future and desired that 
there should be periodical review of the gui delines to enable the Government to take 
timely corrective action keeping the economics of the venture in view. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In a deregulated scenario, the market fo rces would ensure that the investment 
made by the oil companies in pipeline infrastructure is on commercial considerations.  
 
Supplementary Guidelines for Laying Petroleum Product Pipelines have been 
notified on 26.10.2004. Guidelines for La ying Petroleum Product Pipelines and 
Supplementary Guidelines thereto will remain in force till the proposed Petroleum 
Regulatory Board is constituted.  After the constitution of this Board, the right of user in 
land for laying petroleum product pipelines will  be granted by this Ministry subject to 
fulfillment of requirements under the Petroleum Regulatory Law. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated  24.1.2005) 

 
Remarks of Audit  
 
4. The deregulated scenario has not resulted in what  the government envisaged and 
this has been due to shift in Govt. pol icies, resulting in excess creation of 
infrastructure requiring heavy investment. 
 
5. For instance, in 1998, Government fo rmulated a common carrier policy where Oil 
Companies pool their resources and creat e pipelines across the country for 
movement of POL products.  Accordingly, a Company, viz. Petronet India ltd., (PIL) 
was formed and PSU Oil marketing compani es contributed Rs.50 crore as equity 
participation.  PIL took up a few pipeline projects forming separate joint venture 
companies with the help of oil marketi ng companies.  Many of these JVCs have 
stopped their operations and PIL is in red within a period of 6 years.  This was 
mainly due to a shift in Govt. Policy in 2002, whereby oil companies can 
independently implement their own pipelines across the country subject to certain 
conditions. 
 
6. Due to this, 
 
• HPCL put up a pipeline project, Mundra-De lhi pipeline with an investment of 
Rs.1623.84 crore. 
• BPCL extends their Mumbai-Manmad pipeline to Piyali, near Delhi. 
• Recently, Govt. approved six pipeline projects  of Reliance Industries Limited, one of 
which connects Panipat to RIL’s refinery at Jamnagar. 
 
 If all these projects materialize Nort hern Region may have surplus products and 
therefore, the optim um utilization of the two ongo ing pipelines of HPCL and 
BPCL would be effected. 
 
4. Oil Companies go ahead with their own projects without co nsidering similar 
projects of other companies and various a ssociated issues in its totality.  On 
implementation of these pipeline proj ects, there may be a scenario where IOC 
may transport their excess products at Northern Region by their own pipelines. 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
The guidelines for laying petroleum pr oduct pipelines, issued on 20.11.2002 and 
supplementary guidelines thereto, i ssued on 26.11.2004, do not envisage non-
duplication in pipelines but allow a free regime. 
 
On 11.03.2002 IOC had issued notice to HPCL on their conversion of Kandla-
Bathinda Pipeline (KBPL) to crude service w.e.f. August, 2004 and advised HPCL to 
plan their affairs. With the conversion of KBPL to crude service, the vital coastal pipeline 
link to large fuel market around national capital in north zone is missing. HPCL’s 

proposed Mundra Delhi Pipeline wi ll give product sourcing flexibility and economics of 
distribution cost to HPCL. Both are critical in current competitive scenario for retaining 
HPCL’s market share and profitability. HPCL’s  existing market in north zone is almost 
fully dependant on product sourci ng from others. Mundra Delh i Pipeline will lead to 
reduced dependence on competitor s. Continuous upgradation of Auto fuel standards 
and absence / delay of producti on capability to meet the demand from inland refineries, 
highlights this necessity of coastal i nputs at western ports and product movement 
through pipeline to northern market. In case  of any exigency with any of the IOC 
refineries in west or north zone, large volumes will be required to be moved by 
conventional rail / road movements at a sh ort notice after positi oning at western port 
locations or from Jamnagar. Out of 5.8 MMTPA pipeline capacity of proposed Mundra-
Delhi Pipeline project, 80% i.e. 4.64 MMTPA is considered based on HPCL’s demand in 
2016-17. Hence, any underutilizati on of the pipeline is not foreseen. Further, the rate of 
return for this project considering only HPCL volumes is very attractive and cannot be 
overlooked. This pipeline would give a possibility for linkage  with Vadinar-Kandla 
Pipeline (VKPL) in future, if necessary, thereby preventing the investment in VKPL 
becoming infructuous after conversion of IOC’s KBPL to crude service. 
 
Thus, Mundra-Delhi Pipeline will not only be utilized in an optimum manner but 
will also give HPCL the required flexibility and support to pos ition the product in north in 
the most competitive manner . The project will remove  the Company’s dependence on 
its competitors and will also serve as an alter nate source of product to industry in case 
of problems in the inland refineries.  
 
BPCL‘s existing pipeline from  Mumbai to Manmad is fully utilized as envisaged. 
The same line is being extended to Piyala due to the following reasons : 
  
(a) Product availability to BPCL in nor thern region from other sources is 
inadequate to meet own demand. 
   
(b) BPCL’s Mumbai Refinery is being expanded to 12 MMT. This line will 
facilitate proper evacuation of refinery in most efficient manner to meet the 
demand in northern region.  
 
Out of six new proposed product pipelines, M/s Gas Transportation & 
Infrastructure Company Limited (GTICL), a special purpose vehi cle promoted by M/s 
Reliance, intend executing the Jamnagar–Patia la pipeline as the first pipeline. The 
remaining pipelines will be taken up subsequently in stages.  
 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
O.M. No.R-37012/6/2003-OR.II dated  4.4.2005) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see paragraph 6 of Chapter I of the Report 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
- NIL – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi        RUPCHAND PAL  
10, May, 2005                   CHAIRMAN 
20, Vaisakha, 1927(S) COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE 1st  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 10 MAY, 2005 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS, LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
7. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
MEMBERS, RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri. Jibon Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Bal Shekar, S  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri J. P. Sharma  Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Assistant Director 
 
OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri T.G. Srinivasan, Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Ms. Sandhya Shukla, Asstt. Comptroller & Auditor General (Comml) 
 
2. ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 

 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration Memorandum No.2 
regarding the Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 
the 12th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on `Hindustan Petrol eum Corporation Limited  - 
Infructuous Expenditure on creation of a pipeline’ and adopted the report.  The 
Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the report for presentation. 

 
 
 
4.  ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
5.  ******    ******    ****** 
 
 
 
 ******    ******    ****** 
 

APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (Thirteenth Lok  Sabha) on “HPCL. –Infructuous 
Expenditure on creation of a pipeline” 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  5 
 
 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos I, II and 
III(i)] 
 
Percentage of total  
3 
 
 
 
60% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. No  III(ii)] 
 
Percentage of total  
1 
 
 
 
20% 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…(vide recommendations at Sl. No IV) 
 
Percentage of total. 
1 
 
 
 
20% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 