 
13 C.P.U.No. 899 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2005-2006) 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA- LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO 
DELAY IN AWARD OF LICENCES TO OPERATE MONEY EXCHANGE 
COUNTERS  
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
(Action Taken b y th e Govern ment on the recom mendations contain ed in 
the Eighth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok 
Sabha) on – Airports Authority of Indi a – Loss of Revenu e due to delay  in 
award of Licences to Operate Money Exchange Counters ) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.3.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.3.2006 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March 2006 /  Phalguna 1927 (S) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-2006)  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report . 1 
 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government . 
 
5 
 
 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendation which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies.  
 
14 
 
 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee. 
 
15 
 
 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
17 
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of  sitting of COPU  18 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by 
Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of 
Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th 
Lok Sabha) on “Airports Authority of India 
– Loss of Revenue due to Delay in Award of 
Licences to Operat e Money Exchange 
Counters” 
20 
III Annexures I and II of the Action Taken 
Reply received from Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. 
21 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi  
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria  
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
9. Shri Sriniwas Patil  
10. Shri Kashiram Rana  
11. Shri Mohan Rawale  
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
13. Shri Bagun Sumbrui  
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav  
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary  
17. Shri Ajay Maroo  
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
19. Shri Chandran Pillai  
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui  
21. Vacant  
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph  Secretary  
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri N.C.Gupta Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary 
5. Shri H.Ram Prakash  Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by t he Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Airp orts Authority of India – Loss of Revenue due to 
Delay in Award of Licences to Operate Money Exchange Counters. 
 
2. The Eighth Report of the Committ ee on Public Underta kings (2005-2006) 
was presented to Lok Sabha on  25th August , 2005.  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations cont ained in the Report were received on 
28th February, 2006.  The Committee on P ublic Undertakings considered and 
adopted this Report at their sittings held on 20.3.2006.  The Minutes of the sitting 
are given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (2005-06) of  the Committee  is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: Rupchand Pal 
20 March, 2006 Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1927(S)            Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings  (2005- 2006) on “Airport 
Authority of India – Loss of Revenue due to delay in award of Licences to 
Operate Money Exchange Counters which was Presented to Lok Sabha on 25 th 
August 2005. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received  from Government in respect of all 
the 6 recommendations contai ned in the Report.  These have been categorized 
as follows : 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the  
Government : (Chapter II) 
 
Sl. Nos. I, III, IV, V and VI      (Total 5) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies :(Chapter III) 
 
NIL        (Total  NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committe e :           
(Chapter IV) 
 
Sl. No. II       (Total 1) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the  Government are still awaited : (Chapter V) 
 
S l . N o .   N I L        ( N I L )  
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of the recommendations. 
 
 
 
 

 2
Recommendation Serial No.2  
 
Modification of eligibility conditions  
 
4. The Committee have been apprised by AAI that of the three eligibility 
conditions, the condition prescribing gr oss turnover of Rs . 50 crore has been 
borrowed from State Bank of India, whereas the c ondition prescribing 5 years 
experience in the money exchange busi ness and having 15 br anches in India 
and abroad were based on inputs from I ndian Railways. These conditions in 
general and the condition of 15 branche s in India and abroad in particular, 
proved to be so harsh that most of the Indian firms got precluded from tendering. 
As a result, there was very poor response to the tenders, virtually leading to a 
monopolistic situation for a few firms w ho were able to grab most of money 
exchange counters (MECs)  at major International ai rports. The glaring instance 
of such a monopolistic situation can be seen from the fact that at IGI Airport, 
Delhi, 14 out of 15 MECs got allotted to M/s Thomas Cook, while in Chennai, all 
the counters went to M/s T. T. Travels and in Kolkata all the MECs went to M/s 
Thomas Cook. Aggrieved by the stipulation of the condition of having 15 
branches in India and abroad, some firms approached various high courts 
immediately after the Notice Inviting Te nders were issued, between August 1999 
to October 1999. In October 1999, some  High Courts termed these eligibility 
conditions as highly irrational, unrealistic and discriminatory. But the Airports 
Authority, after a lapse of 2 years, in September 2001, modifi ed the eligibility 
conditions from '15 branches in India and abroad' to '15 branches in India and / 
or abroad'. After the modification, thes e firms got all the cases withdrawn / 
closed.  
 
5. Keeping in view all the facts me ntioned above, the Committee are of the 
view that the AAI should have promptly acted soon after the observation of 
Mumbai High Court in October 1999 was re ceived, without waiting for another 2 
years to amend the eligibility conditions. By doing so, the Committee believe that 
the revenue losses could have cert ainly been minimized. The Committee 
recommend that responsibility should be fixed for the revenue loss and suitable 
action be taken in the matters.  
 
6. This instance clearly reveals that  the decision-making mechanism in AAI 
requires a serious review and the Committee recommend that a review in this 
regard should be carried out so that quick  decisions are made in future in all 
matters having revenue implications.  
 
Reply of Airports Authority of India 
 
7. The Single Bench of Mumbai High Court in October 1999 while granting 
stay on the Writ Petition filed by the Pe titioners, desired AAI to improve upon the 
wordings taken while framing the specificat ions so that they are not irrational, 
arbitrary and discriminatory.   However, since cases filed on similar issues at 

 3
Chennai Airport were dismissed in favour  of AAI by a Division Bench of Madras 
High Court and there was no restraint in go ing ahead in processing the tender at 
IGIA, by Delhi High Court. AAI at that stage felt that the case would be disposed 
off in its favour and were regularly fo llowing up the matter in the Mumbai High 
Court. 
 
8. However, the recommendations of the Committee has been noted and 
internal monitoring mechanism is being set up specially involving legal matters so 
that fast track action can be taken in cutti ng down the time fact or involved in the 
litigation process. 
 
9. All the concerned depar tments are being advised to  be more prompt in 
monitoring and taking timely action adhering to the time frame laid down in the 
Commercial Manual for avoiding such losses in future. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005] 
  
Remarks of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government 
 
10. The AAI has noted recommendations  of the Committee for future 
compliance. A copy of the instructions issued to all the departments of AAI in this 
regard has been called for from the Authority, which is awaited. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
11. A copy of the instructions dated 9. 12.2005 advising the airports to be more 
prompt in monitoring and taking timely action adhering to the time frame laid 
down in the Commercial Manual to avoid revenue loss in future is enclosed 
(Annexure-I). 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated the 21st February, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
12 The Committee observe that AAI ha d put up harsh conditions due to 
which most of Indian firms got preclude d  from tendering.  This  virtually 
led to a monopolistic situation for a few firms who were  able to grab most 
of   Money Exchange Counters (MECs ) at major international airports. 
Therefore, the Committee on Public Unde rtakings in their original report 

 4
had recommended that responsibility should be fixed for the revenue 
losses and appropriate suitable action in the matter be taken .  The 
Committee had also recommended for a review of the decision making 
mechanism in AAI so as to facilitate taking quick decisions in all matters 
having revenue implications.  The  Committee highly deprecate  the vague 
and inadequate reply of Ministry  of Civil Aviation and AAI which inter alia  
state that internal monitoring mechan ism is being set up involving legal 
matters so that fast track action can be taken in cutting down the time 
factor involved in the litigation.  The Committee express their displeasure 
that even after a lapse of more than six months, the  Ministry of Civil 
Aviation / AAI  have not taken any c oncrete steps for putting in place an 
internal monitoring mechanism.  The Committee desire that AAI should set 
up the internal review  mechanism wi thin a specific time frame of two 
months and review and dispose of all the cases having revenue 
implications with due promptitude. 
 The Committee further express their dismay that the reply of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and AAI is silent on their recommendation 
regarding fixing of responsibility for the revenue loss which tantamounts to 
inaction.  The Committee take a serious note of the lackadaisical manner in 
which recommendation of the Committee has been dealt with by Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and AAI and reiterat e their recommendation for fixing of 
responsibility in the instant case.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the specific action taken in the matter within a period of three months. 

 5
CHAPTER –II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT . 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. I 
 
Tendering for Money Exchange Counters at the Airports.  
 
The Committee note that prior to 1999, money exchange counters at 
some international airports were being op erated by Public Sector Banks mainly 
the State Bank of India and  some of its subsidiaries alongwith few other private 
agencies as per the directives issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the 
Ministry of Finance. The space for runni ng the counters was allotted by the AAI 
on rental basis. After liber alization of the economic po licies by the Government, 
many other agencies were permitted by t he RBI to carry on the money exchange 
business. As a result, many such parties  started approaching AAI for setting up 
money exchange counters at various inter national as well as domestic airports. 
In view of this and also to enhance the non- traffic rev enue, the matter was 
considered in the Board's meeting of AAI which accorded in principle approval for 
inviting open tenders from reputed authorized money exchange agencies, 
nationalized banks and foreign banks fo r setting up of money exchange counters 
at various airports. AAI decided to float  tenders to award licenses to operate 
money exchange counters on the basis of ro yalty on the gross turnover of these 
counters in addition to the fi xed monthly rentals. Since the AAI was floating this 
kind of tender for the first time, it was thought appropriate by them to contact 
certain agencies doing this kind of business in order to fix the eligibility criteria for 
the tenders. Accordingly, AAI approached Railway Aut horities who were also 
inviting tenders for money exchange busin ess and the State Ba nk of India who 
were already operating money exchange counters at all the international airports. 
Based on the inputs received from these two agencies, the AAI fixed the eligibility 
conditions for the tenders. However, the eligibility conditions so framed proved 
too harsh, as these had the effect of pr ecluding most of the Indian firms from 
participation in the tender process, whic h subsequently led to litigation in various 
courts and resulted in delay in award of licenses and consequential revenue 
losses etc.  
 
The Committee, feel that it was not  proper on the part of AAI to approach 
only two agencies for taking consultation in  setting out the eligibility conditions, 
particularly when there were many ot her Public Sector Banks and private 
agencies doing money exchange business. The Committee, therefore, are of the 
view that such agencies should also have been consulted for enabling the AAI for 
setting out realistic and reasonable condit ions. Had that been the case, such a 
situation would not have arisen, where a very few parties alone were able to 

 6
qualify for bidding their tenders, besides  having an adverse impact on the 
concept of competitiveness. The Committ ee recommends that while undertaking 
such activities in future, the AAI, follo wing prudent commercial practices, should 
undertake wider consultations, while framing eligibility conditions so that there is 
optimum participation and healthy competition.  
 
Reply of Airports Authority of India 
 
 The specifications were framed based on the broad parameters outlined in 
the in principal approval a ccorded by the AAI Board fo r calling the tenders of 
Money Exchange Counters at various airports.  
 
 The recommendations of the Committ ee for following prudent commercial 
practices and framing eligib ility condition after wider consultations for healthy 
competition is noted for compliance.  In this connection, we would also like to 
submit that the criteria and experience details incorporated in the Commercial 
Manual of the AAI in v ogue has been prepared after taking into account the 
views of all the concer ned departments/regions/Airpor t Directors and since 
August 2003, after getting duly approved by the AAI Board. 
 
 Further it has also been decided by the AAI Board that any further 
amendment in the Commercial Manual is to be brought to the AAI Board with the 
recommendations of the Commercial Advisory Board for approval. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005]  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The AAI has noted the recommendations of the Committee for future 
compliance. The compliance in this regard will be watched during the further 
phase audits. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
Keeping in view of the vetting remar ks of the Audit, no further comments are 
required at this stage. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated the 21st February, 2006] 
 
 

 7
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.3  
 
Guidance of AAI Board in all important matters  
 
 Although the AAI Board had accorded in principle approval for inviting 
tenders from reputed money exchange agenci es, unfortunately the Board was at 
no point of time apprised of the litigation cases in various High Courts against the 
eligibility conditions. It is true that the Commercial Advisory Board (CAB) headed 
by Chairman, AAI was competent to take  decisions in commercial matters. But 
the Committee feel that such  sensitive issues should  have been placed before 
the Board and also the Ministry for their guidance.  
 
 The Committee therefore, recommend t hat the AAI should immediately lay 
down suitable guidelines in their Comme rcial Manual providing for seeking 
Board's directions in such crucial matters. 
 
Reply of Airports Authority of India 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee has been noted and action is in 
hand to set up an effective internal moni toring mechanism, by which important 
matters involving time delay due to lit igation process or otherwise would be 
suitably identified analyzed and put up to  the Commercial Advisory Board which 
after review, would submit to the AAI Board/Ministry seeking their 
guidance/directions in crucial matters.   
 
 [Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005] 
 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government 
 
AAI has noted the recommendations of  the Committee. It has further 
stated that an effective internal monitoring mechanism is being set up to analyse 
the time delay in important matters wh ich are due to legal process etc. The 
effectiveness of above mechanism would be studied in the future phase of 
audits. 
 
 
 

 8
 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
Keeping in view the vetting remarks of audit, no further comments are required at 
this stage. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated the 21st      February, 
2006]  
 
Recommendation Serial No.4  
 
Need for proper handling of the litigations  
 
 The Committee note that in view of the stringent eligibility conditions, 
many Indian firms got straightaway precluded from tender ing for the Money 
Exchange Counters. Such aggrieved parties  challenged the eligibility conditions 
in various High Courts at Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi, 
Hyderabad and Thiruvanthapuram during A ugust 1999 to October, 1999. While 
the Mumbai High Court and Kolkata High Court gr anted stay on tender 
proceedings, the other High Courts, though not issuing any stay  orders, ordered 
that the award of lic ences was subjected to the resu lt of petitions filed before 
them. Further, while admitting the petitio ns in October, 1999, the Mumbai High 
Court observed that the eligibility conditi ons were totally irrational, unreasonable 
and illegal. Similarly,  the Kerala High Court, while  setting aside the eligibility 
conditions in August, 2001, stated that the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) was 
unreasonable, arbitrary and di scriminatory. On the c ontrary, the Madras High 
Court dismissed the petition on the ground that the court cannot interfere with the 
jurisdiction of AAI in fixing the terms and conditions of the tender and as such it 
was not open to judicial scrutiny. The observation of the Delhi High Court was 
that though the eligibility conditions did not suffer any arbitrariness or irrationality, 
the same would have been happily wo rded and made more precise. The 
Committee further note that it was only in the year 2001 that the Airports 
Authority of India, for t he sake of resolving the pending litigation proceedings, 
made required modifications in  the eligibility conditions which ultimately resulted 
in withdrawal / closure of the court cases.  
 
 Keeping in view the fact that a large number of case s were filed in 
different High Courts of the country by  various firms against the eligibility 
conditions and different types of obser vations were being given on these 
petitions, the Committee feel that the Authority had failed to effectively handle the 
situation due to lack of s ound legal counseling. In the opinion of the Committee, 
the most prudent course for the Author ity under such circumstances was to 

 9
approach the Supreme Court for collectiv e hearing on all t hese matters. The 
Secretary, MOCA as well as representat ives of AAI during evidence before the 
Committee also subscribed to this view po int. Unfortunately, the Authority did not 
pursue this course of action, as no such advice was given by their legal counsel. 
The Committee are not at all happy with such an inept handling of the litigations 
and therefore strongly recommend that  AAI, should strengthen their legal 
machinery for handling such type of situations in future more effectively.  
 
Reply of Airports Authority of India 
 In the matter of tender for the money exchange counters various parties 
challenged the eligibility cr iteria before the various Hi gh Courts.  First hearing 
was held in Chennai for two Writ Peti tions  and the Divis ion Bench of the 
Chennai High Court dismissed the petitions by  detailed judgment on 6th October, 
1999 holding that Court cannot interfere with the juri sdiction of respondents in 
fixing the terms and conditions and the same is not open to judicial scrutiny.  
Similarly, two writ petitions were also  filed before the Kolkata and Delhi High 
Courts but no stay granted.  However,  the Delhi High Court ordered that the 
award of Licence would be subject to t he result of petition pending before the 
Court.  In the matter of Bombay Hig h Court, however, an interim order was 
passed on 20 th October, 1999 wherein Hon’ble Court found a clause of the 
tender conditions as irra tional and unreason able and hence an interim stay was 
granted.  On the basis of this interim or der Kerala High Court also passed similar 
order holding one condition of the contract as violative of article 14 to the 
Constitution.  The Law Department of AAI  is having 5 (five) regions (North, 
South, East, West and North Eastern Region) with 19 Officers managing cases 
all over the country. The cases are co ntested by the Law Department in 
coordination with the conc erned departments. Keepin g in view the varied 
observations and the order passed by the various High Courts in the Country, the 
Competent Authority at Cor porate Hqrs. had decided to modify the conditions of 
the contract for resolving the problems and accordingly, a modification proposal 
was filed before the Bombay High Cour t which was accepted  by the Court and 
opposite party withdrew the petition. 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and an internal 
monitoring mechanism is being created fo r monitoring all the cases for taking 
prompt action for avoiding delay culminating into th e loss of revenue of the 
Authority.   
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005] 
  

 10
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 The AAI has noted the recommendations of the Committee. The details of 
internal monitoring mechanism created for monitoring the cusses for taking 
prompt action has been called for from the Authority, which is awaited. The 
effectiveness of the mechanism would be studied in the future phase audits. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 The Legal Department of AAI has  taken note of the recommendations of 
the Committee for setting up Special Action Group for monitoring all the cases to 
avoid delay culminating in loss of revenue to Authority. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated the 21st February, 2006] 
 
Recommendation Serial No.5  
Delay in award of licences resulting in revenue loss.  
 
 The Committee note that the Author ity issued instructions to various 
domestic / international airports in July, 1999 to float open tenders for award of 
licenses. Although the airports were advised to make all out efforts for inviting, 
processing and finalizing the facility expeditiously, no time -frame within which 
the entire process was to be completed ha d been prescribed. In this regard, the 
Committee observe that on account of liti gations in various High Courts, delays 
ranging from 30 to 34 months in the case of Mumbai and Kolkata airports, 6 to 37 
months in the case of Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi & Hyderabad airports and delay 
of 25 months in the case of Thiruvanthapuram  airport, took place in awarding of 
licenses.  Further, in the absence of any prescribed time-frame , the airports at 
Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Goa and Jaipur did not follow the instructions at all and as 
a result, the award of licenses delayed which ranged between 18 and 44 months. 
According to the Audit, these delays have resulted in a loss of revenue of Rs. 
18.11 crore to the Authority on account of royalty and the license fee.  
 
 The Committee further note that accord ing to AAI, the delay in awarding 
the licences had occurred mainly on account of petitions filed in different courts 
challenging the eligibility conditions. The other reason s include, reference made 
to CVO/CVC in respect of awarding c ontracts at Delhi & Chennai airport, 
declaration of few airports as International only from 23.6.2000 and 
consequential revision of space license fe e, delay in vacation of counters by 
State Bank of India at few airports; and repeated tender attempts due to technical 
deficiencies etc. The Committ ee are not convinced by the reasoning put-forth by 
the Authority because the Aut hority itself is to be blamed for their inept handling 
of the litigations. The Commi ttee find the other reasons as petty in nature that 
could have been taken care of if proper planning, coordination and follow -up was 
done by the AAI Headquarters.  
 

 11
 The Committee strongly feel that appropriate legal consultations and 
carrying out of expeditious modifications in the eligibility conditions soon after the 
observation of the Mumbai  High Court in October, 1999 would have definitely 
avoided loss of revenue to the Authority.  
 
 Another factor in the opinion of the Committee wh ich has been attributed 
to the delay in awarding of tenders was that no time-frame was prescribed for 
completion of the whole process. In t he absence of the said parameter, many 
airports did not follow the tendering instructions at all. The Committee find such 
approach highly casual and irregular keepi ng in view the fact that as per the 
Commercial Manual of the Au thority, the tender inst ructions should clearly 
stipulate the time-frame for completion of the whole process. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the Authority did not view the delay in awarding the 
licences as a revenue loss proposition. The Committee believe that had the 
Authority acted as a truly professional or ganization in prom ptly addressing the 
causes of delay, the revenue loss could have certainly been minimized. The 
Committee, therefore, recomm end that in future, the pr ocedure laid down in the 
Commercial Manual should be strictly adhered to so as to avoid recurrence of 
such lapses in future. 
 
 
Reply of Airports Authority of India 
 
 The observations of the Committee are noted and instructions will be 
issued to the Airport Directors/Regional Airport Directors at the various airports to 
adhere to the time schedule prescribed in  the Commercial Manual for avoiding 
such recurrence in future.   
 
 Further, an internal monitoring mechanism would be set up, for effectively 
monitoring and reducing/minimizing the time delays in processing tenders. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005] 
  
Remarks of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The AAI has noted the recomm endations of the committee. The 
instructions issued to the Airport Directo rs/Regional Airport directors have been 
called for from the Authority, which is awai ted. After the receipt of the details, the 
same would be studied in further transaction audits. 
 
 

 12
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
 A copy of the instructions issued by  Airports authority of India to the 
Airports Directors/Regiona l Executive Directors vide letter dated 9.12.2005 as 
referred to at Point no. 2   of reply is enclosed as Annexure-I.. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated the 21st February, 2006] 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6  
 
Need for strengthening the Monitoring Mechanism of the Ministry  
 
 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry came to know about 
the legal proceedings against th e AAI in various High Courts relating to eligibility 
conditions set out in the tender for setting up Money Exchange Counters only 
through the draft audit paras from the C&AG.  
 
 The Ministry has stated that their representatives are the Members of AAI 
Board. Since the Commercial Advisory Bo ard (CAB) of AAI who is competent to 
take decision with regard to commercial pr actices did not bring this issue to AAI 
Board, the Ministry's representatives or  the Ministry were not aware of the 
litigations faced by AAI. This explanation is not acceptable to the Committee as 
the senior officers of the Ministry wh o deal with AAI, are completely accountable 
for the performance of AAI. Another important point which has come to the notice 
of the Committee is that on perusal of it em No. 13 of AAI Commercial Manual of 
1993 which was in vogue till 2001, it has been noted that Money Exchange 
Counters were also to be allotted as per di rectives issued by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation from time to time. In view of this, the Ministry cannot be absolved of its 
responsibilities in regard to the controversies generated during the said allotment 
of Money Exchange Counters (MECs). This shows that there was poor 
coordination and lack of supervision of the Ministry over the AAI. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Civil Aviation should strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism and conduct periodi cal reviews of the PSUs and provide 
suitable guidance to them. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Civil Aviation: 
 
 Ministry reviews important projects  of AAI   periodically. Besides, the 
projects are also reviewed as part of Budget exercise and also thorough periodic 
review of Five Year Plan projects. W herever slippages, if any, are observed, 
necessary instructions are given to AAI from time to time. Review is also done as 
a part of monitoring of  MOU signed between AAI and Government of India. 
Besides, two officers of the Ministry, bei ng on the Board of Directors of AAI, also 

 13
oversee the performance of AAI and take decisions with regard to various 
functions of the Authorit y on the basis of policies of the Government. The 
progress of projects underta ken by AAI are reviewed and monitored on periodic 
intervals in the Board of t he Authority. However, Airpor ts Authority of India has 
also been advised to keep the Ministry informed of important policy 
matters/projects including commercial and legal matters etc. where coordination, 
guidance etc of the Ministry is needed.  
 
 [Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005] 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 As per the observations of the Commi ttee there was poor coordination and 
lack of supervision of the Ministry over t he AAI. A copy of the instructions issued 
in this regard has been called for from the Authority, which is awaited. Till such 
time the copy of instruction is handed over to audit, the para may remain 
unsettled. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 Airports Authority of India has already been instruct ed to keep the Ministry 
informed of all important policy matters /projects including commercial and legal 
matters etc. where coordination, guidanc e of the Ministry is needed vide this 
Ministry’s letter No. G.25012/10/2005-AAI dated 27 th October, 2005 is enclosed 
as Annexure-II. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. Dated the 21st February, 2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMM ITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 

 15
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.2  
 
Modification of eligibility conditions  
 
 The Committee have been apprised by AAI  that of the three eligibility 
conditions, the condition prescribing gros s turnover of Rs. 50 crore has been 
borrowed from State Bank of India, whereas the c ondition prescribing 5 years 
experience in the money exchange busi ness and having 15 br anches in India 
and abroad were based on inputs from I ndian Railways. These conditions in 
general and the condition of 15 branche s in India and abroad in particular, 
proved to be so harsh that most of the Indian firms got precluded from tendering. 
As a result, there was very poor response to the tenders, virtually leading to a 
monopolistic situation for a few firms w ho were able to grab most of money 
exchange counters (MECs)  at major International ai rports. The glaring instance 
of such a monopolistic situation can be seen from the fact that at IGI Airport, 
Delhi, 14 out of 15 MECs got allotted to M/s Thomas Cook, while in Chennai, all 
the counters went to M/s T. T. Travels and in Kolkata all the MECs went to M/s 
Thomas Cook. Aggrieved by the stipulation of the condition of having 15 
branches in India and abroad, some firms approached various high courts 
immediately after the Notice Inviting Te nders were issued, between August 1999 
to October 1999. In October 1999, some  High Courts termed these eligibility 
conditions as highly irrational, unrealisti c and discriminatory.  But the Airports 
Authority, after a lapse of 2 years, in September 2001, modifi ed the eligibility 
conditions from '15 branches in India and abroad' to '15 branches in India and / 
or abroad'. After the modification, thes e firms got all the cases withdrawn / 
closed.  
 
 Keeping in view all the facts ment ioned above, the Committee are of the 
view that the AAI should have promptly acted soon after the observation of 
Mumbai High Court in October 1999 was re ceived, without waiting for another 2 
years to amend the eligibility conditions. By doing so, the Committee believe that 
the revenue losses could have cert ainly been minimized. The Committee 
recommend that responsibility should be fixed for the revenue loss and suitable 
action be taken in the matters.  
 
 This instance clearly reveals that  the decision-making mechanism in AAI 
requires a serious review and the Committee recommend that a review in this 

 16
regard should be carried out so that quick  decisions are made in future in all 
matters having revenue implications.  
 
Reply of Airports Authority of India 
 
 The Single Bench of Mumbai High Court in October 1999 while granting 
stay on the Writ Petition filed by the Pe titioners, desired AAI to improve upon the 
wordings taken while framing the specificat ions so that they are not irrational, 
arbitrary and discriminatory.   However, since cases filed on similar issues at 
Chennai Airport were dismissed in favour  of AAI by a Division Bench of Madras 
High Court as there was no restraint in going ahead in processi ng the tender at 
IGIA, by Delhi High Court. AAI at that stage felt that the case would be disposed 
off in its favour and were regularly fo llowing up the matter in the Mumbai High 
Court. 
 
 However, the recommendations of  the Committee has been noted and 
internal monitoring mechanism is being set up specially involving legal matters so 
that fast track action can be taken in cutti ng down the time fact or involved in the 
litigation process. 
 
 All the concerned departm ents are being advised to  be more prompt in 
monitoring and taking timely action adhering to the time frame laid down in the 
Commercial Manual for avoiding such losses in future. 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated   21st November, 2005] 
  
Remarks of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government 
The AAI has noted recommendations of the Committee for future 
compliance. A copy of the instructions issued to all the departments of AAI in this 
regard has been called for from the Authority, which is awaited. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
A copy of the instructions dated 9.12.2005 advising the airports to be more 
prompt in monitoring and taking timely action adhering to the time frame laid 
down in the Commercial Manual to avoid revenue loss in future is enclosed 
(Annexure-I). 
 
[Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.  G.25012/10/2005-AAI Dated the 21st February, 2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
See para no. 12 of Chapter I  

 17
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
- NIL – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi        RUPCHAND PAL  
20, March, 2006                   CHAIRMAN 
29, Phalguna, 1927(S) COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 

 18
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES  OF  THE  15th SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  20th  MARCH,  2006 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
6. Shri Kashiram Rana 
7. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
8. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
 
9. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N. C. Gupt a, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Under Secretary  
 
 
OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  &  AUDI TOR  GENERAL  OF  
INDIA 
 
1. Ms. A.Basu Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Sunil Chander, Principal Director (Commercial) 
 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the followi ng Draft Reports 
without any modifications:- 
(i) XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXXXXXXXXX 
 
 
 

 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha) on – Airports Authority of 
India – Loss of Revenue due to delay in awar d of Licences to 
Operate Money Exchange Counters. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports for 
presentation . 
The Committee then adjourned.  

 20
 APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  “Airports Author ity of India – 
Loss of Revenue due to Delay in Award of Licences to Operate Money Exchange 
Counters.” 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  6 
 
 
lI  Recommendations that  have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos I, III, IV, V 
and VI] 
 
Percentage of total  
5 
 
 
 
83% 
 
LII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies (NIL) 
 
Percentage of total  
NIL 
 
 
NIL 
 
IV Recommendations in respec t of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…[vide recommendation at Sl. No  II] 
 
 
Percentage of total. 
1 
 
 
 
 
17% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  
 
NIL 
 
 
 

 21
APPENDIX III 
ANNEXURE I  
 
No.: COM/913/3/2/89/3125-3134          December 9,2005 
 
 
Airport Director, 
Airports Authority of India, 
CSI/IGI/NSCBI/Chennai/Trivandrum Airports, 
MUMBAI/DELHI/CHENNAI/KOLKATTA/TRIVANDRUM 
 
 
Regional Executive Director, 
Airports Authority of India, 
Western/Eastern/Northern/Southern/North Eastern Regions, 
MUMBAI/ KOLKATTA /DELHI/CHENNAI/GUWAHATI 
 
 
Subject: Action Taken on the recommendat ions contained in the Eighth 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Airports of 
India- Loss of Revenue due to Dela y in Award of Licences to 
Operate Money Exchange Counters. 
 
Sir, 
 
 One of recommendations made by t he Committee on Public Undertakings 
(COPU) inter-alia, included that timely tender action should be initiated and quick 
decisions made in future in all matters having revenue implication.  AAI assured 
COPU that all the concer ned departments are being advis ed to be more prompt 
in monitoring and taking timely action adhering to the time frame laid down in the 
Commercial Manual to avoid such revenue loss in future. 
 
 Your are therefore, requested to take note of the same for strict 
compliance. 
 
 Kindly acknowledge receipt. 
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
 
(R.V.Narayanan) 
General Manager (Comml.) 

 22
ANNEXURE II  
MOST IMMEDIATE 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF  
THE COMMITTEE PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
No. G.25012/10/2005-AAI 
Government of India 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  
 
B Block, Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, 
New Delhi-110003 
Dated 14th October, 2005 
 
To  
The Chairman, 
Airports Authority of India 
Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, 
New Delhi-110003 
Kind Attn: Shri M.C.Kishore, Company Secretary. 
 
Subject: Recommendations of the Committee on Public Undertaking (COPU) on 
C&AG Audit Para No. 3.3.1 of Report No. 3 of 2005 (Commercial) 
regarding loss of revenue due to delay in award of licences of operate 
money exchange counters at Airports. 
 
Sir, 
 I am directed to refer to Airports Authority of India letter No.H.11013/9(1)/05-P&C 
dated 22
nd September, 2005 forwarding therewith Action taken Report(ATR) on the 
recommendations of the Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) of the C&AG Audit 
Para on the subject cited above.  Although this Minister reviews important projects of 
AAI periodically and these projects are also reviewed as part of Budge exercise and also 
through periodic review of Five Year Plan projects, the Committee in its 
Recommendation No. 6 has recommended that Ministry of Civil Aviation should 
strengthen is monitoring mechanism and conduct periodical reviews of the PSUs and 
provide suitable guidance to them. 
 
2. In view of the recommendations made by the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(COPU), it is requested that Airports Authority of India should keep this Ministry informed 
of the important policy matters/projects particularly with reference to commercial and 
legal issues where coordination/guidance of the Ministry is required.  It will be 
appreciated if a report on quarterly basis is furnished to this Ministry on such policy 
matters/projects which are delayed for their completion from their time bound schedule 
with the details of reasons for delay etc.   It will appreciated if the next quarterly reports 
on such matters for the quarter ending 31
st December, is furnished to this Ministry in the 
second week of January, 2006 positively. 
 Yours faithfully, 
 
 
(S.K.Arya) 
Under Secretary to the Government of India  
Tel. No. 24610360 