1
C.P.U.No.884 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
(2004 – 2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
AIR INDIA LIMITED -RECONSTITUTION OF BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
 
[Action Taken by the  Government on the recommendation contained 
in 11th Report of Committee on Public Undertakings (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Air India Limited- Reconstitution of Board or Directors ] 
 
 
   S  
    E  
     A  
      L  
Presented to Lok Sabha on21.12.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on_21.12.2004 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926(S) 

 
CONTENTS 
  Page  
Composition of the Committee (2004-2005) (iii) 
Introduction   (v) 
Report   1 
 
APPENDICES  
 
I. Copy of the Cabinet Secret ary’s D.O. letter dated 9.5.2003  
addressed to all Secretaries of the  Ministries / 
Departments of Government of India. 
    II  Minutes of the Si tting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
 
5 
 
 
6 
 

COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  UNDERTAKINGS 
( 2004 – 2005 ) 
 
 CHAIRMAN 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 
 
 
2. 
MEMBERS,  LOK  SABHA 
 
Shri Ma-noranjan Bhakta 
 
 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
 
 
4 Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
 
 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 
 
6. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
 
 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
 
 
8 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
 
9. Shri Kashiram Rana 
 
 
10. Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
 
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
 
 
12. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
 
 
13. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
 
14. Shri Parasnath Yadav 
 
 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA  SABHA 
16. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
 
 
17. Shri Ajay Maroo 
 
 
18. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
 
19. Shri Jibon Roy 
 
 
20. Shri Shahid Siddiqui 
 
 
21. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
22. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri John Joseph  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri S Bal Shekar  Director 
3. Shri Raj Kumar  Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Vidya Mohan  Executive Assistant 
                                  (iii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Un dertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this First Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendation contained in the Eleventh 
Report of the Committee on Public Under takings (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on Air 
India Limited- Reconstitution of Board of Directors. 
2. The Eleventh Report of the Commi ttee on Public Undertakings(2003-2004) 
was presented to Lok Sabha on  19 th December, 2003.  Repl y of the Government 
to the recommendation contained in  the Report was received on 1 st November, 
2004. The Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report 
at their sitting held on 15 December, 2004.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                          RUPCHAND PAL 
December 15 , 2004                                CHAIRMAN, 
Agrahayana 24, 1926(S)     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS. 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendation containe d in the Eleventh Report (Thirteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public U ndertakings (2003-2004) on “Air India 
Limited –Reconstitution of Board of Dir ectors” which was presented to the Lok 
Sabha on 19 the December, 2003. 
2. The Eleventh Report mentioned ab ove contained only one recommendation. 
Action Taken reply in respect of this r ecommendation has been received from the 
Government.  The Committee have not accepted the Action Taken reply to the 
recommendation. 
3. The Committee will now deal with the details of action taken by the 
Government on their recommendation in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4. The Committee in their Eleventh Re port have recommended about need to 
fill up vacant posts on the Board of Directors of Air India as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation had issued an 
Order on December 12, 1998 regarding reconstitution of the Board of 
Directors of Air India Ltd. which envisa ges appointment of four  Functional 
Directors in charge of Commercial, Engineering, Finance and Personnel  
and five Non-official Directors in the Board of Directors of Air India Ltd.  
The Committee further note that in April, 2000 the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation had sent a proposal to the De partment of Personnel and Training 
(DOPT) for seeking approval of the Appointments Committee of Cabinet 
(ACC) regarding reconstitution of the Bo ard of Directors of Air India Ltd. 
for a period of 3 years or till the qu estion of disinvestment of Government 
equity in Air India was finalized.  Th e Committee are surprised to note that 
in the proposed reconstitution of the Bo ard of Directors, the Ministry had 
suggested to include some names of expe rts from various fields in place of 

the slots of four Functional Directors keeping in view the impending  
disinvestment of Air India Ltd.   However, the Committee note that though 
the  decision to include experts in place of Functional Directors was taken in 
January, 2000,  this information was not furnished to the Committee by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation at the time of oral evidence before the Committee 
which took place on 8 th August , 2000.  Nor was this information furnished 
by the Ministry at the time of furnishing written replies to the Committee.  
In this regard, the Secretary, Civil Aviation while tendering evidence before 
the Committee on October 20, 2003 expresse d regrets not only  for delay in 
implementation of the recommendation of  the Committee but also for some 
of the points which were not specifi cally replied to the Committee.  The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has now in formed the Committee that a decision 
has been taken at the Minister’s level for filling up the posts of Functional 
Directors through Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) and a proposal 
in this regard has already been forwarded to PESB.  The Committee also 
note that Air India has been removed from the Disinvestment list as per the 
decision taken by the Cabinet Committee on Disinvestment on 15
th April, 
2003.  The Committee feel that the Government should have a 
professionalized Board of Directors for Air India as per the DPE guidelines 
of March, 1992 regarding composition of Board of Directors in public sector 
undertakings.  They, theref ore, recommend that f our posts of Functional 
Directors in charge of Finance, Commercial, Personnel and Engineering and 
five posts of Non-official Director s should be filled up in the Board of 
Directors of Air India without any further loss of time.” 
  
5. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
recommendation has stated as under:- 
 “It is submitted that at the instance of this Ministry, Public Enterprises Selection 
Board, notified four vacant posts of Functional Directors in Air India and 
applications have been invited from eligible candidates.  The process is likely to be 
completed in due course. 
  
It may kindly be noted that this Ministry  has already initiate d necessary action to 
fill up the posts of Functional Directors in the Board of Air India.” 
 
6. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government as it is 
evasive and incomplete.  The Committee in their Eleventh Report recommended that 
four posts of Functional Directors represen ting the Finance, Commercial, Personnel 
and Engineering Departments and five posts of  Non-official Directors should be filled 

up in the Board of Directors of Air Indi a so that the Company  is run by a 
professionalised Board of Directors as  per the DPE guidelines of March, 1992 
regarding composition of Board of Directo rs in public sector undertakings.  The 
Committee regret to note that more than a year had elapsed before a proposal was 
sent by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the Public Enterprises Selection Board 
(PESB) for filling up the posts of Function al Directors, the decision for which was 
taken at the Minister’s level. The persons have not yet been appointed against these 
vacant posts.  The Ministry of Civil Avia tion has not even mentioned the time by 
which the Functional Directors would be appointed. Rather they have stated that  
“the process is likely to be completed in due course”.  What surprises the Committee 
more is that the reply of the Government is completely silent on the appointment of 
Non-official Directors  in  th e  Board  of Air India.   In  this regard, the Committee 
wish to draw the attention of the Ministry to the Cabi net Secretary’s D.O.letter dated 
9th May, 2003 addressed to all Secretaries of  the Ministries / Departments of the 
Government of India, wherein he had emphasize d upon the need to suitably sensitize 
the officials of their Ministries / Depar tments about the importance of furnishing  
comprehensive replies to each and every question raised in the recommendations 
made by various Parliamentary Committees so  that the possibility  of any loose or 
casual replies is eliminated.  The Committee,  therefore, take a strong note of such 
lackadaisical approach adopted by the Ministry while furnishing Action Taken reply 
to the Committee’s recommendation   The Committee also express  their strong 
displeasure over the manner in which Board Level appointments in Air India have 
been delayed for a longer period.  They, therefore, recommend that the appointment 

process for filling up the four posts of Functional Directors representing the Finance, 
Commercial, Personnel  and Engineering De partments should be completed within a 
fixed time frame and also immediate acti on should be taken to appoint persons 
against the five posts of Non-official Directors in the Board of Air India. 
 
NEW DELHI     
15 December, 2004       RUPCHAND PAL 
24 Agrahayana, 1926(S)              CHAIRMAN 
    COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 

ANNEXURE - I 
 
D.O.No. 213/5/1/2003-CA.IV 
 
      CABINET SECRETARY 
               NEW DELHI 
 
                May 9, 2003. 
 
Dear Secretary, 
 
 The accoun tability of  the Executiv e in  our Pa rliamentary Dem ocracy has been  
ensured through various m echanisms.  Scrutiny of  the work of the Ministries/Departm ents 
by various Parliam entary Committe es is one such m echanism that dem ands our utm ost 
respect and attention.  
 
2. Reports su bmitted by  various Parliam entary Comm ittees m ake specif ic 
recommendations on which the Ministries /Departments concerned are required to furnish 
detailed replies bringing out clearly the action take n on each recomm endation.  In order to 
help the Committees appreciate the efforts m ade or difficul ties encountered in taking the 
recommended action, such replies should be releva nt and complete in all respects.  In case 
the Ministries/Departments are not in a posi tion to accept a particular recommendation, the 
reasons therefor  need to be explained clearly with relevant details. 
 
3. Instances of casual replies, furnished to the Parliamentary Committees, raise doubts 
in the m inds of m embers of the Comm ittee about the seriousness of the Governm ent’s 
efforts in g iving effect to th eir recommenda tions.  In one such recent instance, the 
Parliamentary Comm ittee on Public Undertakings  has taken a serious note of the casual 
replies furnished to it. 
 
 
4. I would, therefore, urge you to suita bly sensitize the officials of your  
Ministry/Department ab out th e im portance of  furnishing com prehensive replies to the 
questions raised and the recommendations made by the various Parliamentary Committees.  
A careful scrutiny at your level w ould further help in elim inating th e possib ility of  any  
loose or casual replies being furnished. 
 
 W ith regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
                                                                                                                      Sd/- 
(Kamal Pande) 
 
Addressed  to  all Secretaries of Ministries/Departments 
of the Government of India 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE  6th  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON  15  DECEMBER,  2004 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1700 hrs. 
 
 
CHAIRMAN 
  
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK  SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. S. Gadhavi 
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
4. Dr. Vallabhabhai Kathiria 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6 Shri Mohan Rawale 
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 
8. Shri Bagun Sumbrui 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
9. Shri Jibon Roy 
10. Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar, Director 
2. Shri Raj Kumar, Under Secretary 
3. Shri N. C. Gupta, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar, Assistant Director 
 
 
2. The Committee, at first, took up for consideration the following draft 
reports and adopted the same :- 
 
 
 

i) Action Taken Report (ATR) on action taken by Government on 
the recommendation contained in the Eleventh Report (13 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Air 
India Ltd. – Reconstitution of Board of Directors”. 
ii) XX            XX             XX           XX         XX 
iii) XX            XX             XX           XX         XX 
 
3. The Committee authorised the Chai rman of the Committee to finalise 
the aforesaid Reports and to present / lay the same to the Parliament. 
4. XX            XX             XX           XX         XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 