24
C.P.U. No. 914  
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
SPECIAL CONTINGENCY POLICIES ON MOBILE HANDSETS  
BY INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
(Action Taken by  the Government on th e recommendations contained in the 
16th Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha) on 
Special Contingency Policies on Mobile Handsets by Insurance Companies) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.12.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.12.2007 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2007 / Agrahayan 1929(S) 

  
CONTENTS 
  
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-2008)  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  1 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
11 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies.  
15 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee. 
20 
 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
24 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of the sitti ng of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
27 
 
 II   Analysis of the Action Taken by Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 16 th 
Report of Committee on Public Undertakings 
(14th Lok Sabha) on Special Contingency 
Policies on Mobile Handsets by Insurance 
Companies. 
29 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
Chairman 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
4. Shri N.C. Gupta  Deputy Secretary  
5. Shri H. Ram Prakash Under Secretary  
 
 
(iii)

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public  Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit  the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Fourth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in 
the Sixteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Special Contingency Policies on Mobile Handsets by Insurance 
Companies based on Chapter 10 of C&AG’s Report No. 4 (Commercial) of 2005. 
2. The Sixteenth Report of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings (2006-2007) 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 15 December  2006.  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations cont ained in the Report were received on 13 
September 2007.  The Committee on Public  Undertakings considered and adopted 
this Report at their sittings held on 26 th November, 2007. The Minutes of the sitting 
are given in Appendix – I. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 16th Report (2006-07) of the Committee is given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
New Delhi         RUPCHAND PAL  
26 November, 2007             Chairman  
5 Agrahayan, 1929(S)                                   Committee On Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

  
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on Public Undertaki ngs  (2006-2007) on Special Contingency 
Policies on Mobile Handsets by Insurance Companies which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 15th December, 2006 
2. Action Taken notes have been received fr om Government in respect of all 
the 8 recommendations cont ained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3 and 5       (Total 3) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of Government’s replies :(Chapter III) 
Sl. Nos. 1 and 7       (Total 2) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: (Chapter IV) 
Sl. No. 6 and 8       (Total 2) 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited: (Chapter V) 
Sl.No.  4        (Total 1) 
 The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS 
3. The Committee in their Sixteenth Report have recommended as under: - 
“The Committee were informed that out of 1,38,879 claims lodged by 
Reliance Industries under Default Liability Policy (DLP) only 103928 could be 
investigated. The balance 34,000 claims  were not settled because further 
new claims started pouring in. Simila rly many claims filed under handset 
policy could not be investigated. As a result, outstanding claims to tune of 

  
Rs. 31.74 crores under DLP and around Rs.62.80 cr ores under handset 
policy remain unsettled. Besides claims to the tune of Rs. 66.52 crores in 
respect of Default Liability Policy i ssued to Tata Teleservices are still 
outstanding.  
The fact that such huge number of claims  are still outstanding indicate a very 
sorry state of affairs in NICL in the matter of settlement of claims. This is also 
evident from the fact t hat with regard to settlement of claims, CVO’s note 
dated September 5, 2005 inter-alia observed “If the underwriting was bad, 
the claim management was still worse.  No verification was done regarding 
the genuineness of the claims.” The Co mmittee deplore that not only NIC 
failed to investigate all the cases of clai ms which were filed but it also did not 
exercise proper care to check the veracity of such claims. No wonder that 
such callous approach of NIC in settl ement of claims caused huge losses to 
the company.  
The Committee believe that NICL c ould have contained their losses to a 
large extent, if it had done proper clai m investigation. Here the Committee 
would like to refer to the claim investigation done by OIC, in which, out of 
61193 claims lodged for settlement, OICL repudiated around 36728 claims. 
The Committee therefore feel that the responsibility for such acts of omission 
squarely lies with H.O./R.O. of NICL as t hey failed to properly advise Kalyan 
D.O. and initate corrective steps. The committee further note that NICL had 
raised a demand on RIL to repay an amount  of Rs 6.97 cr on claims that 
were wrongly settled. However RIL did not accept NICL ’s contention and 
have not repaid any amount.  This also indicates the undue haste with which 
NICL first settled the claims and sought refund later. 
 The Committee, desire that a thor ough enquiry should be conducted in the 
matter of settlement of claims for fixi ng of responsibility on officials on whose 
behest claims were settled without proper documents. 
 As significant number of claims are still pending, the Committee desire that a 
panel of investigators as directed by  NICL’s Board be formed for proper 
investigation of claims and their settl ement.  Action on this front should be 
time specific and expedited.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress on this issue within the next six months.” 
4. The Government (Ministry of Financ e) in their action taken reply on the 
above recommendation have stated as follows: - 
“NICL has reported that t he matters pertaining to the granting of cover as 
also settlement of claims are the s ubject matter of an investigation being 
conducted by the Economic offences wing of Central Bureau of Investigation, 
Mumbai. 

  
Besides, departmental action have been initiated against three officials of the 
Company.  The report of the Commissi oner of Departmental Inquiries has 
been received and action to be taken on the report is under process. 
The advices of the Central Vig ilance Commission have been sought on 
initiating departmental action against a few other officials. 
As per the Board’s advices, a panel of investigators have been entrusted with 
the task of investigating the Default claims.  Appropriate action shall be taken 
upon receipt of their reports.  NICL shall keep the Committee apprised about 
the progress in this regard."  
 (Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 31.05.2007). 
5. The remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government was as 
follows:- 
As a result of departmental inquiries , NICL has imposed major penalties on 
two officials and minor penalty with recove ry has been imposed on one official.  In 
this connection, the amount so recovered /to be recovered may kindly be intimated 
to Audit. 
 Further course of action on the advice of CVC for major penalty against eight 
officials will be watched in Audit. 
6. The comments of the Mi nistry on the above  mentioned remarks of C&AG is 
as follows::-  
 NICL has reported that the concerned Divisional Office  is in the process of 
working out the amount recove rable out of the incentiv e paid to the Development 
Officer as a result of credit being given fo r the business received from M/s Reliance 
Infocom.  Quantum of the amount re covered will be informed as soon as the 
recovery is effected. 
Further, CBI investigations are still going on in the matter. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 13.09.2007) 
7. Comments of the Committee  
 The Committee in their original report had desired that a thorough 
enquiry should be conducted for fixing of responsibility on officials on whose 
behest claims were settled without proper documents.  Also, the Committee 
wanted NICL to apprise them of the progress made by the panel of 
investigator’s entrusted with the task of investigating the claims. 

  
 The Committee note that regarding th e enquiry against officials, the 
Government have stated that departmental  action have been initiated against 
three officials and advice of CVC has been sought on initiating departmental 
action against a few other officials.  Hence, the Committee would like to treat 
the replies as interim and await the progress and action taken in this regard. 
Regarding settlement of claims th e Committee have been informed that 
NICL shall take appropriate action on receipt of reports from the investigators 
appointed to investigate the claims.  The Committee desire that investigation 
on settlement of claims may be exp edited and the Committee may be 
apprised about the progress in this regard. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
ROLE OF THE THEN CONCERNED CMD OF NICL 
8. The Committee in their Sixteenth Report have recommended with regard to 
the role of the then CMD, NICL as under:- 
“The Committee believe that the exec utive accountability in a commercial 
organization begins with the CMD. From  the audit para, CVO’s note and as 
also Committee’s own examination, t he Committee feel that in the entire 
business beginning from the issue of SC P, settlement of claims, opting for 
ART, lack of reinsurance,  non-invoking of cancellation clause etc., the role 
and conduct of the concerned CMD was far from satisfactory.  
From the CVO’s note of September, 2005, the Committee observe that, the 
then CMD of NICL, was fully aware of the issuance of SCP and he had 
written a letter on 10th 
 
July 2003 to Reliance Infocom Chairman thanking him 
for patronizing NICL and assuring him of  prompt settlement of claims. The 
Committee are highly constrained to note that when the claims were settled 
and losses were mounting, the CMD di d not act to protect the financial 
interests of the Company. He took no steps either to cancel the policy or to 
make proper investigation into settl ement of claims. Further when the 
company was reeling under huge losses on account of single policy, the 
CMD should have brought the matter to the Board’s notice for their 
appropriate direction. However, instead of seeking direction of Board, the 
Committee note that then CM D tried to mislead the Board by seeking ART 
cover and camouflaging it as reinsur ance support. All these facts/points the 
needle of suspicion to the concerned CMD.  

  
Despite the fact that issue of SCP had resulted into huge losses to company 
the Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry did not deem it fit to put 
the CMD on notice and seek explanati on on the issue. The Committee 
strongly believe that without the knowledge of the then CMD, things could not 
have gone thus far. Hence the Committ ee strongly recommend that Ministry 
should prefer CBI to investigate the role  of the then CMD in  the entire issue 
relating to SCP to RIL separately and a report of action taken thereon may 
be given to the Committee.”  
9. The Government (Ministry of Financ e) in their action taken reply on the 
above recommendation have stated as follows:- 
“Chief Vigilance Officer, NICL has in formed that the Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) has registered a case under RC-
10/E/2005/CBI/EOW/Mumbai dated 11th November, 2005 for faulty 
underwriting as well as irregular settlement of claim under two policies issued 
by NICL in favour of Reliance Infocomm.  CBI is conducting investigation 
against the persons who appear to be prim a facie involved in the case. CVO, 
NICL has also informed that, based on the recommendations of the Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC), department al action for major penalty have 
been initiated against the  officials of the National Insurance Company 
Limited involved in the faulty underwriti ng as well as irregular settlement of 
the claims.  Since the case is already  there with CBI, its reference again to 
CBI for investigating the role of the then CMD would not serve any purpose.  
If CBI, during investigation, finds the involvement of the then CMD into any of 
the irregularities, it w ould automatically write to the Government for 
appropriate action.” 
 (Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/ 132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 
31.05.2007). 
10. The remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government was as 
follows:-  
The final outcome of the investigati ons carried out by CBI may kindly be 
intimated in due course. 
11. The comments of the Mini stry on the above  mentioned remarks of C&AG is 
as follows::-  
The final outcome of the investigat ions carried out by the CBI would be 
intimated to the Office of C & AG as and when made available by the CBI. 
 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 13.09.2007) 
 

  
12. Comments of the Committee  
In their original report the Committ ee had observed that in the entire 
business beginning from the issue of SC P, settlement of claims, opting for 
ART, lack of reinsurance, non invoking of  cancellation clause etc, the role 
and conduct of the concerned CMD was far from satisfactory.  The Committee 
had, therefore, strongly recommended that  the Ministry should prefer CBI to 
investigate the role of the then CMD a nd apprise them about the action taken 
thereon.  
The Ministry in their reply have stated that the matter is under 
investigation by CBI and if during the investigation, it finds the involvement of 
then CMD into any of the irregularities then CBI will automatically write to the 
Government for appropriate action.  
The Committee do not accept the reply of  the Ministry as they have not 
acted upon the specific recommendation of  the Committee to investigate the 
role of the then CMD.   Even at the ti me of submission of th eir original report, 
the Committee were very much aware th at CBI was investigating the matter 
for faulty underwriting and irregular settl ement of clams.  However, since the 
needle of suspicion pointed towards th e role of the then CMD in the whole 
issue, the Committee had categorically recommended for special 
investigation  of his role by CBI but unfortunately the reply is unsatisfactory 
and Ministry has failed to act upon it.  The Committee deprecate the Ministry 
for their inaction and reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  

  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
CONTROL AND SUPERVISION BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
13. The Committee in their Sixteenth Report have recommended with regard to 
the Control and Supervision by Ministry as  under:- 
“The Committee note that the National In surance Company Ltd. and Oriental 
Insurance Company Limited come under  the Ministry of Finance. The 
Ministry has two nominees as part-time  Directors in t he Board of these 
companies. As they are non-executiv e positions, these nominees attend 
Board Meetings, which are infrequent  and agenda driven. The Ministry 
reviews their overall financial and physical performance at the end of 
financial year.  
While committee appreciate that by way of functional and financial autonomy 
to PSUs, Ministries should not interfere into their day to day activities they 
feel that Ministries ought not be alt ogether ignorant of such happenings like 
issuance of SCP and consequent losses in Public Sector Undertakings under 
their control. In the extant case, the Committee feel that the response of the 
Ministry to the happenings have been shoddy and apathetic. When the 
Ministry received a complaint from the CVC against the then CMD, NICL, 
they forwarded the same to him for explanation. The Committee are unable 
to understand as to how CMD of a co mpany would send an adverse report 
against himself. This speaks volume of the type of action taken by senior 
officials of the Ministry particularly associated with vigilance matters.  
Further, the Committee are of the view  that the role of the part-time 
Government Directors was merely that of passive listeners as they failed to 
seek any clarification when the issue of approval for ART was discussed in 
the Board Meeting on 12 th June, 2004. The Secretar y (Financial Sectors) 
during his evidence agreed t hat the part-time Government Directors could 
have sought more information on any of the agenda matters placed before 
the Board of NICL as Go vt. nominees. This reflects very poorly on the part-
time Directors occupying the positi on. They   should be aware of the 
responsibilities they discharge as Part -time Directors and also should take 
full cognizance of the fact  that they are represent ing the Government of 
India.  
The Committee, therefor e, feel that present system of control and 
supervision of the PSUs by the Ministry needs to be further strengthened. 
The Committee recommend that the Mi nistry should appoint a group of 
experts to study the weaknesses of t he present system to suggest remedial 
measures for ensuring better supervi sion by the Ministry. The Committee 
further recommend that the feasibility of inducting Independent Directors who 

  
can function without any fear or fav our in the Board of PSU insurance 
companies should also be explored.”  
14. The Ministry of Finance in t heir action taken reply on the above 
recommendation have stated as follows:- 
“Normally, in the case of complaints against the executives / employees of the 
Insurance Companies, as per the proc edure laid down in the CVC Manual, 
Chief Vigilance Officer of the Insurance Company is asked to investigate the 
matter.  In cases where allegations ar e against the CMD of the company, the 
investigation is not entrusted to the CVO of the company as he is subordinate 
to the CMD.  In such cases, fact ual comments are a sked from the CMD 
himself and future course of action is decided accordingly.  In the instant case 
also, the then CMD of NICL was ask ed to provide factual comments on the 
complaint received from the CVC and these were sent to the CVC for 
consideration and further action.  Incidentally, CVC acted upon the comments 
and recommended departmental action  for major penalty against four 
officials  of the company.  Later, CBI took over the matter and investigation 
into claim-settlement and underwriting irregularities is still on. 
 Regarding appointing a group of experts  to study the weaknesses of the 
present system to suggest remedial  measures for ensuring better 
supervision, it may be mentioned that I RDA from time to time deputes the 
experts for carrying out  inspection of  the Insurance Companies.  M/s G.V.R. 
Risk  Management   Associates Pvt.   Limited, Hyderabad were deputed by 
IRDA for carrying out inspection of NI CL during May 9 to June 6, 2005.  The 
report submitted by M/s G.V.R. covered following issues:  
a. Business profile of NIC 
b. Accounting concerns 
c. Intermediaries conduct 
d. Technical conduct of business 
e. Default liability policy and its impact on the company 
f. Financial controls and internal audit system 
g. Corporate governance 
h. Reinsurance management 
i. MACT claims provisions 
   
A proposal for nominating Non-official independent Directors on the Boards 
of the Public Sector Insurers has already been sent to ACC for approval.  
Appointment of these Direc tors would definitely strengthen the Boards of the 
Public Sector Insurance Companies.” 
 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 31.05.2007). 

  
15. The remarks of Office of C&AG on t he Reply of the Government was as 
follows:- 
 The latest status of t he proposal, sent by the Ministry to ACC for approval, 
may kindly be intimated to Audit.  A copy of the findings and recommendations of 
M/s. G.V.R. Risk Management Associates Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad along with the 
status report of action taken on the recommendations may kindly be made available 
to Audit. 
16. The comments of the Ministry on the above mentioned remarks of C&AG is 
as follows:- 
“11 names have been approved by the ACC for appointing Non-official 
independent Directors on the Boards of the public sector insurers and accordingly 
appointment orders have been issued.   
As desired by the Office of C & AG, c opies of the said appointment orders 
and copy of the findings and recommendat ions of M/s. G.V.R. Risk Management 
Associates Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad along with the status report of ac tion taken on the 
recommendations have been sent to the Office of  C & AG vide letter No. 
64/132/2004-OSD-Ins.(Vol.II) dated  29.8.2007.  A copy of the same is enclosed.” 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 13.09.2007) 
 
17. Comments of the Committee  
While analyzing the role of Mini stry regarding the control and 
supervision on Insurance Companies, th e Committee in their original report 
had recommended that the Ministry s hould appoint a group of experts to 
study the weaknesses of the present system and to suggest remedial 
measures for ensuring better superv ision and control.  However, the 
Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry has not taken any action in 
this regard.   
The Committee do not agree with th e contention of the Ministry as 
inspection carried out by experts deput ed by IRDA does not cover the aspect  
of supervision and control by Ministry.  The very fact that inspite of IRDA’s 
inspection such types of irregularities took place shows that there is a need 
to make the inspection system by IRDA experts more fool-proof. The 
Committee therefore, reiterate that the present system of control and 
supervision by the Ministry needs to be strengthened. They therefore desire 

  
that the Ministry should appoint an  expert group to study and suggest 
measures to strengthen the control and s upervision of the Ministry over the 
insurance companies.   
Regarding the induction of independe nt Directors in the Board of 
Insurance Companies, the Committee note that appointment orders have 
been issued.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made 
in this regard.  

  
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
REINSURANCE PROTECTION FOR SCP 
 The Committee have been informed that  the Insurance Companies have 
Reinsurance Departments which decide on the Reinsurance arrangements to be 
made by the Company.  The Reinsuranc e arrangements in respect of standard 
policies are well laid down. 
 The Committee note that before i ssuing the mobile handset and default 
liability policies, NIC did not carry out any  exercise to evaluate the risks associated 
with the policy.  As the SCP’s policies were being given for the first time in the 
country, the Committee feel that the NICL ought to have checked for the availability 
of reinsurance protection.  The Commi ttee do not agree with the contention that 
NICL did not check for Reinsurance before the issue of the policy, considering the 
low value per Handsets.  As the aggregate risk amou nts covered under the two 
policies are Rs. 4931 crores under Handset  Policy and Rs. 4981 crores under 
Default Policy, the Committee feel that it was imperative on the part of NICL to have 
arranged for reinsurance. 
 The Committee highly deplore the inacti on on the part of H.O. officials to 
arrange for reinsurance of SCP.  Had the  Reinsurance Division properly evaluated 
risk involved in issuance of SCP in ques tion and taken Reinsurance cover before 
the issue of policy, the colossal losses to the Company could have been avoided.  
The Committee recommend that before issui ng any policy in future NICL should 
make proper assessment of risk involved in the policy and take adequate steps for 
reinsurance cover. 
 The Committee therefore strongly reco mmend that such guidelines should be 
amended so as to make reinsurance mandatory for SCPs also. 
Reply of the Government 
Special Contingency Policies are issued to  meet the specia l requirements of 
a client which are not met by Standard Insurance Policie s.  Covering of Events, 
Mobile equipments, Cameras, Electroni c Testing equipment etc.  have been the 
subject matter of Special Contingency Polic ies. NICL has cent ralized the authority 
to accept SCPs at Head office.  Utmost care is taken to ensure that no risk is 
accepted beyond its retention lim its.  Wherever it is felt necessary and beyond the 
retention limit, adequate Facultative Reinsurance support is arranged. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 31.05.2007). 
 

  
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
There are no remarks to offer. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
No further comments to offer. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 13.09.2007) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
CANCELLATION CLAUSE IN THE SCP 
 The Committee note that in the MOU signed on December, 2002 between 
NICL and RIL for SCP covering handsets all risks, the MOU contained a condition 
that either side might cancel the policy by giving seven days notice in writing. 
 After the policy came into force, the Committee note that within a short time, 
the NIC got huge claims.  In view of large claims and huge amount involved for 
settlement the Committee are surprised that NICL had not thought it fit to invoke the 
cancellation clause provided for in the policy even after the claims ratio was 
becoming worse.  The Committee are not convinced with the reply of NICL that 90% 
of the total premium was already received in the first year and hence, cancellation 
clause was not invoked.  Even the Ministry  of Finance has expressed the view that 
the Company ought to have cancelled t he policy by invoking the cancellation 
clause.  The Committee, therefore, deplore their actions of NICL for not invoking the 
cancellation clause despite the fact that claim ratio exceeded to alarming 
proportions. 
 The Committee also note that in the default liability policy, Reliance wanted 
to protect their financial interest and hence did not want any cancellation clause to 
be incorporated.  The Committee strongly opine that PSU Insurance Companies like 
NICL should instead of yielding to t he demands of customers protect their 
commercial interest too. 
Reply of the Government 
  National Insurance Company Limited has reported that it has noted the 
advice of the Committee regarding not yi elding to the unreasonable demands of 
customers and protecting  its commercial interest too. 
 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 31.05.2007). 
 

  
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
 NICL has not so far issued any specific  guidelines in this regard to operating 
offices/divisions in Head Office.  Moreover, NICL has not devised any mechanism to 
ensure that Company’s interest will not be compromised while deciding the terms 
and conditions of the ‘SCPs’ in future. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 NICL has reported t hat the authority to issue cover under Special 
Contingency Policies is now vested solely with the head office.  A copy of Master 
Circular No. CMD-0708-020-Mis-003 dated 11. 9.07 issued by the head office of 
NICL to all Regional Offices is enclosed. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 13.09.2007) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
ALTERNATE RISK TRANSFER (ART) 
 The Committee note that as SCP policie s were not covered by Reinsurance 
Protection, the Company had to bear the brunt on the financial front due to the large 
outgo of funds on the settlement of claim.   Having understood the implications of 
such outgo of funds on its financial perfo rmance, NIC looked for Alternate Risk 
Transfer (ART) to smoothen the balance sheet of the Company. 
 The Committee note that unlike reinsur ance where risk is covered Alternate 
Risk Transfer is an arrangement of risk- financing and not risk-sharing.  The 
Committee take strong exception to NIC’s attempt to mislead them as also their 
Board which is evident from the fact t hat in their agenda paper of Board Meeting 
held on 12 June 2004, ART was camouflaged as  an reinsurance protection.  The 
Committee would also like to reprimand the Board of Directo rs of NICL for failing to 
seek proper justification for ART before granting approval for ART. 
 The Committee strongly believe that  happening of this nature do not augur 
well for Public Sector Insurance Co mpanies.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should impr ess upon all public sector insurance 
companies that they should refrain from resorting to ART in a casual manner. 
Reply of the Government 
  While National has confirmed having taken not e of the recommendations of 
the Committee for future guidance, ‘ Oriental Insurance Company Limited’   
‘United India Insurance Company Limited ‘ and  ‘ New India Assurance 
Company Limited’ have confirmed that they have never resorted to the ART of the 
sort subscribed by NICL.  Ministry has al ready issued necessary instructions to all 
the Companies. 
 (Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 31.05.2007). 

  
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
There are no further remarks to offer. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
No further comments to offer. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 13.09.2007) 
 

  
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
POWER TO ISSUE SPECIAL CONTINGENCY POLICY (SCP) 
 The Committee note that NICL issued two policies under Special 
Contingency Policies (SCPs), namely, Hands et all risks cover and Default liability 
policy to Reliance Industries Limited.  As  per audit Default liability policy was also 
issued to Tata Teleservices Limited.  These policies were issued during the year 
from 2002-04. 
 The Committee were informed that S pecial Contingency Policies (SCP) are 
issued by the Insurance Companies, w hen covers are not available under any 
existing standard policies.  Normally SCP’s are issued for events like art exhibitions, 
cultural programmes, cricket matches, etc.  which are specific event related.  
However, the Committee are surprised that  NICL resorted to issue of SCP for 
covering mobile handsets which do not fall under the above categories of activities. 
 The Committee were also informed that the power to iss ue the SCP does not 
lie with either the Divisional Office (D.O.) or Regional Office (R.O.) and all SCPs are 
referred to Head Office before acceptance of  the proposal.  In the extant case 
Committee note that the Head Office (H.O.) did not exercise proper due diligence 
when the D.O. / R.O. sent the proposal to them for approval.  The Committee regret 
to note that without fully analyzing the implications of the policy, the H.O. 
communicated to Mumbai Regional Office t hat as the maximum value per Handset 
was within their acceptance limits they may take an appropriate decision in the 
matter.   
As the number of handsets to be covered were approximately 50 lakhs and 
the aggregate risk was about Rs. 4931 crore fo r Handset policy and Rs. 4981 crore 
for Default liability policy, the Committee strongly feel that the stand of H.O. to allow 
Kalyan D.O. to take appropriate decision in  the matter was not proper and in their 
opinion, it reflects nothing but their evasive attitude. 
 The Committee understand t hat the proposal for the policies covering the 
mobile handsets from RIL and for default liability were received by all the PSU 
insurers.  However, only National Insurance Company Limited (NIC) and Oriental 
Insurance Company Limited (OICL) acc epted the proposal and other PSU insurers 
did not agree for the same as they consider ed it to be a very risky venture.  As no 
such policy had been issued both before and a fter the issue of extant SCP, the 
Committee would like to conclude that the NICL acted with undue haste without fully 
assessing the risk involved and anticipating the claims that could be lodged. 

  
 The issue of SCP and settlement of claims without proper scrutiny, is 
indicative of lack of accountability and failu re of supervisory mechanism in NICL.  
The Committee recommend that the Minist ry / NICL should take appropriate 
remedial measures to strengthen internal controls and supervisory mechanisms so 
that, instances of this kind do not recur in future. 
 In view of the above the Committee re commend that Ministry of Finance in 
consultation with IRDA should amend the gui delines suitably so as to plug the 
loopholes in the issuance of Special Contingency Policies and tailor-made Policies 
to the customers in future. 
Reply of the Government 
National Insurance Company Limited (NICL) has reported that till September, 
2004, its Regional Offices had limited author ity to issue Special Contingency 
Policies (SCP).  Following the events perta ining to the covers granted to Reliance 
Industries, NICL has withdr awn this authority and the power to grant cover under 
SCPs now vests with the Head office. 
Special Contingency Policies are issued to  meet the specia l requirements of 
a client which are not met by Standard Insurance Policie s.  Covering of Events, 
Mobile equipments, Cameras, Electroni c Testing equipment etc.  have been the 
subject matter of Special Contingency Policies. 
NICL has subsequently not granted any such  Default covers.  NICL has also 
centralized the Authority to grant cove rs under SCPs at Head Office.  Such 
proposals are referred to Head Office in a format designed to elicit the relevant 
information.  While deciding upon acceptance of  and pricing of cover,  the probable 
maximum loss due to a single event and  the aggregate losses during the policy 
period are  kept in mind and limits put thereon wherever warranted. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II ) dated 31.05.2007) 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 Notwithstanding above, the fact remains that Ministry of Finance did not 
consult IRDA to amend the guidelines so as to plug the loopholes in the issuance of 
‘Special Contingency Policies’. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 To plug the loopholes, the National In surance Company Limited has already 
centralized the Authority to issue SCPs. 
 The Insurance Regulatory and Developm ent Authority (IRDA) was consulted 
in the context of guidelines for SCP and as  per their opinion, the Insurance Policies 
including SCPs are developed and issued as  per the broad underwriting policy 
which is approved by the respective Boards of the Companies.  Further, with the de-
tariffing of non-life insurance business effective from 1 st January, 2007, 

  
considerable freedom has been granted to in surance companies, both in the public 
sector and in the private sector in the matter of framing and prici ng of products.  As 
per revised ‘File & Use’ guidelines in respect of products designed for individual 
clients, there is no requirement for the insurer to file such products. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 13.09.2007) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
The Committee note that Oriental Insurance Company Limited also 
underwrote the default liability policy of RIL as was done by NICL. They insured 
17.10 lakhs handsets under default liability po licy (DLP). The Committee regret to 
note that the OICL without carrying out in -house assessment with regard to pros 
and cons of SCPs, underwrote the policy mainly because NICL had already issued 
a similar policy and also in order to gain entry into the business of Reliance 
Industries Ltd.  
The Committee have been informed t hat OICL had expected default of 
around 2% of the total number of connections  issued in the instant case wherein 
17.5 lakh handsets were insured. Claims settled by OICL were 24,465 only which 
are less than 2%. The Committee wonder  why even though default was less than 
anticipated 2% yet OICL incurred losses which shows that at the time of issuance of 
SCP proper assessment in fixing the premium was not done. Had OICL fixed the 
premium as per the perceived risk losses altogether could have been avoided.  
OICL has justified the issuance of SCP on the ground that the overall 
business portfolio was profitable even t hough this particular policy had incurred 
losses The committee however find that i ssue of SCP to gain entry into the 
business of RIL is against GIPSA guidelines  which says that each policy should be 
treated separately and cross-subsidisati on is not permissible. The Committee 
deplore the action of OICL for underwriti ng a business knowing fully well that 
particular business will bring losses to the company. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the PSUs are to function as  commercially viable business and they 
should focus on strong business models fo r the long term rather than achieving 
growth through short-term methods. 
Reply of the Government 
  The Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OICL) has submitted adequate 
statistical details in s upport of its decision of underwriting SCP for handset along 
with other profitable portfolio of the client.  However, the final results show that more 
precautions are required to be taken in future.  The tendency to grab business 
should be replaced by sound principl es of underwriting where each risk per se is 
evaluated and rated. The company  agrees with the final remarks of the Committee 
that PSUs are to function as commercia lly viable business and they should focus 
business models for the long term rather than achieving growth through short-term 

  
methods. OICL has further submitted that  claims have been properly handled by it 
with thorough investigation and there is no excess payment or under charge pointed 
out by   C & AG necessitating further follow-up of any recovery. 
OICL has further reported that it has  taken the following precautions in 
underwriting SCP: 
a. OICL has not undertaken any poli cy on mobile handsets after the above 
mentioned SCP (Mobile Handset Default Liability); 
b. The rating of the SCP covering vari ous elements of Insurance should be 
commensurate with the risk involved; 
c. Standard clauses e.g. cancellati on clause, subrogation clause, under-
Insurance clause should be used; 
d. Policy should be accepted by the Regi onal Office if they have an experience 
of similar policy in the past otherwise Head Office’s approval should be 
taken; 
e. Only after ensuring Placement of Rein surance, if required,  the policy should 
be issued 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 31.05.2007). 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
 As has been observed by the Committ ee, the amount of premium was not 
commensurate with the quantum  of risks covered under SCP.  Further, the policy 
was issued without adequate investigation and safeguards. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OICL) has submitted that: 
i. At the time of underwriting the above policy – Special Contingency Policy 
(Default Liability Policy), it was gather ed that the default rate under the 
mobile telephones was around 2% of the total number of connections.  In the 
above case, the total number of connections underwritten were 17.5 lacs and 
the total number of claims settled were  24465 which is only 1.4% i.e. less 
than expected default of 2%. 
ii. The Special Contingency Policy being a non tariff policy therefore rate for 
such non tariff policies are decided keepi ng in view of other tariff business 
expected from the clients and overall expected claim exper ience jointly for 
tariff business and no tariff business. 
iii. In the year 2002-03, ‘Oriental’ wa s having profitable fire and engineering 
premium of Rs. 12.61 crores only and after underwriting of the above 

  
mentioned Special Contingency (Default Liability) Policy, OICL got increased 
fire and engineering premium equal to Rs. 44.85 crores. 
Against a premium of 17.03 crores  under the above Special Contingency 
Policy, OICL settled claims including inve stigation charges amounting to Rs. 
28.13 crores but overall claim experience under Fire & Engg. and this 
Special Contingency Policy was only 44. 88%.  Therefore, the decision to 
issue the Special Contingency Policy (Default Liability) alongwith other 
profitable fire and engineering insurances proved correct. 
iv. “Oriental” conducted full investigations of the claims lodged and as a result of 
the investigation, 36720 claims am ounting to Rs. 38.56 crores were 
repudiated.  So, while dealing with the claims, all safeguards were used and 
all claims were investigated through an outside agency and based on their 
findings, claims were paid or repudiated. 
OICL, therefore, reiterates that  the above Special Contingency Policy 
(Default Liability) Policy being a non tariff, was evaluated keeping in mind 
getting other profitable Fire and Engineer ing premium which came out to be 
true as the overall claim experience was only 44.8%. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 13.09.2007)

  
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
ROLE OF THE THEN CONCERNED CMD OF NICL 
The Committee believe that the exec utive accountability in a commercial 
organization begins with the CMD. From the audit para, CVO’s note and as also 
Committee’s own examination, the Committ ee feel that in the entire business 
beginning from the issue of SCP, settlement of claims, opting for ART, lack of 
reinsurance, non-invoking of cancellation clause etc., the role and conduct of the 
concerned CMD was far from satisfactory.  
From the CVO’s note of September, 2005, the Committee observe that, the 
then CMD of NICL, was fully  aware of the issuance of SCP and he had written a 
letter on 10th 
 
July 2003 to Reliance Infocom Chairman thanking him for patronizing 
NICL and assuring him of prompt settlem ent of claims. The Committee are highly 
constrained to note that w hen the claims were settled and losses were mounting, 
the CMD did not act to protect the financial interests of the Company. He took no 
steps either to cancel the policy or to ma ke proper investigation into settlement of 
claims. Further when the company was r eeling under huge losses on account of 
single policy, the CMD should have brought the matter to the Board’s notice for their 
appropriate direction. However, instead of seeking direction of Board, the 
Committee note that then CMD tried to mi slead the Board by seeking ART cover 
and camouflaging it as reinsurance suppor t. All these facts/poi nts the needle of 
suspicion to the concerned CMD.  
Despite the fact that issue of SCP had resulted into huge losses to company 
the Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry did not deem it fit to put the 
CMD on notice and seek explanation on the i ssue. The Committee strongly believe 
that without the knowledge of the then CMD, things coul d not have gone thus far. 
Hence the Committee strongly recommend t hat Ministry should prefer CBI to 
investigate the role of t he then CMD in the entire issue relating to SCP to RIL 
separately and a report of action taken thereon may be given to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Chief Vigilance Officer, NICL has informed that the C entral Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI)  has registered a case under RC-10/E/2005/CBI/EOW/Mumbai 
dated  11
th November, 2005 for faulty underwriting as well as irregular settlement of 
claim under two policies issued by NICL in favour of Reliance Infocomm.  CBI is 
conducting investigation against the persons  who appear to be prima facie involved 
in the case. CVO, NICL has also info rmed that, based on the recommendations of 

  
the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC),  departmental action for major penalty 
have been initiated against the  officials of  the National Insurance Company Limited 
involved in the faulty underwriting as well as irregular settlement of the claims.  
Since the case is already there with CBI, it s reference again to CBI for investigating 
the role of the then CMD would not serve any purpose.  If CBI, during investigation, 
finds the involvement of the then CMD into  any of the irregularities, it would 
automatically write to the Government for appropriate action. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 31.05.2007). 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
 The final outcome of the investigat ions carried out by CBI may kindly be 
intimated in due course. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
The final outcome of the investigat ions carried out by the CBI would be 
intimated to the Office of C&AG as and when made available by the CBI. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II)  dated 13.09.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph 12 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
CONTROL AND SUPERVISION BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
The Committee note that the National In surance Company Ltd. and Oriental 
Insurance Company Limited come under the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry has 
two nominees as part-time Directors in the Board of these compan ies. As they are 
non-executive positions, these nominees  attend Board Meetings, which are 
infrequent and agenda driven. The Ministry reviews their overall financial and 
physical performance at the end of financial year.  
While committee appreciate that by way of functional and financial autonomy 
to PSUs, Ministries should not interfere into their day to day activities they feel that 
Ministries ought not be altogether ignorant of such happenings like issuance of SCP 
and consequent losses in Public Sector U ndertakings under their control. In the 
extant case, the Committee feel that the response of the Ministry to the happenings 
have been shoddy and apathetic. When the Minist ry received a complaint from the 
CVC against the then CMD, NICL, they forw arded the same to him for explanation. 
The Committee are unable to understand as to how CMD of a company would send 
an adverse report against himself. This spea ks volume of the type of action taken 
by senior officials of the Ministry particularly associated with vigilance matters.  

  
Further, the Committee are of the view  that the role of the part-time 
Government Directors was merely that of passive listeners as they failed to seek 
any clarification when the issue of approval for ART was discussed in the Board 
Meeting on 12th June, 2004. The Secretary (Financ ial Sectors) during his evidence 
agreed that the part-time Government Directors could have sought more information 
on any of the agenda matters placed before t he Board of NICL as Govt. nominees. 
This reflects very poorly on the part-time Directors occupying the position. They   
should be aware of the responsibilities they  discharge as Part-time Directors and 
also should take full cognizance of the fact that they are representing the 
Government of India.  
The Committee, therefor e, feel that present system of control and 
supervision of the PSUs by the Minist ry needs to be further strengthened. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry shoul d appoint a group of experts to study 
the weaknesses of the pres ent system to suggest remedial measures for ensuring 
better supervision by the Ministry. T he Committee further recommend that the 
feasibility of inducting Independent Directors who can function wit hout any fear or 
favour in the Board of PSU insurance companies should also be explored.  
Reply of the Government 
Normally, in the case of complaints against the executives / employees of the 
Insurance Companies, as per the procedur e laid down in the CVC Manual, Chief 
Vigilance Officer of the Insurance Company is  asked to investigate the matter.  In 
cases where allegations are against the CM D of the company, th e investigation is 
not entrusted to the CVO of the company as he is subordinate to the CMD.  In such 
cases, factual comments are asked from the CMD himself and future course of 
action is decided accordingly.  In the inst ant case also, the then CMD of NICL was 
asked to provide factual comments on t he complaint received from the CVC and 
these were sent to the CVC for consider ation and further action.  Incidentally, CVC 
acted upon the comments and recommended departmental action  for major penalty 
against four officials  of the company.  Later, CBI took over the matter and 
investigation into claim-settlement and underwriting irregularities is still on. 
 Regarding appointing a group of experts  to study the weaknesses of the 
present system to suggest remedial measures for ensuring better supervision, it 
may be mentioned that IRDA from time to time deputes the experts for carrying out  
inspection of the Insurance Compani es.  M/s G.V.R. Risk  Management   
Associates Pvt.   Limited, Hyderabad were deputed by IRDA for carrying out 
inspection of NICL during May 9 to June 6, 2005.  The report submitted by M/s 
G.V.R. covered following issues:  
a. Business profile of NIC 
b. Accounting concerns 
c. Intermediaries conduct 
d. Technical conduct of business 

  
e. Default liability policy and its impact on the company 
f. Financial controls and internal audit system 
g. Corporate governance 
h. Reinsurance management 
i. MACT claims provisions 
  A proposal for nominating Non-offici al independent Directors on the Boards 
of the Public Sector Insurers has already been sent to ACC for approval.  
Appointment of these Directors would defin itely strengthen the Boards of the Public 
Sector Insurance Companies. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 31.05.2007). 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
 The latest status of t he proposal, sent by the Ministry to ACC for approval, 
may kindly be intimated to Audit.  A copy of the findings and recommendations of 
M/s. G.V.R. Risk Management Associates Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad along with the 
status report of action taken on the recommendations may kindly be made available 
to Audit. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
11 names have been approved by the ACC for appointing Non-official 
independent Directors on the Boards of the public sector insurers and accordingly 
appointment orders have been issued.   
As desired by the Office of C & AG, c opies of the said appointment orders 
and copy of the findings and recommendat ions of M/s. G.V.R. Risk Management 
Associates Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad along with t he status report of action taken on the 
recommendations have been sent to the Office of C & AG vide letter No. 
64/132/2004-OSD-Ins.(Vol.II) dated  29.8.2007.  A copy of the same is enclosed. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 13.09.2007) 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph no. 17 of Chapter I. 

  
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS 
The Committee were informed that out of 1,38,879 claims lodged by 
Reliance Industries under Default Liability Policy (DLP) only 103928 could be 
investigated. The balance 34,000 claims were not settled because further new 
claims started pouring in. Similarly many claims filed under handset policy could not 
be investigated. As a resu lt, outstanding claims to tune of Rs. 31.74 crores under 
DLP and around Rs.62.80 crores  under handset policy remain unsettled. Besides 
claims to the tune of Rs. 66. 52 crores in respect of Default Liability Policy issued to 
Tata Teleservices are still outstanding.  
The fact that such huge number of claims  are still outstanding indicate a very 
sorry state of affairs in NICL in the matte r of settlement of claims. This is also 
evident from the fact that  with regard to settlement of  claims, CVO’s note dated 
September 5, 2005 inter-alia observed “If the underwrit ing was bad, the claim 
management was still worse. No verification was done regarding the genuineness 
of the claims.” The Committee deplore that not only NIC failed to investigate all the 
cases of claims which were filed but it also did not exercise proper care to check the 
veracity of such claims. No wonder that such callous approach of NIC in settlement 
of claims caused huge losses to the company.  
The Committee believe that NICL could have contained their losses to a large 
extent, if it had done proper claim investi gation. Here the Committee would like to 
refer to the claim investigation done by OIC, in which, out of 61193 claims lodged 
for settlement, OICL repudiated around 36728 claims. The Committee therefore feel 
that the responsibility for such acts of omission squarely lies with H.O./R.O. of NICL 
as they failed to properly advise Kaly an D.O. and initate corrective steps. The 
committee further note that NICL had ra ised a demand on RIL to  repay an amount 
of Rs 6.97 cr on claims that were wrongly settled. However RIL did not accept. 
Reply of the Government 
NICL has reported that the matters pertaining to the granting of cover as also 
settlement of claims are the subject ma tter of an investigation being conducted by 
the Economic offences wing of Central Bureau of Investigation, Mumbai. 
Besides, departmental action have been initiated against three officials of the 
Company.  The report of the Commissioner  of Departmental Inquiries has been 
received and action to be taken on the report is under process. 
The advices of the Central Vig ilance Commission have been sought on 
initiating departmental action against a few other officials. 

  
As per the Board’s advices, a panel of investigators have been entrusted with 
the task of investigating the Default clai ms.  Appropriate action shall be taken upon 
receipt of their reports.  NICL shall keep the Committee apprised about the progress 
in this regard.  
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 31.05.2007). 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government. 
As a result of departmental inquiries , NICL has imposed major penalties on 
two officials and minor penalty with recove ry has been imposed on one official.  In 
this connection, the amount so recovered /to be recovered may kindly be intimated 
to Audit. 
 Further course of action on the advic e of CVC for major penalty against eight 
officials will be watched in Audit. 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 NICL has reported that the concerned Divisional Office  is in the process of 
working out the amount recove rable out of the incentiv e paid to the Development 
Officer as a result of credit being given fo r the business received from M/s Reliance 
Infocom.  Quantum of the amount reco vered will be informed as soon as the 
recovery is effected. 
Further, CBI investigations are still going on in the matter. 
(Ministry of Finance O.M.No.64/132/2004-OSD-Ins. (Vol.II) dated 13.09.2007) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph 7 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi         RUPCHAND PAL  
26 November, 2007             Chairman  
5 Agrahayan, 1929(S)                                 Committee On Public Undertakings 

  
 
COPU MATTER 
 
NO.F.64/132/04-OSD-Ins.(Vol.II) 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
DEPTT. OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 
INSURANCE DIVISION 
  
3rd Floor, Jeevan Vihar, 
Parliament Street, 
New Delhi:  29.08.07 
To, 
 
Sh. Gurveen S. Chophy, 
Asstt. Comptroller & Auditor General (Commercial), 
Office of the Comprtoller and Auditor General of India, 
10, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
New Delhi-110002. 
  
Subject: Committee on Public Undertakings – Sixteenth Report on Special 
contingency Policies on mobile handsets. 
 
Sir, 
  
   Please refer to your letter No . 485-CA-III/KOL II/MIP/COPU/26-2006/Vol.II 
dated 21.8.2007 on the above noted subject.   
 
2. It is stated that action on the vetti ng remarks of the Office of CAG on the 
Action Taken Report is being taken by this Department. 
 
3. With regard to vetting remarks on Recommendation No.8 i.e. Control and 
Supervision by Ministry of Finance,  11 names have been approved by the ACC for 
appointment as Part time Non-official Direc tors on the Boards of  Directors of the 
public sector insurers and accordingl y appointment orders have been issued on 
27.8.2007 vide Order No. 14/7/ 2003-Ins.IV.  Copies of the appointment orders and 
the findings and recommendations of M/s G.V.R. Risk Management Associates Pvt. 
Limited, Hyderabad alongwith the Stat us Report of Action Taken on the 
recommendations by NICL are forwarded herewith as desired.    
      
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
Sd/- 
(LALIT KUMAR) 
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India 
  
Encl: As above. 

  
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 26th NOVEMBER, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1620 hours.  
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3 Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4 Shri Francis K. George 
5 Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
7 Shri Shriniwas Patil 
8 Shri Kashiram Rana 
 
 Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Ajay Maroo 
10 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
11 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
 
 
 Secretariat 
 
1 Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2 Shri J.P. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
4 Shri N.C. Gupta  - Deputy Secretary 
5 Shri Ajay Kumar - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1 Shri A.K. Awasthi  Director General (Commercial) 
2 Shri Naveen Kumar  Principal Director (Commercial) 
  
 
 
    

  
2.   XXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX 
 
3. XXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the 16 th Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings pertaining to Specia l Contingency Policies on Mobile Handsets 
by Insurance Companies. The Committee adopted the Report without any changes 
 
5.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
********** 

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Sixteent h Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Special Contingency Policies on Mobile 
Handsets by Insurance Companies”. 
 
I Total number of recommendations  8 
lI  Recommendations that  have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2,3 and 5  
Percentage of total  
3 
 
37.5% 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1and 7 
Percentage of total  
2 
 
25 % 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 6 and 8     
Percentage of total 
 
2  
25% 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited Sl.No. 4  
Percentage of total 
1 
12.5% 
 
 
 