 
22
C.P.U. No. 912 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
COAL INDIA LIMITED  
 
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
(Action Taken by  the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the 15th Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (14 th Lok Sabha) 
on Coal India Limited) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.11.2007 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.11.2007 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2007 / Agrahayana 1929(S) 

  
CONTENTS 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-2008)  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  1 
 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
21 
 
 
 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies.  
 
33 
 
 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee. 
 
48 
 
 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
53 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 I  Minutes of the sitti ng of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
  
61 
 
 II   Analysis of the Action Taken by Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 15 th 
Report of Committee on Public Undertakings 
(14th Lok Sabha) on Coal India Limited. 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2007-2008) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramdas Bandu Athawale 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Francis K. George 
7. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
8. Ch. Lal Singh 
9. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
10. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasada,  
12. Shri Kashiram Rana 
13. Shri Mohan Rawale 
14. Shri Ramjilal Suman 
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Mahendra Mohan 
19 Shri Ajay Maroo 
20 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
21 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
22 Shri Dinesh Trivedi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary - II 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal  Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
(iii) 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on P ublic Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Second Report on Action Tak en by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteent h Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Coal India Limited. 
 
2. The Fifteenth Report of the Co mmittee on Public Undertakings (2006-
2007) was presented to Lok Sabha on 11 th December, 2006.  Action Taken 
Replies of the Government to the recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 7.5.2007.  The Committee on Public Undertakings considered and 
adopted this Report at their sittings held on 11 October, 2007. The Minutes of the 
sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action tak en by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 15 th Report (2006-07) of  the Committee is 
given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL, 
11 October, 2007      Chairman, 
Aswina, 1929(S)           Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

  
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committ ee on Public Undertakings  (2006-2007) 
on Coal India Limited which was presented to Lok Sabha on 11 th December, 
2006 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received fr om Government in respect of all 
the 21 recommendations contained in t he Report.  These have been categorized 
as follows : 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations t hat have been accepted by the  
Government : (Chapter II) 
 
Sl. Nos. 2,7, 9,12,14, and 17    (Total 6) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies :(Chapter III) 
 
Sl. Nos. 3, 4,5,8,10,16 and 21    (Total 7) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accept ed by the Committee : (Chapter 
IV) 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 6 and 19      (Total 3) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the  Government are still awaited : (Chapter V) 
 
Sl.Nos.  11,13,15,18, and 20    (Total 5) 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 1) 
 
4. Regarding vacancies on the Board of Dir ectors of CIL and its subsidiaries, 
the Committee in their 15th Report recommended as follows: 
 
 As per the prescribed composition of the Board of Directors of the CIL, there 
is a provision of three Non-official Directors. The Committee however, note that 
there have been no Non-official Directors on CIL's Board for the last 4 years 
beginning from 2002-03. Similarly, few posts of non-official Directors are also lying 

  
vacant in the subsidiaries of CIL. Regar ding the reasons for these vacancies, the 
Committee have been informed that the appointm ent of Non-official Directors is 
done on the basis of recommendations made by Public Enterprise Selection' Board 
(PESB) through Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) by way of selection 
amongst public men, technocrats, m anagement experts, consultants and 
professional managers in industry and trade with high degree of proven ability. The 
Committee have also been informed that DPE have recently recommended a list of 
names, company-wise, for appointment as non-official Directors on the Board of 
Directors of CIL and its eight subsidiaries (5 each for Coal India Limited, Eastern 
Coalfields Limited, Bharat Coking Coal Limited, Central Coalfields Limited, 
Northern Coalfields Limited, Western C oalfields Limited and Coal Mines Planning 
and Development Institute Limited and 4 each for South Eastern Coalfields Limited 
and Mahanadi Coalfields Limited). Thus, action to induct the non-official Directors 
on the Boards of CIL and it s subsidiaries has reportedly been initiated. The 
Committee have been further apprised that vac ancies of non-official Directors in 
the Board has not substantially affected the decisions work of the Board of 
Directors. The Committee wonder as to how  the functions sought to be performed 
by the non-official Directors are bei ng actually managed in  the CIL and its 
subsidiaries in their absence. Further , no information has been brought to the 
notice of the Committee which may suggest that any serious efforts have been 
made/are being made by the Government to fill up the vacant pos t during the last 
four years. 
 
The Committee are not at all satisf ied with the above-mentioned reply of 
the Ministry. In the opinion of the Committ ee, by not filling up t he vacant posts of 
non-official Directors for four years, the Board has been depriv ed of the services 
of persons who are expert in the fiel d of management, industry and trade. The 
Committee express their displeasure ov er the lackadaisical attitude of the 
Government in filling up the vacancie s of non-official Directors whose 
significance in running the organization require no special mention. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all out  efforts must be made by 
the Government for filling up the remaini ng vacancies of non-official Directors on 
the Boards of CIL and its subsidiaries  without any further loss of time. The 
Committee further recommend that a mechani sm should be put in place wherein 
a specific time limit is prescribed for f illing up the vacancies for each category of 
posts on Board of Directors and action mu st be initiated in advance for filling up 
the forthcoming vacancies which are generally known in advance. 
 
5. In their action taken reply to t he recommendation of the Committee, the 
Government have stated as follows : 
 
 Department of Public Enterprises vide their OM dated 13.12.2005 
recommended a list of names, company-wise, for appointment as non-official 
Directors on the Board of Directors of CI L and its eight subsidiaries (5 each for 
Coal India Limited, Eastern Coalfields Limited, Bharat Coking Coal Limited, 
Central Coalfields Limited, Northern C oalfields Limited, Western Coalfields 

  
Limited and Coal Mines Planning and Devel opment Institute Limited and 4 each 
for South Eastern Coalfields Limited and Mahanadi Coalfields Limited). Although 
the process for appointment of the per sons recommended by DPE was initiated 
immediately it could not be completed wit hin one year. It took time in obtaining 
the declarations from the recommended per sons since the current addresses of 
many nominees were not available.  After obtaining the required declarations and 
approval of the Minister of State (Coal), a proposal for appointment of non-official 
part-time Directors on the Board of Dir ectors of Coal India Limited and its 
subsidiaries was submitted to the D eptt. of Personnel and Training. The DoPT, 
however, have returned the proposal stat ing that the recommendations made by 
DPE on 13.12.2005 are valid only for a year and as such need to be revalidated.  
 
The Deptt. of Public Enterprises have, therefore, been requested to 
revalidate the names recommended by DPE vide their aforesaid OM and also to 
recommend two new names for appointment on ECL Board in place of those who 
have declined the offer. The DPE vide t heir OM dated 28.02.2007 have informed 
that the matter of revalidation has been referred by them to PESB for their 
consideration. As soon as a revalidated panel   is received from DPE, a revised 
proposal would be submitted to the DoP&T  for obtaining approval of ACC and 
subsequent induction of non-official Directo rs on the various boards  of CIL and 
its subsidiaries. The matter is being purs ued for early appointment  of non-official 
Directors. 
 
Once non-official Directors are inducted this time on the boards of CIL and 
its subsidiaries, advance action would, t hereafter, be initiated for filling up the 
forthcoming vacancies well before the completion of their tenure. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
6. The Committee while taking a seri ous note of the unfilled posts of 
non-official Directors on CIL’s Board ly ing vacant for the last four years as 
well as some similar posts lying vacant in subsidiaries of CIL, made the 
following recommendations in their Original Report: - 
(i) All out efforts must be made by the Government for filling up the 
remaining vacancies of non-official  Directors on the Boards of 
CIL and its subsidiaries without any further loss of time.  
(ii) A mechanism should be put in place wherein a specific time limit 
is prescribed for filling up the vacancies for each category of 
posts on Board of Directors and;  

  
 
(iii) Action must be initiated in advance for filling up the forthcoming 
vacancies which are generally known in advance. 
 
In this regard, the Committee note fr om the action taken reply of the 
Ministry that the process for appoi ntment of persons recommended by 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE)  could not be completed within the 
time limit of one year prescribed by the Department of Personal and 
Training (DoPT). The Company has tried to justify their failure by stating 
that it took time in obtaining th e declarations from the recommended 
persons as their addresses were not availa ble.  Accordingly, the proposal 
of the company was returned by DoPT stating that the said 
recommendations made by Department of Public Enterprises were valid 
only for one year and need to be revalid ated by them.    Presently, the DPE 
has been requested by the Company to revalidate the names recommended 
by them earlier. 
The Committee are surprised to note that for merely obtaining 
declarations from the persons recommended by DPE, the company took 
more than a year’s time. The Committee ar e not at all convinced with trivial  
and flimsy ground advanced by Compan y that as the current addresses of 
many recommended persons were not ava ilable, the declaration could not 
be obtained in time.   The Committ ee while expressing their displeasure 
over the existing state of affairs in dealing with the important issue of 
timely filling up of the vacant posts on th e Board of Directors of CIL and its 
subsidiaries find that the whole appoi ntment process has been dealt with 

  
lackadaisically by the Government and the management. The Committee 
strongly believe that had the management exercised prudently and with 
some degree of foresightedness, the appointment process of non-official 
directors could have been completed within time.  But due to sheer 
slackness and unprofessionalism as evident from the above, the posts of 
non-official directors which have been lying vacant since 2002-2003 could 
not be filled up even by now.   The Committee, therefore, while, strongly 
deprecating the sloppy stand of the management in pursuing the 
appointment process with the Government desire that besides initiating all 
possible efforts for filling up the vacan t posts immediately, responsibility 
must be fixed on the persons concerne d for their failure to deliver the 
goods.  
As regards recommendation of the Committee for prescribing a time 
limit for filling up the vacant posts of  each category of directors, the 
Committee find that no mention at all has been made in the action taken 
note of the Government. The Committee take a strong exception to this 
disinterested attitude of the Go vernment towards their recommendation 
and wish to point out that it was dili dallying stance on the part of the 
management/Government which had prom pted the Committee to come out 
with the said recommendation.  The Co mmittee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that a mechanism specify ing the time limit within which 
the whole exercise of appointments of  each category of director posts 
should be completed, be evolved without any further loss of time.  

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 2) 
 
7. Regarding restructuring of the CIL, the Committee in their original report 
had inter-alia recommended as under: - 
 
The Committee note that CIL was in corporated in November, 1975 after 
nationalization of the coal industry and thereafter to bring most of the coal mines 
under one umbrella. The admin istered prices, opening up of marginal projects 
coupled with huge manpower base and sm all uneconomic mines which CIL 
inherited at the time of nat ionalization resulted in continued ill health of CIL. 
These facts coupled with poor quality of  indigenous equipment and spare parts, 
low utilization of Heavy Earth Moving Machi nery, Social problems relating to land 
acquisition and rehabilitation, poor work cult ure, administrative constraints etc. 
have inhibited growth of CIL in truly becoming a globally competitive company.  
 
In this regard, the Committee note that an expert committee constituted by 
the Planning Commission to formulate an Integrated coal Policy in 1995 under 
the Chairmanship of Shri K. S.R. Chari, former Secretar y (Coal), in its report had 
inter-alia recommended that holding com pany approach of CIL be given a fresh 
look and each subsidiary of CIL be giv en the status of an independent company. 
Subsequently, another Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.L. 
Shanker was constituted by the Minist ry of Coal in November, 2004 for the 
purpose of reviewing the functioning of c oal Sector in the country. One of the 
terms of reference of this Committee was re structuring of CIL to make it a world 
class company. Though Part-II of the report of this committee is still awaited, the 
Expert Committee in Part-I of their report has inter-alia recommended that 
greater delegation of aut hority must accompany greater accountability and 
responsibility. CIL could be granted the st atus of Navratna co mpany whereby it 
need not come to Government for approval of  projects. Subsidiaries of CIL could 
be granted the status of Miniratna companies whereby proposals exceeding Rs. 
500 crore would need government approval . The boards of above companies 
should be restructured with the i nduction of independent non-governmental 
Directors.  
 
In the above context, the Committee not e that CIL is the largest coal 
company in the world and hav e the potential to become globally competitive with 
abundant coal resources in its leas ehold areas, well developed marketing 
network and availability of surplus res ources for investment. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that the Government must address the issue of restructuring CIL 
with more functional autonomy so that the company can meet the challenges of 
the competitive world by making it a world class company. The committee also 
note that proposal of CIL fo r claiming Navratna Status for it and Miniratna Status 
for its subsidiaries is currently under consideration of the Government. The 
Committee recommend that Government should process this matter 
expeditiously and ensure that t he company is able to meet all the guidelines laid 
down by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in this regard.  

  
 
8. The Government while furnishing t heir action taken reply on the above 
recommendation stated as under: -  
  
  A proposal to confer the status of Navratna on Coal India Ltd. was 
submitted by the Ministry of Coal to t he Department of Public  enterprises (DPE), 
the Nodal Department in this regard.  DPE has made certain observations and 
sought additional information. CIL has been requested to furnish the requisite 
information in the prescribed proforma as  per the advice of the Department of 
Public Enterprises. Thereafter, the proposal will be re-submitted to DPE for 
decision.  In the meanwhile CIL and four  of its subsidiary Companies namely 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited, Northern C oalfields Limited, South Eastern  
Coalfields Limited and Western Coalfiel ds Limited have been given Mini Ratna 
Category – I status by the Government.  
 
Regarding re-structuring of Coal India Ltd., the Expert Committee 
constituted in this regard is yet to submit its report.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
9. The Committee had recommended that  Navratna Status be conferred 
on Coal India Limited.  The Governm ent in their action taken reply has 
stated that a proposal to confer the status of Navratna on CIL was 
submitted by them to the Department  of Public Enterprises (DPE) who has 
made certain observations and sought  additional information. In this 
connection, the Committee would like to observe that the Government has 
constituted an Expert Committee headed by Shri T.L. Shanker to draw up a 
road map for coal sector and only afte r the report of the Expert Committee 
is received and considered, the Go vernment may formulate a National 
Integrated Coal Policy.  In the meanwhile, the Committee feel that Navratna 
Status be conferred on CIL without any further delay so as to facilitate its 
functioning in a globally competitive environment.   

  
RECOMMENDATION (SI. No. 6) 
 
10. With regard to performance of underground mining operations, the 
Committee had in their 15th Report recommended as under:- 
 
The Committee note that in India, the coal mining is done by two methods 
namely the shaft mining generally call ed ‘Underground mining’ and the strip 
mining known as ‘Open cast mining’. T he Open cast mining is much more 
advantageous to underground mining in terms of the net output as well as the 
cost of production.  This is indicated by  the fact that output per Manshift (OMS) 
for open cast mine is 7.18 as compared to underground mining which is just 0.69. 
In this regard, the Committee observe that most of the underground mining 
operations in Coal India Limited are incurring losses. There are only 38 mines out 
of 284 underground mines of Coal  India Ltd., which are yielding profit. Most of 
the 500 underground mines t hat Coal India Limited inhe rited at the time of its 
establishment were basically small units. The infrastructure available with these 
mines is very old and most of such mines do not have any scope for improving 
their evacuation facilities, which is a must for improving production/ productivity. 
According to CIL, all these mines though incurring heavy loses could not be 
closed because of difficulties in redeploy ment of surplus manpower and strong 
opposition from trade unions. Any improvem ent in augmentation of evacuation 
capacity in these mines and other related infrastructure to implement 
modernization of operations would requi re considerable investment. Further, 
since many of the loss making are also mi ning inferior grade coal, it would not be 
economically viable to invest for such modernization programmes.  
 
In view of the above, st ated position, the Committ ee feel that an in-depth 
analysis of all the underground mines should be undertaken to identify the 
possibilities of improving productivity from  such mines by way of modernization, 
wherever feasible. Further, to cope up with the heavy loss making underground 
mines where the improvement  in productivity by way of modernization is not 
possible, the Government may explore the possibility of closing down such mines 
and using the resources-both manpower as well as mechanical so made 
available, for improving the economi cs of other mines where economic 
turnaround is possible.  
 
11. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply on the above 
recommendation have stated as follows:  
 
It has been long felt that an in-depth st udy is required to be carried out to 
identify the mines technically suitabl e for introduction of mass production 
technologies in underground mines of CIL command areas/mines to enhance the 
underground coal production and productivity. Accordingly, an exercise has been 
carried out by the Committee constitut ed by CMD, CMPDI on 21.11.2005 on the 
directive of Ministry of Coal. 
 

  
The Committee prepared an “Approac h Note” on mechanization of 
underground mines/ projects of  CIL and its subsidiaries, based on international 
best practices vis-à-vis Indian geo-mining conditions. 
 
  The scope of assignment of the Committee was: 
 
I. To identify areas/coal seams in existing mines/ projects and green field 
projects for application of mass production underground technology along 
with specific enabling condition in coalfields if any. 
II. To examine and recommend suit able organizational structure for 
enhancing production & productivity from UG Mines project.   
 
The Committee has since completed the study and the conclusion of study 
drawn by the committee as stated in its interim report is as under: 
 
Presently, out of 393 operating UG mines  in CIL, 25 existing mines and 17 
ongoing projects have respectively been identified for introduction of Mass 
production Technologies (MPT). Similarly, in case of Green-field mining projects, 
16 projects are identified which have the potential to operate with MPT. Thus, 
mass production technology can be introduced in 58 underground mines/projects 
of CIL provided the constraints outlined in the report against each mine/project of 
each subsidiary company of CIL are dealt with.   
 
Apart from the above, in t he meeting taken by the H on’ble Minister of State 
for Coal on 11.01.2007 with CM Ds of all companies, CIL has been directed to 
increase the underground production to a leve l of 75 million tones in the terminal 
year of Eleventh Plan.  Accordingly,  a detailed study is being undertaken to 
identify other projects and related activities to attain this goal.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
12. The Committee in their recommendation had observed that most of 
the underground mines of CIL were in curring losses due to inherent poor 
infrastructure and inadequate evacuat ion facilities.  The Committee had 
also noted that any improvement in  augmentation of evacuation capacity 
in these mines and other related infrastructure through modernization 
programme would require considerab le investment.  The Committee had, 
therefore, in their original Repor t recommended that (i) an in-depth 
analysis of all the underground mines should be undertaken to identify the 

  
possibilities of improving productivity wherever feasible and (ii) to cope 
up with the heavy loss making underground mines where improvement in 
productivity by way of modernization is not possible, the Government may 
explore the possibility of closi ng down such mines and using the 
resources, both manpower as well as mech anical so made available, for 
improving the economics of other mines where economic turnaround is 
possible.   
In this regard, the Committee note fr om the action taken reply of the 
Government that in order to make an in-depth study to identify the mines 
technically suitable for introducti on of mass production technologies in 
underground mines of CIL comma nd area/mines, the committee 
constituted by CMD, CMPDIL on the di rective of Ministry of Coal have 
identified 58 underground mines/ proj ects of CIL out of 393.  Though, 58 
out of 393 mines have been identified  for introduction of mass technology, 
nothing has been commented upon about  the remaining 235 uneconomical 
mines and their fate.  With regard to remaining unviable and uneconomical 
mines, the Committee desire that the Government should carryout a unit-
wise further study with a view to exp loring the possibilities of converting 
such mines into economically viable.   
The Coal India Limited also needs to urgently address the issue of 
growing dumping that is causing im pediments to normal livelihood of 
locals. The huge dumped earth materia l, etc. should be used for filling 
already evacuated mines as is the usual accepted practice. 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl No. 11) 
 
13. Realizing the urgent need for new formulation for allocation of coal blocks 
through competitive bidding, the Committee had recommended as under: - 
 
The Committee note that prior to 1976, the coal mining activities in the 
country were governed by Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1973 and it was 
restricted to public sector only. Subsequently, by various amendments in the said 
Act carried out in 1976, 1993 and 1996, pr ivate companies engaged in the 
production of Iron & Steel, generation of power, working of coal, cement 
production etc. were also permitted to par ticipate in the coal mining sector by 
way of captive mining. The underlying idea was that allotment of captive coal 
blocks would help in augmenting the produc tion of these basic inputs to the 
economy besides contributing to the C entral and State Government exchequers 
by way of revenue from taxes, royalty etc. As per the existing mechanism, the 
allocation of coal blocks to private par ties is done through the mechanism of an 
inter-ministerial inter-governmental body  called the Screening Committee. The 
Screening Committee is chaired by the Secretary (Coal) and has representation 
from Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Industry and Commerce, 
Ministry of Railways, Coal India Limited, CMPDIL and the concerned State 
Governments. The application is received from the applicant in the Ministry of 
Coal along with its enclosures and is then sent to the concerned administrative 
Ministry for their scrutiny and recommendations. It is also sent to CIL/CMPDIL for 
their scrutiny and recommendations. In t he Screening Committee, the applicant 
is given an opportunity to present his ca se before the full Screening Committee. 
In this regard, the Commi ttee note that a large num ber of applications for 
allocation of coal blocks for captive mi ning are pending in the Ministry of Coal. 
Considering this large number of applicat ions per block, the allocation through 
the existing mechanism has become a difficu lt task. To overcome this problem, 
the Committee note that a new formulation namely competitive bidding process 
of selection has been proposed which w ould be more objective and transparent. 
To implement this new process, an amendm ent to Coal Mines (Nationalization) 
Act 1973 has been considered necessary wh ich is under consideration of the 
Government and is likely to take some time. As such the Government have 
decided to continue for the time being with the existing mechanism. The 
Committee further note that another option to introduce  competitive bidding by 
amending the Mines & Minerals (Devel opment and Regulation) Act 1957 that 
could be applicable to all minerals covered under the said Act, including coal and 
lignite, is also under consideration of the Government. The proposed formulation 
has been referred to Ministry of Law and Ju stice for their legal opinion. A final 
view will reportedly be taken only after t he views of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice are obtained.  
 
The Committee, therefore, observe that  though the privat e participation in 
the Coal Sector has been permitted by the Government by way of captive mining, 

  
the desired objectives have not  been fully achieved in view of the cumbersome 
process involved in the allocation of the coal blocks. In view of the huge backlog 
of the applications from private participants, the need of the hour is the 
expeditious implementation of  the competitive bidding pr ocess of selection. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that c oordinated efforts must be made by the 
Government to remove the impediment s involved in the introduction of the 
competitive bidding by carrying out expeditiously the requisite proposed 
amendments in the Coal Mines (Nati onalisation) Act 1973 or the Mines & 
Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957, whichever is deemed more 
appropriate. The Committee recommend that this matter needs to be finalized by 
the Government in a time  bound manner keeping in view its national importance. 
In order to implement the proposal expeditiously, the Committee recommend that 
the follow- up action with regar d to drafting/ amending of relevant rules may also 
be taken up simultaneously.  
 
14. The Government in their acti on taken reply on the above mentioned 
recommendation stated as follows: - 
 
Energy Coordination Committ ee in its meeting held on 17 th August, 2005 
had taken decision that Coal blocks for captive mining may be auctioned through 
competitive bidding.  At present, the allocation is decided on the basis of 
recommendations made by the Screening Committee.  
 
A proposal for allocation of coal blocks under competitive bidding was 
prepared in the Ministry of Coal.  Th is was referred to Department of Legal 
Affairs for their opinion.  Department of  Legal Affairs has endorsed the view that 
an amendment in the Coal Minies (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 would be 
necessary.  Accordingly a draft am endent Bill for amending the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 was prepared.  
 
 The matter was discussed in the meeting taken by the Principal Secretary 
to the PM and in pursuance of the minut es of the meeting, a formulation to 
amend the MMDR Act 1957 to provide for competitive bidding process of 
allocation in respect of all the minerals including coal and lignite was referred to 
the Ministry of Mines for their view.  T he Ministry of Mines has advised in their 
response that the Coal Ministry could re vise the formulation only to include coal 
and lignite as in respect of other mineral s they will consider the same separately 
after the report of the High Level Commi ttee on Mineral Policy is received.   
Accordingly, a revised formulation was referred to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
for their advice on 3.7.2006. Opinion of Mi nistry of Law & Justice was received 
28.7.2006. Further  clarific ation was sought from Ministry of Law and Justice  
vide note of Secretary (C)  on 17.08.2006.   Ministry of Law again advised, 
Ministry of Coal to initiate suitabl e measures for amendment of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. 
 

  
This issue was again discussed in the meeting taken by Principal 
Secretary to the Prime Mi nister on 22.09.2006. Accordi ngly a draft Cabinet Note 
along with all relevant documents was s ent to Ministry of Mines on 29.09.2006 
and Ministry of Mines was requested to  formulate proposal for approval of 
Cabinet. Draft Cabinet Note  as prepared by the Ministry of Mines was vetted by 
the Ministry of Coal and returned back to Ministry of Mines on 11 th  November, 
2006. Proposal has already been sent to Cabinet by the Ministry of Mines for 
consideration. At present the issue has been referred to  a Group of Ministers for 
a decision.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
15. The issue of allocation of coal  blocks through more transparent and 
effective process needs to be finalized by the Government.  The Committee 
note from the action taken reply of the Government that this issue is 
presently being sorted out amongst the Mini stry of Coal, Ministry of Mines, 
Ministry of Law and also the Prime Minister’ Office.  The Committee desire 
that this issue needs to be decided at  the earliest.  The Committee feel that 
the present practice of allocati on of coal blocks on subjective 
consideration lack transparency and accountability and has been adversely 
affecting the coal sector.  
 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 13) 
16. With regard to the Coal Mines Nationalization Amendment Bill 1993, the 
Committee had recommended as follows: - 
 
The Committee note that since nationalization of coal mines in 1973, the 
coal sector is dominated by the public sector. The present legal framework 
permits private sector participation in coal mining to a very limited extent through 
the route of captive mining. The lack of any competition has been a major factor 
that has constrained the grow th of coal industry. As per the Economic Survey ( 
2005 – 06 ), in the coal sector, lack of pr ivate competition and market orientation 
has stifled growth which has  affected the power sector most. In this regard, the 
Committee note that in line with t he recommendations of the Committee 
constituted by the Planning Commission, under  the Chairmanship of Shri K.S.R. 
Chari, former Coal Secretary in 1995, the Government decided to open the Coal 
Sector for private participation. Acco rdingly, a Coal Mine Nationalisation 
Amendment Bill was introduced in the Rajy a Sabha in the year 2000. The main 
objective of this Bill was to allow the co mpanies registered in India to mine coal 
and lignite without the existing restriction of captive consumption as well as to 
engage in exploration of coal and lignite res ources in the country. In this regard, 
the Committee note that as per the deliberations in the various meetings between 
the trade unions and the gov ernment, it was decided that the matter for 
processing of the Bill further in Par liament shall be decided only after having 
discussions with the Trade Unions. A Group of Ministers ( GOM ) was constituted 
in this connection. After change of the Go vernment at the Centre, the GOM is  
required to be reconstituted.  As per the latest information made available to the 
Committee, the matter of reconstitution of the Group of Ministers is being 
pursued with the Cabinet Secretariat. The Committee, therefore,  feel that the 
objective sought to be achieved by t he Coal Mines Nationalization Amendment 
Bill is still pending. This im portant issue needs a serious consideration by the 
Government keeping in view the future interest of the proper development of coal 
sector in India. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that Cabinet Secretariat 
should take up the matter of constituting the GOM on top priority so that the 
contentious issues may be resolved with the Trade Unions expeditiously.   
 
17. The Ministry of Coal in their action taken reply on the above mentioned 
recommendation has submitted as under: -  
 
The Central Government deci ded to amend the Coal Mines 
(Nationalization) Act, 1973 to allow I ndian companies both in the public and 
private sectors to mine coal  in the country without the existing restriction of  
captive mining and to be engaged in explor ation of coal  in the country. 
Accordingly a Bill, namely, the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Amendment Bill, 
2000, was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 24.4.2000 . 
 

  
The Bill was referred to the Standi ng Committee on Industry on 27.4.2000 
and then to the Standing Committee on Energy on 22.11.2000 for examination 
and report.  The Committee, after having extensive and wide-ranging discussions 
and consultations with the State Governments, Trade Unions/Officers’ 
Associations, apex Chambers of Trade and Commerce, and Central Ministries 
submitted its report which was tabled in both the Hous es of Parliament on 
31.08.2001. The Committee recommended that  the Bill be passed to facilitate 
Indian private companies to explore and mine coal and lignite without the existing 
restriction of captive mining. 
  
Due to stiff resistance from the trade unions, the Bill could not be 
processed further. The matter was cons idered by the Energy Co-ordination 
Committee, (ECC) headed by the Prime Mi nister. The Energy Coordination 
Committee has taken a view that the B ill should be moved for consideration only 
after a consensus is arrived at.  ECC has   asked that efforts should be done in 
this regard.  Planning Commission has been asked to prepare a Paper on this 
subject.   
  
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
18. The Committee had strongly r ecommended that the contentious 
issue pertaining to the amendment in the Coal Mines Nationalization 
Amendment Bill be resolved with th e Trade Unions expeditiously.  The 
Government in their action taken note h as stated that Energy Coordination 
Committee headed by the Prime Minist er has taken a view that the Bill 
should be moved for consideration only after a consensus with the Trade 
Unions is arrived at.  In this regard, the Committee appreciate the 
Government’s view that no step should be taken by the Government which 
may weaken the public sector status of CIL.  The Committee desire that the 
Government should not proceed further in the matter till a consensus is 
arrived at regarding any amendment of the Coal Mines Nationalization 

  
Amendment Bill 1993 which the Trade Un ions have been resisting tooth 
and nail.   
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 19) 
 
19. Stressing the need for review of ro yalty structure, the Committee had in 
their original report had recommended as under:- 
 
 The Committee note that there is a persistent demand of various coal 
producing States for revision of the ro yalty structure. Keeping in view the 
considerable improvement in the profit of Coal Compani es over a period of time, 
the Committee feel that t he demands for review of royalty structure of the 
concerned States needs to be addressed in the light of the recommendations of 
the11th and 12th Finance Commission and the recommendations of the Sarkaria 
Commission.” 
 
20. The Ministry in their action tak en reply on the above recommendation has 
stated as follows:- 
 
 Royalty on coal and lignite is payable under Section 9(1) of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Ac t. Section 9(3) of the  MMDR  Act, 
1957 empowers  the Central Government to enhance or reduce the royalty rates 
in respect of any mineral. The proviso to  Section 9(3) of the Act prevents the 
Central Government from enhancing  the rate  of royalty in respect of any mineral 
more than once during any  period of th ree years and there is no compulsion on 
the Central Government to revise royalty every three years.”   
 
 The royalty rates in respect of c oal were last revised on 16.08.2002 and 
the royalty rate in respect of lignite was revised on 15.03.2001.   
 
 Ministry of Coal constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of the 
Additional Secretary (Coal) on 02.06.2005 to  examine the issue of revision of 
royalty rates on coal.  The Committee afte r detailed deliberations with all stake 
holders submitted its report on 14.07.2006.  
 
 In the mean time, it was observed that many State Governments have 
resorted to levying cess/other taxes on coal in addition to royalty.  In order to 
discuss this issue, a meeting was convened on 10.10.2006 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal) with the representatives of coal producing 
States.   
 
 Based on the report of the Committ ee on royalty, a Note for the CCEA 
has been prepared and circulated to the concerned Ministries/Deptts. on 
02.02.2007 for their comments.  
 

  
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
21. In their original report, th e Committee while taking note of the 
persistent demand of various coal producing States for revision of the 
royalty structure vis-à-vis the consider able improvement in the profit of 
coal companies over a period of time had strongly felt that the demands for 
review of royalty structure must be addressed in the light of the 
recommendations of the 11 th and 12 th Finance Commission and 
recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission.   
 In this regard, the Committee note from the action taken reply of the 
Government that Ministry of Coal had constituted a Committee under the 
chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Coal) on 2 nd June, 2005 to examine 
the issue of revision of royalty rates on coal.  The Committee is stated to 
have submitted its report on 14.07.2006.  Further, it has been stated that 
based on the report of the Committee on royalty, a note for the CCEA has 
been prepared and circulated to th e concerned Ministries/Department on 
2
nd February, 2007 for their comments.   
 The Committee feel that the dema nd of the coal producing States for 
revision of the royalty structure is genuine and needs to be addressed 
urgently.  The Committee, therefore, desire that whole process of obtaining 
comments from the concerned Mi nistries/Departments should be 
completed in a time bound manner so that the genuine demand of coal 
producing States for revision of royalty structure could be met 

  
expeditiously.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government in this regard.  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 20) 
 
22. Expressing a serious concern over  the subsidence problem in many 
coalfields, the Committee recommended as follows: - 
 
 The Committee note that in  many coalfields, particularly near the Raniganj 
Area of West Bengal, there are many unstable locations where the cases of 
subsidence have been reported. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need 
to initiate early and appropriate st eps to assess the danger being posed to 
residential areas adjacent to the mining areas where people suffer from a sense 
of insecurity and uncertainty in the wake  of reports about continued subsidence. 
The Committee further feel that a long-te rm view of this enormous problem is 
urgently required to be undertaken. 
 
20. In response to the recommendation of the Committee, the Government 
through their action taken note has submitted as under: - 
 
 Efforts to deal with the problem of subsidence and fire in Raniganj 
Coalfield have been going on since long. T he magnitude of the problem in the 
Raniganj Coalfield of ECL is mainly re lated to subsidence due to unplanned and 
unsystematic exploitation of coal in the past and compounded by further 
injudicious growth of habitation over subsidence prone areas. 
 
 A high powered committee chaired by Se cretary (Coal was constituted by 
GoI in December 1996 to go in to details of problem of subsidence and fire in 
Raniganj coalfield. As per direction of  the committee CMPDI prepared a Master 
Plan in February 1999. Subsequently a Master plan was updated in 2004 for 
dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation of people residing in unsafe Areas 
of Raniganj coalfield of ECL. Similar Master Plan was also prepared for Jharia 
Coalfield Area of BCCL. These Master  Plans were again updated in August, 
2006 and total period 20 years was reduced to 10 years and all the subsidence 
schemes were converted to Rehabilitati on schemes. The updated Master Plan 
2006 is under process for approval of the Government.   
 
 
 Also in accordance to the directives of high powered committee in 1996, 
the following stabilization and rehabilitation schemes have been undertaken. The 
rehabilitation scheme, dem ographic survey and other related jobs of 
rehabilitation has been entrusted to the Asansol Durgapur Development Authority 
(ADDA), a State Government Agency on behalf of West Bengal. 
 
Stabilization scheme : Two schemes (Arun Talkies & Kumar Bazar) has been 
completed under Coal Conservation and Development Advisory Committee 

  
(CCDA) funding. Three other  Environmental Measures  and Subsidence Control 
(EMSC) schemes (Barachak, Porasband & Bhatdoba) have been completed. Six 
EMSC schemes (Fatehpur, Gowla Basti,  Polasban, Potteryu, Haripur and 
Sanctoria) are ongoing and progressi ng. Three new schemes (Jeebanpara, 
Narsamda & Bharatchak) have been approved and drilling work is in progress. 
 
Rehabilitation scheme : Rehabilitation of 4 unstabl e locations and Sanctoria 
village has been entrusted to ADDA. The jobs like Demographic survey, Land 
record verification, Assessment of valuat ion of schemes completed. Selection of 
the proposed rehabilitation sites are in progress. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
23. The Committee had recommended to draw a long-term plan to deal 
with the problem of subsidence of coalfi elds particularly near the Raniganj 
area of West Bengal. In their action t aken note, the Government has stated 
that subsidence in Raniganj area is due to unplanned and unsystematic 
exploitation of coal in the past and compounded by further injudicious 
growth of habitation over subsiden ce prone areas. It has further been 
stated that an Updated Master Pl an 2006 has been contemplated under 
which various schemes relating to stabilization and rehabilitation are under 
progress.  In this regard, the Commi ttee believe that in view of the 
magnitude of the problem in Raniganj area of East ern Coalfields LImited, 
the Government should immediately take up the national problem of 
handling and management of the incidence of subsidence through 
appropriate measures including stabiliz ation and rehabilitation schemes 
and a comprehensive master plan with appropriate technology and support 
of resources.  The Committee would like to hear from the Government 

  
about the details of the measures, the Government might have undertaken 
to address this serious problem of subsidence.   

  
CHAPTER –II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 2) 
 
RESTRUCTURING OF COAL INDIA LIMITED 
 
The Committee note that CIL was in corporated in November, 1975 after 
nationalization of the coal industry and thereafter to bring most of the coal mines 
under one umbrella. The admin istered prices, opening up of marginal projects 
coupled with huge manpower base and sm all uneconomic mines which CIL 
inherited at the time of nat ionalization resulted in continued ill health of CIL. 
These facts coupled with poor quality of  indigenous equipment and spare parts, 
low utilization of Heavy Earth Moving Machi nery, Social problems relating to land 
acquisition and rehabilitation, poor work cult ure, administrative constraints etc. 
have inhibited growth of CIL in truly becoming a globally competitive company.  
 
In this regard, the Committee note that an expert committee constituted by 
the Planning Commission to formulate an Integrated coal Policy in 1995 under 
the Chairmanship of Shri K. S.R. Chari, former Secretar y (Coal), in its report had 
inter-alia recommended that holding com pany approach of CIL be given a fresh 
look and each subsidiary of CIL be giv en the status of an independent company. 
Subsequently, another Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.L. 
Shanker was constituted by the Minist ry of Coal in November, 2004 for the 
purpose of reviewing the functioning of c oal Sector in the country. One of the 
terms of reference of this Committee was re structuring of CIL to make it a world 
class company. Though Part-II of the report of this committee is still awaited, the 
Expert Committee in Part-I of their report has inter-alia recommended that 
greater delegation of author ity must accompany great er accountability and 
responsibility. CIL could be granted the status of Navr atna company whereby it 
need not come to Government for approval of  projects. Subsidiaries of CIL could 
be granted the status of Mi niratna companies whereby proposals exceeding Rs. 
500 crore would need government approval . The boards of above companies 
should be restructured with the i nduction of independent non-governmental 
Directors.  
 
In the above context, the Committee not e that CIL is the largest coal 
company in the world and hav e the potential to become globally competitive with 
abundant coal resources in its leas ehold areas, well developed marketing 
network and availability of surplus res ources for investment. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that the Government must address the issue of restructuring CIL 
with more functional autonomy so that the company can meet the challenges of 
the competitive world by making it a world class company. The committee also 
note that proposal of CIL fo r claiming Navratna Status for it and Miniratna Status 

  
for its subsidiaries is currently under consideration of the Government. The 
Committee recommend that Government should process this matter 
expeditiously and ensure that t he company is able to meet all the guidelines laid 
down by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in this regard.  
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
  A proposal to confer the status of Navratna on Coal India Ltd. was 
submitted by the Ministry of Coal to t he Department of Public  enterprises (DPE), 
the Nodal Department in this regard.  DPE has made certain observations and 
sought additional information. CIL has been requested to furnish the requisite 
information in the prescribed proforma as per the advice of the Department of 
Public Enterprises. Thereafter, the proposal will be re-submitted to DPE for 
decision.  In the meanwhile CIL and four  of its subsidiary Companies namely 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited, Northern C oalfields Limited, South Eastern  
Coalfields Limited and Western Coalfiel ds Limited have been given Mini Ratna 
Category – I status by the Government.  
 
Regarding re-structuring of Coal India Ltd., the Expert Committee 
constituted in this regard is yet to submit its report.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
Please see paragraph no. 9 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 5) 
 
CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGIES 
 
The Committee note that as per one of the recommendations of the Expert 
Committee (T.L. Shanker Committee) set up by the Ministry of Coal in 2004 to 
review the functioning of the coal sect or, the country needs to take various 
measures for reducing the pollution im pact of coal use by developing and 
adopting all appropriate clean coal technol ogies including carbon sequestration. 
In pursuance of this recommendation, the Committee note that the Government 
of India and CIL have init iated action with cooperatio n of Indo-U.S. Working 
Group, Indo- US Coal Working Group hel d on 4th and 5th Apr il, 2006, it was 
decided for establishment of Coal  Bed Methane (CBM)/Coal Mine 
Methane(CMM) clearing house in associati on with United States Environmental 
Protection Agency and the same is under  advance stage of consideration. 
Further, detailed work plan on many identified topics have also been signed. 
These include coal beneficiation, waste coal  utilization, coal fine recovery, coal 
gasification, etc. The Committee further  note that Coal India Ltd. has signed 

  
MoUs with ONGC and GAIL on coal gasif ication and coal liquefaction projects. 
The CIL is trying to get technologies for further progress in these areas with the 
help of bilateral cooperation and multila teral cooperation. The Committee feel 
that development and adoption of clean coal  technologies are promising areas 
for future from the point of view of env ironmental protection as well as generation 
of extra energy. This would also enabl e to utilize deep-seated coal for energy 
generation and meeting the ener gy requirements. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that continuous efforts must be made for evolvement and putting into 
use the plans of clean coal technologies in a time bound manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   1)      Establishment of a Clearing House in India 
Ministry of Coal (MoC) in Nov'06 has signed an Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between Government  of India & Un ited States 
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA)  regarding establis hment of CBM / 
CMM Clearing House in India. Under th is MoU, MoC is the lead agency. The 
clearing house is to be established at CMPDI, Ranchi. 
 The cooperation agreement bet ween MoC and USEPA is under 
finalization. Meanwhile necessary arr angements for establishment of clearing 
house are under way. 
 
 
2)      Underground Coal Gasification (UCG) 
MoU between CIL and Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) for 
pursuing  pilot scale studies on U nderground Coal Gasification (UCG) 
has been signed. For selection of suitable block for pilot scale studies, 
data package for five prospective blocks were prepared and submitted 
to ONGC. The data packages were evaluated by Soviet Consultants 
appointed by ONGC and they have suggested for generation of 
additional data in one of the block for further studies. Remaining blocks 
were not found suitable. Work has been taken up for generation of 
additional data, as per requirement. 
Underground Coal Gasification (UCG ) has been identified as possible 
area of collaboration in the 3rd US-Indo Working Group meeting held in 
Apri'06,. As discussed in the Joint Working Group meeting, a workshop 
was organized in November'06 to focu s on criteria for identification of 
suitable site for UCG. 
Necessary follow up is under way. 
 
3)         Clean Coal Technologies 
The following preliminary draft pr oposals on the areas identified for 
consideration under 'Indo-US Ener gy Dialogue: Coal Working Group 

  
Work Plan' have been prepared and e -mailed to the US side on 30 th 
December 2006 for necessary input / improvements from their side. 
a. Cost-effective technology for beneficiation and recovery of fine coal 
b. Efficient beneficiation technology for low volatile coking coal of 
lower seams – V/VI/VII/VIII of Jharia Coalfields, BCCL 
c. Developing a coal cleaning plant simulator 
 
 The US lead has confirmed the rece ipt of the above proposal on the 31 st 
December 2006. However, their input  and comments on the proposal is still 
awaited. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 7) 
 
NEED FOR INTRODUCING STATE-OF-ART TECHNOLOGY FOR 
UNDERGROUND MINING 
 
The Committee note that underground mining has always been an area of 
major concern on account of lack of appr opriate technology in respect of geo-
mining conditions prevailing in the deeper seated coal deposits. Track records of 
indigenous manufactures of underground mi ning equipment has also been poor. 
This has inhibited the desired growth of underground coal production. However, 
efforts have been made by the CIL to  mechanize the underground mining 
operations with introduction of Intermedi ate Technology i.e. Side Discharge 
Loader/ Load Haul Dumper (SDL/LHD) in a number of mines, as a replacement 
of manual mining. As a result, the total underground production has increased 
from 38% in 1998-99 to 61.5% in 2004-05. This mechanization process has also 
reduced the exposure of workers to  mining hazards in underground mines. 
Further, in few selected underground mines, another highly mechanized 
Longwall Technology is also in use. Howeve r, as per the information furnished to 
the Committee, this technology has not been very successful in the country as 
the performance of this technology has been below expectations in view of the 
involvement of multiple comple x factors like inadequate geo-technical 
assessment, under rated equipment, inadequate infrastructure links, poor spare 
part management, poor back-up services by overseas suppliers etc. The 
Committee has been informed that in order to improve production and 
productivity of underground mines, introduction of intermediate Technology using 
SDL and LHD has been taken up on a large sca le. Further, a recently introduced 
technology namely ‘Continuous Miner Technology’ has come up with successful 
results. Accordingly, this technology has been proposed to be introduced in some 
more mines of CIL where suitable geo-mining conditions exist.  
 
From the above, the Committee feel t hat introduction of latest technology 

  
is the need of the hour as it is link ed not only to the enhancement of coal 
production from the underground mines but also to the safety of the mine 
workers. The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat CIL should make 
continuous efforts for introducing improv ed technologies including international 
proven technologies from foreign com panies in more and more underground 
mines, wherever feasible. For this pur pose, suitable time schedules be chalked 
out within which the whole exercise is to be carried out.  
 
 The Ministry in their action taken reply on the above recommendation has 
stated as follows: - 
 
  This issue has already been addressed in reply to Recommendation No. 
6.  Some additional information are as under:  
 
Action Plan to achieve targets – Existing mines/Completed and ongoing projects 
 
• Mechanized Drilling and roof bolting being introduced replacing manual 
system. 
• SDL/LHD/Continuous Miner being introduced in existing mines suitably. 
• Introduction of latest technology to reduce time required for driving incline 
and sinking of shaft. 
• Closing down unsafe and unviable mines and redeployment of workforce. 
 
Action Plan to achieve targets – New Projects 
 
• Shifting focus from manual mining to mechanization 
• New mines being planned for high productive (2-10 mt capacity) Long wall 
mine 
• Inviting Joint Venture partners/Mining contractors of world repute for 
opening large UG mines. 
• Work on a risk/gain-sharing basis. 
• This can bring substantial value add to CIL including: 
o Better operating practices resulting in lower mining cost 
o Sharing risk of operation with experts 
o Saving of capital investment requirement. 
 
 Continuous Miner (CM) technology and Powered Support Longwall 
(PSLW) technology are internationally proven state-of-the-art technologies for 
mining coal from underground mines. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
 
 
 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9) 
 
INTEGRATED COAL RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM (ICRIS) 
 
The Committee note that Coal Mines Project and Development Institute 
Limited (CMPDIL) has taken up a Gove rnment of India funded project on 
development of an Integrat ed Coal Resources Information System (ICRIS) for 
estimation of mines/block wise coal rese rves etc. as per United Nations 
Framework Classification (UNFC) guideli nes in X Plan. The Committee have 
been informed that on completion of th is project, an updated integrated mines/ 
block wise coal reserves data base will be created to facilitate perspective 
planning for coal development. The Co mmittee have been informed that for 
ICRIC which is scheduled to be complet ed by October, 2009, procurement of 
hardware and software is in an advance stage.  Further, the process of collection 
of collieries maps, bringing colliery survey  reference points to National Grid and 
capturing of borehole and descrip tive data of first lot of 122 Geological reports in 
Computer Media is also in progress. The Committee are of the view that creation 
of an updated integrated mine/block wise coal reserves data base would certainly 
facilitate perspective planning of c oal development in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that ICRIS project should by provided all 
support (financial and technical) by the Government so that it  may be completed 
within the stipulated timeframe.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICRIS Project is under im plementation by establishing nine Data Centres 
at 9 different locations ( 7 Regional Institutes of CMPDI and one each at 
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL), Kothagudem and CMPDI(HQ), 
Ranchi and the work is continuing from all locations.  
 
About 50% of the Borehole Data G eological Reports (GRs) of 630 coal 
blocks) have been captured into the magnetic  media from the GRs so far. The 
Map Data Capture has also started recently and 150 maps have been handed 
over to the vendor for digitisation / vectorisation.  
 
Approval of the proposal for engagem ent of 16 additional geologists on 
contract for two years for ICRIS job would be considered by CIL Board shortly.  
All efforts will be made to complete this programme in a stipulated time frame.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
 
 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 12) 
EXTENDING CONSULTANCY ROLE OF CMPDIL FOR PRIVATE PLAYERS 
 The Committee note that with the opening of coal mining sector to private 
companies for the purpose of captive mi ning, more and more private companies 
are coming forward seeking allocation of coal blocks. Such private participation is 
likely to attain further momentum after the introduction of the proposed process 
of allocation by competitive bidding. The question which obviously arise is 
whether such private companies possess t he requisite expertise in the field of 
coal mining as it is a highly technical area. In this regard, the Committee have 
been informed that currently a company without necessary expertise in Coal 
mining can source mining expertise from the ma rket or it enters into  a   joint    
venture (JV ) with a mining company hol ding 26% equity in it under special 
dispensation allowed under the existing guidelines. Towards this end, the 
Committee are of the view  that Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
Limited ( CMPDIL ), an engi neering, design and exploration subsidiary company 
of Coal India Limited, can play a crucial role in providing necessary expertise to 
the private allocates of  captive blocks on commercial considerations. The 
Ministry of Coal has also found it a des irable solution. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should explore the feasibility of extending the 
consultancy role of CMPDIL to privat e players for promoting the commercial 
interests of coal mining industry as well as the commercial interests of CIL.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CMPDI is already providing Consultancy Services to the captive coal block 
allocatees on mutually agreed commercial terms & conditions. 
 
Some of the esteemed clients are M/s Tata Steel Ltd., Chhattisgarh 
Mineral Development Corpor ation Ltd., Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board, 
National Thermal Power Corporation Lt d., National Aluminum Company Ltd., 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.  The I ndian Iron & Steel Company Ltd., Neyveli 
Lignite Corporation Ltd.  The Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. etc. 
 
Currently (as on 1 st January, 2007 ), CMPDI is preparing 2 no. of mining 
plans, 4 no. of Feasibility Reports / Detail ed Project Reports, 2 no. of EMPs  for 
various captive coal block allocatees. 
 
 In future also CMPDI shall be providing consultancy services to captive 
coal block allocatees as and when t hey approach CMPDI for such services, 
depending upon the spare capacity available with CMPDI at the time. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 14) 
COAL VIDESH LIMITED 
 The Committee note that presently  there is a demand supply gap in 
respect of metallurgical and low ash therma l grade coal in view of their limited 
domestic reserves.  With the objective of enhancing energy security of the 
country, CIL is contemplating to invest in prospective coal mining opportunities 
abroad. In this regard, presently, the C oal India Limited has set up a separate 
Coal Videsh Department with a view to pursue matters for acquisition of coal 
property abroad. Even the Ministry of Coal has reportedly constituted a dedicated 
group of experts mandating to explore possibility of acquiring coal equities 
abroad.  The Committee note t hat a proposal for setting up a new subsidiary of 
Coal India Limited namely Coal Videsh Limited which would accrete overseas 
reserves and participate in import of coking and high grade non-coking coal to 
meet the domestic deficit has already been considered by the Ministry of Coal. 
Now, a draft Cabinet note fo r consideration of the Cabinet has been prepared 
and which have been circulated to the concerned Ministries / Departments for 
their comments. The said Cabinet note would be finalized accordingly. Taking 
into consideration the im portance of the issue, t he Committee recommend that 
the Government should take an early decis ion on this proposal. In the opinion of 
the Committee, the setting up of Coal Videsh Limited as an entity to deal 
exclusively with the overseas coal acquisition projects will definitely impart cutting 
edge over the present scattered arrangem ent. Towards this end, the Committee 
also desire that Coal India Limited shoul d explore the possibilit y of entering into 
Joint Ventures with leading companies for acquiring coal mines abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The initiatives for taking forward CIL’s proposed foreign venture arm “Coal 
Videsh” is presently purs ued by a multi-disciplinary team working under Coal 
Videsh Department at CIL headquarters, Kolk ata. Efforts are being made to 
explore opportunities for securing coal mines/properties by holding discussions 
with relevant Govt. agencies and coal companies operating in various destination 
countries such as Australia, Indonesia , Canada, Mozambique, Zimbabwe etc. It 
is proposed to hold road shows in some of  the above stated countries to identify 
suitable companies for partnership as an entry strategy. Certain opportunities 
have been identified for which due d iligence will be undertaken. A panel of 
Investment Bankers has been created to assist CIL for scouting, identification 
and evaluation of opportunities abroad.  
 
Coal India Ltd has separately subm itted a proposal for setting up a new 
subsidiary by the name of Coal Vides h Limited to mine and acquire coal 
properties abroad. The proposal was considered in this Ministry.  A draft Note for 
CCEA was prepared and views of concer ned Ministries/Deptts. were obtained 

  
thereon.  The Ministry of Finance has not supported this proposal.  Their 
contention  is that :- 
 
a) The domestic reserves are adequate to take care of most of the 
countries needs, though there are iss ues of quality and price of the 
indigenous coal. 
 
b) The real bottleneck is the legal and structural rigidity in the coal 
sector.  Setting up of CVL will in no way address these problems,  
 
c) Private/public sector user s could be encouraged to acquire 
interests overseas by way of backward linkage rather than a State owned 
company being set up, as the latter is likely to result in high cost 
operations/transactions.  
 
CIL has been requested to suggest alternative ways. 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl No. 17) 
 
SAFETY OF MINE WORKERS 
 
 The Committee note that safety in mines is governed by the Coal Mines 
Act, 1952 and the Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. Mines Rules, 1955, 
the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957, and Mi nes Rescue Rules, 1985 are some of 
the major statutory provisions related to the safety of mine workers. The 
Committee have been further informed that mining operations in the coal mines 
of Coal India Limited are conducted in accordance with the above-mentioned 
statutes relating to Coal Mine Safety which is monitored by the Directorate 
General of Mines Safety ( DGMS ) under  the Ministry of Labour. The Committee 
feel that the safety of mines workers is  one of the major area s of concern in the 
coal mining industry. The number of fa tal accidents in CIL during the years 2002 
to 2004 has been 189 resulting in 200 casualties besides more than 1000 serious 
injuries. The Committee note that the major factors responsible for fatal accidents 
in coal mines are roof / side falls ; movements of trucks and dumpers; use of 
machinery etc. according to CIL, si nce the rocks in earth crust are not 
homogeneous or uniform, their behavior is not  known and as such, the falling of 
the roof and sides of excavations made below the ground can not be eliminated 
entirely. In this regard, the Committ ee has been apprised that CIL has taken a 
number of protective measures to enhanc e safety of mine workers. Such as 
thrust on roof bolting / r oof stitching, training and re-training of workmen, 
continued mechanization of loading and roof  bolting operations and introduction 

  
of modern technologies besides involving trade union in safety matters by way of 
their representation in various safety committees.                    
 In order to ensure safety of mi ne workers and also to protect the 
coalfields, the Committee recommend that  the following safety measures be 
undertaken by the CIL / Government : 
(i) More emphasis be laid on traini ng programmes for mine workers on 
various aspects of mining su ch as geo-mining conditions, 
familiarization with new mining technologies as and when introduced, 
operating various mine related equi pments etc. besides making 
mandatory for the mine workers to undergo such training programmes.  
(ii) Introducing modern mining technologi es in more and more mines so as 
to reduce the manual working to the barest minimum. 
(iii) Ensuring that the recommendati on of the DGMS on various mine 
safety aspects are implemented within the prescribed time-limit in letter 
and spirit. 
(iv) Stringent punitive action be prescribed for those persons who are 
found responsible for cause of accident due to any negligence or 
dereliction of duties on their part. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) Mandatory Regular Basic and Refres her Training is imparted to all 
categories of workmen under  the Mines Vocational Training Rules, 1966. In 
addition to the above statutory training t he following training is also imparted 
:- 
• Special training for new mining technologies and operation of new 
equipment by experts and from the equipment manufacturers 
• Special training in Roof-Bolting is imparted to all workmen and 
supervisors engaged in roof-support. 
• Supervisors and Support personnel ar e imparted training/re-fresher 
training in roof-support. 
• Persons engaged in operation and ma intenance of underground 
mining machinery like Side-Discharge Loaders (SDLs), Load-Haul-
Dumpers (LHDs), Continuous Miners,  Longwall face machinery, are 
imparted training by the representatives of the equipment 
manufacturers as well as by companies officials. 
• Training in operation of Heavy Eart h Moving Machinery is imparted at 
specialized training centers like Cent ral Excavation Training Institutes 
in various subsidiaries. 
• Training/refresher training is impar ted to Workmen’s Inspectors and 
Safety Committee Members. 
 
(ii) CIL inherited la rge number of small underground mines after 
nationalization. Layouts of such mine do not permit high level of mechanization. 
 
Presently about 86 % of total producti on is coming from opencast mines, 
which are mostly mechanized mines. Ho wever 45.82 M.Te ((14%) of coal is 

  
coming from  underground mines. These underground mines are mostly worked 
by Board and Pillar method. 
 
Since large-scale mechanization is not possible in existing mines, some of 
the operations in these mines have been /a re being mechanized. Elimination of 
manual loading by deployment of SDL/L HD/Continuous Miner is one of such 
areas of operation. At present 829 nos. of SDL and 217 nos. of LHD are on roll in 
CIL mines contributing 65 % of total underground production. 
 
In addition to this 6 Long wall faces ar e in operation contributing 2 % of 
total under ground production.  
 
Table below shows the status of trend of increase in production from 
mechanized underground mines during the year 2004-05 to 2011-12. 
                                                                                       In Million Tonnes  
   
 
 
 Coal India is shifting its focus fr om manual mining to mechanization by 
introducing advance technology and ther eby deploying less manpower which 
ultimately will result in enhancement of safety. 
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
(Target) 
2007-08 
(Projected) 
2011-12 
(Projected) 
32 32 35 37 47 
 
However, total mechanization is not po ssible in existing mines, steps are 
taken to mechanize some of its operat ions as listed below which will help in 
reducing accidents 
 
1) .Face Mechanization:   
a. Support: Roof is being supported by using Roof Bolts, thus, 
exposure of work person to green roof eliminated. 
 
Out of total 502 Development dist ricts & Depillaring District Roof 
bolting is used in   366 Devel opment mines and 130 depillaring 
mines. Resin Bolting is used in 7 mines at present and proposed for 
1 mine. 
 
b. Manual Loading: Replaced by mechanized loading by 
introduction of   SDL/LHD/Continuous Miner. 
 
2) Man Riding Systems : To eliminate the fatigue of work person for 
traveling a long distance to the work  place man riding systems are being 
introduced.  
 
3) Environmental Tele-monitoring Systems : Computerised Continuous 
Environmental Tele-monitoring S ystems have been installed in 13 
highly gassy/fiery mines for conti nuous monitoring of the environment 

  
belowground to give advance intimati on of build-up of inflammable 
gases or heating. Such systems shall be installed in more mines in 
future. 
 
4) Instrumentation for monitoring Roof Behaviour : Instrumentation for 
monitoring roof behaviour (Tell-tale  Systems) have been installed in 
some mines with poor roof conditions. Action is in progress for further 
R&D in association with research/educational institutes in this regard. 
 
Status of increase of Production from Mechanized OC (In Million Tonnes) 
 
04-05 05-06 06-07 (Target) 07-08 (Projected)) 11-12 (Projected) 
275.73 296.84 315.02 336.99 465.95 
 
(iii) Every effort is taken to comply  with the recommendati ons of the DGMS 
within the prescribed time. In case the actions necessary for securing compliance 
with the recommendations of the DGMS cannot be completed within the time 
prescribed by the DGMS extension of time is sought with proper justification.  
The DGMS is empowered to prohibit employment of such persons whose 
presence is not required for securing compliance with the recommendations or to 
prohibit extraction of mineral if its re commendations are not complied within the 
prescribed time. 
 
However, CIL and its subsidiary companies are making every effort to comply 
with the recommendations of DGMS within the prescribed time. 
 
(iv) The DGMS is empowered to prosecute persons held responsible for 
violation of statutes leading to an a ccident as per the Mines Act, 1952. The 
quantum of punishment for various off ences has been laid down in the Mines 
Act. Additionally CIL/subsidiaries punishes  those held responsible for accidents 
in enquiries conducted by the Internal Safety Organisation. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 

  
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI. No. 3) 
 
AUGMENTATION OF COAL PRODUCTION : 
 
The Committee note that over the year s, the production of coal in the 
country has been increasing continuously. However, in view of the ever 
increasing demand of coal, the demand and supply gap has continued to widen. 
From the information furnished, the Commi ttee note that as against the demand 
projections of 473.18 million tones (Mt) and 676.00 Mt during the X Plan and XI 
Plan periods, supply of coal from indigenous  sources [ Coal India Limited (CIL), 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL) and others] is estimated to be 
421.50 Mt. and 593 Mt. respectively, leavi ng thereby significant gap between the 
demand and the supply. To meet the burgeoning demand of  coal, the CIL has 
formulated a time-bound enhanced production programme. The targets for coal 
production in terminal year of X Pl an i.e. 2006-07 has been enhanced by 13 Mt 
from earlier level of 350 Mt. The production programme during XI Plan period has 
also been enhanced so as to reach a level of  508 Mt by terminal year of XI Plan 
i.e. 2011-12 which incorporates an increm ental production of 63 Mt over earlier 
projection of 445 Mt. 
 
In this regard, the Committee note that the CIL has identified a total of 101 
projects with 250.27 Mt. production capacit y to be taken up during the X Plan 
period. Out of these, 64 projects with aggregate production capacity of 106.77 Mt 
have so far been sanctioned by the Gove rnment and the approval for balance 
projects is being pursued vigorously. The im plementation of these projects have 
been taken up with utmost priority by the CI L, resulting in likely contribution of 
72.48 Mt in 2006-07 from 51 projects and it is envisaged that a total of 67 
projects out of 101 projects would contribute 89.51 Mt. during the terminal year of 
X Plan. The Committee find that though c oal companies are making consistent 
efforts to increase the coal production, they have not been able to keep pace with 
the growing demand of coal in the count ry. As a result, the gap between supply 
and demand is continuously widening thereby  forcing the country to depend on 
import to meet the coal requirements besides burdening the country’s exchequer. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that not only the approval for the 
remaining projects should be accorded top priority but a mechanism should also 
be put in place for ensuring that all the identified pr ojects are completed and 
commissioned as per schedule. In order to  remove the mismatch between the 
demand and supply of coal in the count ry, the Committee strongly recommend 
that coordinated efforts must be made at the level of various concerned agencies 
to remove the bottlenecks causing delay in  execution of various projects which 
have already been approved by the Government.  

  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The coal demand is a function of grow th of national economy irrespective 
of availability of coal from domestic source. The demand of coal has been 
increasing with the growth of national economy. The measures taken/being taken 
to bridge the gap between demand & supply by Coal India Limited as  follows:   
Coal India Limited has envisaged proj ects with an ultimate capacity of 
241.395 Mty during the X Plan period. Out of these, 80 projects with aggregate 
coal production capacity of 165.985 Mt y have been sanctioned and the approval 
for the remaining projects is being pur sued vigorously. The implementation of 
these projects have been taken up on prio rity by CIL, resulting in likely 
contribution of 71.74 Mt. of coal in 2006-07 from 30 projec ts. Coal production 
from the remaining projects would start during the XI Plan period. 
In addition to the above, 120 pr ojects have been identified for 
implementation during the XI Plan with an capacity of  about 120 Mty of coal and 
are likely to contribute to the tune of about 70 Mte of coal during the terminal year 
of XI Plan i. e. 2011-12.   
The following mechanism has been put in place by Coal India Limited/Ministry 
of Coal for ensuring early completion/commissioning of identified projects as per 
schedule:-  
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
Projects are taken up for implement ation after detailed examination 
of availability of land, state of preparedness and assured flow of funds. 
There is a 2 tier system for appraisa l and sanction of projects. Advance 
Action Proposals (AAP) are implement ed to get possession of land, EMP 
clearance, creation of essential infrastr ucture facilities etc. before sanction 
of actual Project Report. This action is being taken to reduce delays in 
project implementation. 
Projects are monitored on monthl y basis at the Area Level by 
General Manager / Chief General Manager and by Director (Projects) and 
CMDs of the concerned Subsidiaries at Corporate Level. 
Status of Projects are also revi ewed by the respective Boards of 
the Subsidiaries.  
Mandatory Review of t he Projects is carried out at Company Level 
when the expenditure of the Project exceeds 50% of the Sanctioned 
Capital to initiate appropriate action for timely completion of the project. 
Yearly Cost-Updating is done for all Projects and action for 
preparation of RCE and subsequent approv al from Concerned Authority is 
taken accordingly. Projects costi ng more than Rs. 50 Crs. are also 
reviewed by Coal India Limited Boar d periodically for taking corrective 
measures.  
Status/Implementation of Projects  costing Rs. 100 crores & above 
are reviewed by CIL Board and also  by a High Powered Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal).   
For expediting acquisition of land - both forest and non-forest – 
there is a system of regular interaction with the Mi nistry of Coal / Ministry 
of Environment and Forest  / State Government / Local Authorities. 

  
Pending forestry proposals are being pursued at the level of District Forest 
Officer & the State Forest Department s & finally with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest for early releas e of the forest land. Ministry of 
Coal also holds meetings with the Ministry of Environment and Forest at 
regular intervals for close monitoring of pending projects. 
f For projects costing Rs. 100 cror es & above, a proper MIS system 
using MS Project Software has been introduced. This is being 
strengthened with the introduction of on-line computerized monitoring 
system. All major projects are now equipped with computers and Project 
Management software. 
 
Progress reports in respect of Projects costing Rs. 100 Crs. and above are 
submitted to Department of Programme Implementation regularly. 
 
Working Group on Coal and Lignite of XI Five Year Plan has projected 
total coal demand of 731.10 Mt. (coki ng-68.50 Mt., non-coking – 662.60 Mt.) in 
the terminal year of XI Five Year Plan i.e. 2011-12. The projected domestic 
availability of 680 Mt. comprises of 520.50 Mt. from CIL, 40.80 Mt. from SCCL 
and 118.70 Mt. from captive blocks and other  sources. Out of this projected 
metallurgical coking coal supply is 27.65 Mt. and non-coking coal supply is 
652.35 Mt. This works out a gap of 51.10 Mt. in 2011-12, which comprises of 
40.85 Mt. of coking coal and 10.25 Mt. of thermal coal. The demand - supply gap 
is on account of inadequate reserves of  coking and low ash non-coking coal 
reserves in the country. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 4) 
 
NEED TO IMPROVE EXTRACTABILITY OF COAL 
 
As per the information furnished to the Committee, ther e are 92.55 billion 
tones of proved resources of coal (exc luding North-Eastern Coalfields Region) 
available in the country. However, t he resources which have been identified as 
extractable constitutes only about 34.76 billion tones. Thus, the extractable 
reserves are very meager as compared to the overall available resources. It is, 
therefore, evident that there is a great scope for conv ersion of proved resources 
into extractable reserves. In this direction, the Committee note that with a view to 
increase the percentage of extraction, a number of research and development 
projects have been undertaken by the CI L from time to time, including 
technological upgradation. These projects include the research projects funded 
by the Ministry of coal under Coal Science & Technology (S&T) Grant and the 
CIL Research and Development Projec ts. The Committee, however, note with 
concern that CIL has not been able to complete their sanctioned projects during 
9th and 10th Plan as per schedul e. The reasons for delay for non-completion of 

  
the R&D projects include delay in procur ement of equipments, delay in getting 
statutory permission and obtaining environmental clearances etc. The Committee 
are of the view that extrac tability can improve only when it is ensured that all the 
R&D projects which are under  implementation are completed by their scheduled 
dates. Keeping in view the importance of coal in the present energy requirement 
scenario, the whole issue needs serious  consideration. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in order to ensure that  all R&D projects are 
implemented on time and in cost effective manner, a cross monitoring 
mechanism to oversee the progress of implementation of these projects be 
established by the Coal Mines Project and Development Institute Limited 
(CMPDIL), Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC) of the Ministry of 
Coal and the CIL R&D Board. Further , an exclusive monitoring cell headed by 
the Coal Secretary and also the experts in the field, be established in the Ministry 
to collect and analyze the feedbacks received from the above mentioned 
monitoring agencies in implementation of  the R&D Projects  and providing the 
necessary governmental support/guidance wherever necessary.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted.  It is also informed 
that:  
 
 The implementing agencies of Resear ch & Development (R&D) projects 
under Science & Technology (S&T) scheme of  Ministry of Coal (MOC) submit 
quarterly progress reports, which include both physical and financial progress.  
Progress of the projects is also monitored by periodic visits to the implementing 
institutes by the officials of S&T Deptt of Central Mine Planning & Design Institute 
(CMPDI) to monitor / coordinate the im plementation of projects.   For R&D 
projects funded by CIL R&D Board, the implementation of on-going projects is 
reviewed by an Apex committee of CIL R&D Board.  
 
 There are three technical sub-committ ees of Standing Scientific Research 
Committee (SSRC) of MoC.  The sub-co mmittee meetings are held twice a year 
in which status of on-going projects is reviewed.  The meetings of SSRC, headed 
by Secretary (Coal) are also held twice a year.  The pr ogress of on-going 
projects forms a part of  the agenda of these meeti ngs.  The status of 
implementation of the projects is reviewed.  
 
 Research projects are approved for dur ation varying normally from 2 to 4 
years. However, field experiments of innovative mining methods derived through 
research are sometimes delayed due to want of permission/environmental 
clearances etc from concerned statutory bodies.   Extension of time for any of the 
projects is granted only after detail ed deliberation by the concerned sub-
committee of SSRC and is normally of specified duration along with updated 
activity plan.   
 

  
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 8) 
 
NEED FOR UPGRADING THE RAIL AND SURFACE TRANSPORT 
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR EVACUATION OF INCREASED COAL 
PRODUCTION. 
 
The Committee note that the production of coal at a site is directly linked 
to the evacuation facilities available ther e in view of the lim ited storage capacity. 
In this regard, the Committee observe t hat one of the major difficulties being 
faced by CIL and its subsidiaries in dis patching coal to the consumers is the 
inadequacy of the existing infrastructure  for evacuation of coal from the 
production point. The evacuation is prim arily done by rail transport system. The 
Committee have been informed that Ministry of Railway’s insistence on supplying 
wagons as per their own convenience has  adversely affected continuation of 
production at coal companies for paucity of  stacking space. Instead of supplying 
wagons to the coal companies which have the potential to load wagons, the 
wagons are supplied to those sites where the Railways could ensure higher 
freight earning with least diffi culties. As a result, on one hand, some of the coal 
companies starve for wagons to ensure matching evacuation of coal and on the 
other, wagons remain idle in some ot her companies where the supplies are 
forced to be made without indent. This results in uneven stocks at consuming 
ends, particularly at power stations. The Committee also note that over the years, 
the CIL and its subsidiaries have made huge investments for updating 
infrastructure for augmenting wagon loadi ng. However, while coal companies 
have been deploying more loading equipment  to ensure faster loading, the 
Railways has been found to be lacking to develop matching infrastructure by not 
adding the desired rolling stock and hauli ng capacity to upgrade the evacuation 
facilities. In this regard, the Committee not e that both CIL as we ll as Ministry of 
Coal have been pursuing the issue at different fora in the Ministry of Railways, up 
to the level of Chairman, Railway Boar d to impress upon the need for bringing 
improvement in infrastructure and suitable amendment in operating and 
commercial rules. However, the operat ional and commercial difficulties being 
faced by coal companies are yet to be addressed by Railways.  
 
The Committee are, theref ore, of the view that  presently there is a 
mismatch between the production of coal at  various coal companies vis-à-vis the 
availability of infrastructure to evac uate it. Since the issue of meeting the 
requirement of the coal from the indigenous resources is of paramount 
importance, it needs to be ensured that th is objective is not defeated on account 
of transport networking problem. The Commi ttee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the operational and commercial difficu lties which are being faced by the CIL 
and its subsidiaries must immediately be addressed by the Railways by 

  
developing the matching infrastructure in terms of rolling stock as well as hauling 
capacity besides sorting out the network ing problems in consultation with the 
coal companies.  
 
Another area of dispute between t he coal companies and the Railways, 
which has come to the notice of the Commi ttee, is the transportation of the low 
density coal. The bulk density is consi derably less for superior grades/ washed 
variety of coals as compared to other va rieties of coal. However, the Railways, 
have presently a uniform carrying c apacity for wagons without giving any 
cognizance to significant variations in bul k density for various grades of coal. As 
a result of this, certain coalfields and coal washeries are facing difficulties in 
loading the wagons upto their carrying capacity ending up paying under loading 
charges while dispatching higher grades  of non-coking coal and washed coking 
coal. The Committee, therefore, agree with the suggestion of CIL that exhaustive 
joint loadability tests by the Ministry  of Railways and Coal companies are 
required to be undertaken for such coals indivi dually in all coal fields to ascertain 
what should be the chargeable carrying capac ities of different grades of coal, 
prior to bringing any change in the chargeable carrying capacity and recommend 
for implementation of the same. The Committee further recommend that the 
railways should notify the findings of the earlier trials conducted jointly by the 
railways and the coal companies for revising the loading capacity of Box-N 
wagons.  
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Reply by the Ministry of Coal  
 
Field-wise indents are being placed by Coal Companies. Coal Companies 
and Coal India Limited (CIL) mainta in regular liaison with Railways from 
Divisional to Board level for getting supplies of wagons as per loading potential of 
each field.  
 
Bottlenecks with regard to line capacit y and availability of rolling stock 
have been coming in the way of full utilizat ion of loading potential, resulting in 
accumulation of pithead stocks. Conges tion in Bilaspur-Anuppur section has 
been affecting supplies of empties in Korba field. Both IB and Talcher fields of 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL) and Ka ranpura field of Central Coalfields 
Limited (CCL) have not been receiving wagons as per indents.  
 
Unloading constraints at power stations  also affect turn round of rolling 
stock, which has been posing problems for Railways in supplying wagons to Coal 
Companies as per indent. Some of t he power stations are equipped to handle 
particular types of wagons, which furt her reduces Railways’ maneuverability in 
allocation of rakes for the evacuation of coal. 
 
The issue of wagon supplies has also been taken up at ministerial level. In 
the inter-ministerial sub-group meeting taken by Joint Secretary, Ministry of Coal, 
optimization of available resources of Railways is regularly discussed. The issue 

  
of wagon supplies has also been discussed in  the meetings taken by Secretary 
(Co-ordination), Cabinet Secretariat for infrastructure review. Though wagon 
supplies continue to be less than r equirement, there has been steady 
improvement in supplies and CIL as a w hole could register growth in wagon 
loading in comparison to the same peri od last year as may be seen from the 
table given below: 
 
Figures in FWWs/Day 
Period 2006-07 2005-06 % Growth 
November 21992 21110 4.1 
December 22837 22088 3.4 
January 23677 22122 4.8 
April-January 21461 20344 5.5 
     
The issue of exhaustive joint load-ab ility tests by Ministry of Railways and 
Coal Companies had been raised by CI L with Railway Board and other inter-
ministerial Committees/Groups. Railways have not yet notified findings of earlier 
joint load-ability tests. In the meeting of 22 nd December’06 taken by Secretary 
(Co-ordination) for reviewing infrastructure constraints, a decision was taken that 
Ministries of Railways, Power and Coal w ould jointly conduct inspection of test 
rakes formed from Eastern Coalfields Li mited (ECL)/Raniganj and Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited (BCCL)/Washed coal to determine whether the condition for loading 
imposed by the Railways is feasible and this is underway.  
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
(ii) Reply by the Ministry of Railways  
 
 The coal being made available by Coal  Industry is being moved by rail to 
different consumers in the country accord ing to their demand.  Keeping in view 
the requirement of coal for power and cement sector in terms of quality and 
quantity of coal, the available capacity fo r production of coal and the available 
modes of transport i.e.  rail, road, Merry Go Round (MGR), sea etc., 
linkages/targets are draw n out by Standing Linkage Committee (SLC) on long 
term and short term basis. These Committees are represented by 
representatives of Ministries of Power, Railways, Steel, Industry, Central 
Electricity Authority, and C oal India Ltd. under the Chai rmanship of Ministry of 
Coal. 
 
          As per practice in vogue, the programmes are submitted by the consumers 
against which the offer / indents are plac ed by Coal Companies on the basis of 
availability of coal and transport feasibility at  various coalfields. Against this offer, 
Railways allot and    supply wagons at the railheads for loading coal by Coal 
Companies into the wagons within the permi ssible free time allowed. If the Coal 
Company is unable to load the rake supp lied for loading within the permissible 
time, the rakes are treated as Left Behind.  The concept of Left Behind has a 
direct bearing on the overall loading of t he Indian Railways as it  vitiates not only 
the wagon turn-round and thereby the avail ability of wagons for loading but also 

  
impinges on the net availabilit y of supply of rakes in sidings which have capacity 
to load more than one rake per day.  
 
Coal loading by rail is largely guided by the company-wise linkage decided 
by the Standing Linkage Committee (SLC),  programs submitted by the coal 
companies, offers received from them by the Railways and the allotment given by 
the Railways against the received offer. 
 
The company-wise program – offer – allotment –supply – left behind(L.B) 
position for the year 2005- 06 and 2006-07 has been given at Annexure ‘A’.  The 
following points are worth taking note of:- 
 
(a) For the year 2006-07, the loading programs of all coal companies 
except Bharat Cooking Coal Co mpany Limited and Northern Coal 
Company Limited had been pegged at a much higher level than the 
previous year.     
                  The overall growth in programs submitted by the coal companies to 
the Railways was 11.29%. 
 
(b) The offer received from the coal  companies, however, did not match 
the linkage.  The overall offer was only 91% of the submitted 
programs.  All coal companies except Northern Coal Company 
Limited offered less than their pr ograms.  Offer made by Central 
Coal Company Limited was only 72% of their programs.                           
 
             (c) As compared to the previous year, offer was less by 14.68% in ECL, 
14.16% in CCL and 2.35% in Bharat Cooking Coal Company Limited.  
The overall growth in offer was only 3.12%.                          
   
(d)  Even in South Eastern C oal Company Limited and Mahanadi 
Coalfields Limited, which have cons tantly been reporting surplus coal 
stocks awaiting evacuation, the o ffers were less than the program. 
The loading in SECL was 93.39% of  the offer and in MCL it was 
90.06%.                                                                                                                           
 
(e)  Loading in all other coal companies have been more than 95% of the 
offer.  Taking into account the fact that the incidence of Left 
Behind(L.B) in all coal companies  except Bharat Cooking Coal 
Company Limited  and Mahanadi Coalfi elds Limited was more than 
last year, the loading potentials of Coal India Ltd. as a whole has 
been fully met. 
                     
(f) If the growth in offer vis-à-vis t hat in loading is co mpared, it is seen 
that the growth in loading has been more in almost all coal 
companies.   
 

  
            (g)This only proves the Railway’s intent and capability in regard to 
meeting the demand of wagons by the coal companies.    
                
 The maintenance and upgradation of in frastructure of sidings is 
primarily the responsibility of the coal companies. T he Railway infrastructure 
upgradation is being done on a continuous basis  after evaluation of the potential 
traffic on various routes.   It may al so to be pointed out that the Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor has been primar ily sanctioned to move coal traffic 
from the coalfields of Eastern India to the Northern India Power Houses.             
As far as loadability of wagons is c oncerned, Railways fixes the freight for 
transportation on the basis of “cost of se rvice” and “value of service”. Normally 
high-valued commodities are charged at  higher classes and lower-valued and 
essential commodities are charged at com paratively lower classes. Charging at 
any particular class also takes into a ccount loadability of the commodities in 
wagons.           
Earlier, concept of minimum weight  condition (MWC) was prevalent on 
Indian Railways.  That MWC was almost nearer to the actual loadability of the 
commodity in wagons, simultaneously, light er commodities were charged at 
comparatively higher classes.  But differ ential charging by classifying different 
forms of commodities at different classes resulted into mis-declaration. It also led 
to confusion to customers and Railways both.   Due to this, disputes and litigation 
had taken place.  After a lot of deliberat ion, it was decided to dispense with the 
concept of MWC. After that charging is being done on the basis of permissible 
carrying capacity of a wagon (PCC).     
         The Railway receipt indicates the weight of a commodity loaded in a wagon 
as also weight for which freight is to be charged.  This is based on the concept 
that freight has to be charged based on weight specified in the Central 
Government’s notification wh ich can be a specific figure in terms of tonnage, or 
the marked/ stenciled carrying capacity of wagon or the permissible carrying 
capacity which can be more than the mark ed carrying capacity. Thus, even in a 
hypothetical situation, if a consignor loads only one tonne in a particular type of 
wagon, he is charged the pr escribed weight condition i.e. permissible carrying 
capacity of the wagon applicable for that commodity and for the particular type of 
wagon. The basic premise is that Railwa ys charge a particular amount of freight 
e specified commodity when loaded in a wagon.      for th         
 A more or less similar yardstick is followed in respect of chargeable 
distance. For transportation of any commodity for less than 100 km, Railways 
have notified that the minimum distance for charge would be 100 Km. In addition, 
the chargeable distance for ce rtain notified sections could be higher than their 
actual physical distance because of application of inflation in distance for charge. 
The 3rd parameter is classification of the commodity and this coupled with other 
two parameters of chargeabl e weight and chargeable distance determines the 
amount of freight to be charged.        

  
 It is a fact that all variants of c oal cannot be loaded up to the same level 
in rail wagons.  Coal like ‘A’ grade coal, wa shed coal etc, is difficult to load upto 
the prescribed PCC but the lower grade coal which comprise bulk of the coal 
transported by rail, can be loaded upto t he prescribed PCC and even more in 
some wagons.  This has been substantiat ed by the loadability trial conducted on 
different Zonal Railways. A recent tra il shows average loadability of ‘E’ & ‘F’ 
grade coal in range of 67 to 72 tonnes, which is more than the PCC on CC+8 
routes.  Not only this, same grade / type of  coal from different collieries  and in 
different depth of the mines were found with different loadabilit y.  Washed coal 
from different washery was also found with different loadability. Therefore, it is 
difficult to fix different PCC for diffe rent variants of coal. Relying upon the 
averaging principle regarding loadability of coal, the maximum loadability was 
found for slack coal, which comprises about 90% of the total c oal transported by 
rail.  It has been taken as the PCC of the wagons, which is applicable uniformly 
to all variants of coal.  If PCC is fixed on the basis of loadability of different type 
of coal, the classification of different type of coal will require to be fixed differently 
i.e. lower grade coal (having low calorifi c value) at lower class and high quality 
coal (high calorific value) at higher class. But differential classification for different 
varieties of coal was not considered to  be practical and a uniform rate has been 
fixed for all varieties of coal.         
        Moreover, the issue of fixing different PCC on the basis of loadability of 
coal, or for that purpose any commodity, in itself, is a cumbersome process. 
Experience reveals that such exercises are never conducted to the satisfaction of 
customer as well as Railways.                                           
Moreover, in case the actual weight of the commodity loaded in the wagon 
happens to be less than the permissible ca rrying capacity of the wagons for 
which the freight is charged, the freight for actual weight may be deemed to have 
arged at a higher class of freight rate. been ch             
In view of the above facts, Railways do not agree for joint loadability trial 
of all variants of coal in all collieries / washeries for ascertaining loadability. The 
fixation of permissible carrying capacity fo r loading of coal on the basis of the 
principle explained above is quite reasonable. 
 
 
(Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) ’s O.M. No. 2006/RCC/206(COPU)/1 dated 
18.06.2007) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI. No. 10) 
 
RECOVERY OF OUTSTANDING DUES 
 
The Committee note that as on 31 st March 2005, the outstanding coal 
sales dues of the coal companies am ounts to Rs. 3489 crores consisting of 
disputed dues amounting to Rs. 1596 cror es and undisputed dues amounting to 

  
Rs. 1893 crores. The reasons for such huge outstanding dues, as attributed by 
the CIL include-disputes raised by St ate Electricity Boards (SEBs), non-
availability of funds with the SEBs/Other Power Utilities and the time lag between 
billing and payment.  
 
As regards recovery of outstanding dues, the Committee note that Ministry 
of Coal and Ministry of Power jointl y appointed umpires in 1995 to settle the 
disputed dues of SEBs/Power  Utilities. The Committee,  however, observe that 
this system did not prove very e ffective because due to absence of any 
prescribed time limit, the umpires took very long periods to pronounce awards. 
Even after a lapse of 10 years, the final award in respect of few disputes are still 
awaited. The Committee further note that in one case, even after pronouncement 
of the award in favour of Central Coalfields Ltd. (CCL) and Bharat Coking Coal 
Ltd. (BCCL) amounting to Rs. 428 crore, t he amount is yet to be recovered from 
the concerned party viz. t he Badarpur Thermal Power Station (BTPS). Another 
measure taken by the Govern ment of India for settlement  of outstanding dues is 
the Securitisation Scheme launched in 2001.  This scheme has a provision for 
opening irrevocable Letter of Credit (LC) by the SEBs for payment  of coal sale 
bills and payment of interest for delay  in payment beyond a stipulated period. 
This scheme also provides for regulation in coal supply in case of non-payment 
within the stipulated period. The Committ ee note that while some of SEBs have 
already opened LC, others are being pursued for opening it.  
 
 From the above, the Committee conc lude that presently , there is no 
effective mechanism available with the c oal companies for recovery of their 
outstanding dues from various SEBs/Power Utilities. In the absence of any 
stringent provision for realization of arrears, the appointment of umpires or the 
securitization schemes etc. have not proved very effective in achieving the 
desired results. Though it may not be an appropriate idea to altogether stop 
supply of coal in case of non-payment s by some SEBs/Power Utilities, the 
Committee are of the consi dered opinion that some coordination mechanism is 
required to be evolved involving the Mini stry of Coal, Ministry of Power and 
respective State Governments to look in to the issue of outstanding disputed 
payments due to CIL and its s ubsidiaries and to work out the solutions in an 
expeditious manner. Further, it ma y also be made mandatory under the 
securitization scheme for opening of LC by all the SEBs and other Power Utilities 
for availing supply of coal from coal companies.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
State Electricity Boards and other majo r consumers of coal   have been 
paying Coal India Limited(CIL)  for the coal  lifted by them.    However, there  are 
some outstanding dues. The total sum outstanding as on 31. 12.2006 amounts to 
Rs.  3380.98 crores. Steps  taken by the   coal companies  to recover  the 
outstanding  dues are as  follows:  

  
i) As per  provision in the Securitisation Scheme, coal companies  are 
insisting  on State Electricity Boards (SEBs) for opening of Indian 
Revolving Letter of Credit (IRLC) for payment of bills raised against supply 
of coal. Some SEBs have already opened IRLC and  the  scheme  is 
under operation successfully.  Remaining SEBs are being requested to 
comform to this scheme. 
ii) Securitization Scheme has provision fo r regulation of supply, in case of 
non payment of bills during the period  stipulated therein. Further, under 
the provisions of the Securitizati on   Scheme,  coal companies are 
claiming  interest  in case of delay in payment beyond  the schedule 
specified in the scheme. 
iii) Coal companies  are hol ding meetings periodically  at different  levels in 
case of  any default  in payment of bills and  for settlement of disputes 
raised by SEBs  and other consumers.  
 
Umpires appointed by Central Govt. in  1995 to settle the long outstanding 
disputed dues of SEBs/Pow er Utilities have pronounced final awards. Total 
amount of award in favour of the c oal companies amounts to Rs. 1191. 85 
crores. Most SEBs/power Utilities except  Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board 
have accepted the award.  UPSEB has f iled a writ petition in Allahabad High 
Court against the Umpire’s award. The decision of umpire is only pending in 
respect of Punjab State Electricity B oard (PSEB) & Gujarat Electricity Board 
(GEB).  It is thus apparent that appointment of umpires for settlement of dues 
helps the Coal Companies in settlement  and payment of outstanding dues to a 
large extent. 
 
Agreement has also been made with power  utilities for adjustment of coal 
Cell with Cess liability/power bill with State Governments like West Bengal Power 
Development Corporation (WBPDCL) and Chhattishgarh State Electricity Board 
(CSEB).  
 
The Sub-Group constituted under the C hairmanship of Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Coal also reviews the status of pending dues and advises the 
defaulting power utilities for expeditious settlement of the same.  Standing 
Linkage Committee (Short Term) also implores defaulting power utilities for 
settlement of dues. 
 
The total dues of CIL as on 31. 12.2003 was 4725.35 crores which has 
come down to Rs. 3380.98 crores as on 31. 12.2006 as a result of various efforts 
made by Coal India Limited/Ministry of Coal.  Details of such consumers are  
given as follows.  Thus the reduction of dues amounting to  Rs. 1342.37 crores 
has been achieved during the last three years by Coal India Limited. As a result 
of the steps taken as mentioned above, the outst anding dues are gradually 
reducing.   
 
 

  
 
 
 (Rupees in crores) 
Sl. No.  Name of the Consumers  Dues   
 POWER  
1.  Bihar Sate  Electricity Board (BSES) 196.58 
2.  Jharkhand State Electricity Board (JSEB) 82.77 
3.  Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Limited. (UPRVUNL) 93.40 
4.  Punjab State Electricity Board (PSEB) 244.89 
5.  Tamil Nadu Electricity  Board TNEB 15.57 
6.  Haryana Power Generation Corporation Limited (HPGCL) 25.17 
7.  Rajasthan Rajya  Vidyut  Utpadan Nigam Limited  (RRVUNL) 99.04 
8.  Maharashtra State Electricity Board (MSEB) 151.45 
9.  Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (MPEB) 385.43 
10.  Chhattisgarh Electricity Board (CSEB) 52.72 
11.  Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited (GUVNL) 8.41 
12.  West Bengal State Electricity Board (WBSEB) 1.29 
13.  West Bengal  Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) 133.90 
14.  Andhra Pradesh Power Generation  Corporation Limited (APGENCO) 8.06 
15.  Karnataka Power Company Limited (KPCL) 12.62 
16.  Durgapur Project Limited (DPL) 21.32 
17.  Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) 179.84 
18.  Delhi Vidyut Board (DVB) 3.85 
19.  Badarpur Thermal Power Station (BTPS) 334.48 
20.  National  Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) 357.64 
21.  Bharat Aluminium Company Ltd. (BALCO)  1.34 
22.  Calcatta Electrict  Supply  Company (CESC) 5.59 
23.  Ahmedabad Electricity Corporation(AEC) 2.46 
24.  Bombay Suburban  Electric Company(BSES) 1.47 
25.  Disergarh Power Station Company (DPSC)  2.61 
26.  Tenughat Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (TVNL) 103.64 
27.  Orissa Power Generation Corporation (OPGC) 4.39 
 Total Power   2529.93 
 STEEL  
28.  Durgapur  Steel  Plant  132.22 
29.  Rourkela Steel Plant  164.65 
30.  Bokaro Steel Plant 145.79 
31.  Bhilai  Steel Plant (BOKARO) 276.47 
32.  IISCO Steel Plant  11.66 
33.  Indian Iron Steel Company  26.12 
34.  Tata  Iron Steel Company  0.99 
35.  Rashtrya Ispat Nigam (VIZAG) 46.08 
 TOTAL STEEL  803.98 
36.  LOCO 4.80 
37.  GOVT.  42.27 
  TOTAL OTHERS  47.07  
 GRAND TOTAL  3380.98 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
 
 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl No. 16) 
 
NEED TO CURB ILLEGAL MINING 
 The Committee note that as per the provisions of Mines and Minerals  
(Development and Regulations) Ac t, 1957, no mining operation can be 
undertaken except under a mining lease granted as per the provisions of the said 
Act and the rules framed thereunder. Therefore, mining of coal and lignite without 
obtaining the mining lease would amount  to illegal mining. The Committee 
observe that most of the illegal mining ac tivities are confined to the States of 
West Bengal and Jharkhand and is taking place mostly outside the leasehold 
areas of CIL and its subsidiaries. While the coal companies do take preventive 
and punitive action in respect of illegal mining in their leasehold areas, for non-
leasehold areas, the State Authorities hav e to take action. The Committee have 
been informed that the Central Government is also seized of this problem by 
requesting, from time to time, various States which produce coal, to take 
vigorous steps to arrest illegal mini ng and the consequent accidents. Also, the 
Coal companies are constantly in touch with the district adm inistration and other 
intelligence agencies to check the activi ties of coal mafia. The Committee 
observe that to prevent illegal mini ng and theft of coal, the West Bengal 
Government have formed Committees at t he State level, District level, Sub 
divisional level and block levels wit h the members from the concerned 
subsidiaries. The decisions taken by these Committees are being implemented 
by the concerned subsidiaries with the hel p of Police and District Administration. 
Similarly, the Government of Jhar khand have formed Committees at Chief 
Secretary level to conduct monthly meeti ngs for discussing measures to prevent 
illegal mining and theft of coal. On the part of the Central Government, the 
Committee have been informed that under the Chairmanship of the Minister of 
Coal, a Committee has been formed to look into the issues related to illegal 
mining of coal. 
 
 From the above, the Committee note that though a number of measures 
taken at the Centre as well as State Governments levels, the same have not 
proved effective to check illegal mining. As it is a serious issue resulting in loss to 
the coal companies and endangering the lives of the innocent people, the 
Committee feel that some concrete steps  are needed to be taken to prevent it. 
For this purpose, the Committee desire t hat specific areas of cooperation 
between the State Governmental Agencie s, Coal companies and the Central 
Government need to be identified to effect ively deal with the incidents of illegal 
mining. The role and responsibilities of eac h of these agencies also needs to be 
specified. Further, the implementation of specific te chnological innovations to 
effectively seal the abandoned mines from w here the majority of illegal mining 
takes place be also considered. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Ltd. has been taking bot h preventive and punitive action in 
respect of illegal mining in their leasehold areas. 

  
 
Illegal mining of coal is carried out stealthily and clandestinely in 
abandoned/closed/disused mines/non-working part of mines or from outcrop 
regions. However, law and order  is a State subject.  Henc e, primarily, it is the 
responsibility of the State/ District administration to take necessary deterrent 
action to stop/curb illegal mining of coal. 
 
A Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of the 
Honourable Minister of State for Coal, to look into the issues related to illegal 
mining of coal. The Minister in-charge of mining and the leaders of opposition 
from the State of West Bengal and Jharkhand are also member of the 
Committee. To suggest measures to deal wit h technical, legal and safety related 
issues, the Committee has constitut ed a sub-group.  The Sub-group has 
completed its exercise and is awaiting the completion of the other study. 
 
Separately, a study has  been instituted by engaging XLRI Jamshedpur 
and ISM Dhanbad to look into the socio-economic causes of illegal mining, extent 
of the problem, techno-economic measur es required to tackle the menace of 
illegal mining etc.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 21) 
SETTING UP A MODERN NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF COAL TECHNOLOGY 
In view of the rapid changes inte rnationally taking place in coal 
technology, the Committee feel that ther e is a need to continuously train and 
update our technical people of different  categories by setting up a Modern 
National Institute of Coal Technology wit h adequate infrastructure as a part of or 
in close relation with the Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coal India Limited trains their technical personnel of different categories to 
upgrade their skill. To develop skills of it s personnel, the training and re-training 
are being conducted at the 26 training institutes of their eight subsidiary 
companies. The training institut es are all well equipped with adequate 
infrastructure. The training programme on coal technology is being conducted at 
Coal India Long wall & Mechanization Traini ng Institute at Moonidih of Bharat 
Coking Coal Ltd. in collaboration with the British Coal Mining. Every year, on an 
average Coal India trains 9000 employees for up gradation of technical skills.  
 
 Therefore, it is felt that, there is no need to set up a separate Institute of 
Coal Technology for continuous training and updating of technical skills for the 
present.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 1) 
 
FILLING UP OF VACANCIES ON THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF CIL AND ITS 
SUBSIDIARIES. 
 
As per the prescribed composition of the Board of Directors of the CIL, 
there is a provision of three Non-offi cial Directors. The Committee however, note 
that there have been no Non-official Directors on CIL's Board for the last 4 years 
beginning from 2002-03. Similarly, few posts  of non-official Directors are also 
lying vacant in the subsidiaries of CIL. Regarding the reasons for these 
vacancies, the Committee have been info rmed that the appointment of Non-
official Directors is done on the basis  of recommendations made by Public 
Enterprise Selection' Board (PESB) th rough Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) by way of selection amongst public men, technocrats, management 
experts, consultants and professional managers in industry and trade with high 
degree of proven ability. The Committee have also been informed that DPE have 
recently recommended a list of names, company-wise, for appointment as non-
official Directors on the Board of Directors of CIL and its eight subsidiaries (5 
each for Coal India Limited, Eastern C oalfields Limited, Bharat Coking Coal 
Limited, Central Coalfields Limited, Northern Coalfields Limited, Western 
Coalfields Limited and Coal Mines Pl anning and Development Institute Limited 
and 4 each for South Eastern Coalfiel ds Limited and Mahanadi Coalfields 
Limited). Thus, action to induct the non-o fficial Directors on the Boards of CIL 
and its subsidiaries has reportedly been initiated. The Committee have been 
further apprised that vacancies of non-official Directors in the Board has not 
substantially affected the decisions wo rk of the Board of Directors. The 
Committee wonder as to how the functi ons sought to be performed by the non-
official Directors are being actually m anaged in the CIL and its subsidiaries in 
their absence. Further, no information has  been brought to the notice of the 
Committee which may suggest that any  serious efforts have been made/are 
being made by the Government to fill up the vacant post during the last four 
years. 
 
The Committee are not at all satisf ied with the above-mentioned reply of 
the Ministry. In the opinion of the Committ ee, by not filling up t he vacant posts of 
non-official Directors for four years, the Board has been depriv ed of the services 
of persons who are expert in the fiel d of management, industry and trade. The 
Committee express their displeasure ov er the lackadaisical attitude of the 
Government in filling up the vacancie s of non-official Directors whose 
significance in running the organizati on require no special mention. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all out efforts must be made by 

  
the Government for filling up the remaini ng vacancies of non-official Directors on 
the Boards of CIL and its subsidiaries  without any further loss of time. The 
Committee further recommend that a mechani sm should be put in place wherein 
a specific time limit is prescribed for f illing up the vacancies for each category of 
posts on Board of Directors and action must  be initiated in advance for filling up 
the forthcoming vacancies which are generally known in advance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Department of Public Enterprises vide their OM dated 13.12.2005 
recommended a list of names, company-wise, for appointment as non-official 
Directors on the Board of Directors of CI L and its eight subsidiaries (5 each for 
Coal India Limited, Eastern Coalfields Limited, Bharat Coking Coal Limited, 
Central Coalfields Limited, Northern C oalfields Limited, Western Coalfields 
Limited and Coal Mines Planning and Devel opment Institute Limited and 4 each 
for South Eastern Coalfields Limited and Mahanadi Coalfields Limited). Although 
the process for appointment of the pers ons recommended by DPE was initiated 
immediately it could not be completed wit hin one year. It took time in obtaining 
the declarations from the recommended per sons since the current addresses of 
many nominees were not available.  After obtaining the required declarations and 
approval of the Minister of State (Coal), a proposal for appointment of non-official 
part-time Directors on the Board of Dir ectors of Coal India Limited and its 
subsidiaries was submitted to the D eptt. of Personnel and Training. The DoPT, 
however, have returned the proposal stat ing that the recommendations made by 
DPE on 13.12.2005 are valid only for a year and as such need to be revalidated.  
 
The Deptt. of Public Enterprises have, therefore, been requested to 
revalidate the names recommended by DPE vi de their aforesaid OM and also to 
recommend two new names for appointment on ECL Board in place of those who 
have declined the offer. The DPE vide t heir OM dated 28.02.2007 have informed 
that the matter of revalidation has been referred by them to PESB for their 
consideration. As soon as a revalidated panel   is received from DPE, a revised 
proposal would be submitted to the DoP&T  for obtaining approval of ACC and 
subsequent induction of non-official Directo rs on the various boards  of CIL and 
its subsidiaries. The matter is being purs ued for early appointment  of non-official 
Directors. 
 
Once non-official Directors are inducted this time on the boards of CIL and 
its subsidiaries, advance action would, t hereafter, be initiated for filling up the 
forthcoming vacancies well before the completion of their tenure. 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Please see paragraph no. 6  

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 6) 
 
PERFORMANCE OF UNDERGROUND MINING OPERATIONS 
 
The Committee note that in India, the coal mining is done by two methods 
namely the shaft mining generally call ed ‘Underground mining’ and the strip 
mining known as ‘Open cast mining’. T he Open cast mining is much more 
advantageous to underground mining in terms of the net output as well as the 
cost of production.  This is indicated by  the fact that output per Manshift (OMS) 
for open cast mine is 7.18 as compared to underground mining which is just 0.69. 
In this regard, the Committee observe that most of the underground mining 
operations in Coal India Limited are incurring losses. There are only 38 mines out 
of 284 underground mines of Coal  India Ltd., which are yielding profit. Most of 
the 500 underground mines t hat Coal India Limited inher ited at the time of its 
establishment were basically small units. The infrastructure available with these 
mines is very old and most of such mines do not have any scope for improving 
their evacuation facilities which is a must for improving production/ productivity. 
According to CIL, all these mines though incurring heavy loses could not be 
closed because of difficulties in redeploy ment of surplus manpower and strong 
opposition from trade unions. Any improvement in augmentation of evacuation 
capacity in these mines and other related infrastructure to implement 
modernization of operations would requi re considerable investment. Further, 
since many of the loss making are also mi ning inferior grade coal, it would not be 
economically viable to invest for such modernization programmes.  
 
In view of the above stated position, the Committee feel that an in-depth 
analysis of all the underground mines s hould be undertaken to identify the 
possibilities of improving productivity from  such mines by way of modernization, 
wherever feasible. Further, to cope up with the heavy loss making underground 
mines where the improvement  in productivity by way of modernization is not 
possible, the Government may explore the possibility of closing down such mines 
and using the resources-both manpower as well as mechanical so made 
available, for improving the economi cs of other mines where economic 
turnaround is possible.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been long felt that an in-depth st udy is required to be carried out to 
identify the mines technically suitabl e for introduction of mass production 
technologies in underground mines of CIL command areas/mines to enhance the 
underground coal production and productivity. Accordingly, an exercise has been 
carried out by the Committee constitut ed by CMD, CMPDI on 21.11.2005 on the 
directive of Ministry of Coal. 
 
The Committee prepared an “Approac h Note” on mechanization of 
underground mines/ projects of  CIL and its subsidiaries, based on international 

  
best practices vis-à-vis Indian geo-mining conditions. 
 
  The scope of assignment of the Committee was: 
 
III. To identify areas/coal seams in existing mines/ projects and green field 
projects for application of mass production underground technology along 
with spcific enabling condition in coalfields if any. 
IV. To examine and recommend suit able organizational structure for 
enhancing production & productivity from UG Mines project.   
 
The Committee has since completed the study and the conclusion of study 
drawn by the committee as stated in its interim report is as under: 
 
Presently, out of 393 operating UG mines  in CIL, 25 existing mines and 17 
ongoing projects have respectively been identified for introduction of Mass 
production Technologies (MPT). Similarly, in case of Green-field mining projects, 
16 projects are identified which have the potential to operate with MPT.  
 
Thus, mass production technology c an be introduced in 58 underground 
mines/projects of CIL provided the constr aints outlined in the report against each 
mine/project of each subsidiary company of CIL are dealt with.   
 
Apart from the above, in t he meeting taken by the H on’ble Minister of State 
for Coal on 11.01.2007 with CM Ds of all companies, CIL has been directed to 
increase the underground production to a leve l of 75 million tones in the terminal 
year of Eleventh Plan.  Accordingly,  a detailed study is being undertaken to 
identify other projects and related activities to attain this goal.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Please refer to para no. 12 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl.No. 19) 
NEED FOR REVIEW OF ROYALTY STRUCTURE 
 
 The Committee note that there is a persistent demand of various coal 
producing States for revision of the ro yalty structure. Keeping in view the 
considerable improvement in the profit of Coal Compani es over a period of time, 
the Committee feel that t he demands for review of royalty structure of the 
concerned States needs to be addressed in the light of the recommendations of 
the11th and 12th Finance Commission and the recommendations of the Sarkaria 
Commission. 

  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Royalty on coal and lignite is payable under Section 9(1) of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Ac t. Section 9(3) of the  MMDR  Act, 
1957 empowers  the Central Government to enhance or reduce the royalty rates 
in respect of any mineral. The proviso to  Section 9(3) of the Act prevents the 
Central Government from enhancing  the rate  of royalty in respect of any mineral 
more than once during any  period of th ree years and there is no compulsion on 
the Central Government to revise royalty every three years.   
 
 The royalty rates in respect of coal  were last revised on 16.08.2002 and 
the royalty rate in respect of lignite was revised on 15.03.2001.   
 
 Ministry of Coal constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of the 
Additional Secretary (Coal) on 02.06.2005 to examine the issue of revision of 
royalty rates on coal.  The Committee afte r detailed deliberations with all stake 
holders submitted its report on 14.07.2006.  
 
 In the mean time, it was observed that many State Governments have 
resorted to levying cess/other taxes on coal in addition to royalty.  In order to 
discuss this issue, a meeting was convened on 10.10.2006 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Coal) with the representatives of coal producing 
States.   
 
 Based on the report of the Committ ee on royalty, a Note for the CCEA 
has been prepared and circulated to the concerned Ministries/Deptts. on 
02.02.2007 for their comments.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
Please refer to Para No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report. 

  
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl No. 11) 
 
ALLOCATION OF COAL BLOCKS THROUGH COMPETITIVE BIDDING 
 
The Committee note that prior to 1976, the coal mining activities in the 
country were governed by Coal Mines (Nationalization) Act, 1973 and it was 
restricted to public sector only. Subsequently, by various amendments in the said 
Act carried out in 1976, 1993 and 1996, private companies engaged in the 
production of Iron & Steel, generation of power, working of coal, cement 
production etc. were also permitted to parti cipate in the coal mining sector by 
way of captive mining. The underlying idea was that allotment of captive coal 
blocks would help in augmenting the produc tion of these basic inputs to the 
economy besides contributing to the C entral and State Gove rnment exchequers 
by way of revenue from taxes, royalty etc. As per the existing mechanism, the 
allocation of coal blocks to private par ties is done through the mechanism of an 
inter-ministerial inter-governmental body  called the Screening Committee. The 
Screening Committee is chaired by the Secretary (Coal) and has representation 
from Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Po wer, Ministry of Industry and Commerce, 
Ministry of Railways, Coal India Limited, CMPDIL and the concerned State 
Governments. The application is received from the applicant in the Ministry of 
Coal along with its enclosures and is then s ent to the concerned administrative 
Ministry for their scrutiny and recommendations. It is also sent to CIL/CMPDIL for 
their scrutiny and recommendations. In the Screening Committ ee, the applicant 
is given an opportunity to present his case before the full Screening Committee. 
In this regard, the Commi ttee note that a large number  of applications for 
allocation of coal blocks for captive mini ng are pending in the Ministry of Coal. 
Considering this large number  of applications per block, the allocation through 
the existing mechanism has become a difficu lt task. To overcome this problem, 
the Committee note that a new formulation namely competitive bidding process 
of selection has been proposed which w ould be more objective and transparent. 
To implement this new pr ocess, an amendment to Coal Mines (Nationalization) 
Act 1973 has been considered necessary wh ich is under consideration of the 
Government and is likely to take some time. As such the Government have 
decided to continue for the time being with the existing mechanism. The 
Committee further note that another opti on to introduce competitive bidding by 
amending the Mines & Minerals (Devel opment and Regulati on) Act 1957 that 
could be applicable to all minerals covered under the said Act, including coal and 
lignite, is also under consideration of the Government. The proposed formulation 
has been referred to Ministry of Law and Ju stice for their legal opinion. A final 

  
view will reportedly be taken only after t he views of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice are obtained.  
 
The Committee, therefore, observe that  though the privat e participation in 
the Coal Sector has been permitted by the Government by way of captive mining, 
the desired objectives have not  been fully achieved in view of the cumbersome 
process involved in the allocation of the coal blocks. In view of the huge backlog 
of the applications from private participants, the need of the hour is the 
expeditious implementation of  the competitive bidding pr ocess of selection. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that c oordinated efforts must be made by the 
Government to remove the impediment s involved in the introduction of the 
competitive bidding by carrying out expeditiously the requisite proposed 
amendments in the Coal Mines (Nati onalisation) Act 1973 or the Mines & 
Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957, whichever is deemed more 
appropriate. The Committee recommend that this matter needs to be finalized by 
the Government in a time  bound manner keeping in view its national importance. 
In order to implement the proposal expeditiously, the Committee recommend that 
the follow- up action with regar d to drafting/ amending of relevant rules may also 
be taken up simultaneously.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Energy Coordination Committee in its meeting  held on 17 th August, 2005 
had taken decision that Coal blocks for captive mining may be auctioned through 
competitive bidding.  At present, the allocation is decided on the basis of 
recommendations made by the Screening Committee.  
 
A proposal for allocation of coal blocks under competitive bidding was 
prepared in the Ministry of Coal.  Th is was referred to Department of Legal 
Affairs for their opinion.  Department of  Legal Affairs has endorsed the view that 
an amendment in the Coal Minies (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 would be 
necessary.  Accordingly a draft am endent Bill for amending the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 was prepared.  
 
 The matter was discussed in the meeting taken by the Principal Secretary 
to the PM and in pursuance of the minut es of the meeting, a formulation to 
amend the MMDR Act 1957 to provide for competitive bidding process of 
allocation in respect of all the minerals including coal and lignite was referred to 
the Ministry of Mines for their view.  T he Ministry of Mines has advised in their 
response that the Coal Ministry could re vise the formulation only to include coal 
and lignite as in respect of other mineral s they will consider the same separately 
after the report of the High Level Commi ttee on Mineral Policy is received.   
Accordingly, a revised formulation was referred to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
for their advice on 3.7.2006. Opinion of Mi nistry of Law & Justice was received 
28.7.2006. Further  clarific ation was sought from Ministry of Law and Justice  
vide note of Secretary (C)  on 17.08.2006.   Ministry of Law again advised, 

  
Ministry of Coal to initiate suitable measures for amendment of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. 
 
This issue was again discussed in the meeting taken by Principal 
Secretary to the Prime Mi nister on 22.09.2006. Accordi ngly a draft Cabinet Note 
along with all relevant documents was sent  to Ministry of Mines on 29.09.2006 
and  Ministry of Mines was requested to  formulate proposal for approval of 
Cabinet. Draft Cabinet Note  as prepared by the Ministry of Mines was vetted by 
the Ministry of Coal and returned back to Ministry of Mines on 11 th  November, 
2006. Proposal has already been sent to Cabinet by the Ministry of Mines for 
consideration. At present the issue has been referred to  a Group of Ministers for 
a decision.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 Please see paragraph 15 of Chapter I of the Report.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 13) 
COAL MINES NATIONALISATION AMENDMENT BILL 
 
 The Committee note that since nationa lization of coal mines in 1973, the 
coal sector is dominated by the public sector. The present legal framework 
permits private sector participation in coal mining to a very limited extent through 
the route of captive mining. The lack of any competition has been a major factor 
that has constrained the grow th of coal industry. As per the Economic Survey ( 
2005 – 06 ), in the coal sector, lack of pr ivate competition and market orientation 
has stifled growth which has  affected the power sector most. In this regard, the 
Committee note that in line with t he recommendations of the Committee 
constituted by the Planning Commission, under  the Chairmanship of Shri K.S.R. 
Chari, former Coal Secretary in 1995, the Government decided to open the Coal 
Sector for private participation. Acco rdingly, a Coal Mine Nationalisation 
Amendment Bill was introduced in the Rajy a Sabha in the year 2000. The main 
objective of this Bill was to allow the co mpanies registered in India to mine coal 
and lignite without the existing restriction of captive consumption as well as to 
engage in exploration of coal and lignite res ources in the country. In this regard, 
the Committee note that as per the deliberations in the various meetings between 
the trade unions and the gov ernment, it was decided that the matter for 
processing of the Bill further in Par liament shall be decided only after having 
discussions with the Trade Unions. A Group of Ministers ( GOM ) was constituted 
in this connection. After change of the Go vernment at the Centre, the GOM is  
required to be reconstituted.  As per the latest information made available to the 

  
Committee, the matter of reconstituti on of the Group of Ministers is being 
pursued with the Cabinet Secretariat. The Committee, therefore, feel that the 
objective sought to be achieved by t he Coal Mines Nationalization Amendment 
Bill is still pending. This im portant issue needs a serious consideration by the 
Government keeping in view the future interest of the proper development of coal 
sector in India. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that Cabinet Secretariat 
should take up the matter of constituting the GOM on top priority so that the 
contentious issues may be resolved with the Trade Unions expeditiously.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Government deci ded to amend the Coal Mines 
(Nationalization) Act, 1973 to allow I ndian companies both in the public and 
private sectors  to mine coal   in the country without the existing restriction of  
captive mining  and to be engaged in explor ation of coal  in the country. 
Accordingly a Bill, namely, the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Amendment Bill, 
2000, was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 24.4.2000 . 
 
The Bill was referred to the Standi ng Committee on Industry on 27.4.2000 
and then to the Standing Committee on Energy on 22.11.2000 for examination 
and report.  The Committee, after having extensive and wide-ranging discussions 
and consultations with the State Governments, Trade Unions/Officers’ 
Associations, apex Chambers of Trade and Commerce, and Central Ministries 
submitted its report which was tabled in both the Hous es of Parliament on 
31.08.2001. The Committee recommended that  the Bill be passed to facilitate 
Indian private companies to explore and mine coal and lignite without the existing 
restriction of captive mining. 
  
Due to stiff resistance from the trade unions, the Bill could not be 
processed further. The matter was cons idered by the Energy Co-ordination 
Committee, (ECC) headed by the Prime Mi nister. The Energy Coordination 
Committee has taken a view that the B ill should be moved for consideration only 
after a consensus is arrived at.  ECC has   asked that efforts should be done in 
this regard.  Planning Commission has been asked to prepare a Paper on this 
subject.   
  
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated  03.05.2007 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
Please see paragraph 18 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 15) 
 
NEED FOR INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL REPORTING SYSTEM (IFRS) 
 
 The Committee note that in order to participate in international bids for 
acquisition of coal property  abroad, the accounts of C oal India Limited and its 
subsidiaries are required to be prepared under International Financial Reporting 
System ( IFRS ). Presently, the said accounts are prepared in  line with Indian 
Accounting Standard and in compliance wit h the Companies Act, 1956. In this 
regard, the Committee note t hat the CIL Board has alr eady taken a decision to 
prepare the accounts of CIL and its subsidiaries as per the International Financial 
Reporting standard and get it audited by Audito rs of International repute. To this 
effect, the necessary guidelines have also been formulated and selection of the 
Auditors is in process. Keeping in view the fact that acquisition of coal equities 
abroad will continue to rise in the near future, the Committee recommend that the 
maintenance of accounts by the CIL and its subsidiaries be made IFRS 
compliant at the earliest possible. The Committee also desire that the selection of 
the concerned Auditors which reportedly is in progress, be also completed within 
a specific timeframe so that no delays occur in implementation of this system.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
CIL floated a tender to appoint an I ndian Chartered Accounting firm to 
audit the IFRS compliant consolidated a ccounts of CIL, which is yet to be 
finalised. The year of accounts to be audited under the scope of  this tender is 
under review and may require to be amended. However, the progress in 
acquiring overseas coal assets has so far not been impacted by not having 
audited IFRS accounts of CIL.  
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 18) 
 
NEED FOR A NATIONAL INTEGRATED COAL POLICY 
 
 The Committee note that at present 50% of the total commercial energy 
needs in the country are met by coal and the scenario is likely to remain the 
same for another 20 years or so. The Committee feel that in order to promote the 

  
development and utilization of  the coal resources in a planned manner, there is 
definitely a need for formulation of a Nati onal Integrated Coal Policy for meeting 
the present and future coal requirement s of the country. The Committee observe 
that the country already has a nuclear policy as well as the electricity policy 
whereas a petroleum policy is being work ed out. In this regard, the Committee 
note that for quite some ti me now, the Government is seized with preparation of 
a National Coal Policy. The Planni ng Commission in 1995 constituted a 
Committee on Integrated Coal Policy for adoption by the Government during the 
9th and 10 th plan periods. The Committee also note that this Committee after 
undertaking a review of the coal sector had made several landmark 
recommendations, some of which have al so been reportedly implemented by the 
Government. The Committee are however, constrained to note that even though 
a number of recommendations were put fo rth by the Committee since then, an 
Integrated Coal Policy in  a documented form have not so far been brought out. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that though there is 
not a documented policy on coal, there is  a policy framework through various 
enactments and orders which is being follow ed in the functioning of the coal 
sector. The Committee feel that a bunch of scattered enactments and 
administrative orders issued from time to time can not be a substitute for a well 
defined integrated Coal Policy serving as a road map for development of the coal 
sector in a planned manner. In this regar d, the Committee note that recently a 
committee was constituted by the Pl anning Commission which has given its 
report on Integrated Energy Policy. The said report has dealt with energy security 
viewpoints of the country taking into account the nuclear energy prospect, 
thermal energy prospect and non-conventi onal energy prospect altogether. This 
report contains a chapter on coal also as to what is going to be the future 
scenario in respect of coal sector. The Co mmittee feel that taking that chapter as 
one of the guiding principles, the Ministry of Coal must evolve a National Coal 
Policy for the coal sector which is  the need of the hour. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that t he Government must formulate an 
Integrated Coal Policy without any further loss of time.       
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 An Expert Committee headed by Shri T.L.  Sankar has been constituted to 
draw up a road map for coal sector.  On submission of their report, this 
recommendation would be considered.                                             
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 

  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 20) 
 
SUBSIDENCE OF COALFIELDS  
The Committee note that in many coalfields, particularly near the Raniganj 
Area of West Bengal, there are many unstable locations where the cases of 
subsidence have been reported. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need 
to initiate early and appropriate st eps to assess the danger being posed to 
residential areas adjacent to the mining areas where people suffer from a sense 
of insecurity and uncertainty in the wa ke of reports about continued subsidence. 
The Committee further feel that a long-te rm view of this enormous problem is 
urgently required to be undertaken. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Efforts to deal with the problem of subsidence and fire in Raniganj 
Coalfield have been going on since long. T he magnitude of the problem in the 
Raniganj Coalfield of ECL is mainly rela ted to subsidence due to unplanned and 
unsystematic exploitation of coal in the past and compounded by further 
injudicious growth of habitation over subsidence prone areas. 
 
 A high powered committee chaired by Se cretary (Coal was constituted by 
GoI in December 1996 to go in to details of problem of subsidence and fire in 
Raniganj coalfield. As per direction of  the committee CMPDI prepared a Master 
Plan in February 1999. Subsequently a Master plan was updated in 2004 for 
dealing with fire, subsidence and rehabilitation of people residing in unsafe Areas 
of Raniganj coalfield of ECL. Similar Ma ster Plan was also prepared for Jharia 
Coalfield Area of BCCL. These Master  Plans were again updated in August, 
2006 and total period 20 years was reduced to 10 years and all the subsidence 
schemes were converted to Rehabilit ation schemes. The updated Master Plan 
2006 is under process for approval of the Government.   
 
 Also in accordance to the directives of high powered committee in 1996, 
the following stabilization and rehabilitation schemes have been undertaken. The 
rehabilitation scheme, dem ographic survey and other related jobs of 
rehabilitation has been entrusted to the Asansol Durgapur Development Authority 
(ADDA), a State Government Agency on behalf of West Bengal. 
 
Stabilization scheme : Two schemes (Arun Talkies & Kumar Bazar) has been 
completed under Coal Conservation and Development Advisory Committee 
(CCDA) funding. Three other  Environmental Measures  and Subsidence Control 
(EMSC) schemes (Barachak, Porasband & Bhatdoba) have been completed. Six 
EMSC schemes (Fatehpur, Gowla Basti,  Polasban, Potteryu, Haripur and 
Sanctoria) are ongoing and progressi ng. Three new schemes (Jeebanpara, 
Narsamda & Bharatchak) have been approved and drilling work is in progress. 

  
Rehabilitation scheme : Rehabilitation of 4 unstabl e locations and Sanctoria 
village has been entrusted to ADDA. The jobs like Demographic survey, Land 
record verification, Assessment of valuat ion of schemes completed. Selection of 
the proposed rehabilitation sites are in progress. 
 
 
Ministry of Coal 
O.M. No. 25011/11/2006-IF, dated 03.05.2007 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
Please see paragraph 23 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:    RUPCHAND PAL, 
11 October, 2007      Chairman, 
Aswina, 1929(S)           Committee on Public Undertakings 

  
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 9th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON 11th OCTOBER 2007 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1130 hrs. 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri Francis K. George 
4. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
5. Dr. Rameshwar Oraon 
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
7. Kunwar Jitin Prasada  
  
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
9. Shri Dinesh Trivedi  
 
 
 Secretariat 
  
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain Director 
3. Shri N. C. Gupta Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
2. The Committee took up for cons ideration the draft Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the 15 th Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings pertaining to C oal India Limited. The Committee made 
some modifications in comments m ade on recommendation no. 6 regarding 
performance of underground mining operat ions. The Committee also added 
comments to recommendation no. 11 regardi ng allocation of coal blocks through 
competitive bidding.  The committee, thereafter, adopted the report. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Report for 
presentation. 
 
 

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contai ned in the Fifteenth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (F ourteenth Lok Sabha)  on “Coal India 
Limited”. 
 
I Total number of recommendations         21 
lI  Recommendations that hav e been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2,7, 
9,12,14, and 17 
 
Percentage of total     28.57 %
lII Recommendation which the Co mmittee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Gove rnment’s replies [vide 
recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3, 4,5,8,10,16 and 21 
 
Percentage of total   33.33 %
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been a ccepted by the Committee 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 6 and 19  
 
Percentage of total 
  14.29 %
V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of 
Government are still awaited Sl.Nos. 11,13,15,18, and 20 
 
Percentage of total 23.81 %
 
 
 