C.P.U. No. 930   
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
THE FUNCTIONING OF ANDAMAN & NICOBAR 
ISLANDS FOREST AND PLANTATION DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED  
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25-02-2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25-02-2009 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI  
 
 
 
 
 
February, 2009 / Phalguna 1930(S) 
 
36  

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 Page No.  
 
Composition of the Committee (2008-2009) (iii) 
 
Introduction (v) 
 
 Part- A  
Report  
1 
A. 
 Background 1 
B.  Mandate of the Corporation and Impact of the Supreme Court 
Ban 
1 
       C. Restructuring /Revival of the Corporation  11 
D.  Viability of Plantation Projects  15 
E.  Diversification Plans 16 
F. Wages of Industrial Workers 18 
G.  Financial Performance-Waiving of Loans 20 
H.  Board of Directors 22 
 Part – B 
Recommendations/observations of the Committee  
 
24 
   
Annexures  
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

 C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2008 - 2009) 
 
 
  Shri Rupchand Pal - Chairman      
Members  
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Ramesh Bais 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5. Shri Francis K. George 
6. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
7. Shri Harikewal Prasad 
8. Shri Kashiram Rana 
9. Shri Mohan Rawale 
10. 
 Shri K.C.”Baba” Singh 
11.  Smt. Pratibha Singh  
12.  Shri Bharatsinh Madhavsinh Solanki 
13.  Shri K.V.Thangkabalu 
14.  Shri Rajesh Verma 
15.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha  
16 Shri Rahul Bajaj 
17 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
18 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19 Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
20 Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
21 Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
22 Shri Amar Singh 
 
 
 Secretariat 
 
 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2 Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
3 Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
4 Smt. Malvika Mehta  Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings h aving been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on  their behalf, present 
this Thirty Sixth Report on the Functioning of Anda man & Nicobar Islands 
Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited. 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2008-2009)  during their 
Study Visit to Port Blair on 20 th  January, 2009 had informal discussions 
with the representatives of Andaman & Nicobar Islan ds Forest and 
Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDC).  After their 
interaction with the representatives of the Corpora tion, the Committee 
decided to make a Report on the subject. 
3. The Committee had an informal discussion with th e representatives 
of ANIFPDC on 20 
th  January, 2009 and further, took oral evidence of t he 
representatives of Ministry of Environment and Fore sts on 6 th  February, 
2009.   
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2008-09) c onsidered and 
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 24 
th  February, 2009. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e representatives 
of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantat ion Development 
Corporation Limited and Ministry of Environment and  Forests for placing 
before them the desired material and information in  connection with the 
examination of the subject.  The Committee would al so like to place on 
record their appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by 
the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the o bservations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Part-B of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                    Rupchand Pal  
           24 
th  February, 2009                    Chairman, 
5 Phalguna,1930 (Saka)          Committee on Public Undertakings   
 
 
(v) 

 
PART A 
 
REPORT 
A. Background 
 
1. The Committee on Public Undertakings  (2008-09) during their Study Visit 
from 19 
th  to 23 rd  January, 2009, had held informal discussions with the 
representatives of Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest  and Plantation 
Development Corporation Limited (ANIFPDC) about its  functioning at Port Blair 
on 20 th  January, 2009.  During the discussion, the Committ ee had found that the 
Corporation was in a state of utter deprivation and  its functioning had been 
severely affected on account of several issues such  as the ban imposed by the 
Supreme Court on its forestation activities, pendin g decisions regarding 
restructuring of the Corporation, dispute between t he Corporation and its 
employees regarding revision of pay, pending loan e tc.  The Committee felt that 
all these issues required immediate attention and h ence, it was decided that a 
report be made on the subject.  
 The various issues, which are crucial in the funct ioning of the 
Corporation, have been dealt with by the Committee in detail in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  
 
B. Mandate of the Corporation and Impact of the Sup reme Court Ban 
 
2. The Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantat ion Development 
Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDC), a Government of India P ublic Sector Undertaking, 
under the administrative control of Ministry of Env ironment and Forests (MoEF) 
was established in 1977 with the main objective of developing and managing 
forestry plantations on the Islands.  The authorize d share capital is Rs. 600 lakhs 
and the present paid-up capital is Rs. 359 lakhs.  The President of India holds all 
shares except one share each held by Director Gener al of Forests and Special 
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, GOI  and Lieutenant Governor, 
Andaman and Nicobar Administration. 
 
3. The main objectives of the Corporation as submit ted in their written replies 
are as follows:- 

“Scientific harvesting, natural regeneration and de veloping of forest 
resources on the principle of obtaining sustained a nnual yield.  To plant, 
grow cultivate, produce and raise plantations of va rious agricultural & 
horticultural crops, forest species of proven utility, aromatic plants, etc.  To 
establish, administer, own and run industries for m anufacturing forest, 
agricultural and horticultural produces, etc.  To c arry on the business of 
planters, cultivators, producers, sellers and deale rs in timber and such 
other products and to manufacture, dispose, sell an d deal in products of 
natural  forests, agricultural plantations, horticu ltural crops, aromatic 
plants, etc.  To protect and maintain wildlife and other natural resources. 
To undertake projects of tourism development and any other activities.”  
 
4. When asked to explain the mandate of the Corpora tion and to state 
whether the same has been achieved/is being achieve d, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests in their written replies stated the following:- 
 
“The detailed objectives, as given in the Memorandum of Association are:- 
a. To provide the necessary infrastructure to harve st and develop 
 forest resources, to promote forest resources base d industries, to 
 arrange marketing of timber and other forest resou rces on the 
 mainland and abroad. 
b. To plant, grow, cultivate, produce, and raise pl antations of various 
 forest species of proven utility and other agricul tural, plantation, 
 horticultural crops, medicinal and aromatic plants  and to buy, sell, 
 export, import, process, distribute or otherwise d eal with all kinds of 
 forest crops, natural products, agricultural, plan tation and 
 horticultural crops, medicinal and aromatic plants . 
c. To carry on the business of planters, cultivator s, producers, sellers 
 and dealers in timber, processed or not and such o ther products of  
 every description and to manufacture, dispose of, sell and deal in 
 products of natural forest and forest plantations,  agricultural, 
 plantation and horticultural crops and medicinal a nd aromatic 
 plants. 

d. To establish, administer, own and run industries  for manufacturing 
 forest products, agriculture, plantation and horti culture products, 
 medicinal and aromatic plants. 
e. To conduct and contract for training and researc h connected with 
 the integrated development of forest resources of the islands and 
 cultivation as well as processing of agricultural,  plantation and 
 horticultural crops, medicinal and aromatic plants . 
f. To maintain and improve Wild Life and other Natu ral Resources. 
 
 In order to achieve the above objectives, the Corp oration had been 
engaged in the following activities before the impo sition of the ban 
imposed by the Supreme Court vide its letter order dated 10 th  October, 
2001:  
(a) “Harvesting and marketing of timber in the leas ed out   
area at Little Andaman and North Andaman.   
(b) Red Oil Palm Plantation at Little Andaman. 
(c) Rubber Plantation at Katchal. 
(d) Small scale plantation of horticulture and arom atic 
species at Little Andaman and South Andaman 
(e) Small scale tourism at Little Andaman 
 
 The Corporation was largely involved in extraction  and marketing of 
timber  which yielded around 70% of the turn over, till 2001. Till such time, 
apart from revenues earned from the other projects,  the Corporation 
achieved its goal of doing business in the forestry  sector and earning 
surplus revenue, from which it paid dividend as well as Taxes to the Public 
Exchequer. It also provided direct employment to mo re than 2000 persons 
apart from indirect beneficiaries. Because of its p erformance the 
Corporation was awarded the status of a ‘Mini-Ratna’ in 1997. 
 
After the ban imposed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court the 
harvesting of timber in Little Andaman and North An daman projects was 
totally stopped.  Since the end of 2005 and at pres ent the Corporation is 
engaged in extraction of timber in worked forest ar ea as an agent of the 
forest department, in accordance with approved Work ing Plans.  Both the 

Plantation projects of Rubber and Red Oil Palm are losing projects due to 
age as well as non-viable sizes. Therefore, the Cor poration is earning less 
than its expenses on wages, salaries, statutory pay ments and 
maintenance costs.” 
 
5. The Committee, having noted that due to the ban imposed by the 
Supreme Court vide its order dated 10 th  October 2001, the Corporation has been 
converted from a profit-making mini-ratna to a loss -making PSU. Questioned 
about the background of the circumstances leading t o the Supreme Court order, 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests in their wr itten replies submitted as 
under:- 
“Originally a writ petition was filed by T N Godava rman Thirumalpad Vs 
Union of India and others vide W.P. (C) No. 202 of 1995 where the 
Society for Andaman and Nicobar Ecology (SANE), Bom bay Natural 
History Society (BNHS) and Kalpavriksh intervened a nd challenged the 
legality and ecological safety of commercial forestry being practiced at that 
time in the Little Andaman Island.” 
 
6. On being queried as to how the judgment has impa cted the functioning of 
the Corporation and the response of the Government to the same, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests stated the following:- 
“Complete ban on felling of naturally grown trees i mposed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, completely crippled the flagship pro jects of Little 
Andaman and North Andaman Forestry operations, ther eby making the 
Corporation lose its earning capacity by 75 % and c onverting it into a loss 
making PSU. The A & N Administration has also filed  I.A. seeking the 
Court permission for permitting the functioning of the Corporation.” 
 
7. In this regard, the Chairman, Committee on Publi c Undertakings, during 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministr y of Environment and Forests 
stated the following:- 
 
“There have been two mandates of the Corporation.  One is the 
development of the forestry and the second one is t he management of the 
forestry.  I think, in spite of the Supreme Court’s  intervention, both the 

principle objectives are very much in tact and appl icable in India.  Even 
the Supreme Court has never banned the development of forestry.  The 
management of forestry, which is associated with th e development, has 
also not been banned.  That is the first thing.  Th e original mandate is 
intact….. We interacted with all the concerned peop le when we visited 
Andaman and we came to the conclusion that the orig inal mandate is very 
much in tact.  The Government instituted several Co mmittees, 
Commission and all these.  There had been one man C ommission and 
also other studies had come up.  But nowhere has it  been stated that the 
original mandate needs to be radically changed.  That is my impression.” 
 
8. Further, during evidence, it was asked as to wha t was the plea of the 
Government to the Supreme Court to protect the mand ate of the Corporation 
when the original Writ Petition came.  To this the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests in their written submission stated as under:- 
 
“Detailed Affidavit (IA No. 918 of 2003) was filed in Supreme Court by 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration seeking variation of the order of the 
Supreme Court dated 07-05-2002 wherein the Court wa s informed about 
the adverse consequences due to loss of employment to nearly 2000 
employees of  the Corporation as well as direct or indirect affect on nearly 
10,000 persons living and settled in the Islands. T he Court was informed 
that the closure of the Corporation will aggravate the socio-economic 
scenario further- leading to destitution and frustr ation of a large number of 
people. The loss of job opportunities may create la w and order problems 
and an increase in irregularities, poaching and undesirable activities.” 
 
9. When asked whether any Commission or Committee a ppointed by the 
Government or any study or any recommendation have ever contested the 
original mandate, the Ministry submitted the following:- 
 
“Prior to Supreme Court order, no Commission or Com mittee or any study 
or any recommendation contested original mandate of  the Corporation. At 
the instance of the Supreme Court, Prof. Shekhar Si ngh was appointed as 

Commissioner by the Ministry of Environment and For ests in the year 
2001-02. His report recommended the closure of the Corporation. “ 
 
 
10. The Committee, while feeling that there are exp erts holding key positions 
in International Environmental Organizations, asked  the Ministry why one man 
Commission was suddenly set up by the Government at  the instance of the 
Supreme Court.  The Ministry stated in their written replies as under:- 
 
“The Orders of the Supreme Court were made in I.A. No. 502 in W.P. No. 
202 of 1995. The Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its wisd om, appointed Prof. 
Shekhar Singh as Commissioner for an independent su rvey of A&N 
ecology, specifically in regard to the state of for ests and to what extent the 
cutting of trees, if any, could be protected, and w hat was required to be 
done to improve the ecology, and forest cover of the area.” 
 
11. Regarding the current status of the Interim App eal filed by the Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Administration seeking permission f or the functioning of the 
Corporation, the Ministry stated the following:- 
 
“I.A. No. 918 of 2003 was filed by the Andaman & Ni cobar Administration - 
Application for variation of order dated 07.05.2002  regarding closure of 
Andaman Trunk Road (ATR) and Andaman & Nicobar Isla nds Forest and 
Plantation Development Corporation Limited. The app lication dated 
13.03.2003 came up for hearing on 18.02.2005. The H on’ble Court was 
pleased to grant the Administration a period of six  weeks to file the 
supplementary affidavit. Supplementary affidavit li mited to the matter 
relating to the closure of ATR passing through Jara wa Reserve was filed 
on 22.02.2005. Final decision in the matter is awaited.” 
 
12. The Committee during the oral evidence of the r epresentatives of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests stated that it was felt that the Corporation’s 
case was not taken up properly in the Supreme Court  and they were not sure 
whether it was brought to the Court’s notice that i f the Corporation were to be 
wound up, a lot of people would be unemployed leadi ng to a section of 
disgruntled people in a very sensitive area of our country security-wise.  On 

being asked to explain their stand, the Ministry of  Environment and Forests 
stated:- 
 
“Detailed Affidavit raising all the above issues we re filed in the Supreme 
Court of India seeking the permission of the Court for the continued 
functioning of the Corporation.” 
 
 
13. Further, during oral-evidence, the Committee st ated that:- 
 
“The Supreme Court did not ask the closure of the C orporation. It only 
said trees cannot be felled. That was the judgment of the Supreme Court. 
Now, after the judgement of the Supreme Court, seve n years have 
passed. In 2001, the order was given, and prior to that, for a number of 
years, the case was pending. Then, there have been accumulated losses. 
The story is that a Mini Ratna company became a pau per. During all these 
seven years, what was the Ministry doing to protect  this Corporation? If 
you have decided prematurely that this Corporation will be wound up, then 
that is separate. Therefore, the question arises, w hat is the role of the 
Ministry with regard to the functioning of the publ ic sector? What is the 
role?”  
 
14. The response by the Ministry to the queries sta ted above was the 
following:- 
“Realising the sensitivity of the Andaman & Nicobar  Islands, the Ministry 
was not of the view to wind up the Corporation. A d ecision was taken in a 
meeting chaired by the Hon’ble Minister (E&F) to al locate some interim 
work to the Corporation and to raise the issue at t he level of the Deputy 
Prime Minister…. The view of the Ministry is to con tinue the Corporation 
by exploring alternative profit centres, downsizing  the Corporation and 
further diversifying its activities in which its em ployees can be gainfully 
employed…. Presently the work of harvesting of timb er as per the 
approved work plans is being done by the Corporatio n. The decision was 
also taken to provide interim loans to the Corporat ion to help it tide over 
the financial situation and a study was entrusted t o one of the foremost 
professional organisations, i.e. Tata Consultancy S ervices (TCS) to study 
and formulate a revival plan for the Corporation.” 

 
15. Regarding the legal steps taken by the Governme nt to vacate the 
Supreme Court Order, the Ministry of Environment and Forests stated:- 
 
“IA No. 918 was filed in the Supreme Court in March , 2003 by Andaman & 
Nicobar Administration seeking the continuation of the work of the 
Corporation.” 
 
16. The Ministry were asked whether after the Supre me Court verdict, any 
kind of timber cutting and removal work has been un dertaken for purpose of 
regeneration process.  The Ministry replied as under:- 
 
“Extraction of timber is being carried out strictly  in accordance with 
approved working plans as directed by the Supreme C ourt. The operation 
is to be followed by regeneration operations by the Forest Department.” 
 
17. The Committee queried whether under the Nationa l Environment Policy, 
the felling of trees is totally banned in India or it is banned in any part of the 
country or it is partially banned.  The Ministry st ated the following in their written 
replies:- 
 
“The National Forest Policy, 1988 stipulates that t ropical rain / moist 
forest, particularly in areas like Andaman & Nicoba r Islands should be 
totally safeguarded. It further provides that even production forestry 
programmes should not entail clear felling of adequ ately stocked natural 
forests. The principle is the protection of ecologi cally sensitive area and 
preservation of bio-diversity.” 
 
18. It was asked whether the felling of trees is to tally banned only in the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to which the Ministry replied:- 
 
“Felling of trees is allowed as per the provisions contained in approved 
working plans in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands.” 
 
19. In this connection, the Special Secretary, MoEF , during oral evidence 
added the following: - 

“Under the Forest Conservation Act, no forest in th e country can be 
worked unless there is a Working Plan duly prepared  and approved by the 
Government of India and that is how tree felling no w takes place on forest 
land only through the medium of approved Working Pl ans…. 5 Working 
Plans have already been prepared and all of them have been approved.” 
 
20. The Committee further asked whether the Governm ent maintains any 
record of felling of trees.  The Ministry submitted the following:- 
 
“The Supreme Court Order stipulated that no felling  can take place other 
than those approved in the Forest Working Plans. Ac cordingly, from 2005 
onwards the Corporation has been assigned forest co upes for extraction 
of timber and supply in log forms to the A&N Forest  Department on the 
basis of felling list (marking list) provided by th e respective Divisions of the 
Forest Department based on approved Working Plans. A log wise detailed 
list (measurement book) is maintained which is subs equently used for 
recovery of cost of felling, logging and dragging.” 
 
21. The Committee also asked whether the activities  of the Corporation (which 
was set up in 1977) were reviewed in the light of t he provisions of the Forest 
Conservation Act, which was passed in 1980.  The Ministry replied as under:- 
 
“After the ban imposed by the Supreme Court’s order s, the activities of the 
Corporation were reviewed by the Ministry through studies / committees.” 
 
22. The Special Secretary, MoEF, during oral eviden ce stated the following in 
this regard: - 
“Since naturally grown forests should not be remove d in order to plant 
exotic species, guidelines were issued in 1985 by t his Ministry not to 
undertake such species by taking out the existing v egetation in whatever 
form it is.” 
 
23. The Committee asked that though under the Fores t Conservation Act, 
87% of Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest area is req uired to be protected 
because of soil erosion, why was the mandate of the  Corporation not revisited at 

that time i.e. in 1980 leading to the present sorry  state of affairs.  The Ministry 
stated the following in reply:- 
 
“Till the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India passed ord ers banning felling of 
trees in 2001, there were no problems regarding the  working of the 
forestry project of the Corporation and it continue d to generate healthy 
profits. As such, no need was felt for any review o f this aspect of the 
Corporation working. Moreover, the Forest (Conserva tion) Act, 1980 has 
no such specific provisions in respect of the Andam an & Nicobar Islands 
or for any State.” 
 
24. The Committee queried why any special provision  was not made in the 
National Forest Act, 1980 in the case of Andaman & Nicobar Islands considering 
the strategic importance of employing the people wh o are settled there, to which 
the Ministry replied thus:- 
 
“The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was made by th e Government  
making prior approval of the Central Government nec essary for 
dereservation of reserved forests and for use of fo rest land for non-forest 
purposes. It extends to the whole of India except t he State of Jammu & 
Kashmir and there are no specific provisions in res pect of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands or for any State for that matter. “ 
 
25. In this regard, the Special Secretary, MoEF mad e the following remarks: - 
“Sir, the conservation-oriented harvesting of fores t in the country 
emanated out of the National Forest Policy, 1988 in  view of the need of 
conservation of balance forest left in the country,  which is of the order of 
1/5 
th  of the geographical area, that is, the forest cove r. Earlier, lots of 
exploitation of forest had taken place in several p arts of the country. This 
was the fulcrum of the National Forest Policy, 1988 . Prior to that, in 1980, 
the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 was promulgated a ccording to the 
guidelines of which no non-forestry activity can an ywhere take place 
without the approval of the Government of India thr ough the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests. Under the guidelines, plan ting of tree species 
like red-oil palm, rubber, tea, coffee and a few ot her species on forest land 

would be considered as non-forestry activity. If an y user agency seeks 
permission from the Government of India -- through the particular State 
Government -- it has to establish that that species  has been a part of the 
forest of that region for so many years past. It me ans that it has been one 
of the indigenous species. 
As regards rubber, it was started in the late 1960s . Of course, 
rehabilitation of Sri Lankan expatriates and the ph ysical maturity came. 
Besides, there were also directions in respect of A ndaman, which is 
strategically so important; geologically very fragi le; and extremely eco-
sensitive.  
It has got erodible soil and rainfall being high, i t is very much 
susceptible to erosion and that is why 87 per cent forest cover that was 
there is required to be protected. These species we re considered as 
exotic by virtue of their introduction in the islan d for the last 30-40 years. 
They said that no exotic species would be planted, natural forest would be 
maintained and in the worked out forests where work  has already taken 
place, the regeneration has subsided greatly. In fa ct, in 2001, in another 
inter-locutary application, the court had observed that even if physically 
mature and exploitable trees are present in a unit area, they are not 
necessarily to be removed unless assured regenerati on exists on the 
ground. Possibly in the years gone by, due to timbe r working and less 
emphasis on regeneration efforts, certain parts of Andaman had become 
deficient in regeneration of natural species. That is how the emphasis on 
indigenous species and less emphasis on rubber in the present day.” 
 
C. Restructuring /Revival of the Corporation 
26. As regards the restructuring/revival of the Cor poration, the Ministry were 
asked to furnish brief details of the restructuring  proposal of the Corporation.  
The Ministry in their written submission stated as under:- 
 
“A revised restructuring proposal has been submitte d by ANIFPDCL 
through the PCCF (Principal Chief Conservator of Fo rests), A&N Island 
which proposes the following :- 
(a)  Downsizing the Corporation by offering VRS/VSS  

(b)  Continue the forestry project 
(c)  Phase out the Red Oil Palm project by 2015  
(d) Closing down the rubber Plant project or continue f or few more 
 years. 
(e)  Diversification activities like development of tou rism, Research & 
 Consultancy, Training, etc. 
(f)  Proposing for converting the Govt. loan sanctioned  so far into paid 
 up capital & waiving off the interest accrued ther eon.” 
 
27. On being asked for how long the restructuring p roposal has been pending 
with the Government and what efforts have been made  by the Government to 
finalise and implement it, the Ministry stated in their written replies:- 
 
“A Cabinet Note on restructuring was submitted to t he Cabinet Secretariat 
in December, 2005 and it was listed for the meeting  of the Cabinet 
scheduled for 29.12.2005. However, the same could n ot be taken up. 
Thereafter another note for the Cabinet was prepare d and submitted vide 
our letter dated 25.07.2006. The Cabinet Note propo sed VRS to 83% of 
the employees. However, the same could not be taken  up by the Cabinet 
and the matter has remained pending till date. Now,  another revised 
restructuring proposal has been recently submitted by ANIFPDCL through 
the PCCF, A&N Island which is being examined.” 
 
28. The Ministry also stated that:- 
“The Cabinet Note could not be taken up by the Cabi net on 29.12.2005. 
Thereafter it was resubmitted in July, 2006. Howeve r the same could not 
be taken up and was returned back for some procedur al modifications and 
the direction that the Prime Minister’s office may also be consulted in the 
matter.” 
 
29. When asked why there has been an inordinate del ay in finalisation of the 
revival package, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
 
“The Ministry had entrusted Tata Consultancy Servic es to submit a plan 
for revival of the Corporation which submitted its report in 2004. However, 

on 26 th  December, 2004 a devastating earthquake and Tsunam i hit the 
Islands which caused widespread damage to life and property. Therefore, 
it was difficult to take a decision on downsizing a nd VRS of the employees 
who were living and settled in the Islands. Subsequ ently, the Ministry 
constituted a Scientific Expert Committee led by Pr of. C. R. Babu to 
evaluate Shekhar Singh Commission’s recommendations  and recommend 
good practices for environmental protection in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
while not unnecessarily impeding their sustainable development. 
A Cabinet Note on restructuring of the Corporation was submitted to the 
Cabinet Secretariat in December, 2005 and  was list ed for the meeting of 
the Cabinet scheduled for 29.12.2005. The Cabinet N ote could not be 
taken up by the Cabinet on 29.12.2005. Thereafter i t was resubmitted in 
July, 2006. However the same could not be taken up and was returned 
back for some procedural modifications and the dire ction that the Prime 
Minister’s office may also be consulted in the matt er.  Now, another 
revised restructuring proposal has been recently su bmitted by ANIFPDCL 
through the PCCF, A&N Island which is being examined.” 
 
30. With regard to the recommendation made by the S hekhar Singh 
Committee for closure of the Corporation, it was as ked whether his 
recommendation was accepted and at what level, the decision was taken to 
continue the Corporation.   In their written replie s, the Ministry submitted as 
under:- 
 
 
“The Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 7 th  May 2002 accepted the 
report of the Shekhar Singh Commission in the first  instance and passed 
specific orders on many recommendations. As one of the orders was an 
imposition on felling of trees, other than as per a pproved working plans,  
the forestry operations effectively came  to a stop ….  In a meeting held 
under the Chairmanship of the Minister, E & F on 11 .12. 2002 regarding 
future of the Corporation which was also attended b y the Lt. Governor of 
A&N Islands, Member of Parliament, A&N Islands and senior officers of 
the MoEF, following decisions were taken: 

a). To hand over harvesting of the timber, amongst other commercial 
activities to the Corporation, as a corollary to de claration of A&N Forest 
Department as a service Department. 
b). Implementation of VRS scheme in the Corporation  to reduce 
manpower. 
c). Financial Grant to be given to the Corporation to tide over the situation. 
d). To convene a meeting to discuss the fate of the  Corporation at the 
level of the Dy. Prime Minister. 
Consequently, a meeting was convened under the chai rmanship of  
Dy. Prime Minister on 17 
th  October, 2003 wherein the following decisions 
were taken: 
a. The Corporation be given responsibility of extra ction of 30,000 
cu.m. timber as per approved working plans. 
b. Downsizing of the Corporation by offering VRS /V SS package to 
surplus employees. 
c. To tide over the financial crisis, immediate fin ancial assistance to 
be arranged by the Ministry. 
d. A Cabinet Note be formulated for seeking the rev ival of the 
Corporation.” 
 
31. The Ministry also stated:- 
“The MoEF decided to appoint Tata Consultancy Servi ces (TCS) to 
prepare a revival plan for the Corporation and a re port was submitted by 
them in 2004. Subsequently, the Ministry constitute d a Scientific Expert 
Committee led by Prof. C. R. Babu to evaluate Shekh ar Singh 
Commission’s recommendations and recommend good pra tices for 
environmental protection in Andaman & Nicobar Islan ds while not 
unnecessarily impeding their sustainable development.” 
 
32. In this regard, the Committee made the followin g remarks during oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests: - 
“There is a need to keep the Corporation, the  acti vities of the Corporation 
there because it is a very sensitive place.  If the  Corporation is wound up, 
a lot of people are going to be unemployed and we a re going to have a 

section of disgruntled people in a very sensitive a rea of our country, which 
is not at all good, when we consider the security aspect.” 
 
D. Viability of Plantation Projects 
 
33. On being asked whether the Supreme Court has pu t a ban on replantation 
in respect of rubber and Red Oil Palm Plantation pr ojects, the Ministry stated the 
following:- 
 
“As per the recommendation of the Shekhar Singh Com mission, the 
existing plantation of oil palm, rubber etc. are to  be phased out and the  
land so released, in so far as it is forest land, b e regenerated. No exotic 
species of fauna or flora should be introduced into the Islands.” 
 
34. When asked what was being done to make the abov e-mentioned projects 
viable, MoEF replied thus:- 
 
“As on date there is no proposal for replantation of these areas. Therefore, 
the same would be allowed to regenerate naturally o r planted with natural 
species.” 
 
35. It was also queried whether there is any propos al in the detailed revival 
package for plantation of palm, rubber etc.  To this, the Ministry replied:- 
 
“Both the palm and the rubber plantation are at the  end of their productive 
life and will be phased out naturally in the next f ew years.  The National 
Forest Policy, 1988 and the policy decisions of the  Ministry prohibit 
monoculture and introduction of the exotics in natu ral forests. However, 
the possibility of replacing the palm oil plantatio n by indigenous 
horticultural species or medicinal plants, etc. can  be examined with a 
possible view of implementation. However, the same may require seeking 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court permission and will need to be examined from 
the legal point of view.” 
  

36. Regarding the issue of closure or survival of t he rubber plant projects, the 
Ministry clarified that:- 
“The rubber plantations have now reached the end of  their maturity. 
Therefore, the following options are technically possible:- 
(i) Closing down the Rubber division in Katchal imm ediately,  
(ii) Maintain them for few more years to extract la tex using the 
slaughter tapping techniques.” 
 
37. In respect of the Red-oil Palm project, the Min istry explained that:- 
 
“The red oil palm plantation project is required to  be phased out as last of 
these plantations are reaching the end of their eco nomic life i.e., till 2015. 
The staff and workers strength related to the proje ct and the life of the 
project is proposed to co-terminate or will stand d iverted in diversification 
activities.” 
 
38. When asked whether there was any specific order  of the Supreme Court 
saying that the rubber and palm plantations have to  be wound up, the Ministry 
submitted the following in their written replies:- 
 
“As per the recommendation of the Shekhar Singh Com mission, the 
existing plantation of oil palm, rubber etc. are to  be phased out and the  
land so released, in so far as it is forest land, b e regenerated. Moreover, 
the National Forest Policy, 1988 and the policy dec isions of the Ministry 
prohibit monoculture and introduction of the exotic s in eco-sensitive areas 
like the Andaman & Nicobar Islands.” 
 
E. Diversification Plans 
 
39. On being asked to give details of the post-rest ructuring/revival 
diversification plans for the Corporation, the Mini stry of Environment and Forests 
suggested the following:- 
 
“The following activities have been suggested for diversification:  
(i) Tourism and allied Activities  
(ii) New forestry and allied activities 
(iii) Research, consultancy and training 

(iv) Value addition and marketing of various produc ts 
(v) Importing timber from the neighbouring countrie s to meet local 
 demand 
(vi) Establishing a saw mill and convert the import ed timber into 
 demanded size timber (subject to approval of compe tent authority) 
(vii) Sawing and marketing of timber being extracte d from the forest 
 areas. 
(viii) Import and marketing of river sand in view o f heavy local demand 
 due to limited availability of coastal sand. 
(ix) Setting up of a fresh water bottling plant at Little Andaman where 
 there is perennial availability of fresh water.  
 
However, the Corporation will need to select a few viable projects 
and present a detailed project report for financing  to this and other 
Ministries utilizing available schemes of the Government of India. “ 
  
40. In this connection, the Committee during oral e vidence made the following 
observations:- 
“Based on the judgment of the Supreme Court, you kn ow, we have to 
have some kind of a diversification plans to retain  the Corporation.  What 
plans have you made so far?  There are several prop osals.  Once you 
stop the forestry operations there, you can even im port timber from the 
neighbouring countries.  It is very viable. Then, y ou can have a palm oil 
refining unit. You can have fresh water bottling pl ants because there are a 
lot of fresh water springs around those forest area s. So, these kinds of 
diversification plans, which are not highly technol ogical fields, can very 
easily be taken up by the Corporation. But it appea rs that nothing has 
been done so far by the Corporation. There is actua lly no concern, as far 
as the Ministry and the Management are concerned, t o retain this 
Corporation, which had attained a status of Mini Ratna.” 
 
41. The Ministry were asked to give their considere d opinion on the adoption 
of diversification activities like importing timber  from neighbouring countries 
instead of forestry operations, setting-up of a pal m-oil refining unit, setting-up of 

fresh water bottling plants or producing any value- added products etc. to ensure 
continuance of the Corporation.  In their written replies, they stated as under:- 
 
“In principle, the Ministry has no objection to the  above provided the same 
is in conformity with the National Forest Policy, 1 988, the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980  and the orders of the Sup reme Court. However, 
the Corporation will need to prepare and submit detailed project reports for 
financing, if the same is desired by it.” 
 
F. Wages of Industrial Workers 
 
42. The Corporation employs 1137 industrial workmen .  A representation was 
received from the Vanvikas Karamchari Sangh, Andama n & Nicobar Islands 
dated 19.01.2009, which mainly stated that the wage s of the industrial workers of 
the Corporation had not been revised during the las t 14 years and that workers 
were being paid according to the 1994 pay scales. 
43. In this regard, the Corporation stated the foll owing:- 
“There had been a dispute between the Corporation a nd the employees 
regarding revision of pay.  An out of the Court set tlement was worked out 
and has been sent to the Government of India for ap proval.  Revision of 
pay of Industrial Employees is needed who are prese ntly getting around 
Rs. 4000/- p.m. only whereas pay of Industrial Empl oyees in 
Administration is around Rs. 10,000/- p.m.” 
 
44. On this issue, the Chairman, Committee on Publi c Undertakings made the 
following remarks:- 
 
“In such an island, people have very limited opport unities for employment 
and vast resources and these people should be adequ ately and properly 
taken care of….  Certainly it had not got this stat us of mini-ratna at the 
mercy of someone and it had got this status on its own.  Suddenly some 
one gave a PIL, suddenly one man Commission was set  up, and suddenly 
the Government withdrew all these revival and diversification projects.  So, 
naturally the people need not be paid their dues an d even the industrial 
workers need not be given the minimum wage.  They a re the people from 

Island.  So, let them not be touched by the Sixth P ay Commission.  To say 
the least, we are ourselves creating a sense of sec essionism; we are 
ourselves creating, through our wrong policies, a s ense of deprivation and 
injustice because they are our countrymen.  They ha ve built up this 
Corporation which has been enjoying the mini-ratna status….  As regards 
the Government employees -- after the Sixth Pay Com mission -- the pay 
scales of the regular employees of the Government n eeds to be 
addressed appropriately, especially, when we find t hat something is 
happening according to some submission. How can it happen that the 
Corporation employees pay scale, amenities, etc. ar e not increased? As 
regards the industrial workers, I have already ment ioned that they are not 
even getting the minimum wages. We were ashamed to listen to them 
mentioning about the amount of consolidated pay tha t they have been 
receiving for the last several years. It is unbelievable.” 
 
45. In this regard, the Ministry were asked whether  the industrial workers of 
the Corporation were being given the minimum wages and were asked to explain 
their stand with justification.  In their written s ubmission, the Ministry stated the 
following:- 
 
“The Industrial workers of the Corporation are draw ing the scales of pay 
with effect from 01.01.1994 fixed in accordance wit h an award given by 
the Industrial Tribunal during January, 1995.  Unde r the Scale of Pay so 
extended, the Central Dearness Allowance admissible  under the 4 
th  
Central Pay Commission at the 1986 level is paid. A  proposal was 
submitted by the Corporation in November, 2008  for  revising the pay 
scales and was examined by the Ministry in consulta tion with the 
Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy  Industries & Public 
Enterprises. OM’s issued by the Department of Publi c Enterprises clearly 
stipulate that the PSUs will have to bear the finan cial implication on 
account of implementation of recommendation for gra nt of higher pay 
scale to their employees from their own resources a nd there shall be no 
budgetary support from the Government of India for this purpose. The 
Corporation has been accordingly advised. “ 
 

G. Financial Performance-Waiving of Loans 
 
46. The Corporation was asked to furnish their fina ncial performance for the 
last 3 years.  The details as given by them are presented below:- 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
 
Year 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Turn over 214.93 392.27 337.16 
Loss (before fringe benefit tax) 1213.89 1338.40 1665.83 
Loss (after tax) 1214.90 1339.90 1668.13 
 
47. In their written replies, the Corporation broug ht to the attention of the 
Committee, the acute financial crisis being faced by them and stated thus:-  
 
“The Corporation is now surviving on the period int erest bearing loan 
taken from GOI.  The liability of loan has now gone  up to the tune of Rs. 
6539.82 lakhs and is affecting the financial perfor mance of the Company.  
The loan along with the interest may be considered for their waiving off or 
converting into paid up capital.  Otherwise even if  the Corporation 
becomes viable after restructuring, the liabilities  on account of 
Government loan will keep it in the state of sickne ss.  For the current year, 
GOI is yet to release the loan promised by it thoug h it was stated that the 
release of loan would be considered after draft Cab inet Note is submitted.  
If it is not released immediately the Corporation m ay face acute financial 
crisis and may not be able to pay salary and wages of workers leading to 
unrest and this would affect the performance of the Corporation.”  
 
48. The Ministry were asked to explain the factual position in this regard and 
the steps taken by the Government towards this end.   The Ministry replied as 
under:- 
 
“At present such a proposal had not been considered  by the Government. 
Conversion of this outstanding loan into paid up ca pital has been 
proposed by the Corporation for its restructuring a nd will be taken up for 
consideration during the formulation of the Cabinet  Note on its 

restructuring. The total loan amount outstanding ag ainst the Corporation 
as on date is Rs.52.88 Crores….  
There is a provision of Rs. 10.00 crores as an inte rest bearing loan to the 
Corporation during the year 2008-09. An interim loa n of Rs. 3.00 crores 
has been released.” 
 
49. The Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests stated the 
following in his remarks during the oral-evidence taken by the Committee:- 
 
“This Corporation has been under the administrative  control of the Ministry 
of Environment and Forests but, after 2001-02, there have been occasions 
where loans have been advanced to the Corporation.  Presently, the 
cumulative loan amount stands at Rs. 52.88 crore, t hat is about Rs. 53 
crore.  The cumulative loss of the Corporation is R s. 75.34 crore.  In this 
scenario, efforts have been made in the past, twice  during 2005 and 2006, 
to analyse and to approach the Government through C abinet notes, but it 
has not happened yet.” 
 
50. The Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings,  in this regard stated as 
under:- 
“My colleague has also asked about huge amount of m oney being waived 
even for the private sector. Those who have been in dulging for years 
altogether in all sorts of manipulation and malprac tices have also been 
bailed out, but not for the Government Corporation that needed only Rs. 
52 crore. Was there any proposal for waiving of the  loan? Please tell us 
about the same, otherwise, it should be considered.” 
 
51. When asked for how long the proposal for waivin g off loans to the 
Corporation has been pending, the Ministry in their written replies stated thus:- 
 
“The proposal of waiving off/adjustment of loans to  the Corporation has 
been received as part of the restructuring proposal  submitted to the 
Ministry vide PCCF, A&N Islands letter dated 29 
th  December 2008.” 
 
 

H. Board of Directors 
52. On the issue of very less number of Directors o n the Board of the 
Corporation, the Committee during oral-evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Environment and Forests asked the following:- 
 
“About the Board of Directors, you say, that the Cl ause 66 of the Articles 
of Association says the minimum number of Director is four and the 
maximum number is 15 but the Corporation has been f unctioning with only 
the minimum number, that is four.  Can you imagine how will the 
Corporation function just with four Directors?  How  will the Corporation 
function when according to the Articles of Associat ion, there are supposed 
to be 15 Directors? And, all along you are having o nly four Members!  
Was there any attempt made to increase the number o f Directors or the 
only four Directors thought themselves enough that they did not need any 
other Directors?   Similarly, you said that the Gov ernment has not 
appointed any non-functional Directors?  Was any re commendation 
made?  Was this proposal considered or not?  These are the clarifications, 
which I would like to seek.” 
 
53. To these questions, the Ministry furnished writ ten replies and submitted as 
under:- 
 
“According to Article 66 of the Memorandum of Assoc iation and Articles of 
Association of the Corporation, the President is em powered to determine 
the number of Directors of the Company, not less th an four and not more 
than 15. Other than the Managing Director, all othe r Directors are ex-
officio and paid by the Corporation. Accordingly, M oEF has been 
appointing Directors of the Corporation from time t o time….  As the 
activities of the Corporation have been severely cu rtailed by the reduction 
in its forestry operations and it is today a loss m aking PSU, there was no 
need to mandatorily fill up the these Ex-officio va cancies….  Being a small 
Corporation (with a paid up capital of only Rs. 359  lakhs), the functioning 
of Corporation is not affected by the absence of me mbers in the Board of 
Directors. The day to day management of the Corpora tion is being looked 
after by the Managing Director with assistance of h is principal officers 

under the broad guidance of the Board of Directors….  All Directors except 
the Managing Director are ex-officio. In view of th e present prevailing 
situation of the Corporation, no useful purpose wou ld be served by 
increasing the non functional Directors as the same  would increase the 
administrative expenses, etc.” 
54. On the number of non-official Directors in the Corporation and their 
experience in their fields, ANIFPDC in their written replies stated thus:- 
 
“The Government of India has not appointed the non- official Directors on 
the Board of Directors.” 
 

PART – B  
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee  
 
The Committee had an on the spot study visit of And aman & Nicobar 
Islands and held informal discussions with the empl oyees and 
management of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDC) about its fu nctioning on 20 th  
January, 2009.  It was brought to the notice of the  Committee that the 
Corporation was in a state of dire deprivation and its functioning had been 
severely constricted mainly on account of the ban imposed by the Supreme 
Court on its forestation activities.  The situation  further worsened due to 
pending decisions regarding the restructuring of th e Corporation, dispute 
between the Corporation and its employees regarding  revision of pay and 
grant of loan by the Government to the Corporation in meeting its daily 
needs.  The Committee took a serious  note of the p light of the industrial 
workers of the Corporation who made a representatio n to the Committee.  
The Committee, therefore, decided to examine the fu nctioning of ANIFPDC 
and present a Report on the subject to the Parliame nt.  For this purpose, 
the Committee took oral evidence of the representat ives of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for ascertaining the factua l position.  After 
thoroughly examining the issue, the Committee would  like to make the 
following recommendations:- 
 
Revival /Restructuring of the Corporation  
 
The Committee note that due to a ban imposed by the  Supreme 
Court in 2001, the forestry operations of the Corpo ration at both the 
forestry divisions at Little Andaman and North Anda man were completely 
stopped resulting in the Corporation being converte d from a profit-making 
“Mini-Ratna” to a loss-making PSU.  As of now, the future of the 
Corporation is uncertain and a decision on its rest ructuring is pending with 
the Government.  The restructuring proposal stipula tes continuation of 
forestry project, phasing out of Red Oil Palm Plant ation Project, closure of 
Rubber Plantation Project at Katchal, taking up of various diversification 
activities and downsizing the Corporation by offeri ng VRS to about 62% of 
its existing employees.  In this regard, the Commit tee further note that the 

administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Environmen t and Forests engaged 
the services of Tata Consultancy Services to submit  their plan for revival of 
the Corporation in the wake of post-ban scenario wh ich submitted its 
Report in 2004.  The Tata Consultancy Services stud y recommended 
downsizing of the Corporation, as an immediate meas ure so as to reduce 
its size to manageable proportions alongwith divers ification of activities of 
the Corporation into new fields like tourism etc.  Another Scientific Expert 
Committee set up by the Government and headed by C. R. Babu also 
recommended the same. The Committee, therefore, fee l that there is 
sufficient expert opinion available with the Minist ry for revival of the 
Corporation by restructuring, downsizing and diversifying, but to their utter 
dismay, nothing substantial has been done by the Go vernment in this 
regard. On the contrary, the Committee is saddened to note that the 
Government instead of finding an early viable solut ion has been dilly-
dallying on the restructuring issue since 2005 on o ne pretext or the other, 
like non-clearance of the proposal by the Cabinet on several occasions.  
  
The Committee are not happy with the lackadaisical approach of the 
Government in handling the important issue of reviv al and restructuring of 
the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation  Development 
Corporation Ltd. which involves the fate of so many  employees.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, the casual approach of th e Government to the 
whole issue is largely responsible for turning a on e-time Mini-ratna 
Company to a pauper organisation as on date.   As a result of gross neglect 
by the Government, the employees and industrial wor kers of the 
Corporation have been continuously subjected to inh uman hardships and 
miseries. The Committee, therefore, strongly recomm end that the 
Government should do everything possible to put the  revival plan in place 
at the earliest and its urgent implementation throu gh restructuring and 
proposed diversification activities without harming  the basic interest of the 
existing employees like loss of jobs in a far flung  and isolated area where 
there is hardly any means of alternate livelihood. The Committee further 
recommend that in the matter of the revival plan, t he Government should 
take into confidence the employees/officers of the Corporation as well as 

the Andaman & Nicobar Administration.  Till such ti me, the Government 
should provide sufficient financial assistance to t he Corporation in the 
form of waiver of loan and such other financial sup port as is conducive to 
the revival of the Corporation.  
 
Fate of the Industrial Workers  
 
 The Committee note that there are around 1200 indu strial workers 
working in the ANIFPDC who are drawing the scales o f pay which were 
calculated and arrived at during 1994 on the basis of wage structure 
granted by Industrial Tribunal/ Labour Court throug h an award.  The wage 
structure has never been revised during the last 14  years and no other 
allowance is being paid to the employees.  Adding further to their woes, the 
management unilaterally stopped the benefits like A nnual Free Sea 
Passage, LTC, stagnation of Increment, in-situ  promotion etc.  As such the 
industrial workers of the Corporation are finding i t difficult to make their 
ends meet with the meagre wages they are getting as  against escalation of 
the cost of living over the period of time. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee have been informed b y the Government 
that an out of court settlement was worked out betw een the employees and 
the management. The Corporation submitted a proposa l to the Ministry in 
November, 2008 for revising the pay-scales.  Accord ing to the Ministry, the 
said proposal was examined in consultation with the  Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) in the Ministry of Heavy Industri es and Public 
Enterprises. The Committee feel horrified to note t hat on such an important 
issue the DPE has casually drawn the attention of t he Ministry to an Office 
Memorandum issued by them which stipulates that the  PSUs will have to 
bear the financial implication on account of the im plementation of 
recommendation for grant of higher pay-scale to the ir employees from their 
own resources and that there shall be no budgetary support from the 
Government of India for this purpose. The Committee  are saddened over 
the apathetic attitude of the administrative Minist ry towards its own baby 
by simply conveying to it the decision of the Depar tment of Public 
Enterprises (DPE).  

 
 In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry has simply washed off 
their hands from the responsibility of safeguarding  the interest of the 
Corporation fully owned by them. The Committee are surprised to note that 
whereas the recommendations of the Sixth Central Pa y Commission have 
been implemented for employees under the Andaman & Nicobar 
Administration, the Industrial Workers of the Corpo ration are not getting 
even the minimum wages fixed by the Government of India which is a sheer  
violation of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.  The Comm ittee feel that the 
Government must take into consideration the strateg ic location of the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands from security point of vi ew as well as the fact 
that very limited livelihood opportunities are avai lable in the Islands and 
such neglect may create a sense of secessionism in the disgruntled 
industrial workers. The Committee, therefore, recom mend with all 
conviction that the Government should take all urge nt steps to ensure that 
industrial workers and other employees of the Corpo ration are given the 
benefits of the Sixth Central Pay Commission withou t any further delay so 
as to bring them succour and adequate relief from t heir hardships and 
sufferings and apprise the Committee of the action taken thereon.  
 
Waiving of Loan    
 
The Committee note that prior to the ban imposed by  the Supreme 
Court in 2001, the Corporation was earning profit since its inception in 1977 
and because of its performance, the Corporation was  awarded the status of 
“Mini-Ratna” in 1997.  The Corporation was doing go od business in the 
forestry sector and earning surplus revenue from wh ich it paid dividend as 
well as taxes to the public sector. After the ban, the harvesting of timber in 
the Little Andaman and North Andaman Project was to tally stopped which 
otherwise yielded around 70% of the total turnover of the Corporation 
being its main commercial activity. However, as a r esult of the ban, the 
Corporation from 2001 onwards converted into a loss -making PSU earning 
less than its expenses on wages, salaries, statutor y payments and 
maintenance cost.  The Committee have been informed  that at present, the 
liability of loan taken from the Government of Indi a has gone up to the tune 

of Rs. 65.39 crores and is affecting the financial performance of the 
Corporation.  The Committee have further been infor med that the 
Government of India is yet to release the loan prom ised by it which may 
result in acute financial crisis and non-payment of  salaries and wages to 
the workers already reeling under severe hardship.  The Committee further 
note that Government has not considered any proposa l for waiving off the 
loan or converting this amount into paid-up capital  though the same was 
proposed by the Corporation in its restructuring pr oposal.  The 
Corporation is now surviving on the period interest bearing loan taken from 
the Government of India.  
 
 The Committee feel that this issue requires immedi ate Government 
attention and recommend that the Government may con sider converting 
the loan alongwith the interest thereon into paid-u p capital.  If that not so, 
the Corporation becoming viable after restructuring  will continue to be in a 
state of sickness because of its loan liabilities.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that urgent steps must be taken to finali ze the restructuring 
proposal after obtaining expeditious clearance from the Cabinet.  
 
Diversification of Activities  
 The Committee note that as per the restructuring p roposal of the 
Corporation pending with the Government, the Corpor ation plans to enter 
into various diversification activities like develo pment of tourism, research 
and consultancy, training etc. to earn enough reven ues required for its 
existence.  The Committee understand that for takin g up the diversification 
activities, the Corporation needs to select a few v iable projects and present 
a detailed project report to the Ministry of Enviro nment and Forests and 
other concerned Ministries. In this regard, the Com mittee further note that 
during the course of evidence, the representatives of Ministry of 
Environment and Forests informed them that in princ iple, the Ministry has 
no objection in adoption of diversification activit ies by the Corporation like 
importing timber from neighbouring countries instea d of carrying out 
forestry operations, setting up of a Palm Oil Refin ing Unit, setting up of 
fresh water bottling plant or setting up any other value added projects etc., 

provided the same are in conformity with the Nation al Forest Policy, 1998, 
the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and the orders of Supreme Court. 
 
 The Committee, while noting that the Government of  India is the 
complete owner of the ANIFPDC, feel that as such, t he Government itself 
has to come out with viable diversification proposa ls which could be taken 
up by the Corporation to ensure its continuance.  T he diversification may 
further involve setting up of a refinery for Red Pa lm Oil and Coconut and a 
bottling plant for drinking water.  The cultivation  of medicinal plants and 
species and training in them may also be another ar ea, which may provide 
a fillip to the Corporation alongwith participation  in the tourism activities.  
The Committee recommend greater participation of th e Government in the 
diversification efforts of the Corporation and furt her emphasize here that 
the original mandate of the Corporation need not be  disturbed while trying 
to do the best in preserving the environment and bi o-diversity, but at the 
same time, sustainable development should be the mo tto and not the 
uncalled for hindrance to livelihood in the name of  environmental 
protection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                    Rupchand Pal           
24 
th  February, 2009                          Chairman, 
5 Phalguna,1930 (Saka)            Committee on Public Undertakings   
 
 

MINUTES  OF  THE  15 th    SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  PUBLIC  
UNDERTAKINGS  HELD  ON 6 th  February  2009  
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1250 hrs. 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha  
2.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Shri Francis K. George 
4.  Shri Kashiram Rana 
5.  Smt. Pratibha Singh 
6.  Shri K. V. Thangkabalu 
7.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
Members, Rajya Sabha  
8 Shri R.K. Dhawan 
  
Secretariat  
 
 1. Shri J.P.Sharma  Joint Secretary  
 2. Smt. Anita Jain  Director  
 3. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary-II 
 4. Shri H. Ram Prakash  Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Environment & Forests 
 
 
1. Shri P.R. Mohanty    Director General of Forest and Special  
Secretary  
2. Dr. Ranjana Gupta   Deputy Inspector General 
3. Shri M.D. Sinha    Assistant Inspector General 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of Ministry of 
Environment & Forests in connection with the functi oning of Andaman and 
Nicobar Island Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited.  
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represe ntatives of Ministry and 
also drew their attention to direction 58 of the Di rections by the Speaker relating 
to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  T hereafter, Members raised 
queries on various aspects pertaining to the subjec t and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were made b y the representatives of 
Ministry of Environment & Forests.  Information on some of the points raised by 
the Committee was not readily available with the re presentatives of Ministry of 

Environment & Forests.  It was, however, promised b y them that the same would 
be furnished to the Committee Secretariat in a week’s time. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of  Ministry for providing 
all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept  on record separately. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE 16 th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS HELD ON  24 th  February 2009  
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1030 hrs. 
 
CHAIRMAN 
 
 Shri Rupchand Pal 
 
MEMBERS LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria 
4.  Shri Harikewal Prasad 
5.  Shri Mohan Rawale 
 
MEMBERS RAJYA SABHA  
6. Shri Rahul Bajaj 
7. Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
8. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri J. P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri H. Ram Prakash Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the followi ng Draft Reports 
without modifications: - 
 
(i) Draft Report on functioning of Andaman and Nico bar Islands Forest 
and Plantation Development Corporation Limited; and  
 
(ii)  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 