 
 
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF  
POWER GENERATING PSUs - A HORIZONTAL STUDY 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
17 

CPU. No. 950 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF 
POWER GENERATING PSUs – A HORIZONTAL STUDY 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -fourth Report of th e Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Physical and Financial 
Performance of Power Generating PSUs – A Horizontal Study) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2013 / Phalguna 1934 (S) 
 
17 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
46 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require  
reiteration 
 
48 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
64 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 
19.3.2013 
 
66 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Annexure to the reply of Recommendation No. 24 
 
68 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty -fourth Report of COPU (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Physical and Financial 
Performance of Power Generating PSUs - A 
Horizontal Study 
79 
 
   
 
(i) 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012 – 2013) 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  Additional Director 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal   Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth 
Report on action taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -fourth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Physical and Financial Performance of Power 
Generating PSUs - A Horizontal Study’. 
 
2. The Thirty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 22 December 2008.  Replies of the Government to the Observations 
/ Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Government in 
stages during the period 2009-2011.  Subsequently, updated ATRs were furnished 
by the Ministry of Power, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and Depar tment of 
Atomic Energy on 18  and 29 November and 18 December 2012 respectively.  The 
draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on     
19 March 2013.   
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommen dations contained in the Thirty -fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok  
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2008 -09) on “Physical and 
Financial Performance of Po wer Generating PSUs – A Horizontal Study” which was 
presented to Lok  Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha  on 22 nd December, 
2008.  The report contained 27 observations/ recommendations.   Action Taken 
Replies in respect of the recommendations were received in stages from the 
concerned Ministries/Departments viz Power, New and Renewable Energy and 
Department of Atomic Energy during the period 2009 -2011. Subsequently, updated 
ATRs were furnis hed by the Ministr y of Power, Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy and Department of Atomic Energy on 18  and 29 November and 18 
December 2012 respectively. 
 
2. Updated Action Taken notes received from Government in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
 Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11,12,13, 16,17,18, 20,21,24, 25 and 26.  
 (Total 16)  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
 Sl. No. 22.                        (Total 1) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
 Sl. Nos.1, 2, 6, 10, 14,15,19,23 and 27.          (Total 9)
        
(iv) Observations/Recommendations to which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited (Chapter V)  
 Sl. No. 7           (Total 1) 
 
3. The Committee desire that final reply on the Observation / 
Recommendation to which interim reply has been furnished and also response 
to their comments in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to them 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now de al with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
A. Increasing Power target and healthy mix of different energy sources 
 
5. The Committee  desired the Government to increase the power targets to 
reach the world energy average o f 2596 units per capita by 2017 and  recommended 

7 
 
that the Government should review the contribution of various energy sources for the 
11th and 12 th plan periods and desired that the share of nuclear and renewable 
energy should be substantially increased so as to have a healthy mix of different 
energy sources in the overall power scenario thereby reducing the dependence on 
fossil fuels, and to enable the country to attain the world average in per capita 
availability of electricity. 
 
6. The Committee  had desired the Government to increase the power 
targets to reach the world energy average of 2596 units per capita by the year 
2017 and recommended that Government should substantially increase the 
share of nuclear and renewable energy  in the overall installed power 
generation capacity so as to have a  healthy mix from different energy sources 
in the overall power scenario to enable the country to attain th e world energy 
average in per capita availability of electricity .  The Government have in 
response, given the plans and proposals of NTPC.  The Ministry do not appear 
to have taken up the matter with the Planning Commission  which is concerned 
with the matter  nor ha ve responded to the specific recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Committee would like the Ministry of Power to take necessary 
action in this regard and apprise the Committee of the outcome.   
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
B. Enhancing autonomy to PSUs 
 
7. The Committee had inter-alia recommended that the Government should 
encourage the private sector to set up power projects and also take adequate 
measures to strengthen the power CPSUs by way of giving them more financial and 
administrative autonomy which will enable the country to make rapid progress in 
achieving the objectives enunciated in the National Electricity Policy (NEP).  The 
Committee had also felt that a ny underestimation of the potential role of CPSU 
Power majors will harm the progress in this regard.   
 
8. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply have explained about 
financial and administrative autonomy extended to only three PSUs vi z., NTPC 
Limited, THDC Limited  and North Eastern Electric Power Corporation.  Nothing 
has, however, been mentioned in this regard about other PSUs under the 
Ministry of Power viz. NHPC, Power Grid, etc.  Department of Atomic Energy 
have also not given any response to the Committee’s recommendation  on the 
question of enhancing autonomy to the PSUs under its control . The reply is 
also silent with regard to steps taken to encourage private sector to set up 
power projects.  The Committee reiterate their earlier recommenda tion and 

8 
 
would urge the Ministries  concerned to give their response with in a month 
from the date of presentation of this report.   
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 6 
 
C. Priority to power sector in allocation of gas 
 
9. The Committee had recommended that insofar as allocation of gas is 
concerned, power sector should be made at par with fertilizer sector and higher 
allocation be made to it by the Government.   Taking cognizance of the ongoing legal 
battle between Reliance Industries Limited and NTPC regarding gas supply wherein 
commercial interest had taken precedence over national interest , the Committee 
desired that  Government should take early appropriate legal and legislative 
measures to ensure proper safeguards and to thwart such rec urrences in future and 
protect nation’s interest.  
  
10. Regarding existing gas based stations, the Ministry of Power in their Action 
Taken Reply have, inter-alia, stated as follows:  
 
 NTPC has six existing gas based stations viz Anta, Auraiya, Dadri, Faridabad, 
Kawas and Gandhar with capacity totalling 3,605 MW. The estimated gas 
requirement of these stations at 90% PLF is 17.35 MMSCMD. 
 
 NTPC has various long term gas/ RLNG agreements with GAIL & RIL/ Niko 
and the average supplies have been around 11.0 -12.0 MMSCMD in the past 
two years. NTPC bridges the demand supply gap through fallback/ spot 
RLNG contacts on Reasonable Endeavour ‘RE’ basis.  
 
 With the above tie ups, NTPC is in a position to meet almost full requirement 
of gas for its existing gas base d stations. However, against the gas 
requirement of 17.35 MMSCMD @ 90% PLF, the actual average supply of 
domestic gas to NTPC Stations during 2012 -13 (till Oct'12) is only 9.7 
MMSCMD. NTPC had to tie up RLNG from the market to meet its balance gas 
requirement.  
 
 Since the RLNG prices are high, full generation schedule is not available from 
beneficiaries on RLNG. Due to this, actual PLF of NTPC gas stations is lower 
as compared to Declared Capacity (DC). 
 
Regarding future gas based projects (12 th plan projects) , NTPC had 
requested Govt. for allocation of 43.375 MMSCMD of domestic gas for the future gas 
based expans ion projects totaling 8,550 MW.  The Ministry of Power vide its 
notification dated 14.03.2012 has stated that “ no additional domestic g as is likely 
to be available till 2015 -16. Hence, developers are advised not to plan projects 
based on domestic gas till 2015-16”. 
 
On the question of legal issue regarding Gas supply by RIL, it has been stated 
that based  on International Competitive Bidding for procurement of gas/ RLNG, 
NTPC had placed a Letter of Intent on RIL for supply of gas for 17 years which was 
duly acknowledged by RIL thus resulting into a binding Contract. However, RIL didn’t 

9 
 
sign the Gas Sale Pu rchase Agreement (GSPA). Accordingly, NTPC filed a suit in 
Bombay High Court against RIL for specific performance of the contract.  At present, 
the matter is sub-judice.  Meanwhile, NTPC has reportedly requested GOI to allocate 
domestic gas for Kawas and G andhar expansion projects and has informed that 
NTPC shall abide by the decision of EGOM regarding the quantity and price. 
 
11. Taking note of the fact that highest priority is accorded to fertilizer 
sector in allocation of gas by the Government and that power sector is given 
second preference, the Committee had inter-alia recommended that power 
sector should be treated at par with  fertilizer sector in so far as allocation of 
gas is concerned.  It is observed from the Government’s reply that the Ministry 
of Power has conveyed that no additional domestic gas is likely to be available 
till 2015 -16 for future gas based projects of NTPC .  The rationale for this 
decision is unclear.  Considering the crucial importance of power availability 
for industrial growth, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
urge the Ministry of Power to vigorously pursue with the Ministry of Pe troleum 
the matter of allocation of gas to power sector on priority basis. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
D. Level playing field with Private Sector 
 
12. Having noted  that the present procurement system is subjected to the 
guidelines of CVC which has been a great limiting factor in participating in the 
competitive bidding process for UMPPs by NTPC as the CVC guidelines do not allow 
the commercial secrecy of the bidding offers submitted to NTPC by the vendors, the 
Committee had desired that in the absence of proper feedback of NTPC on the stand 
point of level playing field vis-à-vis other private companies participating in the UMPP 
bidding process , early steps need to be  taken to remove the bottlenecks faced by 
NTPC in the competitive bidding process. 
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Power have, inter-alia, stated that 
during the competitive bidding for Ultra Mega Power Projects at Sasan, Mundra, 
Tilaiya and Krishnapattnam,  NTPC participated in the Competitive Bidding for Sasan 
UMPP and Tilaiya UMPP only. However, NTPC was not successful bidder in the 
competitive bidding process.  NTPC did not participate in the competitive bidding for 
imported coal based Mundra and Krishnapattnam projects. 
 
  It has been stated further that during 320th meeting of the Board of Directors of 
NTPC held on 16.9.2008, a Group of Directors was constituted to examine and 
identify actions to be taken for increasing the competitiveness of NTPC in the 
competitive bidding for the power projects. The Group of Direct ors deliberated the 
issues pertaining to preparation of cost estimates; reviewing existing engineering 
policies and optimizing design/testing parameters  and specific approaches have 
been recommended by the Group of Directors for participating in the tariff  based 
competitive bidding of the projects. 

10 
 
 Further to the finalization of the Competitive Bidding Process for the Tilaiya 
UMPP, NTPC has submitted the response to the Request for Qualification (RFQ) 
bidding documents for the Orissa UMPP (to be set up at Bhedabahal) on 
01.08.2011. The RFQ evaluation results are awaited. NTPC has also purchased the 
Request for Qualification (RFQ) bidding documents for the Chhattisgarh UMPP (to 
be set up at Surguja). NTPC would be submitting competitive bid for these project s 
as and when the bids for these projects are required to be submitted. 
 
14. Having observed that the CVC guidelines governing procurement system 
has been a great limiting factor for  NTPC in participating in the competitive 
bidding process for UMPPs , the Committee pointed out the absence of 
feedback from NTPC on the question of level playing field vis -à-vis other 
private companies participating in the UMPP bidding process and  had desired 
that early steps should be taken to remove the bottlenecks faced  by NTPC in 
the competitive bidding process. There is nothing in the Government’s reply 
about the elements which require level playing field vis -à-vis private 
companies in UMPP bidding process. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the same.  The Comm ittee note from the Government’s reply that NTPC was 
not successful bidder in the competitive bidding process for Ultra Mega Power 
projects at Sasan UMPP and Tilaiya UM PP.  The Committee feel that it is high 
time that as recommended by the Committee, concrete steps are taken by the 
Government to remove the bottleneck s faced by NTPC in the competitive 
bidding process.  
Recommendation No. 10 
 
E. Mechanism to resolve issues regarding land, water sharing and 
 boundary disputes. 
 
15. The Committee had inter-alia recommended that Government should devise a 
suitable mechanism like setting up a council or forum with the concerned States for 
resolving of issues  such as land, water sharing and boundary disputes arising in 
construction / implementation of hydro projects.   
 
16. With a view to effectively addressing the problems arising out  of land 
acquisition, water sharing and boundary disputes with States during 
construction of power projects , the Committee had recommended  that the 
Government should devise a suitable mechanism like setting up of a council 
consisting of  the concerned States to resolve the issues.  The Committee 
regret to note that the Ministry ’s reply is conspicuously silent on this aspect. 

11 
 
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry of 
Power to take necessary action in this regard.   
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
F. Empowering DAE to acquire land 
 
17. Having observed that factors such as environmental concerns and 
resistance from local population are adversely affecting the exploration of 
natural uranium resources available in the country , the Committee  had, inter-
alia, recommended that  necessary changes may be made in the law 
empowering the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)  to acquire the land in 
public interest for mining of uranium.  Regrettably, action taken reply of the 
Department of Atomic Energy is silent on this  aspect.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that Government should 
address these issues in right earnest and make appropriate changes in the law 
so as to empower DAE to acquire land in the public interest.   
Recommendation No. 15 
 
G. Transfer of Nuclear Technology for key equipments and spares 
 
18. The Committee cautioned NPCIL and DAE that while entering into commercial 
agreement with global players, they should seek to ensure uninterrupted fuel supply. 
They had also recommended that DAE should insert clauses for transfer of 
technology for key equipments and spares to augment technological indigeni zation in 
the reactors. 
 
19. In their action taken reply, the DAE ha ve, inter-alia, stated that clause of 
uninterrupted fuel supply and protection of  country’s interests in the long term are a 
part of the techno -commercial agreements being negotiated by NPCIL with foreign 
partners and these  have already been incorporated in the proposal in respect of 
Kudankulam 3 & 4, which is under co nsideration of the Government.  The techno -
commercial discussions with M/s Areva of France, GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy and 
Westinghouse Electric Company of the USA in this regard are in progress. 
 
The DAE has further stated that projects based on foreign co operation are 
proposed to be set up on technical cooperation basis.  Six units at each site are 
planned to be set up in phases of twin units with progressively in creasing 
indigenous content.  To begin with, the design and major equipments are planned to 
be sourced from the vendor country and construction, erection of equipment and 
commissioning carried out in India.  However, a large number of equipments are 
planned to be sourced from within the country towards the last phase. 
 
20. The Committee  had recomm ended that DAE should insert clauses for 
transfer of  technology for key equipments and spares to augment 

12 
 
technological indigenization in the reactors.  The Ministry in their action taken 
reply ha ve inter-alia stated that clauses of uninterrupted fuel supply and 
protection of country’s interest in the long term have already been included in 
the techno - commercial agreements being negotiated by NPCIL with foreign 
partners.  The Committee are constrained to point out that there is no mention 
in the reply of the Government about insertion of clauses for transfer of 
technology for key equipments and spares.  The Committee  hope that this 
point has been taken note of for appropriate action.   
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
H. EVACUATION OF POWER PRODUCED BY RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 PRODUCERS 
 
21. While noting that  grid connectivity for power producers using Renewable 
energy sources is a problem area  and there is a problem of evacuation of power of 
small energy projects,  the Committee had recommended that power should be 
purchased and evacuated by the concerned agencies from the renewable energy 
producers without any delay. They have also recommended that the Ministry of 
Power should sensitize the states by convening meeting and by issu ing necessary 
advisories in this regard. 
 
22. In the action taken reply, the Ministry of Power ha ve inter-alia stated that 
renewable energy sources require connectivity with the grid together with 
transmission capacity in the grid for meeting their evacuation needs.  Except for the 
major wind generation, all the other grid -interactive renewable power gets absorbed 
in the local distribution network and thus require connectivity with local distribution/ 
sub-transmission grid level together with arrangement to sell their power either to the 
distribution utility in which they are embedded or to third party by availing open 
access in distribution system.  
 
 For the major wind generations, the transmission system is required basically 
for absorption of power within the State where the wind project is located for which, 
system connectivity and systems strengthening of the grid are imple mented by the 
respective State Transmission Utilities.  For meeting the inter -state transmission 
needs that may arise due to exportable surplus in the State under the conditions of 
maximum wind generation output, the required regional/ Inter -State transmis sion 
enhancements are implemented by the Central Transmission Utility.  The 
transmission planning for the inter -State system as well as intra -State system is 
being done in an integrated manner coordinated by the CEA.  
 
23. Emphasizing the need for providin g the grid connectivity for evacuation 
of power producers using renewable energy across the States, the Committee 
had recommended that the Ministry of Power should sensitize the states by 
convening meetings and issuing necessary advisories in this regard.  There is 

13 
 
nothing in the Government’s reply to show whether any action has been taken 
in this regard. The Committee would urge the Government to pursue the matter 
with the concerned States and apprise the Committee of the outcome  within 
three month after presentation of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
 
I. Incentives for manufacturing of cables and setting up of a distribution 
 company. 
 
24. Taking note that the country possesses technology for manufacturing of 
cables required upto 220 kV only and cables for transmission of higher 
voltages cables are being imported, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry of Power should encourage the industry by offering suitable 
incentives to manufacture such cables in the country.  The Committee had also 
recommended that Government should strengthen the legal framework so that 
offenders are properly br ought to book and desire d that the Government 
should take effective steps for reduction of undermetering and also overdrawal 
of power by industries.   The Committee had further recommended that since 
the Central PSUs have expertise in generation and transmi ssion the 
Government should consider setting up of a distribution company under the 
aegis of a CPSU and entrust it to assist States in improvement of distribution 
system.  The Committee are disappointed to note that Government have not 
responded to these recommendations. The Committee urge the Ministry to take 
necessary action on these recommendations and apprise the Committee of the 
position.   
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
J. COST OF POWER 
 
25. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Power may constitute a 
Committee of Experts to make a cost -benefit analysis of granting fiscal incentives/  
concessions for power sector.  They had also desired that the Department of Atomic 
Energy and Ministry of New and Renewable Ene rgy should look at ways of reducing 
the cost of power by improving efficiencies and by introduction of new technologies, 
economy of size and possible reduction in taxes and duties.   
 
26. The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 

14 
 
“The Ministry of Power constituted a Committee of Experts under the 
Chairmanship of CMD, PFC to make a cost benefit analysis of granting fiscal 
incentives/ concessions for power sector vide Order No. 27/1/2009 -R&R 
dated July 8, 2009. Th e Committee submitted its report on June 2, 2010 and 
recommended for fiscal incentives, concessions, exemptions in direct and 
indirect taxes and other significant policy issues.  
 
The Sub - Committee of Group of Ministers constituted under the 
chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission to look into the 
financial issues of Power sector, had submitted its final report on 06.10.2010 
to Hon’ble Minister of Power.  The GoM on power sector issues considered 
the various recommendations of the Sub -Committee and adopted the report 
for further follow up action in its meeting held on 29.10.2010.  Some of the 
important recommendations of the Committee of Experts also find mention in 
the recommendations of the Sub -Committee of GoM and the same are under 
consideration either through note to Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure 
circulated on 10.03.2011 which has not been cleared by Ministry of Finance.  
Tax related issues are taken up with the Ministry of Finance during Budget 
Session.” 
 
27.  The Committee are glad to note that a Committee of Experts constituted 
on the recommendation of the Committee has submitted its report  proposing 
fiscal incentives, concessions and exemptions in direct and indirect taxes and 
other significant policy issues.   The Committee would urge expeditious action 
in the matter by the Ministry of Finance.   
 
28. The Department of Atomic Energy and Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy have not responded to the Committee’s suggestion to reduce cost of 
nuclear power and renewable energy by improving efficiency and by 
introduction of new technologies, economies of scale and reduction in taxes 
and duties.  The Committee would awa it their response in this regard within a 
month after presentation of this report.  
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNEMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
STRENGTHENING OF NTPC 
 
 Out of the country’s installed capacity of 146752 MW, power from thermal 
sources accounts for 92892 MW.  NTPC has an installed capacity of 27904 MW, 
which is about 20% of the country’s installed capacity and contributes close to 28% of 
the total generation of electricity.  The Committee note that NTPC was set up in 1975 
to promote and develop thermal power.  Over the period, NTPC has grown 
consistently and has emerged as the premier power undertaking in the country.  The 
Committee further note that NTPC has  embarked upon an ambitious diversification 
plan to enlarge its power portfolio to hydro, nuclear and renewable energy also.   The 
company has developed interest in the ‘Power Value Chain’ business.  In this 
connection, the Committee would like to caution that while entering the other areas, 
the company should not lose   sight of its core competency of thermal power 
generation where they have achieved leadership position with great aplomb.   
 
 NTPC have been mainly operating in a traditional cost plus return regime.  
With the new electricity policy in place, NTPC has to move towards competitive 
bidding based on tariff cost for future power projects.  In this regard, the Committee 
would like to emphasis the need for NTPC to adapt itself to the changing c ompetitive 
environment sooner rather than later. 
 
 The Committee also point out the fact that with the entry of private sector in 
the thermal power generation in a big way, the company is likely to face stiff 
competition to retain its leadership position.  Under such a scenario, it became 
imperative on the part of NTPC to review its performance and improve efficiency in all 
spheres of its activities, so that they can continue to maintain the premier position in 
the power sector. In addition to this, the Com mittee would like to emphasis the need 
on the part of Ministry of Power to review the performance of NTPC periodically and 
strengthen it in all possible ways so that NTPC can continue to lead the power sector. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
 NTPC is the larg est power generator in the country with current installed 
capacity of 39,674 MW, comprising 34,810 MW from its own stations and 4,864 MW 
under Joint Ventures. As has been rightly noted by the committee, NTPC has 
obtained the distinction of being the larges t thermal power generating company in 
the country. NTPC has presence across all the major states in the country and is 
supplying power to almost all the states and UTs. 
 
 NTPC’s installed capacity of 32,650 MW (as on 31.03.2012) constituted 16% 
of total in stalled capacity in the country and with this capacity NTPC’s generation 
during 2011-12 was 25% of the all India generation. The group NTPC generated 240 
BU in 2011-12. 
 
 

16 
 
i) Diversification of NTPC (Para 1) 
 
 NTPC prepared its Corporate Plan for the period  2010-32 and adopted a 
Vision ‘ To be  the world’s largest and best power producer, powering India’s 
growth’  As per this corporate plan NTPC envisaged to have a total generating 
capacity of 128000 MW by the year 2032 with well diversified fuel mix comprisi ng 
Coal, Gas, Hydro, Nuclear and Renewable Energy based capacity. Hydro, Nuclear 
and Renewable Energy are the benign sources for power generation and are carbon 
free.  
 
 The diversification initiatives of NTPC are primarily meant to strengthen its 
leadership position in its core business area of setting up and operating power 
projects. NTPC is also clear that these initiatives should also create value for the 
company and its stakeholders. Additionally the new business initiatives would also 
provide NTPC to offer new growth opportunities to its employees while leveraging 
their skills / talent to capitalize on new opportunities. 
 
 NTPC envisages to pursue a mix of strategic options to ensure fuel security 
and is developing coal mines to partially meet the coal  requirement for its new 
projects. 
 
 Power trading has been recognized as the district activity by Electricity Act 
2003. Therefore NTPC has entered power trading through its subsidiary to ensure 
optimal utilization of its power plants. Its subsidiary, name ly NTPC Vidyut Vyapar 
Nigam Limited, is the second largest power trader in the country with 17% market 
share in 2011-12. 
 
 In addition, NTPC has formed joint venture companies for various businesses 
along the energy value chain which include power equipmen t manufacturing, energy 
efficiency, services, high power testing of electrical equipment, coal mines 
acquisition and development etc. 
 
 As such, thermal power generation continues to be the predominant segment 
of NTPC’s business. Nevertheless, fuel mix diversification and business 
diversification in to related areas along the energy value chain will enable NTPC to 
further consolidate its leadership position while exploiting the new business 
opportunities. 
 
ii) Competitive bidding based on Tariff (Para 2) 
 
 NTPC has submitted the response to the Request for Qualification (RFQ) 
bidding documents for the Orissa UMPP (to be set up at Bhedabahal) on 
01.08.2011. The RFQ evaluation results are awaited. NTPC has also purchased the 
Request for Qualification (RFQ) bidding documents for the Chhattisgarh UMPP (to 
be set up at Surguja). NTPC would be submitting competitive bid for these projects 
as and when the bids for these projects are required to be submitted. 
 
iii) Performance Monitoring of NTPC (Para 3) 
 
 NTPC Projects are monitored by multiple agencies as given below for their 
timely completion: 

17 
 
 
I) Monitoring by NTPC’s internal mechanism  
 
a) NTPC has an elaborate and efficacious Project Management System, 
known as IPMCS (Integrated Project Management & Control S ystems). 
IPMCS integrates all control centers, namely, Engineering 
Management, Contracts Management and Construction Management. 
The system takes care of all stages of project implementation from 
concepts to commissioning. The system has proactive planning  and 
meticulous monitoring mechanism. A regular review of projects is held 
every month by project review team constituted for this purpose. The 
exceptions out of this review are flagged for the corrective measures 
and direction by the top management.  
 
Further based on the experience from the implementation of its 
projects, NTPC has taken up several new initiatives for faster 
development of projects: 
 
 Setting up of a project monitoring centre with audio video 
monitoring facilities through which Video Conferencing with 
Regional Head Quarters, Projects and concerned depts. at 
Corporate Centre such as PP&M, Contracts, Engineering etc. 
are held for discussion and resolution of critical issues and 
review of project progress 
 Adopting on -line web based projec t monitoring system. This 
website contains information about the various 
milestones/activities of the projects; access has been given to 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA), Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation (MoSPI). Web 
based real time project monitoring has been implemented for all 
the projects under construction. 
 Rolling out of ERP system which covers all ongoing projects of 
NTPC. 
 Intervention of top management at critical stages for speedy 
dispute resolution and regular reviews by top management to 
monitor progress and resolve critical issues. Apex level meeting 
by CMD (NTPC) with the CMD of main plant agency (BHEL) is 
conducted periodically. Periodic Package -wise reviews are also 
held by top management such as CM D and Directors of NTPC 
with CMD of major suppliers like RITES, KBL, INDURE, etc. for 
monitoring & expediting progress. Regular site visit of top 
management of NTPC (CMD & Directors) for holding review 
meetings with NTPC project officials, Suppliers, Erect ion 
agencies for on the spot decisions on critical hold -up for 
expediting project progress. 
 Regular interaction with local administration, state and central 
government 
 
II) Monitoring by MOP / other Government agencies    
 

18 
 
(a) Monitoring by Government Agencies thr ough monthly reports/review: Monthly 
reports of every project are being submitted to Central Electricity Authority 
(CEA) and Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MOSPI) in 
addition to the detailed report from CMD, NTPC to Secretary (Power), Ministry 
of Power (MOP). 
 
 Based on the above report, Chairperson, CEA reviews the projects. 
 
(b) MOP‘s Quarterly Progress Review (QPR):  NTPC’s Project review is a part of 
MOP’s QPR taken by Secretary (Power). The performance highlights, critical 
issues/ area of concern are reviewed in detail and action plans are finalized to 
meet the target.  
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
CAPACITY ADDITION BY NTPC 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that the capacity utilization (plant load factor) 
of NTPC in coal plants is 84% and gas based plant is 71% which is quite satisfactory. 
The Committee further note that NTPC has major expansion plan and targets to build 
capacity of over 75000 MW by 2017 from the present installed capacity of 26350 
MW.  In the 10 th Plan, NTPC added about 7155 MW capacity.  For 11 th Plan, a 
capacity addition of about 2235 0 MW has been envisaged out of which 500 MW has 
been commissioned and 13360 MW capacity has been scheduled for commissioning 
in the period from 2008 -2012.  However, new projects of capacity 8490 MW are at 
preliminary stages for want of clearances from various agencies.  
 
Keeping in view the long gestation period of a thermal power plant, the 
Committee are apprehensive that NTPC achieving their 11 th Plan target of capacity 
addition.   The Committee desire that NTPC should expend all available resources at 
their command to complete these planned projects on schedule.  
 
 The Committee opine that if NTPC fails to achieve the targets of capacity 
addition, which is about 28% of the total 11 th Plan target, the demand - supply 
position may deteriorate further and the Government may find it difficult to achieve 
the vision of power for all by 2012.  Hence, the Committee recommend that Ministry 
should review all the Projects related to Capacity add ition during the 11 th Plan and 
coordinate with other departments in respect of new projects to remove the 
bottlenecks so that these projects could be completed within the plan period. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
 Total Installed capacity of NTPC including  joint ventures is 39,674 MW as on 
23rd November, 2012.  As per Govt. of India target for 12 th Plan, NTPC is to add 
14,038 MW, out of which 2,660 MW has already been commissioned and 
construction works are in progress for 16,309 MW capacity. NTPC is target ing 
capacity addition of 4160 MW during 2012-13. 
 

19 
 
Performance Monitoring of NTPC  
 
 NTPC Projects are monitored by multiple agencies as given below for their 
timely completion: 
 
I) Monitoring by NTPC’s internal mechanism  
 
a) NTPC has an elaborate and efficac ious Project Management System, 
known as IPMCS (Integrated Project Management & Control Systems). 
IPMCS integrates all control centers, namely, Engineering 
Management, Contracts Management and Construction Management. 
The system takes care of all stages of  project implementation from 
concepts to commissioning. The system has proactive planning and 
meticulous monitoring mechanism. A regular review of projects is held 
every month by project review team constituted for this purpose. The 
exceptions out of this review are flagged for the corrective measures 
and direction by the top management.  
 
Further based on the experience from the implementation of its 
projects, NTPC has taken up several new initiatives for faster 
development of projects: 
 
 Setting up of a project monitoring centre with audio video 
monitoring facilities through which Video Conferencing with 
Regional Head Quarters, Projects and concerned depts. at 
Corporate Centre such as PP&M, Contracts, Engineering etc. 
are held for discussion and resolutio n of critical issues and 
review of project progress 
 Adopting on -line web based project monitoring system. This 
website contains information about the various 
milestones/activities of the projects; access has been given to 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA ), Ministry of Power (MoP), 
Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation (MoSPI). Web 
based real time project monitoring has been implemented for all 
the projects under construction. 
 Rolling out of ERP system which covers all ongoing projects of 
NTPC. 
 Intervention of top management at critical stages for speedy 
dispute resolution and regular reviews by top management to 
monitor progress and resolve critical issues. Apex level meeting 
by CMD (NTPC) with the CMD of main plant agency (BHEL) is 
conducted periodically. Periodic Package -wise reviews are also 
held by top management such as CMD and Directors of NTPC 
with CMD of major suppliers like RITES, KBL, INDURE, etc. for 
monitoring & expediting progress. Regular site visit of top 
management of NTPC (CMD &  Directors) for holding review 
meetings with NTPC project officials, Suppliers, Erection 
agencies for on the spot decisions on critical hold -up for 
expediting project progress. 
 Regular interaction with local administration, state and central 
government 

20 
 
 
II) Monitoring by MOP / other Government agencies    
 
a) Monitoring by Government Agencies through monthly reports/review:  
Monthly reports of every project are being submitted to Central Electricity 
Authority (CEA) and Ministry of Statistics &  Programme Implementation 
(MOSPI) in addition to the detailed report from CMD, NTPC to Secretary 
(Power), Ministry of Power (MOP). 
 
Based on the above report, Chairperson, CEA reviews the projects. 
 
b) MOP‘s Quarterly Progress Review (QPR):  NTPC’s Project review is a part 
of MOP’s QPR taken by Secretary (Power). The performance highlights, 
critical issues/ area of concern are reviewed in detail and action plans are 
finalized to meet the target.  
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
COAL AVAILABILITY 
 
 The Committee note that availability of coal on a continuous basis is the key to 
effective capacity utilisation of Thermal Power plants.  Out of 27904 MW which is the 
country’s installed capacity, about 22895 MW (73%) is generated from coal based 
stations.  The Committee have been informed that coal supply to NTPC power 
stations will be based on long term linkages by Ministry of coal. However, the 
Committee are deeply concerned about the availability of coal at NTPC power 
stations.  The coal requirement has  been projected at 125.73 MT for 2007 -08 and 
there is a gap of the order of 4.73 MT, which is being met through imports.  The coal 
requirement is expected to rise to 212 MT in 2011-12 and it is expected that this shall 
be met through supplies from Coal India Limited (CIL).  There is however a mismatch 
in development of linked mines by CIL and construction of NTPC units.  The 
Committee are of the view that NTPC should insist on including penalty clauses in 
the agreements with CIL for supply of coal and bind Government to synchronize the 
development of coal mines.  
 
The Committee also note that though NTPC have been allotted coal blocks for 
captive mining, which is likely to provide some relief to its problems.  However, in the 
foreseeable future, to meet the demand and to build up sufficient coal stock, NTPC is 
increasingly expected to rely on both domestic and international sources for its coal 
requirements.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Government should 
allot preferentially more coal and coal  blocks to NTPC to meet its requirement and 
also encourage NTPC either alone or in consortium with other PSUs like CIL, SAIL, 
etc. to buy coal mines and/or tie-ups with suppliers in foreign countries.  
 
 The Committee also note that NTPC have suggested for  Regulatory Price 
mechanism for coal.  The Committee desire that the Government should seriously 
look into this suggestion and help implement it for long term supply of coal to NTPC 
at fixed rates, so that power can also be supplied to the consumers at rea sonable 
rates.   

21 
 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
i)         Fuel Supply Agreement between NTPC and with CIL (Para 1) 
 
NTPC had signed Coal Supply Agreement (CSA) for stations commissioned prior to 
31.03.2009. CIL has uploaded modified model CSA for units commissioned after 31st 
Mar 2009 and to be commissioned on or before 31 st Mar 2015, on its website on 26 th 
Sept 2012. Many clauses in the CSA are one sided. NTPC had sent detailed 
comments and discussions are in progress to resolve various issues so that C SAs 
can be signed at the earliest. 
 
ii)        Coal mining blocks allocated to NTPC (Para 2) 
 
Government of India had allocated six coal blocks, namely Pakri Barwadih, 
Chatti Bariatu, Kerandari, Dulanga, Talaipalli and Chatti Bariatu (South), to NTPC. 
These coal blocks are being developed with a targeted coal production of 3.00 
MTPA by 2014, which shall be raised to 37.00 MTPA by 2017. Subsequently, these 
coal blocks are expected to achieve their full production potential of 53.00 MTPA by 
2021-22 (subject t o immediate re -allocation of the coal blocks de -allocated earlier),  
which will cater to around 10840 MW of NTPC’s coal based generation capacity. 
NTPC is also exploring faster ramping up of coal production from its mines.  
 
Apart from this, Brahmini Coal block including Chichro -Patsimal is being 
developed by ‘CIL -NTPC Urja Pvt. Ltd.’, a JV Company incorporated on 27.04.10 
with M/s CIL (CIL being the lead partner).   
 
In addition to the above, the Ministry of Coal, on 23.09.2011, conveyed in -principle 
approval for allotment of coal blocks in lieu of linkages to cater to coal requirement of 
8460 MW of generating capacity of NTPC. Identification of mines and formal hand 
over to NTPC is awaited. In this regard, NTPC has identified new coal blocks of 42.5 
MTPA c apacities from the list of MOC and applied to MOP on 10.09.12 for 
consideration and for forwarding to MOC, for implementation of 8460 MW power 
projects for which in-principle approval was conveyed by MOC on 23.09.11.  
 
Ministry of Coal (MOC) on 14.06.2011 de-allocated Chatti -Bariatu, Chatti 
Bariatu (South), Kerandari, Brahmini & Chichro -Patsimal coal blocks. NTPC 
requested MOC to review the decision of de -allocation and restoring it in favour of 
NTPC/JV Company. MOC has conveyed in -principle approval for wi thdrawal of de -
allocation of Chatti -Bariatu, Chatti Bariatu (S) and Kerandari coal blocks on 
27.01.2012. Formal communication of withdrawal is awaited from MOC.  
 
ii b) Acquisition of stake in coal mines abroad (Para 2) 
 
 Earlier NTPC was pursing coal mine  acquisition in Australia, Indonesia, South 
Africa and Mozambique but at present NTPC is not pursuing any coal mine 
acquisition abroad. 
 
ii c) Joint Venture for coal mining projects in India and Abroad (Para 2) 
 

22 
 
 NTPC has formed a JV Company named as ‘NTPC-SCCL Coal Ventures Ltd.’ 
with Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) for acquisition and 
development of coal mines in India & abroad. 
 
 Joint Venture with CIL: M/s CIL NTPC Urja Pvt. Ltd., a JV Company with M/s 
CIL incorporated on 27.04.10 with the aim of jointly undertaking the 
development, operation & maintenance of coal blocks at Brahmini Coal Block 
including Chichro Patsimal in Jharkhand and integrated coal based power 
plants. 
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
SUPPLY OF EQUIPMENTS TO POWER PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee note that the country has an ambitious programme to increase 
the power generation capacity in the future.  This will entail the need for equipment 
suppliers.  The Committee are constrained to note that except BHEL, there are no 
major PSUs in the manufacturing and supply of critical equipments for power 
projects.  Some of the projects of  NTPC are getting delayed due to non -supply of 
equipments by BHEL forcing NTPC to re -schedule the completion dates of these 
projects.  Though BHEL has been expanding their capacity, the demand for 
equipments are not being met on time.  This forces NTPC to delay the 
commissioning of their projects thereby causing unpleasantness in the relationship 
with BHEL.  The Committee are of the view that NTPC & BHEL both being PSU’s 
themselves, should work in tandem with the spirit of mutual cooperation and 
understanding and the Government should sort out any problems that may arise 
between these PSU’s. 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is making efforts to 
attract international manufacturers so as to encourage more players for supply of 
critical equip ment and their response has been encouraging.  According to the 
Ministry, it would induce competition and bring about competitive pressure  for 
performance.  
 
While endorsing their viewpoint, the Committee feel that there should be more 
emphasis on building  indigenous capability in manufacture of critical equipments.  
Since there is a huge opportunity for manufacturing of equipments the Committee are 
of the opinion that Government  should encourage other PSUs to enter into the 
manufacturing of equipments for power projects either in joint venture with 
international players or on other suitable mode of partnerships with emphasis on 
Supercritical Technology. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
 In order to achieve the objective of rapid capacity addition in the country, 
transfer of supercritical technology and development of indigenous manufacturing 
capacity, it was decided to go for the bulk tendering of super -critical units with 
emphasis on dev elopment of indigenous manufacturing facility as per a phased 

23 
 
manufacturing program so that domestic manufacturing capacity of super -critical 
equipments is established in the country with new manufacturer(s) in addition to 
BHEL.  
 
 In the 13 th Plan nearly 100% is expected to come through supercritical units. 
Accordingly, in Bulk Tender -I, Government approved proposals on 27.08.2009 for 
the induction of supercritical technology through bulk ordering of 11 units of 660 MW 
(totaling 7,260 MW) by the NTPC Ltd f or itself and on behalf of its joint venture (JV) 
companies and on behalf of the Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC). Further in 
Bulk Tender-II, Government approved proposals for Bulk ordering of 9 units of 800 
MW (7200 MW) by NTPC on 31-12-2010. 
 
 Orders have already been placed for 3960 MW capacity (Solapur, Meja and 
Mouda-II) under the 660 MW bulk tendering. Under the 800 MW bulk tendering, 
orders have been placed for 2400 MW capacity (Kudgi) and investment approval has 
been accorded for Lara (1600 MW). Bal ance awards for one project of (660 MW) 
and three projects of (800 MW) are in process. 
 
The bulk -tendering program has encouraged new manufactures like L&T – MHI, 
Bharat Forge – Alstom, JSW – Toshiba, Gammon – Ansaldo Caldaie, Thermax – 
Babcock & Wilcox and BGR – Hitachi, etc. to set up power equipment manufacturing 
facilities in India. 
 
 Apart from this NTPC has taken following initiatives towards equipment 
required for power projects: 
 
 Joint Venture (JV) with BHEL:  A 50:50 Joint Venture Company has been 
incorporated on 28 th April 2008 under the name of NTPC BHEL Power Projects 
Pvt. Ltd. to take up EPC contracts and manufacturing of equipments required for 
power projects and infrastructure projects in India & abroad.  The JV Company 
has taken up contracts for Balance of Plant (BOP) at Palatana Combined Cycle 
Power Plant in Tripura, Namrup Combined Cycle Power plant in Assam and one 
another Combined Cycle Power plant in Monarchak at Tripura for NEEPCO. The 
company has e ntered into a technical collaboration agreement for the Coal 
Handling Plant.  Similarly, it is also in the process of tying up for technology 
transfer for the Ash Handling Plant. The company has already shifted its 
corporate office to Mannavaram, near Tirupati in A.P. and is in the process of 
setting up manufacturing plant there. Civil works are in advance stage.  
 JV with Bharat Forge Ltd.:  A Joint Venture Company with equity participation, 
51% by Bharat Forge and 49% by NTPC has been incorporated under the  name 
of  BF -NTPC Energy Systems Ltd. on 19 th June 2008 to initially take up 
manufacture of casting, forging, fitting & high pressure piping, balance of plant 
equipment  required for power projects & and other industries. The JV Company 
is in process of tying up with Technology providers for Pumps & valves, castings, 
piping solutions. The company has acquired land at Solapur for setting up the 
manufacturing plant. 
 Acquisition of stake in Transformers Electricals Kerala Ltd.(TELK):  A share 
holders & business collaboration agreement was signed amongst NTPC, Govt. of 
Kerala and TELK on 23.06.2007 to acquire 44.6% equity shares of TELK held by 

24 
 
Govt. of Kerala.  The acquisition of shares by NTPC was completed on 
19.06.2009.The company has achieved production of 5 762 MVA capacity during 
year 2011-12. 
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
NEED FOR A MECHANISM TO GRANT APPROVALS AND MONITORING OF 
POWER PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee note with concern that for implementation of CPSU’s Power 
Projects, the time taken for the requisite clearances are causing avoidable delay 
adversely effecting their scheduled financial closure and completion of projects.   The 
Committee are of the view that to achieve the targets f or power production in various 
plan periods, the Government should grant approvals in a time bound manner to 
reduce the total time taken from conception to operationalization of the projects.  In 
this regard, the Committee would like to point out that unde r the UMPP Policy, the 
responsibility of coordinating with agencies for ensuring coal 
linkage/environmental/forest clearances and water linkage, etc. lies with the 
Government.  The Committee desire the same treatment to be offered to NTPC and 
other PSUs as  this will not only ensure level playing field to them but also would 
enable them to focus on the Project implementation instead of spending time on 
obtaining clearances. To achieve this, the Committee recommend that appropriate 
mechanism be put in place b y the Government to expedite approvals for the power 
projects and to review delay at regular intervals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government is aware of the long process and time involved in getting 
requisite clearances for setting up of power projects. While the Ministry of Power 
(MOP) is not directly involved in getting environmental and other statutory 
clearances and approvals required by the Public Sector Power Projects, it has been 
supportive of expeditious clearance/approvals including fuel linkages by the 
concerned statutory authorities for such projects. The Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) have suitable internal  mechanism  in each for formulating 
proposals, submission to and following up with the concerned authorities for 
obtaining the requisite clearances viz. coal linkage, environmental and forest 
clearance and water linkage etc.  The MOP reviews the status of the projects from 
time to time and takes up the matter, wherever necessary, with concerned agencies/ 
State Governments to expedite the necessary approvals/inputs. Matters of 
importance are also discussed in the meetings with Chief Ministers/Chief Secretary  
of States, Secretaries of Central Ministries etc. for early disposal of pending issues 
with them.  
  
In the case of UMPP of capacity of 4000 MW each, Shell Companies i.e. 
Special Purpose Vehicles(SPV) set up under the Power Finance Corporation have 
been taking steps for seeking specified clearances/approvals.  Various inputs for the 
UMPP are tied up by the SPV with assistance where required of Ministry of Power 
and Central Electricity Authority.  
 

25 
 
The whole concept of UMPP is based on Tariff based internat ional 
competitive bidding for selecting a project developer for implementing the UMPP. 
The SPVs set up for the projects seek and obtain the specified clearances during the 
bid process itself. On identification of the project developer at the end of the bid  
process, the SPVs are transferred to the selected project developers. 
 
NTPC and other CPSUs on the other hand are individual developers who plan 
and implement power projects of different capacities. The projects being 
implemented by them are also not subj ect to tariff based bidding mode. The 
mechanism adopted for operation of UMPP initiative of the Ministry of Power can not 
therefore be made applicable to NTPC and other generating CPSUs.  
 
The major steps taken in this regard for simplification of procedur es for 
obtaining timely clearances for the projects are as follows: 
 
 The requirement of according Techno -economic Clearance by Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) has been dispensed with for thermal generation.  
However, any generating company intending to  set up a hydro generating 
station shall prepare and submit to the Authority for its concurrence, a scheme 
estimated to involve a capital expenditure exceeding such sum, as may be 
fixed by the Central Government from time to time.  
 
 CEA already has a mecha nism for Concurrence of hydro electric schemes.  
CEA acts as single window and coordinates with different formations of 
Central Water Commission, Geological Survey of India, Ministry of Water 
Resources, Central Soil & Material Research Station, State Gover nments & 
its Departments, Project Developers etc. for appraisal of various aspects of 
hydro electric schemes.   
 
 CEA takes action to accord Concurrence to hydro electric scheme submitted 
to it in the time period of ninety working days in line with the stip ulation in the 
CEA’s guidelines. 
 
 Planning Commission has delegated full powers to State Governments for 
approval of power projects without any ceiling.  Clearance from Planning 
Commission is to be restricted only to those hydro -electric projects where 
inter-State issues are involved. 
 
 The Environment Impact Assessment Notification, 2006 has prescribed a time 
limit of 105 days for appraisal of projects by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests from environmental angle and communicating the decision thereon.   
 
 Secretary level coordination meetings are held to sort out issues relating to 
coal linkages to the projects.  
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
  

26 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 
PERFORMANCE OF NHPC 
 
 The Committee note that NHPC was incorporated in the year 1975 for the 
development of hydro power projects in the country.  The installed capacity of the 
Company stands at 3145 MW.  The Committee further note that NHPC has one of the 
largest capacity in the hydro power secto r and once its plans for capacity addition in XI 
Plan are achieved, NHPC would have almost 20% of the hydro capacity of the country. 
 
 NHPC has plans to add 5233 MW of power during the XI Five Year Plan with a 
total plan outlay of Rs. 28000 crores.  Out of this Rs. 10812 crore is proposed as equity 
and this is to be arranged from internal resources to the tune of Rs. 4870 crore and 
balance Rs. 5942 crore is to be infused as capital.  NHPC has been permitted to raise 
capital by disinvesting the equity in the capital markets.  But the current turmoil both in 
the international and national market does not warrant opting for any venture to mob ilize 
capital from the capital market.  In such a situation, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should regularly review the performance of NHPC with special regard to their 
financial requirements and provide them all support necessary to achieve their plan 
targets.    
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
 The installed capacity of NHPC as on 20.11.2012 is 5526 MW from 15 power 
stations which includes 1520 MW from two projects in JV with Govt. of MP. During 
11th Five Year plan (April’ 2007 - March’ 2012), NHPC has added capacity of 1150 
MW through 3 Projects,  further 2 units of 11 MW each of Chutak (44 MW) HEP in 
J&K were also synchronized during 11th Five Year Plan but not included in the 
capacity addition as these units were synchronized at partial load due to non 
availability of desired load. However, as of  now, from three units out of total four 
units (11 MW each) completed w.r.t. Chutak HE Project, two units of (22 MW) have 
been commissioned in Nov’12  .During 12 th Five year plan, NHPC is likely to add 
hydro capacity of 1702 MW. 
 Total Plan outlay of Rs 28000 crore was proposed for 11th Plan, the same was 
revised to Rs 21600 crore during mid term. The actual fund utilization of 11th Plan 
was Rs 17,269 crore with GBS of Rs 1398 crores and IEBR of Rs 15,871 crores. 
 NHPC is likely to invest about Rs. 20,000  crore during 12 th Five year plan 
period for its capacity addition programmes. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
 The Committee note that the technology required for hydro power projects 
vary from project to project due to the fact that many parameters like geological 
history, weather, water flow, environmental challenges, etc, would all be different.  
The Committee h ave been informed by NHPC that it faces technological constraints 
in the areas like hydrological services, non -availability of hydro -metrological data, 

27 
 
availability of state of the art equipments etc.  The Committee have been further 
informed that Central Electricity Authority has prepared a National Power Plan 
wherein new areas for technology improvement and up -gradation in the power sector 
have been prepared for the period 1997-2012. 
 
 As the National Power Plan for technology improvement and up -gradation will 
end by 2012, the Committee recommend that CEA / MOP should immediately look at 
this aspect afresh and prepare a new plan for technology up -gradation dovetailing 
the latest targets of capacity addition and geographical locations of future power 
projects. 
 
 The Committee also recommend that NHPC should scout and enter into 
alliances with national / international agencies who can provide technological support 
in case of specific requirements in a project, so that they can avail such services as 
and when required. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Development of Hydro -electric Projects are site specific, complex in nature 
and each project has unique features due to varying characteristics of different River 
basins, changing topographical and geological conditions  and distinct climatic and 
seismic conditions. NHPC has been using modern design tools and State of Art 
technology in design and construction of Hydro-electric projects. The multi disciplined 
Design division is well equipped with modern design tools and a well trained team of 
designers, hydrologists, hydro -mechanical experts and skilled professionals for 
trouble shooting and tackling issues in power stations during operation stage. Project 
planning, design & engineering of various components, construction e quipment 
planning etc. are being done according to relevant IS provisions, prevailing national/ 
international guidelines and practices given in USBR, US Army Corps of Engineers, 
ICOLD Bulletins and ACI manuals etc. The planning and design of all components  
associated with hydro -power development is carried out using latest soft -wares for 
structural design and rock mechanics related to large underground caverns and 
tunnels/shafts. The designs are firmed up after detailed finite element analysis by 
mathematical numerical modeling using latest softwares like Stadd -Pro, SAP, FLAC 
2D & FLAC 3D, Phase -2, Slope-W & Seep -W etc. Hydrology Unit of NHPC carries 
out Hydrological studies for all the projects of NHPC during various stages of 
projects. The Hydro -meteorological data is procured from different agencies such as 
CWC, IMD, state governments, and international agencies (RGoB), NRSC, Survey of 
India etc, for concerned projects. New Hydro -meteorological stations such as Gauge-
Discharge-Sediment sites, rain gauges ( ORG,SRRG), Automatic weather station 
(AWS), Meteorological stations, Automatic Water Level recorder, sunshine recorder, 
evaporimeter, etc are established for the projects and all such data is regularly 
monitored, maintained & compiled. Hydrological and hyd raulic modeling softwares 
developed by US Army Corps of Engineers such as HEC-1, HEC-HMS, HEC-2, HEC-
RAS, HEC-5, HEC-6, HEC-RESSIM are used for analysis of design flood, back water 
study, water surface profile, rating curve, reservoir operation, reservoir & channel 
routing, reservoir sedimentation, flood moderation etc. Hydraulic modeling software 
Mike-11 developed by Danish Hydraulic Institute, Denmark, is used for reservoir & 
channel routing, back water study, water surface profile, rating curve, reservoi r 
sedimentation studies. GIS based softwares such as Arc -GIS, ILWIS, ERDAS are 
used for deriving topographical information of the basin, catchment plan preparation, 

28 
 
hypsometric curve development as well as obtaining basic data for Glacial Lake 
Outburst Flood (GLOF) studies using satellite imageries and Digital Elevation Models 
(DEM). GLOF study is carried out independently as well as by taking consultations 
from other agencies such as National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), NRSC, CWC etc. 
Advanced Flood -Forecasting is carried out in collaboration with IMD and CWC. 
Transient study for water conductor system is carried out using WHAMO software 
(Water hammer and Mass Oscillation – Hydraulic transient software developed by US 
Army Corps of Engineers). The prepara tion of Detailed Project Report (DPR) by 
NHPC for an individual hydro -power project comprises a detailed / comprehensive 
study in coordination and involvement of various specialized divisions and groups for 
greater efficiency of use of water and head to de termine its engineering and 
economic feasibility. This report (DPR) is discussed and deliberated in detail in CWC 
and CEA for getting techno-economic clearance before commencement of the project 
implementation. 
 
 NHPC had collaboration with Canadian firms like SNC and Acres in 
association with Canadian International development agency (CIDA) for 
implementation of Chamera H E project St -I in Himachal Pradesh during 1984 -1990. 
The implementation of the project used the services of national/international 
engineers and skilled professionals and use of latest equipment. Further, NHPC in 
association with Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) appointed an 
international Panel of Experts during 1990-1995 for Uri Hydro electric projects in J&K. 
The Internati onal Panel of Experts (POE) included experts on Civil engineering, 
hydraulics, Geotechnics, geology and equipment selection who provided 
technological support and reviewed the adequacy of the various components to carry 
out their intended functions in a sa fe and efficient manner. The panel served for 
approximately five years throughout the period of design and implementation of the 
project. During 1999 -2004, services of International Panel of Experts (POE) for 
Dhauliganga Hydro-electric Project in Uttarakha nd were taken in the field of CFRD & 
Dam foundation, Hydraulics and sedimentation, construction management, rock 
mechanics and Electrical and Mechanical equipment. On case to case basis, NHPC 
has been taking supports of National/International renowned Expe rts to resolve Geo-
technical, structural and other Engineering issues for its projects. Mr. Malcolm 
Dunstan of M/S MDA (UK) has been engaged for the planning, design and 
construction aspects of RCC dam for Teesta Low Dam Project (Stage -IV) being built 
by N HPC in West Bengal. Also, NHPC availed the services of experts for TBM of 
PHEP-II- M/s Electrowalt Engineering, Switzerland (now Porey Engg) and M/S Jager 
Bau,GMBH, Austria. NHPC is first in the country to construct concrete forced rockfill 
dam (CFRD) with  70m deep cut off wall in river bed for Dhauliganga project. The 
deep cut-off was constructed by M/S Bauer Ltd. Another concrete cut-off wall is being 
implemented in Subansiri Lower H E project by the specialized agency -M/S 
Solentache Bachy (SBF). Also fir st time, deep jet grouting was implemented in the 
country for Teesta -V project in Sikkim by NHPC deploying the specialized agency -
M/S Solentache Bachy(SBF).NHPC also completed one of longest inclined pressure 
shaft (1546m) in the country for PHEP -II using double shield TBM for the first time. A 
latest concrete placement system like Rotec System for concrete dams has been 
used for Omkareshwar H E Project and presently is being used for Subansiri Lower H 
E Project.  For 3000 MW Dibang Multipurpose project, in ternational dam and 
foundation experts - Mr. Ruedi Straubhar of M/s. Poyry Energy ltd., and Mr. Mala 
Wielland were engaged for seismic analysis of 288m high concrete gravity dam and 

29 
 
for geotechnical evaluation and treatment of foundation for concrete dam during 2007 
& 2008. 
 
 NHPC, in endeavor to overcome the geological problems has already 
introduced advance state -of-the-art methodologies such as Tunnel Seismic 
Prediction (TSP) to foresee the geological uncertainties ahead of face. Besides, to 
make an overa ll realistic assessment of geological features which are important for 
project execution, latest remote sensing techniques & geophysical applications viz 
Ground Probing Radar (GPR), Multi -channel Analysis of Surface Waves (MASW) & 
Local Earthquake Tomograp hy (LET) have been/are being adopted as per site 
requirement. Latest investigation practices like micro earthquake studies, 
neotectonic / paleoseismic studies, MT survey etc. have also been carried out in 
some of recently investigated projects of NHPC viz.  Tamanthi and Shwezaye, 
Myanmar.  NHPC has an in house investigation team comprising of surveyors, 
geologists, geophysicists, drilling professionals, Construction Material Survey 
experts etc. and capable of carrying out geological investigation of any scal e and 
magnitude. Reputed International Agencies like SNC Acres Canada, Coynei Bellier 
France, SWECO Sweden, Electrowat Switzerland, Electrowalt Ekono Jaakko Poyri 
Group. Switzerland etc. were consulted for obtaining expert advice while negotiating 
critical/problematic reaches. NHPC has also utilized the vast experience of 
renowned agencies, institutes, Departments of Govt. of India e.g. GSI, CSM, CIMFR, 
NIRM, NRSC, IIT Roorkee / IIT Delhi, CWPRS, IIG, etc. for carrying out specialized 
site specific investig ations. NHPC is constantly upgrading its skills by adopting best 
and latest practices in design and construction of hydro -electric projects and has 
been continuously participating in various national and international conferences and 
seminars.”  
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
DAE TO PURSUE INDIGENOUS DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGY 
 
 The Committee note that India is pursuing a three stage nuclear power 
programme and nuclear power in the total power generation is about 4120 MW which 
is about 3% compared to nearly 15% in the global energy mix.  As per plan in the first 
stage, the country would install a capacity of 10000 MWe of PHWR reactors based 
on natural uranium resources in the country.  In the se cond stage, the country would 
construct a series of Fast Breeder reactors.  The fuel for these reactor would come 
out of the plutonium that will be separated from the spent fuel of the PHWR reactors 
by reprocessing.  In the breeder reactors, Thorium 232, w hich our country has been 
well endowed with, will be utilized for conversion to Uranium 233 which will be 
available for use as fuel in the third stage of the nuclear programme.  The Committee 
have been informed by DAE that development of nuclear energy is an important 
component in the long term energy security of the nation. 
  

30 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that the DAE has successfully mastered 
the first phase of the programme and has embarked upon the second phase of the 
programme, namely, the construc tion of Fast Breeder Reactors.  Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) have mastered the Pressurised Heavy Water 
Reactor (PHWR) technology and at present operate a series of reactors.  The 
Committee has taken note of the fact that BHAVINI, a CP SU under DAE, have been 
formed to undertake construction of Fast Breeder Reactors (FBR) based on breeder 
technology and has started the construction of the first prototype FBR.  The 
Committee while commending the visionary approach of DAE, would like to caution  
that it may have to face a lot of challenges in terms of technology and systems in its 
second stage programme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that DAE should 
explore all possible avenues to bring the second stage to fruition in a shorter period 
than envisaged. 
 The Committee also note that DAE have been pursuing a new programme 
called Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR).  In the interest of commercialisation 
and achieving self -reliance, AHWR programme needs to be pursued with due 
seriousness.  The  Committee would like to impress upon DAE not to abandon or 
slowdown any of the ongoing indigenous programmes for development of technology 
due to the recent international agreements in the field of nuclear energy.  The 
Department should make every endeavo ur to expand its technological base for an 
early roll out of the second and third phases of the programme. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 NPCIL is mandated with implementation of the first stage of the three -stage 
nuclear power programme and additionalities, Light Water Reactors (LWR) based on 
international co -operation.  It has mastered the Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor 
(PHWR) technology and has successfully developed indigenous 700 MW PHWRs.  
The construction of four PHWRs - two 700 MW PHWRs each at Kakrapa r in Gujarat 
and Rawatbhata in Rajasthan respectively commenced in the XI Plan.  The 
construction of these reactors is in full swing and the two projects KAPP 3 & 4 
(2X700 MW) and RAPP 7 & 8 (2X700 MW) have achieved a physical progress of 
29.9% and 18.7%, respectively, as of October 2012.  These are expected to be 
progressively completed by the year 2017.  Two LWRs, Kudankulam 1&2 are at 
advanced stage of commissioning. 
 
 In addition, the XII Plan proposals envisage start of work on eight 700 MW 
PHWRs comprising of two reactors each at Gorakhpur in Haryana, Chutka in 
Madhya Pradesh, Mahi -Banswara in Rajasthan and the existing site at Kaiga in 
Karnataka.  The XII Plan proposals also envisage start of work on eight Light Water 
Reactors comprising of two e ach at Kudankulam in Tamilnadu, Jaitapur in 
Maharashtra, Kovvada in Andhra Pradesh and Chhaya Mithi Virdi in Gujarat. 
 
 In respect of Kudankulam 3&4 (2X1000 MW), to be set up at existing site at 
Kudankulam in Tamilnadu, land is available, site infrastructu re is in place and the 
Environmental and Coastal Regulatory Zone clearances have been obtained.  The 
project proposal is presently under consideration of the Government for accord of 
administrative approval and financial sanction. 
 

31 
 
 In respect of Jaitapur nuclear power project 1&2 (2X1650 MW) in 
Maharashtra, land title has been transferred to NPCIL, environmental and CRZ 
clearances have been obtained.  Technology independent site infrastructure 
development activities are in progress c urrently.  The techno - commercial 
discussions with Areva, France to arrive at a project proposal are in progress.   
 
 At the other sites, pre -project activities including land acquisition (with the 
exception of Kaiga site, an existing site, where land is a vailable), obtaining 
environmental and other statutory clearances and site investigations and preparation 
of detailed project report are at various stages. 
 
 In case of the Haryana project, the land acquisition process is at an advanced 
stage.  The process  of environmental clearance has also reached an advanced 
stage with EIA, Public hearing and a meeting of the Expert Appraisal Committee of 
the MoEF already concluded in November, 2012. 
 
 Thus, as NPCIL implements a large Light Water Reactor programme based 
on foreign cooperation, the implementation of the first stage of the three-stage 
programme based on indigenous resources continues to be a priority. 
 
[Department of Atomic Energy O.M. No. 6/4(2)/2008-Power/13181 dated 
18-12-2012] 
 
 
Recommendation. 16 
 
REGULATORY REGIME FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY 
 
 The Committee note that with the recent clearances from the NSG, the country 
may have the opportunity to access co -operation in the nuclear energy sector with 
many countries.  However, as of now, the Atomic Energy Act  1962 stipulates that 
power generation by nuclear energy is permitted by Government approved CPSUs 
only.  Consequently only NPCIL and BHAVINI are operating in the nuclear energy 
sector for power generation.  The Committee also note that some other CPSUs ar e 
also interested to enter this sector. 
 
 This may also entail that the technology for all these reactors may be different 
and hence their close supervision and monitoring would be required.  The regulatory 
authority should be in readiness to face this additional responsibility.  The Committee, 
therefore, suggests that the DAE should work in tandem with the regulatory authority 
to handle the additional activities effectively. 
 
 As the fuel and other related issues are sensitive and lot of stringent 
provisions are to be followed, the Committee recommend that the Government 
should put proper policy guidelines and regulatory regime in place before opening up 
the nuclear sector for private participation. 
 
Reply of Department of Atomic Energy 
 

32 
 
 Joint Ventures bet ween NPCIL and Public Sector companies in Energy 
Sector- NTPC, IOCL, and NALCO with NPCIL as the majority share holder have 
been incorporated with a view to operate nuclear power reactors. 
 
For creating Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority, a bill has been introduced in 
Parliament.  The Authority will have statutory rights to regulate nuclear safety 
issues in all nuclear power plants. 
 
[Department of Atomic Energy O.M. No. 6/4(2)/2008-Power/13181 dated 18-12-
2012] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
NEED FOR A CPSU FOR HARNESSING RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES 
 
The Committee note that adequate power is a key requirement for the 
country’s economic growth.  The power sector in the country has been dominated by 
Central and State Public Sector undertakings as they contribute about 87% of the 
total power generation.  The Committee observe that the Central PSUs play a pivotal 
role. 
 
The Committee further note that in the thermal power sector, NTPC has the 
leadership position with more than 25% of power generation with only 20% o f 
installed capacity in the country, which is unlikely to change in the near future.The 
hydro sector, which alone accounts for about 25% of the power generation in which 
the role of NHPC is quite significant.  As per the information furnished to the 
Committee regarding their future plans, the Central PSUs are likely  to increase their 
share very significantly. In the nuclear power sector too, only the Central PSU, 
namely, NPCIL is running all the country’s nuclear power plants.  However, in the 
case of rene wables, which forms about 8 to 10%; of the power generation, the 
scenario is totally different.  To the dismay of the committee, there are no PSUs in 
the renewable energy sector.  The only PSU in renewable energy sector is IREDA 
which is primarily a financ ial institution that finances Renewable Energy projects.  
The Committee during their interaction with experts from various fields of the energy 
sector found that a Central PSU in the Renewable Energy Sector is the need of the 
hour which would set as a catalyst and provide leadership role in exploring renewable 
energy sources and set up power plants for power generation. 
 
The Committee also endorse the opinion that Central PSU for Renewable 
Energy can provide greater thrust, and can also ensure better coordi nation with Sate 
Governments.  The size of the projects undertaken by the PSUs may also impact 
cost of power positively.  Above all, the Government can get important feedback 
about this promising land important sector.  Considering the potential of renewab le  
energy and the immense  promise it holds for the future, particularly the exciting 
prospects in solar energy exploitation, the Committee recommend that the 
Government should set up a Central PSU to tap the renewable energy sources in the 
country and play a lead role in the sector. 
 
Reply of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy:- 
 

33 
 
The position of the Ministry is reiterated.  Further, in pursuance of the decision 
of the Government to implement the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, the 
issue of a su itable and autonomous institutional structure for the implementation of 
the Mission was examined.  It was decided to set up a Government owned public 
limited company, under the Section 25 of Companies Act 1956, as a company not for 
profit, under the administrative control of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.  
Solar Energy Corporation of India has been set up and its certificate of Registration 
was issued by Registrar of Companies on 20 th September, 2011.  Dr. Anil Kakodkar 
has taken over as Chairman , Solar Energy Corporation of India.  The Corporation is 
now functional. 
 
[Ministry of New Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/4/2007-P&C dated 7-12-2012] 
 
  
Recommendation No. 18 
 
SOLAR MISSION 
 
The Committee note that of late, climate change concerns have caught  the 
attention of leaders and countries around the world.  In this context, the renewable 
sources of energy like wind, solar and biomass have been getting increased 
attention.  India has a natural advantage to harness renewable energy as the country 
is endowed with sunlight for over 300 days/year and a strong wind regime in many 
parts of the country. 
 
The Committee have been apprised that the PM’s Council on climate change 
is preparing an action plan on National Solar Mission.  The Committee are of the view 
that our country needs a strong actionable framework to intensify R&D in renewable 
energy sector to harness clean and green power, which would draw upon 
international cooperation as well, to enable the creation of more affordable and more 
convenient solar power systems and to promote innovations that enable the storage 
of solar power for sustained use.  In this regard the Committee recommend that the 
Government should set up a Central Institute to coordinate R&D activities in 
renewable energy. 
 
The Committee further note that at present the materials needed for solar cells 
are being imported.  The Government should take steps to facilitate indigenous 
manufacturing of key materials by facilitating investments through incentives and 
concessions.  The Committe e also suggest that strong fiscal incentives for 
development of related technologies in solar energy should be provided for attracting 
serious and interested players to invest and participate in this sunrise sector of the 
future. 
  
Reply of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy:- 
 
 The policy frame work of Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission was 
approved by the Cabinet on 19 th November, 2009 and formally launched by the 
Prime Minister on 11 th January, 2010.  The objective of the Mission is to establish 
India as a global leader in solar energy, by creating policy conditions for its diffusion 
across the country quickly and achieve a scale to drive down costs to levels required 
to achieve grid parity by 2022.  The Mission targets include (i) deployment of 20,000 

34 
 
MW of grid connected solar power by 2022, (ii) 2,000 MW of off -grid solar 
applications including 20 million solar lights by 2022, (iii) 20 million sq.m. solar 
thermal collector area, (iv) to create favourable conditions for developing solar 
manufacturing capability in the country; and (v) support R&D and capacity building 
activities to achieve grid parity by 2022. 
 
 The Mission is implemented in three phases.  For the first phase of the 
Mission, which is till March, 2013, target is to set up 1,100 MW grid connected solar 
plants including 100 MW of roof top and small solar plants and 200 MW capacity 
equivalent off-grid solar applications and 7 million sq. m. solar thermal collector area. 
 
The following are the major initiatives under the Mission: 
 
 1152 MW capacity grid connected solar power projects have been 
selected. 
 
 11 projects of 50.50 MW capacity (48 MW PV+ 2.5 MW ST) under 
migration scheme, 26 projects of 130 MW capacity under Batch -I 
and 68 projects totaling 87.80 MW of small capacity power projects 
(RPSSGP Programme) have been commissioned.  In all, a total 
capacity of over 1045 MW Grid connected Solar Power Projects 
have been commissioned in the country as on 31.10.2012. 
 
 A total capa city of 138.00 MW off -grid Solar Power Projects have 
been sanctioned. 
 
 About 59.80 lakh sq. meter of collector area of solar thermal 
systems have been installed against a target of 70 lakh sq. meter 
of collector area to be completed by March, 2013. 
 
Ministry is providing 30% subsidy and/or loan at 5% interest rate to consumers for 
purchase of solar systems through select implementing organizations in Government 
and also through solar system integrators.  The regional rural banks have been 
engaged in the programme to sanction loans for solar systems mainly for individuals. 
 
Research and Development  
 
A comprehensive policy for research & development has been put in place. The 
following R&D projects are under implementation: 
 
1.  A megawatt scale Nationa l Solar Thermal Power Test and Simulation facility is 
being set up at Ministry’s Solar Energy Centre by IIT Bombay and a consortium of 
Industries.  The test facility is aimed at to serve the industry and help in designing 
solar thermal power projects based  on technology parameters and climatic 
conditions of the locations. 
 
2.  R&D-cum-demonstration project for development of Central Receiver Technology 
for solar thermal power generation has been sanctioned to a Group led by an Indian 
industry and comprising  scientists from USA, Spain and Switzerland.  The project 
aims to design and develop solar tower with an output of 1MW thermal energy. 
 

35 
 
3.  Development and demonstration of 1MW capacity solar thermal power R&D 
project with 16 hour thermal storage for setti ng up at Mount Abu, with co -funding 
from German Ministry and Indian industry.  The project is first of its kind to provide 
thermal storage of 16 hours and will be based on fully indigenously developed solar 
dish technology. 
 
4.  Development of nano structu res thin film dye sensitized solar cell along with 
capacitor storage by Amrita Centre for Nano science, Cochin.  The project aims at 
development of novel storage technique for low power applications. 
 
5.  Development of 15% efficiency thin film CIGS solar cell modules by an industry.  
The project would lead to setting up of a pilot plant by the industry. 
6. Development of high efficiency solar thermal air conditioning systems in 
association with M/s. Thermax. 
 
[Ministry of New Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/4/2007-P&C dated 7-12-2012] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
PERFORMANCE OF IREDA 
 
The Committee note that IREDA was established as a Government of India 
enterprise in March 1987 under the administrative control of the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE) to  promote, develop and extend financial assistance to 
various renewable energy projects.  IREDA is a profit making institution and has built 
up a sizeable portfolio of advances in various sectors in the renewable energy space. 
 
The Committee note with conce rn that the Non Performing Assets (NPA) of 
IREDA are 20%, which is considerably high.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that IREDA should be very vigilant and strengthen their loan appraisal and evaluation 
systems.  The action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
 
The Committee understand that banks and other financial institutions are also 
now giving loans for renewable energy projects, thereby competing with IREDA.  
However, the Committee are dismayed to find that being an all Indian  financial 
institution, IREDA has a very small network with only two branches outside Delhi.  
The Committee believe that renewable energy will be a very important area of 
business in the near future and therefore IREDA should capitalize on the business 
opportunities.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that IREDA should look at 
expansion of their network to other important cities and regions where there is 
adequate potential for renewable energy projects. 
 
One of the mandates of IREDA is promotion of r enewable energy.  The 
Committee desire that it should create awareness among the masses about the 
benefits of renewable energy and allocate more resources for promotion of such 
activities.  The Committee further suggest that IREDA should conduct such 
promotional programmes on renewable energy in sates where there is a good 
potential for such projects. 
 

36 
 
Reply of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy:- 
  
IREDA has taken various steps to recover the non -performing assests (NPAs), 
during the period 2009 -10 to 2011-12, as a result of the said efforts, the NPAs 
(Gross) were reduced to 5.46% as 31 -3-2012 as against 14.32% as on 31 -3-2009.  
The net NPAs also reduced from 4.36% as on 31 st March, 2009 to 2.50% as on 
31.03.2012.  IREDA is taking all efforts for reduci ng the level of NPAs which are 
enlisted below: 
 
 The appraisal procedure of individual application has been 
strengthened by introducing the Credit Risk Ratings Systems.  
All the projects are evaluated as per the software developed by 
Credit Analysis and Res earch Ltd. (CARE) and based on the 
ratings, the projects are categorized into four Grades I to IV.  
The rate of interest is fixed commensurate with the risk 
perception of the projects.   
 
 IREDA has clearly laid down OTS and reschedulement policies.  
Recovery from old NPA cases is effected through OTS as per 
the policy approved by the Board of Directors.  In addition the 
projects where the symptoms of defaults emerge are analysed 
and after examining the reasons for the default, the same are 
considered for reschedulement of the dues as per the approved 
Board policy. 
 
 Wherever the proposals for regularizing the accounts are not forthcoming 
from the borrower, IREDA resorts to the legal action such as: 
 
 Criminal complaints u/s 138 of NIA are filed against the 
borrowers and guarantors for the dishonor of cheques which are 
normally obtained at the time of disbursement of loan: 
 The recovery proceedings before DRT are filed in case the 
accounts turns out to be the NPA. 
 Wherever the security for the loan appears to be sufficient, 
IREDA resort to initiate action under SARFAESI Act. 
 Winding-up proceedings has also been filed in some cases to 
effect recovery from NPAs loans wherever securities are not 
sufficient. 
 
 IREDA has two branch offices operating in Chennai and H yderabad to cover 
Tamilnadu, Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh respectively.  Further, IREDA 
two camp offices in Kolkata and Ahmedabad.  While the Kolkata camp office is 
covering states of Orissa, North Eastern Region, Sikkim and West Bengal, the 
Ahmedabad camp office is catering to mainly Gujarat, Maharashtra and Rajasthan. 
 
 IREDA has been making concerted efforts in creating awareness among the 
masses about the benefits of renewable energy.  Publicity campaigns have been 
conducted through print and el ectronic media.  IREDA has prepared video films on 
various Renewable Energy Sectors and shown to the participants during awareness 
campaigns.  It has been organizing/ sponsoring various promotional programs like 
Business Meets/ Seminars/ Conference, etc. 

37 
 
 
[Ministry of New Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/4/2007-P&C dated 7-12-2012] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
LOW COST OF FUNDS AND EQUITY SUPPORT TO IREDA 
 
The Committee has been informed by IREDA that the following measures 
would address their request for low cost funds: 
 
(i) To charge concessional guarantee fee by Government of India. 
(ii) To permit to issue tax free bonds and also issue bonds under Section 
54E(b) of Income Tax Act, 1961. 
(iii) To provide GOI guarantee to raise resources from bilateral/multilateral 
agencies. 
 
 The Committee feel that the above requests are genuine and well deserving 
and all fall under the ambit of Ministry of Finance.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should impress upon 
Ministry of Finance to consider all these requests favorably without any delay so that 
IREDA may be able to raise funds at lower cost, which in turn would re duce the 
costs for renewable energy sector. 
 
The Committee note that IREDA has sought access to low cost funds so as to 
reduce the cost of capital to the important renewable energy sector.  The high capital 
costs in this sector in turn increases the cost of power generated.  The Committee 
therefore desire that Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) should provide 
enhanced and adequa te equity support to IREDA on annual basis so as to enable 
IREDA to achieve its targets. 
 
The Committee note IREDA’s suggestion that custom and excise duty may be 
exempt 100% for all equipments of renewable energy power projects.  Ministry of 
Finance may c onsider this request favourably so as to provide necessary fillip to 
these activities.  Also, the Committee further note that the generation based 
incentive for wind projects is available upto 49MW only.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, it is a very limit ed incentive and may dissuade potential  investors from 
investing in new projects.  In this regard the Committee recommend that these 
incentives should be extended by Government to all projects that are scheduled for 
installation and power generation during the 11th Plan period. 
 
 
Reply of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy:- 
 
 Government has extended guarantee for following Line of Credit at normal 
guarantee fee of 1.2% p.a. 
 
SI. No. Line of Credit Amount  Year 
1. KfW Line of Credit III 19.97 million 2009-10 
2. KfW Line of Credit IV 200 million 2010-11 
3. AfD Line of Credit 70 million 2010-11 

38 
 
4. JICA 30 billion 2011-12 
 
 Further the Government has extended guarantee for following Line of Credit 
at concessional fee of 1% p.a. to IREDA 
 
SI.No. Line of Credit Amount (in Euro) Year 
1. KfW Line of Credit II 50 million 2008-09 
 
 Proposal was sent for allocation of tax free bond for an amount of Rs. 1000.00 
crore during the year 2012 -13 out of the overall budget of Rs. 10,000.00 crore for 
infrastructure sector.  Recently Ministry of Finance’s published notification allocating 
of tax free bonds of aggregated amount of Rs. 53000 crore wherein no allocation in 
favour of IREDA has been made. 
 
 With regard to Generation Based Incentives (GBI) in the wind proj ect, MNRE 
vide notification dated 17 th December, 2009 has extended GBI to a maximum 
capacity of 4000 MW during the remaining period of 11 th Five Year Plan.  Against 
this a capacity addition of 2236.93 MW has been made till March, 2012 for which 
GBI has been extended. 
 
 A budgetary provision of Rs. 60 crores has been made by the MNRE towards 
equity support to IREDA for the financial year 2012 -13.  The same has been 
received. 
 In the 12th Five Year Plan proposal, MNRE has recommended to the Planning 
Commission for infusion of Rs. 2500 crore equity to IREDA. 
 
[Ministry of New Renewable Energy O.M. No. 8/4/2007-P&C dated 7-12-2012] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
 
ENERGY CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY 
 
The Committee note that the peak power shortage in the country is around 
15% and feel that by efficient use of power, this shortage can be managed in a much 
better way. The Committee note that Energy Conservation Act, 2001 provides for the 
implementation of energy efficiency measures through Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
(BEE) and other designated agencies.  The BEE has been functioning for the past 
several years to promote energy conservation and efficiency efforts.   
 
The Committee have been informed that BEE has prepared an action plan for 
the period 2007 -2012 with the aim of achieving 5% savings to result in an avoided 
capacity addition of 10,000 MW during the period.  The Committee note that t he 
Government has started the Standards &Labelling Scheme to provide the consumer 
an informed choice about energy saving and cost saving potential in household and 
other equipments.  The Committee appreciate such initiatives and recommend that 
more and more gadgets and household products which consume high energy should 
be included under such schemes and consumers should also be educated about the 
benefits through awareness campaigns. The Committee further recommend that BEE 

39 
 
should be expanded and its scope  and activities should be widened so as to make it 
more effective. 
 
The Committee have noted that BEE has made certain proposals for tax/duty 
exemption for promotion of energy efficiency and the same are being considered by 
Ministry of Finance for inclusio n in the budget proposal (2009 -10).  The Committee 
desire that Ministry of Power should closely pursue these proposals with the Ministry 
of Finance. The Committee recommend that an appropriate fiscal incentive scheme 
be put in place by the Ministry of Power  to reward for use of energy efficient gadgets. 
 
The Committee understand that the Government has initiated a dialogue with 
the manufacturers of energy related products for improving energy efficiency.  The 
Committee note that most of the manufacturers b elong to unorganized sector and 
hence would like to advise the Government to tread cautiously as this will have an 
socio-economic impact.  The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry may 
provide incentives and concessions for the manufacturers and encourage access to 
energy efficient technologies. 
 
The Committee desire that awareness of energy conservation and energy 
efficiency should be more vigorously pursued and all sections of the society 
especially the youth, children, women and industry should  be targeted in the 
awareness campaigns.  The Committee desire that the performance of Bureau of 
Energy Efficiency should be periodically reviewed and any gap is its performance 
should be plugged.  The support of civil society groups like NGO’s, PSU’s, 
Government agencies, etc. may be enlisted in the pursuit and demonstration of 
energy efficiency and conservation measures. The Ministry may look at fund 
requirement and increase allocation in an appropriate manner for these activities. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
(1) BEE has laid minimum energy performance standards, labeling of air -
conditioners, frost free refrigerators, tubular florescent lamps (TFLs) and 
distribution transformers & were made mandatory on 7.01.2010. 
 
The other 10 equipments and appliances which have been included as 
voluntary programme include direct cool refrigerator, geysers, motors, pumps 
sets, colour televisions, LPG stoves, washing machines, ceiling fans, Laptop 
and Cassette Air-Conditioners. 
 
Labeling program for ballet, invested, boi ler (upto 10TM) office equipment, 
voltage stabilizer, set -top box, DG sets and DG pumps sets is under 
development. 
 
BEE has made request to the Ministry of Power to enhance the sanctioned 
strength of employees from 18 at present to 47. In this regards, it is stated the BEE’s 
sanctioned strength has been increased from 18 to 21 and 16 additional posts 
including 2 DDG post has been sanctioned under National Mission of Enhanced 
Energy Efficiency under Plan Scheme. 

40 
 
 
(2)  Ministry of Power agrees with the recommenda tions of the Committee for 
providing incentives and concessions for the manufacturers and encouragement 
of access to energy efficient technologies for promoting energy efficiency. A 
detailed self contained proposal for tax/duty exemption for promotion of e nergy 
efficiency products was sent to Ministry of Finance during the Annual Budget 
proposal of 2010 -11. It is stated that the same has not been announced during 
the Interim Budget of 2011-12. 
 
(3)  Ministry of power has approved the scheme for providing suppor t to Small and 
Medium technologies. The scheme provides for Government support for 
preparation of technology based detailed project reports, giving incentives in the 
form of financial instruments to fund the DPRs and training/capacity building of 
small and Medium entrepreneurs. 
 
(4) During the 11th Plan, seven schemes with an allocation of Rs. 346.86 crores have 
been approved by the Government. 
 
In addition, two more schemes with an allocation of Rs. 321.42 crores have been 
approved. The Schemes are (i) for enh ancing awareness of energy efficiency 
(Rs. 86.07 crores) (ii) National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency (Rs. 
235.35 crores) 
 
(5) The Cabinet has approved the National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency 
(NMEEE) in June, 2010. The objective of the Missio n is to device efficient and 
cost effective strategies through demand side management, initiatives and 
market transformation in favour of energy efficient processes, products and 
services. These initiatives include: 
 
(a) A market based mechanism to enhance cos t effectiveness of improvements in 
energy efficiency in energy -intensive large industries which facilitate energy 
saving certificates that could be traded. (Perform Achieves and Trade)  
 
(b) Accelerating the shift to energy efficient appliances in designated sectors through 
innovative measures to make the products more affordable. (Market 
Transformation for Energy efficiency (MTEE)). 
(c) Creation of mechanisms that would held finance demand side management 
programme in all sectors by capturing future energy saving s (Energy Efficiency 
Financing Platform (EEFP)). 
 
(d) Developing fiscal instrument to promote energy efficiency namely Framework for 
(Energy Efficient Economic Development (FEEED)). 
 

41 
 
(6) The number of BEE’s Executive Committee/Governing Council meeting held so  
far. 
(a) Executive Committee/Management advisory Committee Meetings  -- 
(b) Governing Council Meeting       04 
 
(7) BEE has been holding the National Conservation Awards to spread Awareness 
among the industrial and commercial units and Painting Competition on Ene rgy 
efficiency and conservation for students. These Awards have proved to be a 
means to institutionalize the energy efficiency movement in the country by 
identifying and giving recognition to the energy conservation efforts undertaken 
by different firms an d industries. The scheme has become very popular among 
industrial units, as is evident from increasing participation level (from 123 in 1999 
to 644 in 2011).  
In the spirit of spreading Awareness among the school children, Painting 
Competition is held every year since 2005. A Painting Competition for school 
children at School, State and National level is taken up, which not only makes the 
children aware about the need of conserving energy but at the same time 
educate and involve their parents, friends an d siblings in the above cause.  This 
activity is one of the measures, which has helped in creating awareness in the 
domestic sector.  The student participation level has increased from 3.43 Lakh 
students in 2005 to 20.72 Lakh students in 2011 which is very encouraging. 
 
(8) The energy conservation target planned for the XI Plan is 10,000 MW.  The 
achievements in respect of energy saved relating to the programme/schemes of 
the BEE during the XI Plan are 10,836 MW.  The physical and financial targets of 
BEE’s Schemes are given in the Annexure.       
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
 The Committee believe that Research and Development is key to achieving 
the long-term goals in any field.  R&D in the energy sector will increase our energy 
independence and allow us to achieve reasonable levels of energy security.  The 
Committee are dismayed to note that barring nuclear energy, there are no institutions 
for R&D activities in any of the power sectors like  thermal, hydel and renewable 
energy.  As pointed out in the Integrated Energy Policy, basic research leading to a 
fundamental breakthrough may open up possibilities of applications and R&D is a 
prerequisite to developing new concepts. 
 
 The Committee take  further note of the fact that the R&D expenditure by the 
PSUs is in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 percent of the net profit which is inadequate.  The 
Committee are disappointed with the poor allocation of resources for R&D purposes 
by PSUs.  In this regard the Committee recommend that the Government should 
create an Institute of Excellence where energy related R&D be undertaken.  The 
CPSU’s should be asked to contribute financially and can award their R&D projects 

42 
 
to the institution.  This will also help to focu s and enable the institution to tie -up with 
International agencies wherever required and create a talent pool in R&D activities 
for power sector.  
 
Reply of Ministry of Power  
 
  The Central Power Research Institute (CPRI) was established by the 
Government of India in 1960 with the objective of helping the Indian Power Sector.  
The Institute was re -organized into an autonomous society in the year 1978 under 
the aegis of the Ministry of Power, Government of India.  The Ministry has been 
supporting the Instit ute since the third five year Plan.  CPRI to -day has the 
necessary infrastructure to foray into all major thrust areas of R&D in Power Sector 
namely (i) Generation, (ii) Transmission, (iii) Distribution (iv) Energy and environment 
and (v) End use etc.  CPR I has ambitious plans to expand further through 
establishments of Regional Testing Laboratories in North and Western parts of India 
to cater to the demands of Manufacturers, utilities and the Industry from all regions of 
the country.  The proposals under 1 2th Plan are towards strengthening of 
Infrastructure to benefit the society. 
 
  Central Power Research Institute with broad mandate covering all aspects of 
Power sector is already functioning under Ministry of Power, Government of India. 
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 26 
 
SETTING UP OF INSTITUTES TO CREATE SKILLED MANPOWER FOR THE 
POWER SECTOR 
 
 The Committee note that one of the key resources for any sector is the human 
resource.  At present, this is also the most important challenge for most of the sectors 
of the economy.  The Committee have been informed that due to the boom in 
IT/ITES, many sectors which are in need of huge skilled manpower have been 
complaining of attrition or non -availability of manpower. The Committee are of the 
view that for a specialized sector like power, availability of skilled manpower  is going 
to be a challenge in the foreseeable future.  However, as huge growth plans are lined 
up in this sector, action needs to be t aken to attract and retain skilled manpower so 
that  planned growth is not hampered.  
 
 In this regard, experts who deposed before the Committee have also 
underscored the point that manpower in PSUs needs to be given proper exposure in 
leadership skills and decision making processes so that they may be able to compete 
and take quick and right decisions, as PSUs compete with large and successful 
private sector companies.  
 
 The Committee also note that the Government have taken some initiatives for 
addressing the problem of skill deficit for the industrial sector.  The Committee are of 
the view that PSUs in the power sector may consider starting educational institutions 
catering to different disciplines of power sector at their different plant locations.   A 
consortium approach among the PSUs in this regard to start institutes like 
engineering colleges, polytechnics, ITI’s etc for captive manpower requirements 

43 
 
could be a step in this direction.  This would not only result in a very useful CSR 
initiative for the CPSUs but may also be useful in utilizing the expertise of retired 
personnel of these PSUs whose expertise in training people can be tapped gainfully.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To bridge the skill gap in the manpower required for the power sector, the 
Ministry of Power and the Central Electricity Authority had launched ‘Adopt an ITI’ 
scheme for power sector in July 2007. 
 
Under the scheme, a PSU can either upgrade existing ITI(s) or establish a 
new ITI in the vicinity of its power station. By way of adoption of an ITI, the 
concerned PSU would render contribution towards infrastructure improvement, 
augmenting the trade strength, launching of new trades, improvement i n practical 
training, modernization of equipment, training of trainers, etc. 
 
The Government of India, Ministry of Labour provides a loan of Rs 2.5 crores 
per ITI with a moratorium period of ten years. In addition to the loan, the industry 
partner (the PSU) may allocate funds from its own organization. 
 
The CPSUs have favourably responded to the ‘Adopt an ITI’ scheme in a 
good way. As per the information available with CEA, 60 ITIs located in various parts 
of the country have been adopted by incurring expen diture towards training of 
trainees/trainers, procuring equipment/ machinery, upgrading physical infrastructure, 
starting new batches in required trades, setting up new ITIs, opening of new trades, 
etc.  
The feedback from the adopting CPSUs has reported im provement in the 
quality of trainees and trainers (ITI instructors) achieved by organising practical 
training at the power plants/site visits for the ITI students, arranging training of 
trainers by the CPSUs at their own establishment or at other institutes like NPTI, etc.  
 
 Location-wise list of ITIs adopted/ being adopted by CPSUs 
           
S. 
No. 
CPSU ITI name District State Existing 
/ new ITI 
1 NTPC ITI Olpad  Surat Gujarat Existing 
2 NTPC ITI Pali  Korba Chhattisgarh Existing 
3 NTPC ITI Brehomore  Murshidabad West Bengal Existing 
4 NTPC ITI Begusarai  Begusarai Bihar Existing 
5 NTPC ITI Tapovan  Chamoli Uttarakhand Existing 
6 NTPC ITI Uttarkashi  Uttarkashi  Uttarakhand Existing 
7 NTPC ITI Mouda Nagpur  Maharashtra Existing 
8 NTPC ITI Dhenukanal  Angul  Orissa Existing 
9 NTPC ITI Anta  Baran  Rajasthan Existing 
10 NTPC ITI Karimnagar  Karimnagar Andhra 
Pradesh 
Existing 
11 NTPC ITI Bhadragiri  Vizianagaram  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Existing 
12 NTPC ITI Sundernagar  Mandi Himachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 

44 
 
13 NTPC ITI Malviya Nagar New Delhi  Delhi Existing 
14 NTPC ITI Chennerkara  Pathanamthitta  Kerala Existing 
15 NTPC ITI Faridabad  Faridabad  Haryana Existing 
16 NTPC ITI Uncha Amipur Gautam Budh 
Nagar 
U.P. Existing 
17 NTPC ITI Pussore Raigarh  Chhattisgarh Existing 
18 NTPC ITI Naini Allahabad U.P. Existing 
19 NTPC Naktu  Sonebhadra U.P. New 
20 NTPC Salakati  Kokrajhar  Assam New 
21 NTPC Chatra  Chatra  Jharkhand New 
22 NTPC Baloda  Janjgir  Chhattisgarh New 
23 NTPC Barkagaon  Hazaribagh  Jharkhand New 
24 NTPC Nabinagar  Aurangabad  Bihar New 
25 NTPC Solapur Maharashtra Maharashtra New 
26 NTPC Sahalwas Jhajjar  Haryana New 
27 NHPC Reasi Udhampur J&K Existing 
28 NHPC Leh Leh J&K Existing 
29 NHPC Uri Baramulla J&K Existing 
30 NHPC Kargil Kargil J&K Existing 
31 NHPC Ramban Doda J&K Existing 
32 NHPC Roing (under CoE 
Scheme of World 
Bank) 
Lower Dibang 
Valley 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
33 NHPC Tabarijo Upper 
Sibansiri 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
34 NHPC Pokhra(under CoE 
Scheme of World 
Bank) 
Pauri Garhwal Uttarakhand Existing 
35 NHPC Rudraprayag Rudraprayag Uttarakhand Existing 
36 NHPC Tanakpur Champawat Uttarakhand Existing 
37 NHPC Khatima Uddam Singh 
Nagar 
Uttarakhand Existing 
38 DVC Chatna Bankura West Bengal Existing 
39 DVC Durgapur Burdwan  West Bengal Existing 
40 DVC Raghunathpur Purulia West Bengal Existing 
41 DVC, 
BHEL 
KGITC, Bolpur(as 
Centre of 
Excellence) 
Birbhum West Bengal New 
42 DVC Koderma Koderma Jharkhand New 
43 DVC Hazaribagh Hazaribagh Jharkhand Existing 
44 DVC Chaas Bokaro Jharkhand Existing 
45 DVC ITC, Chandrapura Bokaro Jharkhand New 
46 DVC Dhanbad Dhanbad Jharkhand Existing 
47 NEEPCO  Dirang West Kameng Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
48 NEEPCO  Haflong N.C. Hills Assam Existing 
49 NEEPCO  Yupia Papumpare Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Existing 
50 NEEPCO  Tinsukia(ITI for 
women) 
Borguri 
Tinsukia 
Assam Existing 

45 
 
51 NEEPCO  Williamnagar East Garo Hills Meghalaya Existing 
52 PGCIL  Bhadrawati Chandrapur Maharashtra Existing 
53 PGCIL  Bargi Jabalpur M.P. Existing 
54 PGCIL  Buxar Saran Bihar Existing 
55 PGCIL  Marhoura Saran Bihar Existing 
56 SJVNL Berthin Bilaspur H.P. Existing 
57 SJVNL Bangana Una H.P. Existing 
58 THDC Gopeshwar Chamoli Uttarakhand Existing 
59 THDC Chamba Chamba Uttarakhand Existing 
60 NHDC Narmada Nagar 
(under CoE 
Scheme of World 
Bank) 
Khandwa M.P. Existing 
61 NLC Neyveli Cuddalore Tamil Nadu Existing 
 
*Earlier NLC proposed to adopt an ITI at Neyveli in Cuddalore (S.No. 61) district but 
the same was allocated to some other Industry for upgradation by the State 
Government.  
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
 
RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMME 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Power had launched a program called 
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).  This program basically aims 
at providing access to electricity to all rural households over a period of four years.  
Under this scheme, the Government provides 90% capital subsidy for rural 
electrification infr astructure and funding of electrification of all unelectrified BPL 
households with 100% capital subsidy.  An expert in the field apprised the Committee 
about the lacunae under the rural electrification programme where for a village to be 
declared as electrified, the number of households electrified should be atleast 10% of 
the total number of households in the village, and once a village is declared as 
electrified, the capital subsidy made available to the projects or beneficiaries is 
discontinued. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that this is a serious lacuna which should be 
rectified if the Government’s intention of village electrification has to succeed.  This 
lacuna needs to be removed by the Government/Ministry and suitable changes made 
in the definitions so that subsidy for future beneficiaries may also be made available 
to provide them with electricity power.   
 
Reply of the Government 
  
  To give a fillip to rural electrification in the country, the Government in 2005 
made the definition of village electrification more stringent and launched Rajiv 
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).  This is the first scheme of rural 
electrification, which aims comprehensive rural electrification in the country.  
 
 The RGGVY was sanctioned in March, 2005 for electrifying 1.25 lakh villages, 
intensively electrify 4.62 lakh electrified villages and to provide free electricity 
connections to 2.34 crore  BPL rural households.  The approval was given at that 
time for capital subsidy of Rs.5000 crore for remaining two years of the X plan 
period.  The scheme was to be reviewed at the end of the X plan before obtaining 
fresh approval for its continuation in the XI Plan.  
 
 Under the scheme, projects were financed with 90% Capital subsidy by the 
Central Government for provision of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB), 
Creation of Village Electrification Infrastructure (VEI), and Decentralized Distribu ted 
Generation (DDG). These would also cater to the requirement of agriculture and 
other activities including irrigation pump -sets, small and medium industries, khadi 
and village industries, cold chains, healthcare and education and IT. This will 
facilitate overall rural development, employment generation and poverty alleviation.  
 Electrification of un electrified Below Poverty Line (BPL) households will be 
financed with 100% capital subsidy as per norms of Kutir Jyoti Programme in all rural 

47 
 
habitations.  Households above poverty line will be paying for their connections at 
prescribed connection charges and no subsidy will be available for this purpose 
 
 The Government on 3 rd January, 2008 approved continuation of RGGVY in 
the XI Plan with a capital subsidy  of Rs.28000 crore during the Eleventh Plan period 
at that stage against the total requirement of Rs.42000 crore for comprehensive rural 
electrification in the country.   
 
 As on 15.11.2012, 1,06,019 un -electrified villages have been electrified, 
2,72,561 electrified villages have been intensively electrified and free electricity 
connections have been provided to 202.29 lakh BPL households.  
 
 As per Detailed Project Report (DPR), clearly contains the coverage of 
households as well as release of BPL househo lds.  The electrification works are 
being carried out to cover all the scope mentioned in the DPR.  However, a village 
would be declared as electrified if:- 
 
(i) Basic infrastructure such as distribution transformer and distribution 
lines are provided in t he inhabited locality as well as dalit basti/hamlet 
where it exists. (For electrification through Non -Conventional Energy 
Sources a distribution transformer may not be necessary). 
(ii) Electricity is provided to public places like schools, panchayat office s, 
health centres, dispensaries, community centres etc. and  
(iii) The number of households electrified should be at least 10% of the 
total number of households in the village. 
 
 It is not correct that an electrified village will not be eligible for capita l subsidy. 
Under RGGVY, villages declared electrified as per the old definition are also being 
taken up for intensive electrification with the same pattern of financing of 90% 
subsidy and 10% loan. In fact as per old definition, mere access of electricity at the 
revenue boundary of village itself made it eligible to be declared electrified.   
 
 RGGVY specifically launched for providing access to electricity to households 
in the country.  Under the scheme unelectrified villages/hamlets/SC &ST Bastis 
/households are being electrified and intensive electrification in already electrified 
villages is being carried out.  Therefore, it should not be linked with definition of 
village electrification. In this background, the existing definition of village 
electrification need not be changed. Changing definition will lead to increase in 
number of un -electrified villages and   consequential increase in funding 
requirements.  The funds made available so far are inadequate to cover the villages, 
even as per present definition.  
 
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
ENERGY SCENARIO 
 
The Committee note that Government is aiming an annual economic growth of 
about 7% to 8% in near future to eradicate poverty and improve the human 
development index in the country.  To achieve the growth rate, it is imperative to 
have adequate and substantial supply of energy for meeting the various development 
goals.  The Committee, however, note that as per World Energy Statistics, the per 
capita availability of electricity in India is as low as 619 units as compared to World 
Energy average of 2596 units which presents  a dismal picture.  The demand supply 
scenario of electricity is also not satisfactory and there is a general shortage of about 
10.6% and a peak shortage of about 15%. 
 
The Committee have been informed that in order to accelerate the 
development of power s ector the Government brought out National Electricity Policy 
(NEP) 2005 which envisages to meet the full demand for power and eliminate all 
shortages by 2012.  The Policy further aims at increasing the per capita availability of 
electricity to over 1000 un its upto the same period.  The Committee are of the view 
that though the targets are fully achievable but as compared to world average they 
are very low.  They would like the Government to increase the targets to reach the 
World Energy average of 2596 by 2017. 
 
The Committee further note that the energy mix in the present installed 
capacity of 146753 MW of the country, comprises 24% from hydro, 63% from 
thermal, less than 3% from nuclear and about 9% from renewable energy sources.  
 
For 11th Plan a capacity addition of 78700 MW has been planned and a further 
capacity addition of 94500 MW has been planned during the 12 th Plan with 70000 
MW (74%) from thermal, 20,000 MW (21%) from hydro and 4500MW (5%) from 
nuclear energy. The Committee wish to point out that at present the installed capacity 
of renewable energy is at 13242 MW, which is quite significant but no capacity 
addition target for renewable energy has been indicated in the 12 th Plan targets.  
Similarly looking at the contribution of nuc lear energy in global fuel share which is 
nearly 15%, the Committee are confident that the country have scope to increase 
capacity addition to the nuclear sector too particularly through vigorous pursuit of the 
country’s own three-stage nuclear power programme.  
 
Considering the emerging challenge due to climate change concerns and 
carbon emissions, the Committee desire that the energy mix should move towards a 
balance of various energy sources so as to reduce dependence on fossil fuels.  In 
the light of recent development in the nuclear energy sector following the civil nuclear 
cooperation agreements with various countries and the immense potential in the 
renewable energy sources of the country, the Committee feel that there is 

49 
 
considerable scope for revising the targets for capacity addition especially from these 
sources. 
In view of the above, the Committee are of the considered view that the 
Government should review the contribution of various energy sources for the 11th and 
12th plan periods and recommend  to substantially increase the share of nuclear and 
renewable energy so as to have an healthy mix of different energy sources in the 
overall power scenario thereby reducing the dependence on fossil fuels, and to 
enable the country to attain the world avera ge in per capita availability of electricity 
and removal of power shortages. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Under Long Term Planning, NTPC prepares Corporate Plans which are co -
terminus with the national five year plans. NTPC has prepared its Corporate Plan 
2010-32 which lays the broad roadmap for NTPC’s growth for the period 2010-32. 
 
 NTPC plans to have an installed capacity of 128000 MW by the year 2032 
with a well diversified fuel mix comprising 56% coal, 16% gas, 11% nuclear energy, 
9% renewable energy and 8% hydro power based capacity. 
 
 The latest status of NTPC’s initiatives in the area of nuclear power and 
renewable energy are as under: 
 
i) Nuclear Power 
 
A joint venture company namely Anushakti Vidhyut Nigam Limited has been 
incorporated with 49% equity holding by NTPC and 51% equity holding by Nuclear 
Power Corporation Limited (NPCIL) for setting up nuclear power projects in the 
country. The JV Company is planning to execute 2 x 700 MW PHWR units at district 
Fathehabad, in Haryana. 
 
ii) Renewable Energy 
 
NTPC plans to broad -base generation mix by evaluating conventional and non -
conventional sources of energy to ensure long term competitiveness and mitigate 
fuel risk. In this endeavor NTPC has taken various initiatives to implement the 
Renewable energy projects. The brief status of these initiatives is given below: 
 
1. Capacity under execution – 18 MW  
(Including A&N Solar PV project of 5 MW and Dadri Solar PV project of 5 
MW) 
2. Capacity under bidding – 100 MW 
3. Capacity for which DPR is being finalized – 480 MW 
4. Consequent to JVA with ADB and Kyuden International Corp., a JV company 
named Pan Asian Renewable Co. Ltd has been set up. 
 
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 6, of Chapter I of the Report] 
 

50 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
ROLE OF CPSUS IN ENERGY SECURITY OF THE COUNTRY 
 
The Committee note that the Government in recent years have taken  a lot of 
policy initiatives in the power sector like Electricity Act 2003, National Electricity 
Policy, UMPP, APDRP, National Tariff Policy etc. aimed at liberalizing power sector 
and to en courage more investments from private sector.  In this regard, the 
Committee would like to point out that it is the Central and State PSUs that have so 
far shouldered the major responsibility contributing to 87% of total generation of 
power in the country.   The Committee find that the central PSUs like NTPC and 
NPCIL have leadership position in thermal and nuclear sectors respectively as also 
NHPC, another Central PSU which has a significant share in the hydro electric power 
plants, but are dismayed to find  that there is no Central PSUs in the renewable 
energy sector in the country.  
 
During the 11th Plan target for capacity addition of 78700 MW, the Central and 
State PSUs are projected to add new capacity to the tune of 39865 MW and 27952 
MW comprising abou t 51% and 30% of the total planned target.  It is, therefore, 
evident that the capacity addition in the power sector is fully dependent on the ability 
of the CPSUs to complete their projects.  The Committee while appreciating the 
central role of PSUs in po wer generation are disappointed by the lack of cognizance 
of this fact in the National Electricity Policy (NEP).  A brief look at the NEP gives a 
very disheartening picture as no proposal has been spelt out regarding the specific 
role of CPSUs to meet the challenges of power generation.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government while 
encouraging the private sector to set up power projects should also come out with 
adequate measures to strengthen the power CPSUs by way of giving them more 
financial and administrative autonomy which will enable the country to make rapid 
progress in achieving the objectives enunciated in the National Electricity Policy 
(NEP).  Any underestimation of the potential role of CPSU Power majors will harm 
the progress in this regard.   
 
The Ministry of Power while furnishing their Action Taken Reply on the above 
recommendation stated as under:- 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
I.  NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
1. Reduce multiplicity of reviews:  
 
It was felt that each of the reviews were significant and the request of NTPC 
to reduce the multiplicity of reviews was not acceptable.  Action is 
completed. 
 
2. Objectivity in relating Appraisal Report of Board level executives to the 
organization performance: 

51 
 
 
Keeping in vie w the suggestion of NTPC during informal discussion to drop 
this suggestion, it was decided that this suggestion could be treated as 
deleted and no further action on this suggestion was required.  Action is 
completed. 
 
3. Enhancement in the Delegation of Powers for entering into Joint 
Ventures/ Subsidiaries: 
 
Maharatna status has been granted to NTPC by DPE in May, 2010.  
Maharatna CPSEs are empowered to make equity investment to establish 
financial joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries and undertak e mergers 
& acquisitions, in India or abroad, subject to a ceiling of 15% of the net worth 
limited to Rs.5,000 crore in one project against Rs.1,000 crore for Navratna 
CPSE.  The overall ceiling on such investments in all projects put together will 
not exc eed 30% of the net worth.  It was decided to maintain the present 
dispensation following award of Maharatna status to NTPC.  Further, they 
have to follow the guidelines on formation of joint venture issued by 
Department of Expenditure.  Action is completed. 
 
4. Creation of below Board level posts: 
 
NTPC as Maharatna CPSE has powers to create below Board level posts up 
to E-9 level, as per DPE's O.M. No.22(1)/2009 -GM dated 04-02-2010. Action 
is completed. 
 
I. TEHRI HYDRO DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
Enhance financial autonomy to incur capital expenditure on the pr -
construction activities on new projects: 
 
 Miniratna Category status has been granted to THDC in October, 2009.  
Such Miniratna PSUs are empowered to incur capital expenditure on new 
projects without Government approval upto Rs.500 crore or equal to their net 
worth, whichever is lower, as per DPE's O.M. No.18(24)/2003 -GM-SL.65 
dated  05 -08-2005 and 18(16)/2005 -GM-GL-84 dated 28 -05-2007. Action is 
completed. 
 
II. NORTH EASTERN ELECTRIC POWER CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
Enhance financial and administrative power/ autonomy as allowed to 
Miniratna PSEs: 
 
 Miniratna status to NEEPCO has been concurred in by DPE subject to 
one of the conditions that present Board of NEEPCO would be restructured by 
appointment of two more non -official Directors so that the number of non -
official Directors on Board of NEEPCO would be minimum one third of the 
actual Board strength. 
 
Proposal for compliance of the above condition is under process.  Order for 
grant of Miniratna status to N EEPCO will be issued after completion of the 

52 
 
process of filling up of two vacancies of non -official part time Directors on the 
Board of NEEPCO.  Action is being taken by NEEPCO and Hydel Division 
of Ministry of Power. 
 
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 8, of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
GAS AVAILABILITY 
 
 The Committee have been informed that NTPC is having one naphtha based 
and six gas based power stations with total installed capacity of 3955 MW.  The 
estimated gas requirement at 90% PLF for these stations is at 17.35 MMSCMD.  
NTPC has long term agreement s with GAIL for supply of 12.93 MMSCMD gas to the 
six power stations and with BPCL for naphtha supply to run the plants.   However, the 
Committee have been informed that during the year 2007 -08, only 9.08 MMSCMD 
was supplied by GAIL and to meet the balance  requirement, NTPC was forced to 
procure/arrange Spot Regassified Liquefied Natural Gas from oil PSUs. Even with 
these arrangements NTPC could operate its power plants at a PLF of around 61%.  
 
The Committee are dismayed that the NTPC could not operate the ir plants at 
higher Plant Load Factor(PLF) which has caused loss of power generation due to 
under utilisation of capacity and also deprive them of the opportunity to expand the 
capacity of gas based plants.   The Committee note that NTPC has not planned an y 
gas-based plant on domestic gas in the near future due to its non-availability.  
 
The Committee have also been informed that in allocation of gas by the 
Government, the highest priority is accorded to Fertilizer sector, and Power sector is 
given the second preference and Ministry have sought that in view of large shortage 
of power in the country, higher allocation be made to NTPC in larger public interest.  
The Committee concur with the views of Ministry regarding importance of power in 
economic devel opment and recommend that insofar as in allocation of gas is 
concerned, power sector should be made at par with fertilizer sector and higher 
allocation be made to it by the Government. 
 
 The Committee also note that from the ongoing legal battle regarding the gas 
supply by Reliance Industries Limited to NTPC that commercial interest is taking 
precedence over national interest.  In the opinion of the Committee, the Government 
should take early appropriate legal and legislative measures to ensure proper 
safeguards and to thwart such recurrences in future and protect nation’s interest.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Existing Gas based stations 
 
 NTPC has six existing gas based stations viz Anta, Auraiya, Dadri, Faridabad, 
Kawas and Gandhar with capacity totalling 3,605 MW. The estimated gas 
requirement of these stations at 90% PLF is 17.35 MMSCMD. 

53 
 
 
 
 NTPC has various long term gas/ RLNG agreements with GAIL & RIL/ Niko and 
the average supplies have been around 11.0 -12.0 MMSCMD in the past two 
years. NTPC bridges the  demand supply gap through fallback/ spot RLNG 
contacts on Reasonable Endeavour ‘RE’ basis. The gas/ RLNG tie ups and 
supply status during last two years is as under: 
(Figures in MMSCMD) 
Sl. 
No. 
Gas/ RLNG Contracted 
Quantity 
Average Supplies 
 
 Long term  2011-12 2012-13(up to Oct'12) 
1 APM/PMT* 14.48 8.60 8.27 
2 Non APM* 0.82 0.24 0.45 
3  GAIL Long Term 
RLNG 2.00 1.48 1.48 
4 KG D6** 2.30 1.90 0.96 
 Short term    
5 Spot RLNG RE basis 0.87 0.85 
 Total  13.09 12.01 
 
* Actual supplies based on availability from upstream supplier i.e. ONGC 
** Against EGOM allocated 4.46 MMSCMD KG D6 gas, 2.30 MMSCMD has been      
contracted. Tie up of balance 2.16 MMSCMD is under discussion 
 
 With the above tie ups, NTPC is in a position to meet almost full requir ement of 
gas for its existing gas based stations. However, against the gas requirement of 
17.35 MMSCMD @ 90% PLF, the actual average supply of domestic gas to 
NTPC Stations during 2012-13 (till Oct'12) is only 9.7 MMSCMD. NTPC had to tie 
up RLNG from the market to meet its balance gas requirement.  
 
 The DC & PLF data for NTPC’s gas based stations (including Kayamkulam)for 
the last three years & current year is as under : 
Year 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 (Till Oct'12) 
DC (%) 90.64 92.60 93.81 91.86 
PLF (%) 78.38 71.77 65.22 61.46 
 
 Since the RLNG prices are high, full generation schedule is not available from 
beneficiaries on RLNG. Due to this, actual PLF of NTPC gas stations is lower as 
compared to Declared Capacity (DC). 
 
Future Gas Based projects (12th plan projects): 
 
NTPC had requested Govt. for allocation of 43.375 MMSCMD of domestic gas for 
the future gas based expansion projects totaling 8,550 MW:  
 

54 
 
MoP vide its notification dated 14.03.2012 has stated that “ no additional domestic 
gas is likely t o be available till 2015 -16. Hence, developers are advised not to 
plan projects based on domestic gas till 2015-16”. 
 
Legal issue regarding Gas supply by RIL:  
 
Based on International Competitive Bidding for procurement of gas/ RLNG, NTPC 
had placed a Lett er of Intent on RIL for supply of gas for 17 years which was duly 
acknowledged by RIL thus resulting into a binding Contract. However, RIL didn’t sign 
the Gas Sale Purchase Agreement (GSPA). Accordingly, NTPC filed a suit in 
Bombay High Court against RIL for specific performance of the contract.  At present, 
the matter is sub-judice. 
 
Meanwhile, NTPC has requested GOI to allocate domestic gas for Kawas and 
Gandhar expansion projects and has informed that NTPC shall abide by the decision 
of EGOM regarding the quantity and price. 
 
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 11, of Chapter I of the Report]    
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 
CHALLENGES IN HYDRO POWER DEVELOPMENT 
 
 The Committee note that of the total power generated in the country, about 
25% is from hydro power  compared to the global hydro share of 14%.   Out  of the 
36,000 MW of hydro capacity, about 4145 MW is operated by NHPC through 11 
power stations.  The Company has plans to add 5233 MW during XI Five Year Plan, 
which will augment its share to 20% of the country’s total hydro electric power. 
 
 The Committee note that NHPC are executing many projects in NE Region.  
The Committee have undertaken visit to a project and have understood the difficulties 
being faced by CPSU’s in terms of infrastructural challenges, logistic and locational 
difficulties, environmental concern, and construction and geological challenges.  The 
Committee appreciate the achievements of NHPC wh ich have completed some 
projects and despite serious difficulties have undertaken more ambitious projects in 
the region for the future. 
 
 The Committee also note that these PSU’s also face law and order related 
problems, local problems, and challenges in i mplementation.  There are also issues 
like payment of royalties, land/water sharing, boundary disputes between States, etc., 
which pose challenges to implementing agencies.  The Committee desire that to 
resolve land/water sharing/boundary disputes arising in hydro projects, the Ministry 
should devise a suitable mechanism like a council or forum with the concerned 
States to come together for resolving of such issues.  Whenever required, NHPC 
should explore options like Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), Joint Venture (JV), 
Public Private Partnership(PPP) etc., with States which  have potential of hydropower 
development.  The Committee are of the view that this will ensure greater 

55 
 
participation of State Governments in smooth implementation of hydro power projects 
and help address the local issues.  
 
 The Committee also recommend that Ministry of Power should interact with 
State governments and authorities concerned for provision of safety and security to 
projects and personnel working in the projects.  Considerin g the difficult 
circumstances of the projects, the Committee recommend that the NHPC/Ministry of 
Power should provide adequate incentives to personnel working in such projects.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The total hydro capacity added by NHPC from its 15 power stations (including 
two in JV of 1520 MW) is 5526 MW which is about 14% of the total hydro installed 
capacity of the country. Out of 5322 MW targeted in 11 th Plan, three projects totaling 
1150 MW (Teesta-V 510 MW, Omkareshwar, 520 MW, Sewa-II, 120 MW) have been 
commissioned. Besides this, two units of 11 MW each of Chutak project were 
completed in 11 th Plan but not included in the capacity addition as these units were 
synchronized at partial load due to non availability of desired load. However, as of  
now, from three units out of total four units (11 MW each) completed w.r.t. Chutak 
HE Project, two units of (22 MW) have been commissioned in Nov’12  
 NHPC has already formed JV with Govt. of Madhya Pradesh i.e. Narmada 
Hydroelectric Development Corporati on Ltd. in August 2000 for implementation of 
two hydro projects, Indira Sagar 1000 MW and Omkareshwar 520 MW. Both these 
projects have since been commissioned by NHPC. 
 Apart from that NHPC has also signed MOU with Govt. of Manipur on 
14.09.2007 for execution of Loktak Downstream Project 66 MW in JV with the State 
Govt. The JVC (LDHCL) has been registered on 23.10.09, with a share holding of 
NHPC & Govt. of Manipur in the ratio of 74:26. The JV Board has started functioning. 
The project is presently under clearance stage.  
 An MOU has also been signed on 10.10.2008 amongst JKSPDC, NHPC Ltd.  
and PTC to develop Pakal Dul and other hydroelectric projects in the Chenab River 
Basin of J&K with aggregate installed capacity of 2100 MW though a Joint Venture 
Company. The JVC, M/s ‘Chenab Valley Power Projects (Private) Limited’ with a 
share holding of NHPC, JKSPDC & PTC in the ratio of 49:49:02, has been 
incorporated on 13.06.2011. All statutory clearances including MOEF clearances are 
available for Pakal Dul Projec t and have been transferred to JVC. Updated DPR of 
Kiru HEP and Kwar HEP for installed capacities of 660 MW & 560 MW respectively 
have been submitted to CEA by M/s CVPPPL 
 Further, Ministry of Power vide letter dated 06.06.09 has informed that 
Tipaimukh- 1500 MW project in Manipur shall be executed through JV among NHPC 
SJVNL and Govt. of Manipur. To this effect, MOU and Promoters Agreement 
amongst NHPC, SJVNL and Govt. of Manipur has been signed on 28.04.10 and 
22.10.11 respectively. The incorporation of JVC is under progress. 
GoI has also conveyed its approval for change in object clause 1a) of the 

56 
 
Memorandum of Association of NHPC which inter-alia allows NHPC to plan, promote 
and organize an integrated and efficient development of power in all its aspects  
through conventional and non -conventional sources in India and abroad.  With this 
approval, NHPC will have endeavor to take up Thermal Projects in the country on its 
own. Presently, NHPC is exploring the possibilities for coal linkage for establishing 
Thermal Power Plants of 1320 MW in Bihar.  
 
As on date, NHPC is having 15 operating power stations and 09 projects 
under construction. Two units out of total 4 units (11 MW each) of Chutak HE project 
in J&K have also been commissioned in Nov’12. To guard the operating Power 
Stations, NHPC has deployed 1998 CISF Personnel, 366 ex -servicemen (DGR 
Guards), 156 IRBn Personnel and 500 CRPF Personnel. The cost of deployment is 
borne by NHPC except that of Loktak Powr Station. For 09 nos under construction 
projects, 330 CISF, 226 ex -servicemen (DGR Guards), 354 State Police Personnel 
are deployed. The cost of deployment of Security personnel is borne by NHPC. 
 
Employees posted in difficult locations in NHPC has been provided adequate 
incentives by granting of higher rate of compensatory allowance, special benefits like 
emergency passage, special leave, every year LTC in addition to normal LTC, higher 
insurance coverage, winter clothing in cold regions etc. 
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 16 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
PERFORMANCE OF NPCIL 
 
 The Committee note that NPCIL was formed in September, 1987 as a public 
sector enterprise under the Department of Atomic Energy with the objective of 
operating atomic power stations for generation of electricity in the country.  The 
installed capacity of NPCIL is 4120 MWe.  However, the Committee note that the 
power generated by the NPCIL is around 2000 MWe only at a plant load factor of 
about 50%.  The main reasons for this low capacity utilization is non -availability of 
requisite fuel for these reactors. 
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Nuclear Power Programme based on the 
available uranium in the country has bee n estimated at an installed capacity of 
10,000 MW of power production for a period of 40 years in the first phase of the three 
phase nuclear programme.  However, due to various factors like environmental 
concerns and social resistance from local population , all the natural uranium 
resources available in the country have not yet been fully explored.  The Committee 
recommend that the Government should address these issues in the right 
perspective and make necessary changes in law thereby empowering DAE to 
acquire the land in public interest for mining of Uranium. 
 

57 
 
 The Committee note that NPCIL utilized Rs. 3692 crore out of Rs. 4700 crore 
in 2005-06 and Rs. 3215 crore out of Rs. 3400 crore in 2006 -07 and Rs. 1775 crore 
out of Rs. 2698 crore in 2007 -08 respectively.  The Committee are concerned over 
the declining trend of fund allocation as well as its utilization by NPCIL over last three 
years.  The Committee note that the Nuclear Supplier Group (NSG) Clearances may 
ease the availability of fuel.  The Committe e, therefore, desire that NPCIL should 
make capital expenditure plans and firm up their capacity addition in a time bound 
program.  Also, the Committee desire that DAE should immediately step up 
budgetary support to NPCIL to enable them to scale up their n ew projects, which 
could not be taken up for want of fuel in the past, in the wake of the civil nuclear co -
operation the country has obtained in recent months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 NPCIL’s operational performance has improved significantly after 2008-09, 
the year in which international cooperation in this sector opened up for India.  
Following the fruition of international civil nuclear cooperation, fuel supply contracts 
with foreign countries have been entered into, and imported fuel in adequate 
quantities have been made available for reactors under IAEA Safeguards.  There 
has also been an improvement in supply of indigenous uranium. 
 
 Presently, the NPCIL capacity of 4680 MW from 19 out of the 20 reactors in 
the country (One reactor RAPS -1, 100 M W, owned by Government is under 
extended shutdown since October 2004 for techno -economic assessment) is being 
operated at around 4000 MW as against about 2000 MW four years ago. 
 
 The details of NPCIL generation and capacity utilization during the last fou r 
years and the current year upto October 2012 are as follows: 
 
 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 till 
October 12 
Generation 
(Million 
units) 
14927 18831 26473 32455 19161 
Capacity 
Factor (%) 
20 61 71 79 80 
 
 Presently, nine NPCIL reactors with a capacity of 1840 MW are under IAEA 
Safeguards and use imported fuel.  These are being operated at rated power.  In the 
year 2011-12, these reactors recorded a capacity utilization of 97%. 
 The remaining 10 NPCIL reactors with a capacity of 2840 MW are fuel led by 
indigenous fuel, which is not available in the required quantity.  These are thus being 
operated at power levels matching the indigenous fuel availability.  There has been 
an improvement in indigenous fuel supply, leading to improvement in their cap acity 
utilization.  In the current year (upto October), the capacity Factors of these reactors 
ranged from 61% to 88%. 

58 
 
 In respect of budget utilization, the details of outlay and utilization in respect of 
years 2009 -10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 and the current  year upto October are as 
follows: 
Item 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 upto 
October 
BE 1917 2925 3996 5460 
RE 1796 2981 4844 - 
Utilisation 2014 1865 2775 2030 
 
 The budgetary allocation and expenditure has been in line with the progress 
of projects and start of new projects.  The utilization has been lower than the BE in 
2010-11 and 2011 -12 largely on account of lower expenditure in planned XI Plan 
new starts, due to delays in land acquisition at new sites and finalization of project 
proposals for LW Rs apart from delay in completion of Kudankulam 1 &2 due to 
protests by local people. 
 
[Department of Atomic Energy O.M. No. 6/4(2)/2008-Power/13181 dated 18-12-
2012] 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 17, of Chapter I of the Report]    
Recommendation No. 15 
 
UNINTERRUPTED FUEL SUPPLY AND FLEXIBILITY FOR USAGE OF FUEL 
 
 The Committee note that with the clearance from NSG in place, the country is 
poised to get co-operation in the field of nuclear power and supply of fuel from many 
countries around the globe.  The NPCIL being the major and significant player in the 
sector, would be able to source reactors and other technological requirements. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee while appreciating the need for better 
technological access and latest equipments for the reactors, would like to caution 
NPCIL and DAE that while entering into commercial agreements with global players, 
they should seek to ensure uninterrupted fuel supply. 
 
 The Committee desire that the Government should encourag e NPCIL to 
acquire Uranium mines or Companies having Uranium assets abroad so that it can 
run the reactors without any interruption and at full capacity.  The Committee also 
recommend that DAE should insert clauses for transfer of technology for key 
equipments and spares to augment technological indigenisation in the reactors. 
 
Reply of Department of Atomic Energy :- 
 
 Uninterrupted fuel supply and clauses to ensure protection of our interests in 
the long term are a part of the techno -commercial agreements being negotiated by 
NPCIL with foreign partners.  Such terms have already been incorporated in the 
proposal in respect of Kudankulam 3 & 4, which is under consideration of the 
Government.  The techno -commercial discussions with M/s Areva of France, GE 
Hitachi Nuclear Energy and Westinghouse Electric Company of the USA in this 
regard are in progress. 

59 
 
 
In connection with securing long term supplies of Uranium, all options including 
acquiring assets abroad, as recommended by Committee, are being explored.  It is 
planned to incorporate a Joint Venture of NPCIL and Uranium Corporation of India 
Limited (UCIL) specifically for acquisition of uranium assets abroad. 
 
The projects based on foreign cooperation are proposed to be set up on technical 
cooperation basis.  Six units at each site are planned to be set up in phases of twin 
units with progressively in creasing indigenous content.  To begin with, the design 
and major equipments are planned to be sourced from the vendor country and 
construction, erection of equip ment and commissioning carried out in India.  
However, a large number of equipments are planned to be sourced from within the 
country towards the last phase. 
 
[Department of Atomic Energy O.M. No. 6/4(2)/2008 -Power/13181 dated 18 -12-
2012] 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 20, of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
EVACUATION OF POWER PRODUCED BY RENEWABLE ENERGY 
PRODUCERS 
 
The Committee have been informed that the grid connectivity for power 
producers using Renewable energy sources is a problem area.  The Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy has admitted that there is a problem of evacuation of power 
of small energy projects.  The Committee feel that this might discourage small 
producers because without grid connectivity, the  power produced cannot be 
evacuated.  The Committee understand that providing grid connectivity lie with the 
Electricity Boards/Corporation of the respective State Governments and Central 
Government has hardly any role.  However, under the Electricity Act,  the power 
produced by renewable energy sources can also be made available to grid 
connectivity. 
 
The Committee are of the opinion that as power is a scarce commodity, it 
should be purchased and evacuated by the concerned agencies from the power 
producers without any delay.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Power 
instead of abdicating its role on the issue should sensitise the states by convening 
meeting and by issuing necessary advisories in this regard. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
Renewable energy sources require connectivity with the grid together with 
transmission capacity in the grid for meeting their evacuation needs.  Except for the 
major wind generation, all the other grid -interactive renewable power gets absorbed 
in the local  distribution network and thus require connectivity with local distribution/ 
sub-transmission grid level together with arrangement to sell their power either to the 
distribution utility in which they are embedded or to third party by availing open 
access in distribution system.  

60 
 
 
For the major wind generations, the transmission system is required basically 
for absorption of power within the State where the wind project is located for which, 
system connectivity and systems strengthening of the grid are imple mented by the 
respective State Transmission Utilities.  For meeting the inter -state transmission 
needs that may arise due to exportable surplus in the State under the conditions of 
maximum wind generation output, the required regional/ Inter -State transmis sion 
enhancements are implemented by the Central Transmission Utility.  The 
transmission planning for the inter -State system as well as intra -State system is 
being done in an integrated manner coordinated by the CEA.  
 
Further, it may be mentioned that nec essary changes in the Indian Electricity 
Grid Code for facilitating the harnessing of renewable sources of energy have been 
carried out. 
 
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 23 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation No. 23 
 
TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION 
 
 The Committee note that power produced in a power plant is transmitted and 
distributed to the end users by an extensive network system created for the purpose.  
Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd., a Central PSU, is the notified Central 
Transmission Utili ty of the country wheels about 45% of the total power generated 
and remaining are managed by the State utilities.  
 
 The Committee further note that to mitigate long distance transmission losses, 
use of higher voltage levels for transmission are planned in  the 11 th and 12 th Plan 
period.  The Committee would like to emphasize the need for expansion of 
transmission and distribution system in commensuration with the capacity addition 
targets in the plan periods by using latest technologies.  To meet long term power 
transfer requirement, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd., is developing + 800 kV, 
6000 MW HVDC as well as 1200kV AC system.  The Committee further note that the 
country possesses technology for manufacturing of cables required upto 220 kV only 
and cables for transmission of higher voltages cables are imported.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Power should encourage the industry by offering 
suitable incentives to manufacture such cables in the country. 
 
The Committee have been informed that the transmission and distribution loss 
(T&D) for the year 2006-07 was 28.26% of the total energy available for sale which is 
considerably on the higher side whereas the T&D loss in many countries ranges from 
6% to 17% which indicates that there is a lo t of scope for improvement.  Further, it 
may be noted that the Aggregate, Technical and Commercial (AT&C) loss of the 
State utilities at the national level for 2006 -07 was 33.07% of the total energy 
available for sale which includes technical loss, theft, pilferages and commercial 
losses due to poor metering and billing and non -realization of dues. The Committee 
recommend that Government should strengthen the legal framework so that 
offenders are properly brought to book and desire that the Government shoul d take 

61 
 
effective steps for reduction of undermetering and also overdrawal of power by 
industries.  
 
Another important step taken by the Government is that it launched 
Accelerated Power Development Reforms Programme (APDRP) with the objective of 
reducing  A T&C losses, improving quality of supply of power and improving 
consumer satisfaction.  The Committee have also noted that the target was to reduce 
AT&C losses to 15% in five years and the achievements have been mixed.  The 
Committee have noted that the Gov ernment has approved a Restructured APDRP 
Plan with an outlay of Rs. 51,577 crore in the 11 th Plan with focus on demonstrable 
performance on loss reduction. The Committee recommend that information 
technology solutions may be applied in this sector so as t o reduce losses in 
distribution. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should keep a  strict vigil 
over the progress of the plan and may entrust the supervision of the scheme to 
agencies like Central Electricity Authority.   
 
The Committee are of the v iew that since the Central PSUs have expertise in 
generation and transmission, therefore, the Government should consider setting up 
of a distribution company under the aegis of a CPSU and entrust it to assist States in 
improvement of distribution system. 
 
Reply of the Ministry of Power 
 
 The Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme 
(R-APDRP)  is being implemented in two parts with the objective of reducing AT&C 
losses to 15% in the project areas.  Part – A  includes  the projects for establishment 
of baseline data and IT applications for energy account/auditing & IT based 
consumer service centers.  It has also included adoption of IT applications for meter 
reading, billing & collection, energy accounting & auditing, MIS, redressal of 
consumer grievances, establishment of  IT enabled consumer service centers. etc.   
Part-A will be fully funded by Govt. of India.   Rs.10,000crore have been earmarked 
for this purpose.  Part “B “ is meant for strengthening of distribution infrastructure and 
subject to reduction of AT&C loss levels to  15% in the project areas.  Upto 50% 
capital subsidy will be made available under this part.  Rs.40,000crore have been 
earmarked for Part -B (including loan component), out of which Rs.20,000 crore can 
be disbursed for capital subsidy. 
 
 The Power Finance Corporation (PFC) has been nominated as the ‘Nodal 
Agency’ for the operationalisation and implementation of the APDRP programme, 
under the overall guidance of the Ministry of Power (MoP). PFC is acting as a sing le 
window service under APDRP and coordinating with the main stakeholders involved 
such as MoP, APDRP Steering Committee, Central Electricity Authority (CEA), 
Financial Institutions, utilities and various Consultants. PFC has been expected to 
take the init iative for speedy and timely completion of projects and thus assist the 
Utilities in achieving loss reduction targets and other parameters of the scheme. 
 
 
Third party evaluation 
 
Ministry of Power will appoint Third Party Independent Evaluating Agencies (TPIEAs) 
through the Nodal Agency for following verification:  

62 
 
 
(a) Base (starting) figure of AT&C loss of the project area : The 
state power utility/ distribution Company shall ring fence each 
identified project area at the beginning of the programme. Three 
billing cycle data of energy inflow and outflow and corresponding 
revenue collected for the project area shall be furnished to the 
Independent Agency for verifying the base (starting) figure of 
AT&C loss of the project area. Part B projects will be taken up after 
verification of initial AT&C loss by Ministry of Power (MoP) through 
nodal agency. 
 
(b) The establishment of Base line Data System   (i.e. completion of 
Part-A projects). 
 
(c) Yearly AT&C loss figures of project areas and State Power Utilities 
/ Distribution Companies.  
 
 
Present status of R-APDRP 
 
 Under Part-A of the Re -Structured APDRP 1402 projects worth of Rs.5,196.50 
Crore,  covering all 1402 eligible towns as per the approved schemefor  
establishment of IT enable  base line system have been approved. 
 
 Under Part-A 63, SCADA Projects worth Rs.1,442.29 Crore, covering 63 towns 
out of eligible 67 towns have been sanctioned. 
 
 Under Part –B, 1132 projects worth Rs.25,684.91 Crore for strengthening and 
upgrading  of the  sub- transmission distribution system have been sanctioned so 
far. 
 
 The Ministry of Power has released an amount of Rs 6,502.10 Crore under the 
Restructured -APDRP programme, out which Rs 6,304.97 Crore is the loan 
against Part-A and Part-B projects for disbursement to state utilities and Rs197.13 
Crore is grant against enabling component for implementation of R-APDRP.  
 
 [Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 24 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
COST OF POWER 
 
 The Committee note that power is one of the key services used by all sections 
of the society.  The cost of power is an important concern for consumers of electricity. 
The Committee note that the power tariff charged by the distribution comp anies is 
determined by the State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERC’s) and includes 
power purchase cost, Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses etc.  The 
Committee have been informed that some of the steps required to reduce the cost of 

63 
 
power are reduction in T&D losses, commercial losses and fuel price.  The 
Committee are however of the view that in addition to reducing input costs, measures 
such as  lower cost of capital and completion of projects within schedule could go a 
longway in reducing the cost of production of power.  
  
The Committee desire that the Ministry of Power should press upon Ministry of 
Finance for concessions for power projects like lower interest rate on capital, lower 
tax rates and duty concessions for equipments used, etc. All these measures would 
reduce the  cost of production of power.  Transportation costs of coal can also be 
scrutinized for possible reduction, which will reduce the cost of coal.  All these 
measures might lower the realization of revenue for Government, but it may well 
benefit a huge number  of consumers and also increase the demand, playing a 
beneficial role in the economic development of the country. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Power may constitute a Committee of Experts to 
make a cost -benefit analysis of granting fi scal incentives/concessions for power 
sector.  As regards cost of nuclear power and renewable energy, the Committee 
desire that the Department of Atomic Energy and Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy should look at ways of reducing the cost of power by im proving efficiencies 
and by introduction of new technologies, economy of size and possible reduction in 
taxes and duties.   
 
Reply of Ministry of Power 
 
 The Ministry of Power constituted a Committee of Experts under the 
Chairmanship of CMD, PFC to make a cost benefit analysis of granting fiscal 
incentives/ concessions for power sector vide Order No. 27/1/2009 -R&R dated July 
8, 2009. The Committee submitted  its report on June 2, 2010 and recommended for 
fiscal incentives, concessions, exemptions in direct and indirect taxes and other 
significant policy issues.  
 
 The Sub - Committee of Group of Ministers constituted under the 
chairmanship of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission to look into the financial 
issues of Power sector, had submitted its final report on 06.10.2010 to Hon’ble 
Minister of Power.  The GoM on power sector issues considered the various 
recommendations of the Sub-Committee and adopted the re port for further follow up 
action in its meeting held on 29.10.2010.  Some of the important recommendations 
of the Committee of Experts also find mention in the recommendations of the Sub -
Committee of GoM and the same are under consideration either through  note to 
Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure circulated on 10.03.2011 which has not been 
cleared by Ministry of Finance.  Tax related issues are taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance during Budget Session. 
 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 27 and 28 of Chapter I of the 
Report] 
  

64 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
UMPP AND NTPC 
 
 The Committee note that the Government has taken an important initiative to 
scale up the power generation capacity by launching the Ultra Mega Power Projects 
(UMPPs) which are of 4000 MW and above in size and are open for competitive 
bidding based on tariff cost per unit of power.  
 
 The Committee also note that NTPC being the country’s premier public utility 
Company, also bid for the various UMPPs, but was not a successful bidder in any of 
the projects.  The Committee were informed by NTPC that the present procurement 
system is subjected to the guidelines of CVC which has been a great limiting factor in 
participating at the competitive bidding process for UMPPs as the CVC guidelines do 
not allow the commercial secrecy of the bidding offers submitted to NTPC by the 
vendors.   
 
 The Committee note that the difficulties have been referred to CVC and CVC 
has responded to the issues there under.  The Committee further note that CVC has 
now suggested NTPC for obtaining competitive pricing from empanelled vendors 
through limited tenders and te nders so received have been allowed to be opened 
confidentially by a high level Committee of NTPC officials.  The Ministry have further 
informed the Committee that the suggestions of CVC would be considered by the 
Group of Directors constituted by NTPC for  increasing competitiveness. The 
Committee feel that in the absence of proper feedback of NTPC on the stand point of 
level playing field vis-à-vis other private companies participating in the UMPP bidding 
process, the Committee would expect that early step s need to be taken to remove 
the bottlenecks faced by NTPC in the competitive bidding process. 
 
Reply of Ministry of Power :- 
 
1. During the competitive bidding for Ultra Mega Power Projects at Sasan, 
Mundra, Tilaiya and Krishnapattnam,  NTPC participated in the Competitive 
Bidding for Sasan UMPP and Tilaiya UMPP only. However, NTPC was not 
successful bidder in the competitive bidding process.  NTPC did not 
participate in the competitive bidding for imported coal based Mundra and 
Krishnapattnam projects. 
 
2. During 320th meeting of the Board of Directors of NTPC held on 16.9.2008, a 
Group of Directors was constituted to examine and identify actions to be taken 
for increasing the competitiveness of NTPC in the competitive bidding for the 
power projects. The Group o f Directors deliberated the issues pertaining to 
preparation of cost estimates; reviewing existing engineering policies and 
optimizing design/testing parameters. The following specific approaches have 
been recommended by the Group of Directors for particip ating in the tariff 
based competitive bidding of the projects: 

65 
 
 
i. Breaking the procurement packages/ Contracts for the power station to 
more number of supplier packages keeping in view value addition 
levels of contractors, likely savings and project schedule . The Package 
splitting should be on the basis of Equipment/ system which are not 
manufactured/ engineered by main supplier .  Breaking down the 
procurement packages / contracts for the power station to more 
number of smaller packages with due care that the interface 
engineering cost are lower than the benefits obtained by adopting the 
above philosophy.  
ii. Rationalizing the redundan cies & margins in the equipment and 
reducing the number of buildings and control points in the power 
station. 
iii. Support of NTPC balance sheet shall be utilized to obtain debt at most 
optimum conditions. 
iv. The activities related to coal mines development and it s operation 
should preferably be done departmentally. 
v. Deployment of substantial part of the equity upfront to reduce the 
financing cost. 
vi. Appropriate Terminal value of the project after its contractual life shall 
be considered in the financial model for arriving at the tariff quotes for 
competitive bidding process.  
vii. Deferred capital expenditure after the commercial operation for the 
common s tation services package like Ash Dyke and other non 
critical/standby facilities.  
 
 Further to the finalization of the Competitive Bidding Process for the Tilaiya 
UMPP, NTPC has submitted the response to the Request for Qualification (RFQ) 
bidding document s for the Orissa UMPP (to be set up at Bhedabahal) on 
01.08.2011. The RFQ evaluation results are awaited. NTPC has also purchased the 
Request for Qualification (RFQ) bidding documents for the Chhattisgarh UMPP (to 
be set up at Surguja). NTPC would be submi tting competitive bid for these projects 
as and when the bids for these projects are required to be submitted. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-11021/1/2009-Parl. dated  17.12.2012]. 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
  

66 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19  March, 2013 from 1500 hrs to 
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
4.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
5.  Shri Shailendra Kumar  
6.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
8.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
9.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
10.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anil Desai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
   
 
 
…2p.. 
 

67 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up Memoranda Nos. 3 to 7 containing 
following draft Reports: 
 
(i). Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Physical and 
Financial Performance of Power Generating PSUs – A Horizontal Study. 
 
(ii). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iii). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iv). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(v). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
 
3. The Committee approved the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports 
without any modification and authorized the Chairman to present these Reports after 
getting them factually verified from the concerned Ministries / Departments. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX    Matter not related to this Report. 
  

68 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
Annexure to the reply of Recommendation No. 24 
BUREAU OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
Review of performance during 2007-08 
S.N
o. 
Scheme BE Amount 
released 
to BEE 
Physical Target Achievement 
1 Bachat Lamp 
Yojana 
6.75 3.25 Preparation of Programme of 
Activities (POA) for registration 
under the CDM Executive Board 
POA prepared and validator 
appointed  
2. SDA’s 7.55 17.55 Prepare Energy Conservation 
Action Plans 
Prepared for 28 States. 
3. SMEs 3.80 0.00 Under preparation NIL  
4. Institutional 
Strengthening of 
BEE 
37.15 0.00  Scheme withdrawn in 2008-
09 
5. Energy 
Conservation 
Building Code & 
Existing Building 
1.40 1.40 Capacity Building of 
professionals and architects 
Facilitating Energy Efficiency in 
Govt. buildings 
Training programmes were 
conducted. 
Development material for 
introducing a course on 
ECBC in Architecture & 
Engineering colleges 
6. Standards & 
Labeling 
12.75 22.75 Introducing voluntary standards 
for TFLs/AC & Refrigerators, 
conducting and awareness 
campaign and appointing RITES 
for check testing 
-Labeling programme for 
TFLs, ACs and Refrigerators 
introduced 
-Awareness campaign 
conducted 
-RITES appointed for check 
testing 
 Total 69.40 44.95   
In 2007-08 physical targets achieved and resulted in saving of electricity of 3731.5 MU and an avoided 
capacity generation of 623.1 MW. 
Review of Performance during 2008-09 
1. Bachat Lamp 
Yojana 
14.40 7.57 Obtaining approval of CMD 
Executive Board for pilot projects 
in AP and Haryana. 
Distribution of CFLs. 
-Approval obtained  
-6.3. lakh CFLs distributed  
2. SDA’s 23.71 23.71  Finalize proposals of 
states 
-23SDA’s submitted their 
proposal based on the 
Action Plans. 
 Identification of demo 
projects 
-Demonstration projects 
identified 
3. Energy  
 
Conservation 
Building Code & 
Existing Building 
2.80 2.80 Facilitate Energy Efficiency in  
 
buildings and promotion of 
ESCOs. 
-56 Architects empanelled 
 
-35 ESCO shortlisted and 
accredited by ICRS & 
CRISIL. Investment grade 
audits initiated in 35 central 
Govt. buildings and in 400 
buildings in the states 
through SDAs. 
-BEE signed an MOU with 
PTC to implement these 
projects under the Energy 
Efficiency Financing 
Platform. 
 

69 
 
 4. Agricultural and 
Municipal DSM 
12.01 3.00 Obtaining EFC approval for the 
scheme and initiating 
preparatory work 
EFC approval obtained 
towards te end of the year 
Ag DSM 
-6 states selected for 
implementing pilot projects. 
First pilot projects launched 
in Solapur. 
Mu DSM 
-Situation analysis of 171 
urban local bodies in 23 
states was conducted 
5. Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SME) 
14.22 3.00 To obtain EFC approval Approval of EFC obtained 
towards the end of the year 
To initiate investment grade 
audits for 10 units in each of the 
25 clusters 
25 SME clusters short-listed 
and energy audits initiated. 
6. Standards & 
Labeling 
11.22 21.22 Voluntary labeling scheme to be 
expanded to included other 
appliances and equipments 
Ceiling fans, Agriculture 
pump sets, LPG Stoves, 
Motors, Colour TV and 
Electrical geyser introduced 
on a voluntary basis 
7 Institutional 
Strengthening of 
BEE 
3.29 0.00  Scheme withdrawn 
8. Contribution to 
State Energy 
Conservation 
Fund 
4.24 0.00  Scheme under preparation 
9. Energy 
Conservation 
Awareness 
Scheme  of MoP 
10.00 28.69 Energy conservation Awards for 
industries and commercial 
establishment, Painting 
Competition and media publicity 
368 industrial units which 
participated had an annual 
savings of Rs. 1858 crores 
with an avoided capacity of 
325 MW. 7 lakhs students 
participated in painting 
competition. 
  
Total 
 
100.00 
 
89.99 
  
In 2008-09 physical targets achieved and resulted in saving of electricity of 6528.15 MU and an avoided 
capacity generation of 1504.97 MW. Thus the total avoided capacity for the last two financial years is 
2127 MW. The fuel saving are nearly 1% 
Review of performance during 2009-10 
1. Standards & 
Labeling 
3.74 3.74 Regulations for making 
Standards & Labeling 
Programme mandatory for 
Refrigerators, Air  
 
conditioners, Tube light and 
Distribution Transformers 
Notification has been issued 
and these appliances will be 
made mandatory with effect 
from 7.1.20 
2. Energy 
Conservation 
Building Code & 
Existing Building 
4.20 5.70 Star labels for 50 Government 
office building to be issued 
Applicants for 75 buildings 
received so far of which 62 
were considered and after 
scrutiny 50 have been 
awarded  
Energy Conservation Building 
Code (ECBC) User Guide to be 
launched 
Launched by Secretary 
Power on 22.07.09 
3. Bachat Lamp 
Yojana 
13.15 1.50 Programme of activities (POA) 
under CDM to be approved by 
the National Coordination 
Committee in MoEF 
Approved by National 
Coordination Committee in 
MoEF 

70 
 
4. SDA’s 
Strengthening 
Programme 
8.15 8.15 Report on assessment of energy 
savings potential in states to be 
completed 
Report has been completed 
by the National Productivity 
Council 
5. SMEs 16.10 5.50 Award of energy audit studies in 
18 SME cluster 
Energy audit studies 
awarded in 25 SME clusters 
6. Agriculture & 
Municipal DSM 
13.41 10.00 Initiation of energy audit in 4 
states 
Energy audit awarded in 4 
states 
7. Contribution to 
SECF 
23.25 23.25 Circulation of EFC Memo To be circulated shortly 
8. Energy 
Conservation 
Awareness, 
Awards & Painting 
Competition 
Scheme 
18.00 18.00 Media campaign Media Campaign Competed 
successfully Award and 
Painting Competition held 
successfully 
National Energy Awards and 
Painting Competition to be held 
9. National Mission 
Enhanced Energy 
Efficiency 
38.00 0.00 Approvals to be obtained and 
activities under mission to 
commence 
PM’s Council on Climate 
Change accorded in 
principal approval. EFC 
memo circulated Energy 
Efficiency Services Ltd. To 
be setup shortly. 
  
Total 
 
138.00 
 
75.84 
  
Avoided capacity generation achieved in 2009-10 is 2868.01 MW 
Review of performance during 2010-11 
S.N
o. 
Scheme BE Amount 
released 
Physical Target Achievement upto 
31.1.2011 
1. Standards & 
Labeling 
Programme 
9.00 9.00 Finalizing of rating plan for 
vehicles, CFL, HVAC systems, 
UPS/Inverters, Office 
Automation products and other 
large refrigeration systems, 
Check testing of equipments 
Washing Machine 
introduced on a voluntary 
basis and Computer laptop 
in final stage for introduction  
1. Under training program for 
retailers, more than 850 
salesmen got trained. 
Awareness programs are 
regularly being conducted. 
Check testing in under 
progress for Room air 
conditioner, geyser, 
refrigerator, motor, pumps. 
2. Energy 
Conservation 
Building Codes 
(ECBC) 
2.80 2.80 -Enhancing the pool of ECBC 
expert Architects-EOI, simplified 
compliance procedures for state 
& local bodies 
-A Pool of 45 ECBC expert 
architects has been 
empanelled. 
Capacity building of state & local 
government personnel 
Workshops undertaken to 
sensitize various Govt. 
Departments. 
Promotion of ESCOs Till date 89 ESCOs have 
been empanelled 
3. Bachat Lamp 
Yojana 
6.00 6.00 Coverage of entire country in a 
phased manner based on 
DISCOM areas POA to be 
submitted for DNA approval to 
CDM Executive Board after 
validation & stakeholder 
consultation  
Estimated 6.5 crores CFLs to be 
distributed 
The CDM Executive Board 
has registered the BLY PoA 
on 29th April 2010. 
20 CPAs of Kerala and 07 
CPAs of Karnataka have 
been forwarded to the DOE 
for CPA validation 
16 states have initiated the 
implementation of BLY 
scheme.  

71 
 
200 lacs CFLs have already 
been distributed in various 
States of India. 
4. SDA 
Strengthening 
Prgramme 
12.00 12.00 To enhance institutional capacity 
of the SDAs Demonstration 
projects to be implemented 
Energy Conservation Action 
Teams (ECATs) are being 
encouraged in the states 
-Activities of the SDAa are 
being monitored 
-545 buildings identified by 
26 SDAs. DPRs of 360 
buildings have been 
prepared 
-Financial support has been 
provided for implementation 
of 45 demonstration projects 
to 25 SDAs 
-LED Village Campaign 
competed in 13 States  
5. Designated 
Consumers and 
SMEs Programme 
6.49 5.25 Energy Efficiency & technology 
gap assessment in 25 SMEs 
clusters 
179 nos DPRs on energy 
efficiency technologies 
prepared for 25 SME 
clusters 
Preparation of cluster specific 
manual on Energy conservation 
measures in 25 SME clusters 
60 nos detailed energy audit 
in 16 SMEs clusters  
160 nos detailed energy audit in 
16 SMEs clusters 
 
6. Agriculture DSM & 
Mu DSM 
8.37 3.66 -Business model linked to 
subsidy reduction being evolved 
-Self of bankable DPRs to be 
prepared- 139 ULBs for Mu 
DSM. In Ag DSM, 5 pilot projects 
(1each in the States of 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, 
Rajasthan, Punjab & Haryana) 
will be implemented through 
Discoms to stimulate the market. 
Awareness & outreach to local & 
municipal bodies 
Ag DSM 
Business model prepared for 
6 pilots in 5 states. 6 DPRs 
prepared, 2 DPRs under 
preparation, 10 Awareness 
Programmes conducted for 
farmers. 
Mu DSM 
Review of 92 DPRs 
completed and DPR 
submission process is 
underway, Work Order 
issued to 31 ULBS 
Awareness workshops 
conducted in 7 
municipalities. 
7. Contribution to 
SECF 
22.26 22.26 -The scheme will provide 
contribution to SECF after it is 
notified by states and will be 
pari-passu with the contribution 
made by the states  
Rs. 32.00 crores released to 
16 SDAs from FY 2009-10 
till 31st December 2010 
8.  
Energy 
Conservation 
Awareness, Award 
& Painting 
Competition 
Scheme 
18.94 18.94  
National Awards to Industry 
establishment for achieving 
energy savings 
Awards and Painting 
Competition completed 592 
unit participated in 2010 
award. 
15.6 lakh students 
participated in painting 
competition Phase -I&II 
awareness campaign 
through DAVP completed. 
Organization of painting 
competition for school children 
all over the country 
Awareness campaign through 
print visual and electronic 
9  
National Mission 
for Enhanced 
Energy Efficiency 
 
125.0
0 
 
108.30  
Specific energy consumption 
norms for 8 sectors 
 
Setting up of trading platform for 
PAT 
 
 
Baseline data collected for 
last 5 years (2005 -06 to 
2009-10) of 8 industrial 
sectors. Data compilation 
and verification has been 
completed by NPC for 

72 
 
Operationalization of Perform, 
Achieve and Trade (PAT) 
scheme being one of the 4 new 
initiatives of the NMEEE 
establishing the baseline 
specific energy consumption 
Draft report on Guarantee 
Fund (PRGF) and Venture 
Capital Fund (VCF) has 
been obtained and are under 
review. Draft reports of the 
study on “Institutional 
Mechanism for Issuance of 
e-Scerts and trading 
mechanism” from PXIL has 
been received and being 
reviewed. Baseline data 
collected for last 5 years 
(2005-2006 to 2009 -10) of 
563 designated consumers 
identified in 8 industrial 
sectors.   
 Total 210.86 188.21   
Avoided capacity generation achieved in 2010-11 upto 31st Mar 2011 is 2882 MW 
Review performance during 2011-12 
S.N
o. 
Scheme BE Amount 
released  
Physical Targets Achievements 
1. SME    3.09 3.09 -150 DPRs will be prepared in 29     
clusters. 
 
-Availability of financing by 
capacity building of banking 
personnel in matters like project 
appraisal of performance 
contracting 
 
-Proposed 5 Demo in SME 
Clusters 
 
-25 Workshops for Financial 
Institutions Local Service 
Providers and Industrial 
Associations. 
-370 DPR prepared in 25 
Clusters and peer reviewed 
by ISTSL (Indian SME 
Technology Services ltd. 
 
-To be taken up in XIIth  Plan 
 
 
 
-To be taken up in XIIth  Plan 
 
 
-Completed Workshops for 
LSP/Technology Providers 
in 25 SME clusters 
 
2. 
 
Energy 
Conservation 
Building Code 
(ECBC) Scheme 
 
1.29 
 
1.29 
Capacity building and enhancing 
the pool of ECBC expert 
Architects 
A Pool of 52 ECBC expert 
architects/ consultants has 
been empanelled who have 
assisted various government 
projects in meeting ECBC 
compliance 
Training material for various 
stakeholders  
Standard Training module 
has been developed 
covering components of 
ECBC 
 Simplified compliance 
procedures for state & local 
bodies to assist them to 
implement provisions of ECBC 
code 
Web enabled conformance 
tools have been developed 
and model building bye -laws 
incorporating provisions of 
ECBC have been developed 
Capacity buildings of state & 
local government personnel 
through training and building 
simulations 
Capacity building 
workshops/ conferences 
have been organized in 
various states covering 
different climatic zones. 
 

73 
 
Strengthening of testing 
infrastructure in buildings 
Building Energy 
Performance Lab has been 
set up in CEPT university, 
Ahmedabad.  Labeling 
programme for  Windows 
has been developed 
Promotion of energy audit 
through ESCOs and 
Implementation of EE measures 
on Performance contracting 
mode 
Mandatory energy auditing 
in states (Madhya Pradesh, 
Kerala, and Gujarat have 
been initiated. Energy audits 
have been conducted for 
Parliament House Complex, 
Sirifort Auditorium and 
Institute for Defense Studies 
and Analysis (IDSA).  
Standard templates hav e 
been developed for RfP, 
DPRs, Performance 
Contracts and M&V etc.  
Rating of ESCO to improve 
investor confidence 
A panel of 114 ESCOs has 
been empanelled 
3. SDA 
Strengthening 
Programme 
 
8.88 
 
8.82 
 
Establishment/ Maintenance of 
Internet platform of SDAs. 
 
Publicity awareness in States. 
 
Maintenance of list of 
designated consumers and list 
of Energy. Managers and 
Energy Auditors. 
 
Organizing workshops/ training 
programmes. 
 
Implementation of Energy 
Efficient Demonstration Projects. 
 
Preparation of DPR s under 
IGEA of the Govt. Building. 
 
Implementation of LED. 
Demonstration project under 
LED village campaign. 
 
Domestic/International training 
programme for the SDA 
personnel. 
Preparation of State wise sector 
specific action plans. 
Financial support provided to 
the 23 SDAs for activities 
under Annual Action Plan 
 
Financial support provided to 
6 SDAs for Preparation of 
State-wise Sector Specific 
Annual Energy Savings Plan 
 
26 SDAs have developed 
their internet  platform to 
interact with various stake 
holders. 
 
Publicity & awareness 
campaigns on EE have been 
organized by SDAs.20 SDAs 
have celebrated Energy 
Conservation Day on 14 th 
Dec, 2011. 
 
Half yearly regional meeting 
with other SDAs for 
exchange of information 
about lessons learned on 
state level impl ementation of 
EC Act have been organized 
by the SDAs 
 
New demo projects on EE 
street lights have been taken 
up in Chhattisgarh, Orissa, 
Delhi, Nagaland, Goa 
Mizoram, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh 
and Punjab. New demo 
projects on revamping 
drinking wate r system taken 
up in Odisha. 
15 ongoing demo projects 

74 
 
have been completed till 
December, 2011-12. 
 
12 ongoing LED village 
campaign have been 
completed during 2011-12 
The International training 
programme for the SDAs 
was organized in Germany 
during July -August 2011 
.The second International 
training programme ECIN11 
at Tokyo, Japan for the SD A 
personnel is scheduled 
during 7th-16th February, 
2012 
National Workshop on Best 
Practices of SDAs held at 
New Delhi on 21 st – 22nd 
March 2012. 24 SDAs 
participated in the workshop. 
 
4. 
 
Contribution to 
SECF 
 
 
20.49  
 
 
 20.49  
 
 
The scheme will provide 
contribution to SECF after it is 
notified by states and will be 
pari-passu with the contribution 
made by the states. 
 
Financial support provided to 
the State Govt./UT 
Administration of Bihar, 
Puduchery, Jharkhand and 
U.P. as 1st installment after 
they created their SECF and 
finalized the rules & 
regulation to operationalize 
the same.     
Financial support provided to 
the State Govt. of Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Odhisa 
and Punjab as 2nd 
installment after the 
respective State Govt. have 
provided the matching 
contribution.    
An amount of Rs.49.00 lakhs 
was disbursed  to the SECF 
of Andhra Pradesh as 2nd 
installment towards balance 
amount of the previous 
financial year.      
5. Municipal Demand 
Side Management 
(MuDSM) 
Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
Shelf of bankable DPRs to be 
prepared for 139 ULBs for 
MuDSM 
Shelf of bankable DPRs 
prepared for 134 ULBs for 
MuDSM, others could not be 
taken up due to various 
force majeure causes. 
Awareness & outreach to local  
& municipal bodies 
Interactive meetings 
involving ULB officials 
conducted in 38 ULBs. 
Manual for MuDSM being 
developed with standards 
contract documents to enable 
easier implementation 
Tenders documents 
prepared for 4 ULBs to 
facilitate them in the bidding 
process. 
 
6. 
 
Agriculture 
Demand Side 
Management 
 
2 
 
0.59 
Workshops for utility employees 
and various stakeholders 
More than 26 open house 
sessions for farmers had 
been conducted for creating 
awareness among farmers 

75 
 
for Ag DSM project 
Stakteholders  consultation 
held in state in MP,AP and 
Karnataka 
Capacity building of utility 
employees in 5 selected 
DISCOMs of 3 
states:Workshop and 
discussion sessions were 
conducted for DISCOM 
officials of Pachim Gujarat 
utility (Guj),Madhya Gujarat 
utility (Guj),Uttar Haryana 
(Haryana),PSPCL (Punjab) 
& JVVNL Rajasthan. 
 
Preparation of 5 DPRs in 5 new 
DISOMS. 
Creation of pool of designated 
energy auditors for M&V purpose 
DPRs for 5 DISCOMS in the 
State of Karnataka, A.P & 
M.P has been prepared. 
 
Completed 
 
7. 
 
NMEEE 
 
110.35 
 
29.57  
Baseline Energy Audit of DCs in 
9 sectors(about 70% of total) 
Baseline energy Audit of 543 
industries from 8 sectors 
have been completed (about 
88% of total ) 
Note: This total no. of 
industries are DC’s as well 
as Non-DCs. 
Creation of M&V system Formulation of M& V system 
is under discussion with the 
technical c ommittees of 
each sectors 
Operationalization of PRGF and 
VCF 
Ministry of Finance has 
approved the rules on PRGF 
and VCFEE and sent to 
Ministry of Power for 
issuance. 
Conducting consultation and 
awareness workshop 
23 nos. of PAT notification 
workshops are planned all 
over the country to 
disseminate the information 
about the target setting 
methodology and the PAT 
rules. (21 nos. of Workshops 
have been conducted during 
June- August, 2012.) 
Creation of an web-based 
energy monitoring system 
The PAT -Net portal (online 
facility for submission of 
information by DCs, Energy 
Managers, Accredited 
Energy Auditors, and SDAs) 
is under preparation. 
Creation of pool of designated 
energy auditors for M&V purpose 
Accreditation of energy 
auditor is under progress 
after the selection of such 
auditors empanelment of 
accredited energy auditors  / 
firms will be taken up. 

76 
 
Review of EA reports and 
incorporating in target setting 
approach 
Energy Audit reports are 
being reviewed by the 
Energy Professiona ls.  Total 
463 nos. of report have been 
submitted to EESL for 
review. 
Upgradation of professional 
staffing in BEE for NMEEE  
Additional officials and staff 
have been appointed for 
NMEEE 
Monitoring and tracking of 
energy usage pattern of DCs 
DC’s are submitting Form -1 
(energy consumption and 
production related details) to 
BEE for every financial year 
and it is being reviewed by 
BEE. 
Operationalization of PAT 
scheme 
Additional Achievement: 
Rules and Targets under the 
PAT scheme are approved 
by Minister of Power and the 
scheme is launched on 30 th 
March, 2012. Now 
notification is available on 
the website. 
8. Standards & 
Labeling 
Programme 
39.05 28.31 
 
Continuation of awareness 
campaign 
 
Awareness campaign has 
been done at various parts 
of the country through print 
and electronic media. 
Check testing-Independent 
Agency 
Check-testing for all 
equipment covered under 
S&L program have been 
done through independent 
agencies i.e. RITES and 
EESL. 
 
Finalization of rating plan for 
boilers, office automation, 
ballasts, inverters and inverter 
batteries 
 
Star rating plan for boilers, 
office automation, ballasts 
and inverters finalized.  The 
rating plan for inverters 
batteries are being reviewed 
by the technical committee. 
 
9 Bachat Lamp 
Yojana 
 
6.85 
 
0.00 
 Coverage of entire country in 
a phased manner based on 
     DISCOM areas 
 
 POA to be submitted for DNA 
approval to CDM Executive 
Board after validation & 
stakeholder consultation 
 
 Estimated 6.5 crores CFLs to 
be distributed 
 
 The BLY scheme is 
registered as   SSC -PoA 
in the UNFCCC. 
 50 CPAs have been 
included in the PoA. 
 37 CPAs have been 
implemented 
successfully and 28 
million CFLs are 
distributed. 
 CFLs have also been 
distributed in Haryana, 
ChhattisgarhMaharashta 
and Himachal Pradesh 
under Stan d Alone 
Projects. 
 An avoided generation 
capacity of 324.3 MW 
has been achieved by 

77 
 
the BLY scheme - I till 
December 2011. 
10. Energy 
Conservation 
Awareness 
Scheme of MOP 
20.45 20.42  
Energy Conservation Awards for 
Industries and Commercial 
establishment for saving energy   
 
Organization of painting 
competition for school children 
all over the country                 
 
Awareness Campaign through 
print, visual and electronic media 
 
 
644 industrial units which 
participated had an annual 
savings of Rs. 2390 Crores 
with an avoided capacity of 
504 MW.  
 
Approx. 20.72 Lakh students 
participated in painting 
competition 
Avoided Capacity generation achieved upto December 2011 is 2959 MW (Verified) 
Physical Targets for 2012-13 
S.N
o. 
Scheme BE Amount 
released upto 
Oct. 12 
Physical Targets 
1. Standards & Labeling 
Programe 
20 NIL Continuation of awareness campaign 
Check testing-Independent Agency 
Launch of voluntary programme on ballasts, office 
automation and inverters. 
Market assessment study for color TV, Water Heater 
and direct cool refrigerator for mandatory labeling 
Monitoring of laboratory capacity building programme 
 
2. 
 
SDA Strengthening 
prgramme 
 
25.70 
 
21.55 
Providing financial support to SDAs for the following: 
Implementation of energy efficiency measures to 
showcase the potential of energy efficiency through 
demonstration projects 
-Carrying out LED village campaign 
-Workshops/training programs involving ener gy 
professionals 
-Analysis and survey of the impact of energy 
conservation activities 
-Publicity/awareness on energy efficiency in the states 
-Maintenance and updatation of internet platform 
3. Contribution to SECF 10.00 - -The scheme will provide contribution to SECF after it 
is notified by states and will be pari -passu with the 
contribution made by the states. 
4. Municipal Demand 
Side Management 
(MuDSM) 
Programme 
 
1.59 
 
- -Hiring of a retainer consultant manage the programme 
-Assessment & conversion of DPRs and upgradation of 
MuDSM portal 
5. Designated 
Consumers and 
SMEs Programme 
6.5 0.00 Sector Specific Approach for Energy Efficiency and 
Technology Up-gradation through Replication of DPRs 
Technical Assistant and Capacity Building 
SMEs Product Labeling Promotion Scheme 
Project management 
 
6. 
 
Energy Conservation 
Building Code 
(ECBC) Scheme 
 
2.00 
 
1.00 
Adoption & Facilitation of ECBC Implementation in 
states through National / state Capacity building 
conferences/ meetings 
Administration & Enforcement of scheme through 
capacity building through training of design 
professional 

78 
 
Facilitation of Demonstration projects for ECBC 
implementation & retrofitting 
Energy efficiency in existing buildings through 
retrofitting & Star rating programme 
Awareness  campaign  
 
7. 
 
Bachat Lamp Yojana 
 
1.5 
 
Nil 
 Maintain the institutional structure of Coordinating 
and Managing Entity (CME)  
 Provide technical assistance for monitoring and 
verification of individual projects  
 Continuous engagements with the State Electricity 
Distribution Companies 
 Workshops on Awareness of BLY 
 Inclusion of new projects under the registered PoA. 
(Depend upon the market scenario)  
 Continuous engagements with the State Electricity 
Distribution Companies 
 Formulating guidelines and processes for bulk 
procurement of LED bulbs and other areas of the 
scheme 
8. Energy Conservation 
Awareness Scheme 
of MOP 
10 10 - Energy Conservation Awards for Industries and 
Commercial establishment for saving energy                  
-Organization of painting competition for school 
children all over the country                 
- Awareness Campaign through print, visual and 
electronic media 
9. NMEEE 180 61 Notification to all DCs about PAT scheme 
Conducting PAT notification workshops 
Identification of new DCs in existing sectors 
Study about deepening and widening of PAT scheme 
Empanelment of Accredited Energy Auditors for 
verification and check-verification  
Development of trading rules and setting of trading 
platform 
Workshop with Financial Institutions to promote 
financing in energy efficiency projects 
Operationalization of Partial Risk Guarantee Fund  
(PRGF) and Venture Capital Fund (VCF) for Energy 
Efficiency  
Institutionalization of Super –Efficient Equipment 
Program (SEEP) 
10 Agricultural DSM 2  Carrying out Impact Assessment Study for Ag -DSM 
program in 11th plan. 
Continuation of Solapur project project activities & total 
project pumpsets installation will be completed by 
January 2013. 
Stakeholder consultation session for formulating Ag -
DSM scheme. 
One workshop for capacity building of  manufacturers 
Targeted Avoided capacity generation for the year 2012-13 is 950 MW at baseline of 2010-11 
 
******** 
  

79 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha)  of the Committee on Public Undertakings  (2008-09) on “Physical and 
Financial Performance of Power Generating PSUs – A Horizontal Study”. 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  27 
 
 
lI Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
[vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8,9, 11,12,13, 16, 17, 
18, 20, 21, 24, 25 and 26]   
  
Percentage of total  
 
16 
 
 
59.3% 
 
lII Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s replies [vide recommendation at Sl. No. 
22] 
 
Percentage of total  
 
1 
 
 
3.7% 
 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee  [vide 
recommendations at Sl. Nos.1, 2, 6, 10, 14,15,19,23 and 27] 
 
Percentage of total.  
 
 
9 
 
33.3% 
 
V Recommendations in re spect of which final repl y of Government 
is still awaited. 
 
 
Percentage of total 
 
01 
 
 
3.7% 
 
 
 
 