C.P.U. NO. 935 
 
 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2009 - 2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
SALE OF SURPLUS LAND AND BUILDINGS BY NATIONAL TEXTILE 
CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
[BASED ON CHAPTER IX OF C&AG REPORT NO. PA 27 OF 2009-10 
(PERFORMANCE AUDIT)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.3.2010 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5.3.2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
March 2010 / Phalguna 1931 (S)
 
2 

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
Composition of the Committee (2009-10)   (iii) 
Introduction (v) 
 PART I  
 REPORT 
  
 Overview    5 
Chapter-I Revival Scheme 
 
6 
Chapter-II Assets Sale Committee 
 
15 
Chapter-III Sale of Surplus Land and Buildings not identified in the 
Revival Scheme 
 
18 
Chapter-IV System of valuation of  properties and fixation of 
reserve price  
 
20 
Chapter-V System of valuation of Building structures/Materials 27 
Chapter-VI Defects in the Tender Documents 28 
Chapter-VII Weaknesses in internal controls of accounting system 33 
Chapter-VIII Sale below registration rates and reserve price 34 
Chapter-IX Sale without following tender process 36 
Chapter-X Inconsistencies in the Guidelines 41 
Chapter-XI Fund Management 43 
Chapter-XII Lessons learnt 44 
 
 
 
PART II 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
 
45 
 APPENDICES  
I Highlights of the Audit Report  63 
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 80 
  
 
  

3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2009-2010) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8 Shri Baijayant Panda 
9 Shri L. Rajagopal 
10 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12 Shri Ganesh Singh 
13 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
17 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
18 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani  
21 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
22 Shri Amar Singh  
 
Secretariat  
1 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma Director 
3 Shri Girdhari Lal Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

4 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Second 
Report on Sale of Surplus Land and Buildings by National Textiles Corporation 
Limited. 
2. The Committee‟s exam ination of the subject was based on Chapter IX of the 
Audit Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 (Performance Audit). 
 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2009 -10) took evidence of the 
representatives of NTC on 12.11.2009  and the representatives of the Ministry 
of Textiles on 08.12.2009.   
 
4. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2009-10) considered and adopted the 
Report at their sitting held on 12.02.2010 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Textiles a nd 
National Textile Corporation Limited for placing before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection with examination of the subject.  They 
also wish to thank in particular the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles 
and National Text ile Corporation Limited who gave evidence and placed their 
considered views before the Committee. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered by the officials of Comptroller & Auditor General of India. They would 
also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in PART-
II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
12 February, 2010        Chairman  
23 Magha, 1931 (S)                               Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
- (v)- 
  

5 
 
PART I 
 
REPORT 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
National Textile Corporation Limited (Company) was incorporated in April 
1968 with the main objective of managing the affairs of sick textile undertakings 
taken over by the Government of India ( GOI). The Company was managing 119 
textile mills through its nine subsidiaries. All these subsidiaries were declared sick 
(eight between 1992 and 1994 and one in December 2005) under the Sick Industrial 
Companies (Special Provisions) Act 1985. Revival schemes (2002) and a modif ied 
revival scheme (2006) were approved by the Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR)/GOI which envisaged closure of unviable mills and revival of 
viable mills. According to these schemes, 77 unviable mills were to be closed, 40 
viable mi lls to be revived (22 through modernisation and 18 through public private 
partnership) and two mills in Pondicherry to be transferred to the State Government . 
The scheme was self -financing and  the funds utilized from sale of surplus assets 
were to be utilized for revival/modernisation. Asset Sale Committee (ASC) was 
constituted for each subsidiary to take decisions regarding sale of surplus assets.  In 
pursuance of orders of BIFR, all the nine subsidiaries were merged with the Holding 
Company, thus, making NTC a single Company as against 10 companies before the 
merger in 2006 and a single ASC was constituted  by Ministry of Textiles in October 
2006.  The erstwhile subsidiaries exist as sub-offices of the Company.  
 
A performance r eview covering the sale o f surplus land and buildings from 1 
April 2002 to 31 March 2008 in six of the nine sub -offices of the Company was 
conducted by Audit between February and September, 2008  and their observations 
as appearing in Chapter IX of the C& AG‟s Report No. PA 27 of 2009 -10 
(Performance Audit) are reproduced at Appendix-I.   
 
The Audit findings and other issues related with the subject matter have been 
dealt with in the succeeding chapters of this Report. 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REVIVAL SCHEMES 
A. Features of the Schemes 
 
 In the year 2002, BIFR/GOI approved revival schemes for eight sick 
subsidiaries envisaging modernization of 53 viable units and closure of 6 6 unviable 
mills with an estimated cost of Rs. 3937 crores.  The scheme was to be implemented 
upto 31st March, 2004 which was further extended upto 31st March, 2006.  
 
 According to NTC, the salient features of the Scheme 2002 for 8 sick 
subsidiary were as follows: 
 
(i). “Identify mills as viable or unviable. 
(ii). Unviable mills will be closed under Industrial Dispute  Act after paying Modified 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme (MVRS) to the employees. 
(iii). Modernisation of 53 viable mills and closure of 66 unviable mills. 
(iv). The Scheme was to be self financed through sale of surplus assets of NTC 
Mills. 
(v). Financial Institutions and banks to accept payment of outstanding dues under 
one time settlement by way of Govt. guaranteed 9.5% per annum bonds. 
(vi). Govt. of India to write off interest  on its loans to NTC outstanding up to 
31.3.2001 and to convert GOI loan outstanding into equity to enable NTC to 
make its net worth positive. 
(vii). Various Reliefs and Concessions from the offices of State Govts. Electricity 
Boards, Municipal Corporation, State Govt. etc.  
(viii). To mobilize enough funds initially from banks/financial institutions for payment 
of MVRS compensation. 
(ix). To offer MVRS to the employees of the mills identified for closure. 
(x). Payment of 1% Guarantee Commission to M inistry of Textiles  (MOT) for 
providing guarantee to mobilise funds through bonds. 
(xi). Payment of all outstanding dues of PF/ESI after waiver of damages.” 
 
Meanwhile, a Modified Rehabilitation Scheme (MRS) was submitted to BIFR 
by the operating agency IDBI in January, 2006 and the sam e was approved by BIFR 
in March, 2006 and communicated by an order in May, 2006.  According to the 
information furnished by NTC, the salient features of the Scheme 2006 are as 
follows: 
 
(i). “Merger of 9 subsidiary corporations of NTC with Holding Co. 
(ii). 22 mills to be revived by NTC itself. 
(iii). 30 mills to be offered for joint venture with private partnership. 
(iv). The manpower requirement should be restricted to on roll strength of 10,050 
for 22 mills and daily engagement of 12,480. 
(v). The implementation period of scheme will be up to 31.3.2008. 
(vi). Unsecured loans of Rs.2755.36 crores to be converted into equity during the 
financial year   2006-07. 
(vii). The entire interest of Rs.2166.87 crores on Govt. loans outstanding up to 
31.3.2005 to be written off. 
(viii). The net worth of the company to become positive in financial year 2008-09. 
(ix). The sales were projected at Rs.931 crores in the optimum year 2008-09. 

7 
 
 
The cost of the scheme was Rs.5267.00 crores including redemption of 
Bonds of Rs.2028 crores which were issued as a bridge arrangement.” 
 
On being asked about the reasons for bringing out a modified revival scheme 
in 2006 while revival schemes were already issued and approved by BIFR in 2002 , 
the Ministry of Textiles, in a written reply, submitted as follows: 
 
 “Modified Revival Scheme (06) was required to get approval of the BIFR for 
sale of assets in respect of the following to take the Revival Scheme forward. 
 
(i). Merger of all the nine subsidiaries with the Holding Company. 
(ii). To extend the scheme period upto 31.3.2008 due to delays in 
modernization of mills on account of delay in mobilizing funds through 
land sale. 
(iii). To permit construction of integrated textiles/handicrafts plaza in the 
land of erstwhile Jehangir Textile Mills, International Trade Towers on 
the land  of Indu Dye Works, Mumbai  to facilitate the marketing 
capability due to envisaged higher production  from modernized mills 
and for earning sustained income by effective utilization of assets. 
(iv). To permit surrender of closed mill land taken on lease basis to Govt. of 
Maharashtra (GOM ) in order to get permission from GOM for NTC to 
sell equal portion of freehold land belonging to closed mills to generate 
revenue. 
(v). To permit joint venture for rehabilitating identified potentially viable 
mills. 
(vi). To sanction a scheme of rehabilitation favouring NTC (TN&P). 
(vii). Setting up new composite textile mill in the suburban area of 
Bangalore, Karnataka in the place of modernizing the Minerva Mills at 
its existing location. 
(viii). To give a direction of GOI (MOT) for converting Rs. 2755.36 crores into 
equity during 2006-07 so as to enable the networth turn positive during 
that year itself.” 
 
B. Achievement of Objectives 
 
 Paragraph 7.1 of the 41 st Annual Report (2008-09) of the Company brings out 
that in terms of the Revival Schemes of 2002, 65 unviable mills were closed under ID 
Act, 1947 and 2 mills (one viable and one unviable) were handed over to the 
Government of Pondicherry w.e.f. 1.4.2005.  Employees of 65 unviable mills opted 
for MVRS and were given compensation.  According to this report, the “Scheme 
could not be implemented due to non -availability of funds through sale of assets 
because State Governments where the NTC Mills are situated did not give the 
permission to sell the land of the Mills especially the valuable land in Maharashtra”. 
  
In the cont ext of State Governments‟ refusal to give permission for sale of 
land, the CMD, NTC explained during evidence as under:- 
 
“………Since the State Governments were not giving permission, in a case 
before the Supreme Court filed by the employees, the Supreme Court gave 
notices to the State Governments asking for their consent for sale of land.  

8 
 
Many of the State Governments have given their consent.  Of course, some of 
them gave permission with some conditions.  That is how the third attempt of 
the Government for revival of the NTC has succeeded, at least, should say, 
partially in implementing the revival scheme.” 
 
On being asked whether the precise objectives for which revival scheme 2006 
was conceived, have been achieved, NTC in their written repl y inter-alia stated as 
under: 
“The Revival Scheme of NTC has considerably succeeded in achieving the 
objectives for which the same was conceived for the following reasons. 
 
The company has achieved a positive net worth in the year 2008-09, as 
was envisaged  in the Scheme.  NTC has achieved closure of 77 mills (11 
more mills, originally decided for revival through joint venture route).  NTC has 
completed modernization of 17 mills and the modernization of 18 th mill is 
expected to be completed by November, 2009.  Three new composite mills, by 
relocation from their original locations, will be completing the spinning 
segment of the project by December, 2009 and weaving by March, 2010.  The 
company has given MVRS to 60800 employees from the 77 mills already 
closed and the surplus employees of a few of the viable mills, the Head 
Offices of the various subsidiaries and the Retail Showrooms and Divisional 
Offices of the Marketing Division.  As on date (1.10.2009) the total manpower 
strength of the company, as a whole i s 10,458.NTC has already paid 
Rs.1910.14 crores on redemption of bonds (including OTS Bonds) and 
Rs.777.29 crores as interest on these bonds, mobilized for MVRS 
compensation, in addition to paying Rs.294.11 crores as one time settlement 
to 23 banks/financial institutions.  Rs.188.07 crores was paid for settlement of 
all its (overdue) PF/ESI and other statutory dues.  NTC has paid Rs.89 crores 
as a Guarantee Commission to Ministry of Textiles for providing guarantee of 
the Taxable bonds of Rs.1779.35 crores…..   
 
…..The Government has waived of interest of Rs.2727.13 crores and 
written off loan of Rs.3402.62 crores as on 31.3.2006, after converting 
Rs.2542.79 crores  of loan into equity and also waived off Rs.1454.01 crores 
interest.  The company has generate d Rs. 4034.60 crores by sale of assets of 
the closed mills and surplus assets of the viable mills.  In order to bring in 
economy of operation and synergy in its operations, the BIFR/Govt. have 
approved merger of all its 9 subsidiaries with the Holding Comp any and NTC 
is now only one company as against earlier 10 companies with effect from 
1.04.2006.  Modernization/ revival through Joint venture has been completed 
for 5 mills and the process for further 11 mills is going on.” 
 
The Committee pointed out that the Revival Scheme 2002 envisaged closure 
of 66 unviable mills but NTC has achieved closure of 77 mills and desired to know 
the reason for closure of more mills than that originally envisaged in the Scheme, in 
its reply the NTC submitted as follows: 
 
 “In the original scheme approved in 2002 -2003, 66 mills being unviable were 
identified for closure.  Vide Modified Rehabilitation Scheme (MRS -06), BIFR 
approved joint venture for 30 mills subject to proper procedure of approval 
from Government.  Subsequently, Group of Ministers(GoM) in its meeting 

9 
 
dated 5.12.2006 approved closure of 12 non-functional mills out of the 30 mills 
to be revived through joint venture and to offer MVRS to the remaining  
employees of these mills.  BIFR , vide Modified Scheme 2008 (MS -08) dated 
4.9.2008 permitted closure of 12 identified mills out of the 30 mills earmarked 
for revival under joint venture, since the revival of these 12 mills was 
economically non-feasible. It may be seen that the original decision to close 
66 mills was taken  by BIFR vide scheme approved in 2002 -03. Further 
decision for closure of 12 more mills has been taken by the BIFR vide MS -08 
approved on 4.9.08.” 
On being asked as to how  the total manpower of the Company as on 
1.10.2009 stood at 10,458 when  the Revival Scheme 2006 stipulated that the 
manpower requirement should be restricted to on roll strength of 10,050 for 22 mills , 
NTC in its written reply submitted 
 
“Number of 10458 employees mentioned on the  company‟s roll as on 1 st 
October, 2009  will come down as   employees of some of the closed mills are 
still in the process of opting MVRS. The Company has a plan to give VRS to 
2500 more employees, and to transfer employees of closed mills to the 
running mills.” 
 
C. Financial Performance 
As regards, the details of expenditure incurred and the funds generated out of 
the sale proceeds, during the course of the rehabilitation upto 30.9.2009, NTC 
furnished the following information: 
 
a) “MVRS payment                       -                   Rs. 2203.60 crores. 
b) Interest on bonds                     -                   Rs.   777.29 crores 
c) Settlement with banks and FIS -                  Rs.   294.11 crores 
d) PF/ESIC dues                           -                  Rs.   188.07 crores 
e) Raw material suppliers and creditors           Rs.    79.68  crores  
f) Government guarantee fee     -                    Rs.    89.00  crores 
g) Municipal Taxes                                           Rs.    32.43  crores 
Purchase of machinery and other      -         Rs.  345.56 crores 
Ancillary items for modernized mills 
h) Civil Work and modernisation expenses       Rs.  140.47crores 
i) Purchase of plant and machinery for             Rs.  176.61crores 
Greenfield projects 
j) Civil works                                                     Rs.    73.80 crores” 
Total       Rs. 4400.62 crores 
 
The Committee pointed out that the Company has generated Rs. 4034.60 
crores by sale of assets of the closed mills and surplus assets of the viable mills 
whereas the expenditure incu rred by the Company out of sale proceeds during the 
course of the rehabilitation worked out to Rs. 4400.62 crores.  When asked as to how 
the Company explained incurring of more expenditure on rehabilitation than the 
revenue generated by sale of assets of t he closed mills, the Company in a note 
stated as follows: 
 

10 
 
 “In addition to revenue generated by sale of assets, Company has earned 
interest of Rs. 555.62 crores upto 30.9.2009 and also mobilized funds 
amounting to Rs. 2028.04 crores by issue of bonds.” 
 
In reply to a question about the amount spent on modernization/revival of the 
viable mills so far, the Ministry of Textiles in their reply stated: 
 
 “NTC has so far spent a sum of Rs. 760 crores for modernization of 22 mills.” 
As regards the modernization / revival of the mills through Joint Venture, it 
was, however, learnt from Audit that the process of modernization of four mills in 
Mumbai has not yet started.  When asked about the factors holding up the process of 
modernization of these four mills in Mumbai, the NTC stated as under: 
 
“INTECH, Mumbai has filed a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) in the High Court 
of Mumbai and claimed that structure of these five mills decided to be revived 
through JV are of Heritage nature.  As the case is pending in the C ourt, the 
process of implementation of business plan is held up.” 
 
 
To a specific query as to whether the Ministry feel satisfied with the initiatives 
taken by the NTC towards achievement of objectives of revival schemes, 2002 and 
2006, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Yes,  the milestones achieved under the Revival Scheme of the Company are 
indicated below:- 
1. NTC mobilized Rs. 2028 crores by private placement of bonds, 
redeemable on 5 years maturity.  NTC paid Rs. 248.69 crores as OTS 
to 23 Financial Institutions/Banks under the Revival Scheme. 
 
2. The entire workers of the mills identified for closure and the surplus 
employees in the viable mills in addition to those employees who were 
desirous to go under MVRS in the various offices, were given MVRS at 
a cost of Rs. 2205 crores. So far, 60859 employees have gone 
accepting MVRS. 
 
3. The Company identified 77 mills as unviable and closed under the 
provisions of Industrial Disputes Act (I.D. Act), after following necessary 
procedure. 
 
4. 43 mills are slated for revival – 24 directly by the Company and balance 
under joint venture partnership with private sector. 
 
5. The Company has so far spent Rs. 760 crores(as on 30.11.2009) for 
the modernization of 22 mills, out of a total of Rs. 1155 crores. 
 
6. 17 of the mills have completed modernization.  The 18 th mill, viz., 
Cannanore Spinning. & W eaving. Mills, Cannanore, will be completing 
the modernization in December, 2009.  The spinning segment of 3  
composite mills is expected to be commissioned by March/April, 2010. 

11 
 
 
 
7. NTC h as completed the process of revival of 5 mills through joint 
venture companies.  Two of the mills have started the activities – one in 
the Aurangabad Textile Mills for garmenting and work -wear and the 
other New City of Bombay Mfg. Mills Ltd. has set up a d esign studio 
and setting up sampling and garmenting unit. 
 
The process of joint venture for other 11 mills is going on. 
 
8. From Rs. 385 crores budgetary support for wages in the year 2001 -02, 
there is no budgetary support from the Govt. for the wages in the year 
2009-10.  
 
9. The Company has sold assets worth Rs. 4035 crores under the Revival 
Scheme. 
 
10. The Company has paid Rs. 89 crores as 1% commission as Guarantee 
commission to the Ministry of Textiles. 
 
11. The Company has paid Rs. 224 crores to EPF/ESI to settle the 
outstanding statutory liabilities. 
 
12. Since NTC was left with less number of mills, merger of all the 9 
subsidiaries be came necessary and all the subsidiaries were merged 
with the Holding Company w.e.f.01.04.2006. 
 
 
13. Net worth of the Company has become positive as on    31.03.2009. 
 
14. All the secured and most of the unsecured creditors have been paid off. 
 
 
15. NTC has already paid Rs. 1910 crores on redemption of bonds and Rs. 
777 crores as interest on these bonds.  The last instalment of Rs. 126 
crores is payable in January, 2010.” 
 
According to NTC, the implementation period of the scheme 2006 was upto 
31.3.2008.  When asked whether the Government has granted any extension for 
completion of the revival scheme 2006, NTC in a written note stated as under: 
 
“As per the approval of BIFR Scheme of MS 2008 (September, 2008), the 
implementation period was extended upto 31.3.2009.  In  view of existing 
status of new projects, further extension of period upto 31.3.2011 is under 
process for obtaining approval of the Cabinet after completion of inter -
Ministerial consultations.”   
When enquired as to how the Ministry explain ed their s atisfaction towards 
achievement of objectives of revival schemes when the NTC could not even sell 50 
per cent of surplus land and assets and complete projected modernization and 
revival of viable mills during the originally stipulated implementation period  which is 

12 
 
now stated to be under process for further extension upto 31.03.2011, the Ministry of 
Textiles in their written reply submitted as follows: 
 
“Since the entire scheme for revival is self financing, funds are to be 
generated from sale of surplus land and assets of closed mills. The land could 
not be sold for a number of years mainly due to lack of permission from State 
Governments and poor response against tenders. However, despite these 
obstacles, till date, NTC has been able to complete a major pa rt of revival, 
including modernization of 17 mills out of 22 to be revived by NTC and set in 
motion joint venture for 16 mills. Balance part of revival is expected to be 
completed by 31.03.2011.” 
  
On being asked about the measures now being contemplated t o achieve the 
objectives of the revival schemes in a time bound and professional manner to the 
best advantage of the Government, the Ministry in their reply submitted as under: 
MOT Replies P.4 
 “NTC was originally a spinning Company and the margin for spin ning being 
very low, the viability of the Company depends on NTC being transformed into 
an integrated textile Company consisting of spinning, weaving, processing and 
garmenting.  The Revival Scheme modified in 2006 and 2008 proposes to set -
up composite textile mills in the States of Karnataka, Maharashtra and Gujarat 
and this would make the Company a viable Company.  Efforts would be 
stepped up to rationalize the existing manpower so as to achieve ideal 
manpower requirement.  The surplus manpower would be o ffered MVRS.  
Sale of assets would be viewed in the context of the market scenario.” 
 
When asked what guidelines have been or are being issued by the Ministry for 
making concerted efforts towards achievement of the objectives of modified revival 
schemes within proposed stipulated time frame of 31 st March, 2011, Ministry in their 
reply stated as under: 
 
“The proposal for extension of revival scheme upto 31 st March, 2011 is 
presently under consideration for approval of the Cabinet. The guidelines in 
this regard will be issued by the Ministry in accordance with the decision of the 
Cabinet.” 
D. Monitoring System 
 
On being asked whether BIFR and GOI had subsequently also issued 
guidelines at different points of time in order to achieve the objectives of the rev ival 
schemes, NTC in a written note informed the Committee that:  
 “The Revival Scheme was approved in 2002.  A Modified Scheme (MS -1-06) 
was sanctioned by BIFR on 17.5.2006. The same was further approved by 
BIFR in September, 2008 (MS (2) – 08).  The revi val scheme has been 
implemented by NTC under the BIFR / GOI approvals, based on the 
instructions issued by Ministry of Textiles from time to time.  The Empowered 
Group of Ministers had also been guiding the process and progress in its 
various meetings.”  
 

13 
 
As regards constitution of the Empowered Group of Ministers, the Ministry  
furnished the following information: 
 
“The action plan for revival of NTC was placed before the Cabinet vide agenda 
note dated 9.6.2000.  The Cabinet considered the Note in its meeti ng held on 
20.6.2000 and decided that “the matter may be considered expeditiously by a 
Group of Ministers consisting of Minister of Finance, Minister of Labour, 
Minister of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Minister of Textiles, 
Minister of State (I ndependent Charge) of the Department of Disinvestment 
and Minister of State in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation”  Further, in its meeting held on 4.9.2000, the Cabinet 
authorized the Group of Ministers to take decisions during the im plementation 
period of the scheme.  The scope of work of the GOM included review of the 
progress of the Scheme periodically, directing and guiding the further course 
of action in the light of orders of BIFR.” 
  
When asked how the Ministry of Textiles has be en associated with the GOM 
and at what regular intervals t he meetings of GOM are convened, Ministry stated as 
under: 
 
“The Minister of Textiles is a member of the Group of Ministers. There was no 
specific time frame / regular interval for the meetings of GOM, and these 
meetings were held as and when decision of GOM was required.  In all, 13 
meetings of GoM have been held. The last meeting of GOM was held on 7 th 
August, 2008.” 
 
In reply to a question about specific responsibilities devolved on the Ministry of 
Textiles for successful and timely implementation of the Revival Schemes in terms of 
the guidelines issued by the BIFR and Government from time to time , the Ministry 
stated as follows: 
“Since the revival plan approved by BIFR in 2002, subsequently modified in 
2006 and latest in 2008, was based on financing the revival through sale of 
assets, the Ministry was entrusted with the responsibility of constituting the 
Asset Sale Committee (ASC).  Besides this, the Ministry has been entrusted 
with the respo nsibility of providing assistance for financial restructuring of the 
company during the revival period by way of writing off Government loan, 
waiver of interest thereupon, providing Government guarantees required to 
raise bonds; and providing wage support in case required during the revival 
period.  Further, as per requirement of the company, the Ministry also 
coordinates with the various Central/State Ministries/Departments for the 
reliefs and concessions sought in the Rehabilitation Scheme for ensuring 
expeditious approvals/ clearances with a view to ensure smooth 
implementation of the rehabilitation plan.  The entire implement action of the 
revival scheme was monitored by the Group of Ministers (GOM) constituted by 
the Cabinet. The Cabinet had authorized G OM to guide the revival process 
and take necessary decisions .  The Ministry approached the GOM as and 
when its decisions were required, and also apprised the GOM of the progress 
made during the implementation period.”  
 
When asked about the mechanism put in place in the Ministry of Textiles to 
ensure that the objectives of the revival schemes are achieved in a time bound and 

14 
 
professional manner to the best advantage of the Government and the Company, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as follows: 
“Cabinet had constituted and authorized a Group of Ministers (GOM) to take 
decisions during the implementation period. The Ministry of Textiles 
approached GOM periodically to apprise the progress made during the 
implementation period, and to obtai n its decisions on initiatives, if any, being 
taken by the company. The decisions of GoM ensured best advantage for the 
Government, as well as for the company.  The last GOM meeting was held on 
7.8.2008.  Now the GoM is not in existence. Therefore, periodi cal reviews of 
progress of implementation have been taken by Secretary (Textiles).  The 
Minister of the Textiles has also reviewed the implementation of revival 
scheme.”    
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
ASSETS SALE COMMITTEE 
 
According to the information made available to the Committee, Asset Sale 
Committee (ASC) was constituted for each subsidiary to take decisions regarding 
sale of surplus assets.  With effect from 1 April, 2006, all the nine subsidiaries were 
merged into the Company and a single ASC was constituted.   
 
Replying to a question about formation of ASC for each subsidiary of the 
Company, the NTC in its written reply stated that the constitution of the Asset Sale 
Committee for each subsidiary was in accordance with the Schemes approved by the 
BIFR/GOI. 
 
According to NTC, the composition of ASC at subsidiary level was as under: - 
 
1. Chairman of the Holding Co. would be the Chairman of the ASC. 
2. Managing Director of the subsidiary company would be the Member 
Secretary. 
3. BIFR nominee. 
4. MOT Nominee. 
5. Operating Agency nominee 
6. State Govt. nominee (not below the rank of Joint Secretary). 
 
In reply to another question about composition of the single ASC constituted 
after merger of all the nine subsidiaries into the Company , NTC in its written note  
stated: 
 
“The single ASC constituted, is having the following composition:- 
 
 Chairman of NTC is the Chairman of the ASC. 
 One nominee each from the concerned State Govt; 
 One Member from IDBI. 
 One Member from the MoT. 
 One Member from the BIFR. 
 Regional Head of NTC (Southern Region). 
 Regional Head of NTC (Western Region). 
 
Members of various State Governments will represent as and when the 
sale of assets situated in the State is concerned.” 
 
Explaining the rationale that has been followed for deciding the composition of 
the Asset Sale Committee constituted by the Ministry from time to time, the Ministry 
in written reply stated as under: 
 
“The composition of the Committee was approved by BIFR which had 
sanctioned the revival scheme of NTC. The Ministry of Textiles has constituted 
the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) based on the guidelines issued by the BIFR 
and being the owner, the Ministry has ensured that representatives of various 
agencies including the owner of the Company, the Operating Agen cy, the 
States where the assets are located, BIFR, being the agency sanctioning 

16 
 
scheme, are all forming part of the Committee as stake -holders.  NTC, being 
the Company for revival, the Chairman of NTC was made as the Chairman of 
the Asset Sale Committee. R epresentation of stake holders was decided to 
ensure sale of assets for successful implementation of the Revival Scheme.    
The Asset Sale Committee also requires a Convenor for all paper work and 
hence Managing Directors of the erstwhile Subsidiaries and subsequently the 
Regional Incharges have been made as Member-Secretary.” 
 
When asked whether the Ministry is considering any change in  the 
composition of ASC, it was informed to the Committee by the Ministry that: 
 
“At present the Committee is fairly repre sented by various stake -holders.  
However, in case it needs to be further broad based depending upon the 
requirement, the same would be considered. At present the Ministry is 
considering reconstitution of the ASC by including a senior representative of 
Finance…………” 
 
When desired to know the reasons for reconstitution of the ASC with a revised 
composition, Ministry in their written reply submitted that: 
 
“The composition of the Committee was approved by BIFR which had 
sanctioned the revival scheme of NTC.  The ASC was constituted by the 
Ministry of Textiles on the guidelines issued by the BIFR.  It has been ensured 
that representative of the various agencie s including the owner of the 
company, the Operating Agency, representatives of the State Governments at 
the level of Secretary where the assets are located, the representatives of the 
BIFR and of the Monitoring Agency(MA) are in the ASC.  While constitutin g 
the ASC, conditions were prescribed to ensure that the sale is conducted in a 
transparent and fair manner through open notification.  The ASC has 
functioned in a transparent manner in view of the above conditions.  However, 
issues regarding fixation of r eserve price, sale at less than reserve price etc. 
were observed in the Performance Audit by C&AG which necessitated a 
review of the existing system to make it more broad -based with increased 
transparency to function as per the guidelines in a policy which  is being 
formulated.”  
As per the information made available to the Committee, the functions of ASC 
as entrusted by BIFR are as under: 
 
(i). To ensure that the land is sold in such a manner as to generate 
maximum resources for the Revival Plan. 
(ii). To ensure that the sale is conducted in a transparent and fair manner 
and through open notification. 
(iii). To ensure that procedure for sale and maintenance of accounts is as 
per highest professional standards.  To meet this objective, they shall 
utilize the services of profes sional agencies for such specific period, as 
may be necessary. 
(iv) To ensure timely filling of applications for statutory clearances for sale 
from competent authorities under ULCRA and other urban 
development/ regulatory bodies and securing their early approval. 
(v) To monitor progress in sale and generation of resources.” 
 

17 
 
 
Regarding the precise role actually being played by the Ministry in monitoring 
and ensuring that the revival schemes are implemented by the management of the 
Company strictly in accordance with the guidelines issued on the subject matter 
particularly when a Joint Secretary level officer represents the Ministry in the ASC, 
the Ministry submitted as under:  
 
“BIFR appointed IDBI as the Monitoring Agency (MA) with the responsibility of 
monitoring the progress of revival scheme on a quarterly basis through their 
reporting system.  Company has to satisfy the MA that the physical progress 
and all aspects of cost of the scheme/ means of finance of the scheme are 
complied with as per the original schedule.  The company is also required to 
furnish to MA such info rmation and data as may be required by it on quarterly 
intervals.  The SS&FA and Joint Secretary, Ministry of Textiles are 
represented on the Board of NTC and the implementation as above is 
monitored at the Board level by them.  Besides this, the entire im plementation 
of the revival plan was monitored by the Group of Ministers (GoM) constituted 
by the Cabinet.  The progress of implementation was placed before the GoM 
in the form of Action Taken Report in the next meeting of the GoM.  So far 13 
meetings have been held by GoM since June, 2000 upto August, 2008.” 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
 
SALE OF SURPLUS LAND AND BUILDINGS NOT IDENTIFIED IN THE 
REVIVAL SCHEME 
 
Audit paragraph reflects  that the total surplus land of 2737.99 acres and 
buildings of 286.70 acres  were identified for sale in the revival schemes. Of this,  the 
Company sold 1354.80 acres of land and 257.85 acres of buildings up to 31 st March, 
2008.In the six sub-offices selected for Audit, and there were 110 cases of sale upto 
March 2008 covering 790.68 acres of land and 100.25 acres of buildings.  
 
 Audit examination, however, revealed that certain parcels of land which were 
not identified as surplus in the revival schemes were sold by the Company.  A few 
cases are:  
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name of the 
property 
Land 
identified 
(in acres) 
Actually 
sold (in 
acres) 
Difference 
(in acres) 
Remarks 
1 Jyoti Weaving Mills, 
Kolkata 
4.29 4.94 0.65 Increase was 
due to mutation 
done at a later 
date. 
2 Shree Mahalaxmi 
Cotton Mills, 24 
paragana 
11.24 11.34 0.10 Reasons for sale 
of land more 
than identified 
were 
not on record 
3 Model Mill, Nagpur  40.33 42.09 1.76 
4 Central Cotton Mill, 
Howrah 
11.67 12.06 0.39 
5 Bungalow of New 
City 
Mill, Worli Mumbai 
 
--- 0.16 0.16 Approval of BIFR 
was obtained 
 Total   3.06  
 
It was also observed in the Audit that there were no specific guidelines for sale 
of land and buildings beyond those included in the revival schemes approved by 
BIFR and a pproval of BIFR was not obtained for sale of such land and buildings 
(except in the Sl. No. 5 above) 
 
In this context, the Committee desired to know authority under which the 
management of NTC decided to sell such land not covered in the revival schemes, 
NTC in its written reply stated as under: 
 
“Conclusion drawn by the audit that “NTC has sold the land which was not 
identified under revival Scheme” as per observation in respect of five cases of 
land is not correct.  Out of five cases, four were related to mills land identified 
for sale and where excess sale of land took place due to difference between 
area as per property record and as per actual measurement of land in 
possession.  Location -wise all these four cases are same as identified in 

19 
 
revival scheme.  In fifth case, though the sale of bunga low of New City Mills, 
Worli was initially not identified but subsequently BIFR approved its sale and 
treated it authorised.” 
 
According to the information furnished subsequently by the Audit, the Ministry 
stated that the difference in the area identified in BIFR scheme and the area actually 
sold is due to error in records of the land and the area sold on the basis of actual 
measure done before going for sale. 
When asked to clarify w hether physical measurement of land area was not 
done before submitting the proposal for revival to BIFR, NTC replied as under: 
 
 “Physical measurement was not done prior to submitting proposal to BIFR.  In 
fact NTC became the owner of all such mills land under the three enactments 
i.e. in the year 1974, 1986 and 1995.  It has taken over the mills and its 
property without doing any measurement.  In some of the cases authentic 
documents of property were also not with NTC.  The area appeared in the 
documents of the Company as well as mentioned in the BIFR Scheme was 
based on records made available at the time of its takeover.” 
 
Asked as to when approval in all such cases was actually obtained from BIFR, 
the NTC submitted in a written note as under: 
 
“The land area of 3.06 acres shown by the Audit is belonging to five mills 
property.  Sale of entire land of four mills i.e. Jyoti Weaving Mills, Kolkata, 
Shree Mahalaxmi Textile Mills, 24, Paragana, Model Mills, Nagpur and Central 
Cotton Mills, Howrah, was approved  by the BIFR as a unit for the area 
appeared in record……….” 
 
In reply to another related question, NTC furnished the following information: 
 
“In the Revival Scheme approved by the BIFR, entire land of closed mills and 
the surplus land of viable mills (working mills) were approved for sale.  The 
area was also indicated in the approved scheme.  Physical measurement of 
the area is always done before execution of the sale deed and in this process; 
minor changes had come to the notice of NTC. Considering the fact that 
Company has sold 1347 acre of land, this measurement difference is 
negligible.  The Company got more value realized by the above proces s in 
respect of these 3.06 acres of land.  Approval was obtained from BIFR.” 
When asked whether any initiatives for formulation of any guidelines for sale 
of such land and buildings not covered in the revival schemes of BIFR/GOI  has now 
been undertaken, NTC stated as under: 
 
“No sale of land and buildings beyond the purview of revival plan approved by 
BIFR/GOI is being done by NTC.”  
  

20 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
SYSTEM OF VALUATION OF PROPERTIES AND FIXATION OF RESERVE PRICE 
 
Audit scrutiny reveal ed that a ccording to the methodology for fixation of 
reserve price devised (November, 2002) by the Company, reserve price was to be 
determined on the basis of average of three valuations, namely, valuation in Draft 
Revival Scheme (DRS) approved by BIFR, valuations given by property consultants 
and valuation by Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT).  The GOI further directed 
(November, 2004) that in case of Mumbai, where marketing consultants (consultants) 
had quoted Minimum Assured Returns (MAR), the reserve price should not be less 
than MAR.  It was, however, observed in Audit (April, 2008) that out of 79 cases of 
sale of land, only in 27 cases all the three valuation factors were considered.  In 37 
cases either two or only one valuation factors were considered while in 15 ca ses 
none of the prescribed valuation factors were considered while fixing the reserve 
price.  Further, in 26 cases out of 79 cases, reserve price fixed was less than 30 per 
cent of the sale value though the GOI had specifically directed (April 2005) that 
reserve price should be nearer to the market value.  It was also noticed that there 
was wide variation between the actual sale value and valuation done under the three 
factors used for reserve price fixation. 
 
Commenting upon the Audit observation, NTC in a written reply stated that: 
“It has been evolutionary process as regards the fixation of Reserve Price 
(RP) mainly in respect of land sale.  Originally the RP was determined on the 
basis of the highest value from among the three values of 
registration/CBDT/CPWD valuation.  Subsequently, since the response to the 
Company‟s efforts for sale of land by applying the above formula was not 
encouraging, it was decided that the RP shall be average value of three 
valuations, viz., CBDT/Draft Rehabil itation Scheme Valuation and Property 
Consultant valuation. This system of averaging three valuations created a 
criticism as it is possible to have a wide variation between one value and the 
other value and the gap between the lowest and the highest is alw ays 
neutralized by averaging the RP.  Again Company has stabilized the system 
for arriving at the RP by having the collectors guidelines rates and three 
independent valuations from the Govt. approved registered valuers; the 
highest of the four being the RP .  In any case, the RP is only an indicative 
figure for the ASC to decide whether the price bid quoted is the RP or above 
the RP and whether the Committee can confirm the sale.  We have found from 
our experience that irrespective of the RP, it is always th e market forces that 
governs the price bid.  For example in Mumbai for the sale of 5 properties, 
NTC got even as per analysis 180% to 350% increase though the RP was 
much lower because of its location and the demand of the property.  Thus, the 
RP and the price bid has no relation.  In case of no response or the response 
is less than the RP in repeated three attempts of public tender, the only option 
available with the Company is to confirm the sale for the value that is quoted 
which is the best available offer in the market at that point of time.  There is no 
point in repeating tender indefinitely not knowing the market response. 
 
It is a fact that the real estate market in this country was at its peak 
from January, 2005 to March, 2008, and it had started fa lling again from April 
2008 onwards.  There are many factors which are influencing the real estate 

21 
 
market in the country.  It may also be noted that NTC has always been arriving 
at the RP for its land on the basis of the collectors guidelines rates which i s 
always for a developed property for residential use.  In fact, The entire land of 
NTC was having industrial land use.  It was an attempt on the part of the 
Company to see whether it gets the best possible prices, above the RP 
calculated on the basis of a bove principle because most of the properties are 
situated in cities and the industrial use was there long back. Today, the land 
use depends on the Master Plan of the city and the use of land in the vicinity.  
There was no case for NTC to fix the lower RP.   It is only hypothetical to say 
that NTC fixed the RP lower, the criteria prescribed by the Company.  The 
criteria was fixed and approved by a duly constituted broad based ASC and 
improved on the basis of NTC‟s experience in the sale of land……..” 
 
According to Audit, the following deficiencies in different factors used for fixing 
reserve price were noticed: 
 
A  DRS Valuation:  
In 66 cases of sale of land through tender, valuation in DRS was made up to 
2002 whereas the sales were made between April 2002 and  March 2008.  
This had resulted in fixation of lower reserve price due to timing difference 
between the date of valuation in DRS and the date of fixation of reserve price. 
B  MAR Valuation:  
The Company had no system of vetting valuation reports and MAR gi ven by 
the consultants.  Further, the Company had obtained MAR for five land 
parcels only (sold up to March, 2008) against the 25 land parcels identified for 
sale in Mumbai.  While quoting MAR for these five parcels, the consultants 
had stated (February 20 05) that it was not a valuation of the property and the 
Company may take a conscious decision to fix reserve price on the basis of 
valuation of the property or on the basis of MAR. A comparative position of 
MAR vis -à-vis reserve price fixed and actual sale  value in the five cases is 
given below: 
 
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
mill 
Highest 
MAR 
quoted by 
consultant 
Valuation 
of 
building 
structures 
Reserve 
price 
fixed 
Sale 
value 
Variance 
between MAR 
and sale value 
(percentage) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
(Col 6-Col 
3)/Col 3 x100 
1 Jupiter Mill 142.32 12.22 155.00 276.60 94.35 
2 Elphinston 
Mill 
120.00 3.51 125.00 441.75 268.12 
3 Kohinoor Mill 
No.3 
111.00 1.15 120.00 421.00 279.28 
4 Mumbai 
Textile Mill 
260.00 5.28 270.00 702.22 170.08 
5 Apollo Textile 
Mill 
 
90.00 5.99 100.00 180.00 100.00 

22 
 
 Total 723.32 28.15 770.00 2021.57 179.49 
 
It was also observed in the Audit that the variation between sales value 
realised and MAR quoted by the consultants ranged between 94.35 per cent 
and 279.28 per cent.  The purpose of obtaining MAR was not achieved as it 
did not give the realistic market value of the land parcels being offered for 
sale. 
 
C  CBDT Valuation:  
CBDT valuation of 1994 -95 was considered and in one case valuation of 
1998-99 was considered for fixation of reser ve price during April 2002 to 
March, 2008.  The CBDT valuation was not indexed (based on capital gain 
index of CBDT) to the year of fixation of reserve price for arriving at realistic 
value. 
 
Responding to aforesaid audit observations, NTC stated: 
 
 DRS valuation 
“Even the valuations carried out by the Govt. of India valuers show large 
variations between lowest and highest points due to subjectivity of the valuers.  
As such the process is to be seen.  Reserve Price is not really effective as the 
market forces drive the sale.  DRS valuation was a core valuation mentioned 
in the Scheme.  It was the only reason for taking into account as the 
Benchmark.”   
 
MAR valuation  
“MAR valuation was carried out by the Company when there was a proposal 
for exploring the  possibility of joint venture with the private partners in 2004.  
The consultants chosen were internationally acclaimed Real Estate Authority 
namely Knight Frank, Salmaan.  These consultants submitted the approximate 
returns for the mills properties within  minimum assured returns.  In the 
meantime, the Govt. of Maharashtra permitted the Company to sell of 5 of its 
mills land in Mumbai and the Government did not consider the JV proposals 
and opted to dispose of these properties through public tender process.  Since 
the MAR was available at the time of fixation of Reserve Price, it was added in 
the guidelines by the Competent Authority i.e. Ministry of Textiles that the 
Reserve Price should not be in any case below the MAR. MoT‟s O.M. No. 
18021/6/2002-NTC dated 5.11.2004.  As per para 2(b) of OM, it is stated that 
“in case of properties in Mumbai, where Marketing Consultants have quoted a 
Minimum Assured Return (MAR), the reserve price shall not be less than the 
quoted MAR”.  It was subsequently ratified in O.M . No. 18021/6/2002 -NTC 
dated 7.1.2005 of MOT.  As per contents of O.M. “for selling the lands of NTC 
mills in Mumbai, Reserve Price should not be less than the highest MAR 
quoted by the Consultants, provided that it is above the latest prevailing circle 
rates/registration rates”. While arriving at the Reserve Price, it was noticed  
that among the available valuations of the mills land from CBDT, Real Estate 
consultants, stamp duty ready reckoner rate, the MAR value was above all of 
these values and hence AS C decided to fix the Reserve Price on the basis of 
MAR.  Mumbai is the strongest Real Estate market in the country.  MAR was 
arrived by best International Real Estate consultants who are considered to be 

23 
 
the authority on the Real Estate.  There is no reaso n NTC could question their 
wisdom.  Response, as already stated above, is by the market only.” 
 
CBDT valuation,  
“CBDT was not ready to take up the valuation and hence the approved valuers 
valuation was adopted. In most of the cases the approved valuers we re also 
approved valuers of CBDT.” 
It was observed in audit that out of 66 cases of sale of land through tender, 
CBDT valuation was considered in 22 cases only and even this valuation was not 
indexed to the year of fixation of reserve prices for arriving a t realistic value.  NTC in 
reply stated that CBDT valuation was done only in 1997 and subsequently CBDT 
was not willing for any valuation.  In this regard, during evidence the CMD, NTC 
reiterated as under: 
“I have gone through the records of the Company and  I have found that 
CBDT was involved in the valuation of land once in 1995 -96 period. After that 
when the Company approached them, they have not agreed.”” 
  
On being enquired as to when CBDT actually expressed  their unwillingness 
for undertaking any valuation for the properties being offered for sale by NTC and 
asked to produce a documentary evidence to substantiate its claim, the NTC replied 
as under: 
 
 “NTC does not have any documentary evidence portraying unwillingness by 
CBDT for undertaking valuation of properties being offered for sale” 
 
The Committee enquired whether the Company does  not feel that the 
valuation by CBDT should be obtained in all cases for the purposes of fixation of 
reserve price particula rly when they have a Valuation Cell for the purpose .  In its 
reply, NTC stated: 
 
“The BIFR in their guidelines of the approved scheme did not suggest for a 
CBDT valuation, hence CBDT has generally not been associated.  Further, a 
review is under consideration on the policy on sale of surplus assets in respect 
of fixing of reserve price, to broad base the technical inputs and bring in 
increased transparency in the system.  The policy has been considered by the 
Board of NTC on 18.11.2009.” 
 
On being asked w hether any steps were contemplated to obtain inputs for 
determining reserve price of properties put on sale by NTC from the Government 
agencies like CBDT and CPWD which have expertise in valuation of land/properties , 
the  Company stated: 
 
“The BIFR in their guidelines of the approved scheme did not suggest for a 
CBDT valuation, hence CBDT has generally not been associated.” 
 
In reply to  a pointed question w hy CBDT valuation was stated to have been 
taken into consideration during the year 199 7 when BIFR guidelines on the subject 
matter were not in existence, the Ministry stated as under: 
 

24 
 
“The Company was responsible for sale of assets to finance its revival. The 
valuation by CBDT had been got done by the company in the absence of BIFR 
guidelines” 
Audit pointed out that the guidelines for system of valuation of properties and 
fixation of reserve price were not followed in a number of cases.  In its reply, the NTC 
stated that the Company has stabilized the system for arriving at the reserve pric e by 
having the collectors‟ guidelines rates and three independent valuations from the 
Govt. registered valuers. 
 
On being enquired w hen the system of valuations was  stabilized by the 
Company, the Company replied as under: 
 
“To begin with the sale of assets, NTC followed one system w.e.f. 2002.  
Based on observation given by audit , NTC revised the system and have been 
using to fix the reserve price on the basis of highest amongst the circle rate 
and valuations done by three government approved valuers.” 
 
In reply to a query w hether reserve prices are presently being fixed for all the 
properties as per revised system of valuation, NTC replied as under: 
 
“Yes. NTC has been fixing the reserve price on the basis of “highest of all the 
valuation” in all the cases w.e.f. 27.1.2007.” 
 
When further asked w hether this revised system of valuation has been 
approved by Board of Directors/Asset Sale Committee, NTC stated: 
 
“The Board of Directors of NTC has approved the system for valuation of 
surplus land in their meeting held on 18.11.2009.”  
 When asked whether any professional help in valuation of sale of surplus 
property of NTC was obtained, NTC in their post evidence reply furnished the 
information as under: 
 
“With a view to bring profe ssional help in valuation of sale of surplus property 
of NTC and to plan the process in a time frame, on the advice of Ministry, five 
property consultants were appointed on 13.02.2002 for evaluation and 
providing assistance in the sale of properties.  Out of 97 properties entrusted 
for evaluation, all the five consultants together completed valuation in 69 
cases and the balance 28 assignments were cancelled as the work was not 
completed in time.  In fact, none of the consultants actually assisted the 
Company in sale of land.” 
 
When asked to clarify whether any proposal is now under consideration for 
seeking assistance of Government or profess ional agencies for this purpose, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 
“NTC has  sought the assistance of professional consultants i.e. M/s. Jones 
Lang Lasalle Meghraj in case of going for sale of Finlay Mills land.  At the 
moment, Government is considering re -constitution of Asset Sale Committee 
by including a senior representative o f Finance.  NTC will be advised to seek 
assistance of CPWD and other professional agencies.” 

25 
 
 
Asked whether the Ministry feel that the revised system of valuation now put in 
place would result in optimum realization of revenue to the advantage of the 
company in a transparent manner without involvement of Government agencies like 
CBDT and CPWD, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
 “The valuation being done as per the revised system approved by the Board 
of Directors on 18.11.2009 is expected to give the optimum realization of 
revenue. The BIFR in their guidelines of the approved scheme did not suggest 
for a CBDT valuation, hence CBDT has generally not been associated.  
However, the p ossibility of getting the services of CBDT/ CPWD will be 
explored, if it is felt that their participation would really result in enhanced 
realization from sale of surplus assets.” 
 
When asked whether any initiative has been taken or proposed to be taken to 
ensure that the guidelines for determining the reserve price are strictly followed, NTC  
in a written note stated as under: 
 
“NTC has been very regular in following the guidelines issued by BIFR/Govt. 
of India in respect of fixation of reserve price.  In ex ceptional cases, where 
sale of property could not be implemented even after 4 -5 attempts, based on 
unanimous decision taken by ASC, it revisited the reserve price which was the 
only option to implement the sale and continue the revival process.  However, 
a policy (wherein all the guidelines have been incorporated) on sale of surplus 
assets i.e. land, building etc. is under finalization in the Ministry of Textiles.”   
 
 On being asked to specify the compelling need for finalization of a new policy 
on sale of surplus assets of NTC in the Ministry of Textiles and in what manner the 
new policy will be an improvement over the existing g uidelines on the subject matter, 
Ministry in their submission stated as under: 
“Ministry of Textiles desired to have a review on the policy on sale of surplus 
assets in respect of fixing of reserve price to broad base the technical inputs 
and bring in increased transparency in the system.  This is also in view of the 
observations made by C&AG. The policy was framed and placed before the 
Board of NTC, who considered the same on 18.11.2009.  This policy will then 
be considered for approval by the Ministry.”  
 
 On being further asked w hether the new policy on sale of surplus assets has 
since been finalized by the Ministry, the Ministry stated as under: 
“No.  The Ministry would examine the policy as approved by the Board when it 
receives it.” 
. 
As regards the salient features of the new policy on sale of assets, the Ministry 
furnished the following information: 
 
“It may be stated that sale of land and assets is being undertaken by the 
company in accordance with the decision of Asset Sale Committee constituted 
as per BIFR directions, and instructions issued by the Government. However, 
issues regarding fixation of re serve price and sale at less than reserve price 
were observed in the performance audit of C&AG which necessitated a review 

26 
 
of the existing system, and formulation of a comprehensive policy for sale of 
assets to make it more broad-based. 
 
Salient features o f the new policy on sale of assets are placed at 
Annexure-I which are under consideration.  Subsequent suggestion such as 
involvement of CBDT, CPWD etc would be examined keeping in view the 
requirements. The improvements over the existing system are  self evident as 
assessment of valuation, fixation of reserve price etc. are more board based.  
This does not exist in the present system.  In fact the policy being considered 
is quite comprehensive.”   
Realization from sale of NTC properties in Mumbai and Delhi  
 
Attention of the Committee was drawn to a report that NTC sold a piece of 
land in Delhi at Rs.2.5 crore per acre at a time when the market price was Rs.30.42 
crore per acre according to the DDA.  When asked to furnish comment in the matter, 
the Ministry clarified as under: 
 
“NTC has informed that they sold 4.54 acre of land of Ajudhia Textile Mills, 
Azadpur, Delhi.  The 4.54 acre area of the property was sold at Rs.67.01 
crore in Februar y, 2005 in 3 rd attempt.  The sale rate of this land comes to 
Rs.14.76 crore per acre; in other words, Rs.36,462 per sq. Mtr.  As per 
………. letter No. PS/Dir.(RL)/ DDA/2004/15 dated 23.1.2004  
………………………….. received from Shri D.P.Dwivedi, Director (RL), Delhi  
Development Authority addressed to Shri Sudhir Bhargava, CMD, NTC, the 
prevalent DDA rate of the land at that point of time in the nearby residential 
colony (Shalimar Bagh) was Rs. 22,000 per sq. Mtr. It may be observed that 
the rate fetched by the above sale to the company were about 1.5 times of 
the DDA rates.  (The company has no comments on the authenticity of the 
market price of Rs. 30.42 crore per acre).  Needless to mention that the rates 
of Rs. 22000/ - per sq. Mtr. were for developed residential pl ot in a 
comparatively better locality (Shalimar Bagh), whereas land of Ajudhia Textile 
Mill was undeveloped industrial and encroachment prone.  It would, therefore, 
be seen that the realisation of land -value by NTC was 1.5 times more than 
that of developed residential area.” 
  
The Committee also pointed out that in Mumbai, the sale realization of NTC 
was Rs.42.78 crore per acre against the reported market price realization of Rs.87.12 
crore per acre which resulted in lower realization of approximately Rs.2400 crore less 
than the amount that should have been realized for 54 acres.  
 
When sought clarification, the NTC submitted that 
“We are not aware of any private land sale during the period February to July, 
2005, which fetched more value per acre in Mumbai city.” 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
SYSTEM OF VALUATION OF BUILDING STRUCTURES / MATERIALS 
 
According to Audit, no uniform system for fixation of reserve price of buildings 
as adopted.  As per the information furnished to the Audit, the Ministry stated that 
most of the buildings are in a dilapidated condition and have to be disposed off at the 
salvage value so that the land can also be sold. 
 
In response  to a question about evolution of any system to determine the 
reserve price of buildings for sale, NTC in a written note stated as under: 
 
 “By and large NTC has taken over very old sick mills having dilapidated 
structures.  Only the salvage value of the retrievable material from the debris 
has been taken into account which was valued by various approved agencies 
including M/s. Handicon promoted by IDBI, IFCI and other companies etc.  
The overall sale for building salvage material till date has been to the tune of 
Rs.77.10 crores for 44 structures out of the total asset sale of Rs. 4063.33 
crores.  The reserve price is fixed on the basis of such valuations and sale is 
finalized after inviting open tenders.” 
 
On being asked w hether any system to determine reserve price of the 
buildings for sale is under consideration, NTC stated in a written note that: 
 
 “There is no proposal to change the existing practice of valuations of disposal 
of old buildings and fixation of the reserve price.” 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER - VI 
 
DEFECTS IN THE TENDER DOCUMENTS 
 
It was observed in Audit that in the tender documents issued for sale of land 
and buildings, the information disclosed was either incorrect or ambiguous or vital 
information was not disclosed.  Further, the Company had not established any 
system for verifi cation of the contents of the tender documents.  Consequently, the 
Company had suffered a loss of Rs.185.10 crores in the following three cases: 
 
Mumbai Textile Mills, Mumbai : The tender document for sale of land of 
Mumbai Textile Mill stated (June 2005) that the mill area consisting of 67,293.17 
square metre bearing Cadastral Survey (CS) No.464 and 4/464 was offered for sale. 
The mill plot consisted of only CS No.464 admeasuring 65,993.17 square metre. The 
CS No.4/464 admeasuring 1,300 square metre consis ted of Marwari chowka chawl. 
The land was sold for Rs.702.22 crore (July 2005).  It was observed in Audit that the 
Company had no intention for sale of the land of Marwari chowka chawl (CS 
No.4/464). It was wrongly included in the tender document.  This wa s evident from 
the fact that in the layout map enclosed with the tender document, only mill land (CS 
No.464) was depicted. Also, in the terms and conditions of the tender document 
there was no mention of providing alternative accommodation to the occupants  of 
Marwari chowka chawl as per Development Control Regulations for Greater Bombay, 
1991. Further, the sale deed (October 2005) and the possession letter specified the 
boundaries of the land sold which did not include area of Marwari chowka chawl.  In 
September 2006, the purchaser asked for possession of Marwari chowka chawl (CS 
No.4/464) also since it was included in the tender document. The ASC accepted the 
fact (October 2006) that this parcel of land of 1,300 square metre was wrongly 
included in the tend er document but decided to rehabilitate the occupants of the 
chawl to another plot of land. The possession and ownership of 1,300 square metre 
of land worth Rs.13.56 crore was given to the private party without any consideration 
besides the liability of ab out Rs.5.23 crore to rehabilitate 24 occupants of chawl was 
owned by the Company. This had resulted in loss of Rs.18.79 crore to the Company. 
 
Apollo Textile Mill, Mumbai : Surplus land on rear side of Apollo Textile Mill 
admeasuring 30073.30 square metre with existing structures and permissible FSI of 
39314.58 square metre was sold in July 2005 to the highest bidder at Rs.180 crore. 
This portion did not have direct access to  the main road (N.M. Joshi Marg). Tender 
document did not disclose about any prospective access to the main road. Instead, it 
was specified in the tender document that access to Jivraj Boricha Marg (small road 
on rear side) could be made available. The Jiv raj Boricha Marg was heavily 
encroached and was not motorable. It was observed in Audit that ASC had allowed 
(October 2006) access of 40 foot approach road to the main road (N.M. Joshi Marg). 
This had enhanced the value of land (October 2007) to Rs.1,05,44 8 per square 
metre (based on the valuation done by government approved valuer after the access 
to the main road was allowed) from Rs.45,784.54 per square metre. Normal 
enhancement due to timing difference (the Company charged SBI PLR plus four per 
cent per annum for timing difference) worked out to Rs.16,535.09 per square metre, 
the abnormal enhancement due to access to the main road (not disclosed in the 
tender document) worked out to Rs.43,128.37 per square metre. Thus, by not 
disclosing the feasibility o f access to the main road (which was allowed later on) in 
the tender document, the Company had received lesser amount in tendered bids. 

29 
 
This had resulted in loss of Rs.165.80 crore after deducting consideration received 
for right to access to main road. 
 
Chalisgaon Textile Mill, Chalisgaon : Six plots of land of Chalisgaon Textile 
Mill were sold (December 2002) to the highest bidder at the negotiated price of 
Rs.3.34 crore. The purchaser did not pay second and final instalment of Rs.2.50 
crore which was due in January 2003 on the plea that in the tender document the 
Company had wrongly mentioned the land to be in residential zone though it was in 
industrial zone. The purchaser asked (February 2003) for extension for payment till 
industrial zone was converted into residential Zone. The Company decided (July 
2003) that purchaser may be permitted to make payment without interest after 
change of zone. The payment was received in August 2004. Further, it was decided 
to retain one plot due to resistance from local p eople and after adjusting the amount 
receivable for that plot, the net receivable was worked out to Rs.1.90 crore. Thus, 
incorrect information in tender document resulted in delay in receipt of sale proceeds 
amounting to Rs.1.90 crore for 18 months for whi ch no interest was recovered. The 
Company lost interest of Rs.51 lakh calculated on the basis of 18 per cent per annum 
for the period from 13 February 2003 to 21 August 2004. 
 
When asked to give its comments on the audit observation in each of the 
cases stated above, the Company furnished the following information:  
 
 “Details of land of Mumbai Textile Mills identified for sale in revival scheme 
approved by BIFR are as under :- 
 
Description of land                         CS No.                       Acres 
 
Inside mills land                                 464                            16.30 
Marwari Chowka Chawl                     4/64                             0.32 
Mathura Land                                     29                               7.21 
Total                                                                                     23.83 
 
Out of above land 16.62 acre land was in Mumbai and 7.21 acre is in 
U.P. (Mathura).  It may be observed that in the tender published for sale of 
land, we mentioned both the land of the mill situated in Mumbai with a total 
area of 67293.17 sq. Mtrs. (16.62 acres) along with its CS No. 464 and 4/64 
as the same was identified for sale under BIFR Scheme. It is submitted that 
sale of the property takes places in  the form of a contract which requires an 
offer and an acceptance, the offer by the company is for 67293.17 sq. mtrs. 
area and the bidder has quoted  for that area.  It is true that .32 acres (1300 
sq. mtrs.) covered for chawl was included for sale.  Howev er, while publishing 
the lay out plan the fact that land of 1300 sq.mtr. (.32 acre) was occupied by 
chawl has not appeared due to mistake.    Anyway the purchaser has quoted 
the price for tender and as an H -1 bidder executed the sale deed without any 
objection.  As the sale of entire land has been concluded the company has not 
suffered any loss.  The above mistake of non -disclosure of Marwari Chowka 
Chawl has thus not been liable for any loss to the Company. 
As regards Apollo Textile Mill, it is stated  that Apollo Textile Mill, 
Mumbai is one of the mill identified for revival.  What was sold was the surplus 
land of this mill.  This land had no access.  The textile activities situated at the 
rear side of the Apollo textile Mills were closed and the land was d eclared as 

30 
 
surplus and incorporated in the BIFR Scheme for sale.  As such there was no 
access road available to the rear side of the mills.  Thereafter, the land was 
included in the Integrated Development Scheme submitted to MCGM and as 
per DC Regulation a n access of 30‟ road is required for development of land.  
During inspection, MCGM officials requested NTC to make available the 
access road through Shree Sitaram Mill land adjoining to Apollo Mills 
compound.  Since there was no alternative, an access thro ugh the rear side of 
Apollo Mills was made available to obtain approval from the MCGM and the 
same was incorporated in the tender document.  The sale deed was also 
signed by General Manager of Sri Sitaram Mills for giving access through their 
land.  NTC al so received the highest consideration of Rs. 180 crores as 
against the reserve price of Rs. 100 crores. Hence there is no loss to the 
company.  As informed earlier that in subsequent developments after sale of 
land of 5 mills and during the meetings with t he Hon‟ble CM of Government of 
Maharashtra and other officials, it was emphasised that NTC should appoint 
Architects/City Planner to carry out Traffic Impact Study of Road Network and 
Studies on Civic Infrastructure of all the mills and submit the same to State 
Government for implementation till the time no fresh permissions for sale of 
mill land shall be released.  Since it was a later development, it cannot be 
construed non-disclosure of vital information in the tender.    According to DC 
regulations, NTC  is under statutory obligation to construct the road as per 
norms and specifications and thus it hand over the same to MCGM for public 
purpose. Further the Company has realised Rs.180 crores as against the 
reserve price of Rs.100 crores in the sale through  the tender.  Hence the 
company has not suffered any loss in the transaction. 
 
In response to the audit observation regarding Chalisgaon Textile Mill, 
Chalisgaon, it is submitted that the State Government/local Municipal 
authorities were reluctant to grant  approvals for change of zone.  The Revival 
Scheme sanctioned by BIFR in 2002 and the NTC was in financial crunches 
during that period, hence it was decided to sell the land of upcountry mills on 
“as is where is” basis for survival of the company and accor dingly the tenders 
were floated for sale of land before obtaining change of zone.  The highest 
bidder requested that he may be permitted to make the balance payment after 
obtaining necessary permissions from State Government for change of zone.  
The charges/expenses required for the process had also been incurred by the 
purchaser for change of zone.  The ASC considered the request of purchaser 
and allowed them to make the payment after receipt of change of zone.” 
 
To a pointed question as to w hy approach road was not included in the tender 
for sale of Apollo Mills, the Company in a post evidence reply explained: 
 
“Originally the property was tendered in 2005 giving all the particulars known 
to the Company.  Later on, in 2006, a provision for road was made.  The 
provision for road required as per the town planning was a later development 
in 2006.  Hence, it cannot be presumed as deficiency in tender document.” 
 
During the evidence in respect of Apollo Textile Mills, the Committee observed 
that the land was sold at Rs.180 crore but the tender document did not disclose 
details of access to the main road on account of which the difference of price was 
almost 50%.  The land was actually sold for Rs.45 784 per sq. mtr and after it was 

31 
 
disclosed that it has an access from the main road, price realized was Rs.1,05,448 
per sq. mtr. This has resulted in loss to NTC of Rs.165.80 crore. 
 
  In the post-evidence reply, the Company stated as under: 
 
“It was indicated in the meeting that the proper location of the property 
advertised by the NTC, particularly Apollo Mills, was not indicated in the 
tender.  I am enclosing a copy of the tender notice.  Tender for sale of part of 
the land admeasuring 30073.30 sq. mtrs, along with existing  structures was 
issued on 18/19.05.2005.  The layout plan was approved by Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) under Integrated Development 
Scheme (IDS) and the Floor Space Index (FSI) sanctioned was 39314.58 sq. 
mtrs.  The location of the property given in the tender under Clause 1.2 is :- 
 
 
Land Marks Distance Travel time 
(minutes) 
Lower Parel Railway Station 1.00 KMs 15 minutes 
Chinchpokli Railway Station 0.50 KMs 10 minutes 
N.M. Joshi Marg (Delisle Road) 100 mtrs. 05 minutes 
Sat Rasta Circle 0.50 KMs 10 minutes 
 
Under Clause of existing position 1.3, further details given are as under :- 
 
The rear part of the mill stands closed by order number L -51016/5-12/2004-
IR(PG) dated 16 -03-2004 of the Deputy Director, Ministry of Labour, 
Government of India, under Section 25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.  
The sub-division of the land shall be got demarcated by the DILR in presence 
of both the parties (as per condition number 21 of MCGM permission).  At 
present, the mill is divided into two parts and the western part adjacent to Jivraj 
Boricha Marg is under sale.  An access could be made available through 
outside land of Sitaram Mills belonging to NTC (MN) Ltd. to Jivraj Boricha 
Marg.  All the machineries in the surplus area of th e mills are in process of 
sale/disposal other than the retained machineries which are being shifted to 
sister units shortly: the surplus employees have opted for MVRS. 
 
In addition, a tender document was also supported with layout plan of the 
land. ASC had fixed reserve price of this property at Rs.100 crores with EMD 
of Rs.10 crores after considering highest of the valuation done by CBDT in 
(1994) valuation given in the draft rehabilitation scheme, Real Estate 
Consultants (REC) reports, ready reckoner rates and MAR given by marketing 
consultants. Total 50 tenders were sold.  Three bids were received on due 
date, 20 th June, 2005.  Highest bid was of Rs.180 crores. ASC approved the 
offer of the highest bid of Rs.180 crores at its 13 th meeting held on 5 th July, 
2005. 
 
When asked w hether any standard tender form was prescribed to avoid 
defects in tender documents issued for sale of land and buildings , the Corporation 
has informed the Committee in a written reply that: 
 

32 
 
 “Tender form was standardised which had been vetted by the legal experts in 
respect of terms and conditions. Company has been taking maximum care to 
provide all the information in the tender document.  In addition in respect of 
major properties, pre bid meeting is also held with the prospective buyers to 
clarify the doubts so that the defects if any in the tender documents could be 
avoided.  As per practice, the tender documents were vetted by the officials 
concerned and the map is certified by the engineer in respect of the survey 
numbers, areas  locations etc.  In fact, Company is taking maximum care to 
avoid any defects in the tender documents giving all the information as 
required in the standard tender form in addition to the any information specific 
to the particular property.” 
 
On being aske d how the Company explain s their failure to establish a proper 
system for verification of all the facts included in  tender documents which ultimately 
proved detrimental to the financial interest of the company , the Company stated as 
follows:  
 
“NTC was dealing with the textile had no expertise of sale of land.  It has 
resorted to execute sale of assets only to implement the Revival Scheme 
approved by the BIFR.  Defects in the tender document have occurred due to 
inadequacy of the system.  However, NTC is now strengthening the system by 
framing the Asset Sale Policy approved by the Board.” 
 
On being enquired why t he right to reject or accept clause inherent in the 
tender was not exercised if the price  was lower than the reserve price , NTC in its 
reply stated as under: 
 
“It has been the experience of NTC that in a few cases, even after repeated 
tender, the Company was not able to get the reserve price.  The first case was 
in 2005, which was referred to the Ministry for a decision when the Ministry 
advised vide its letters dated 29.04.2005 and 12.05.2005 that ASC should do 
this.  Accordingly, the Company, instead of keeping the property idle with the 
chances of encroachment, analysed the responses received and wherever it 
found that the price received is the b est possible in the then market scenario, 
it was sold at that price.  Such cases are very few.” 
 
In reply to a question whether any initiatives have  now been taken to avoid 
such defects in the tender documents, NTC replied: 
 
 “Steps have been taken by NTC to review the suggestions given by the Audit 
for improvement in the existing system.” 
 
In reply to a specific query w hether any responsibility for defects in tender 
documents as pointed in audit, has been fixed against the erring officials/consultants 
by the Government, NTC stated: 
 
“NTC has improved the implementation process of sale of assets in the 
company on the basis of past experience and the recommendations made by 
the Audit.” 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
WEAKNESSES IN INTERNAL CONTROLS OF ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 
 
According to Audit, the Company did not have any Control Register to monitor 
the receipt and deposit of Demand Drafts (DDs)/Pay Orders (Pos) received as 
Earnest Money Deposit (EMD).  The DDs/Pos received with the tenders were kept in 
Technical Division and  DDs/Pos of unsuccessful bidders were returned in original 
without knowledge of Finance Division. 
 
When asked about the reasons for non-maintenance of any control register to 
monitor the receipt and deposit of demand drafts/Pos received as EMD , NTC in a 
note stated: 
 “Respective departments of the units in NTC maintained a record for having 
received the EMD from the tenderers.  They used to return the EMD of the 
unsuccessful tenderers‟ same day and keep the EMD of successful bidder 
with the company. This was done as per the request of all the tenderers to 
refund the deposit if they were not successful except the highest tenderer.  In 
order to have more response this system was adopted.” 
 
In response to a question about the measures proposed to be taken by the 
Company to strengthen the intern al control in accounting system, NTC stated in a 
written reply as under: 
 
“The Company and its units would maintain the control register to monitor the 
receipts of the Demand Drafts/Pay Orders received and deposited EMD in 
coordination with the Finance Division.” 
 
When desired to know w hether any system for accounting demand 
drafts/postal orders received from tenderers has since been introduced by the 
Company, NTC replied in affirmative as under: 
 
 “Yes.”  
  

34 
 
CHAPTER - VIII 
 
SALE BELOW REGISTRATION RATES AND RESERVE PRICE 
 
It was observed in Audit that t he GOI directed (November 2004) that the 
reserve price fixed (or re -fixed) for any property should not be less than the circle 
rates/registration rates fixed by the District Collector. It was observed in Audit (April 
2008) that in contravention of the GOI directions; sale was made below the prevailing 
registration rates in the following cases.  
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
Name of the mill 
Valuation 
as per 
registration 
rates 
Reserve 
price fixed 
by the 
Company 
Actual 
Sale price 
 
Loss 
1 Edward Mill 10.55 4.00 5.85 4.70 
2 Shree Bijay Cotton 
Mill 
3.79 1.92 1.95 1.84 
3 Jahangir Textile Mill 26.83 25.00 25.00 1.83 
4 Coimbatore Murugan 
Mill 
3.04 1.73 1.89 1.15 
5 Kishnaveni Textile 
Mill 
5.50 4.80 5.20 0.30 
6 Sri Rangavilas Mill 
 
8.61 3.33 8.00 0.61 
 Total 10.43 
 
The Company lost an opportunity to earn Rs.10.43 crore due to fixing reserve 
price and sale below the prevailing registration rates. 
 
As per the latest information submitted by the Ministry to Audit, the sale was 
effected below the circle rates due to the non -receipt of any response despite 
repeated tenders issued by the Company. 
 
In reply to a clarification sought by the Committee for any exemption obtained 
by NTC from GOI for sale of properties below prevailing registrat ion rates in all such 
cases, NTC informed the Committee that: 
 
“First time when a sale was considered by the Asset Sale Committee, it was 
decided to refer the matter to the Ministry of Textiles for their approval.  The 
Ministry vide their letter  No18021/6 /2002-NTC dated 29.4.2005 authorized 
ASC to take a decision on the reserve price, keeping it as close to the market 
value as possible, considering therein the net usable area and the stamp duty 
rate in the vicinity for the related land use. After  repeated attempts if a 
property has not taken for the reserve price fixed by the company, the 
Company cannot indefinitely keep on re -tendering and has come to the 
conclusion that the market has shown the best price for the property.   
Therefore, there was a felt ne ed for the company to re -fix the reserve price 
and dispose of the property.  The company has to fix the realistic reserve price 
after making the few attempts.  It is very relevant to point out that NTC has 
always been fixing the reserve price on the basis of developed residential 
used property while in fact the property the property was for „industrial‟ use.    

35 
 
The company has been making earnest efforts to sell its assets and wherever 
it does not succeed it used to re -fix the reserve price for disposal of the 
property.” 
 
When asked about the steps taken by the Company to ensure adherence to 
GOI guidelines for fixation of reserve price at par or above the registration rates, NTC 
in a written reply has stated that: 
 
“GOI is reviewing the guidelines for fixation of the reserve price with a view to 
refining and improving the system and achieve optimum realization from sale 
of assets.”   
 
Sale below Reserve Price 
 
According to Audit, the GOI directed (November 2004) that no sale should be 
confirmed where th e highest bid falls below the reserve price. In all such cases, the 
tenders should be called again. It was observed in Audit that in contravention of the 
GOI directions, sale was made below the reserve price. This could be seen from the 
sale of building of  Om Parasakthi Mills, Kishnaveni Textile Mills and Somasundaram 
Mill.  The reserve price for demolition of the buildings of Om Parasakthi Mills, 
Kishnaveni Textile Mills and Somasundaram Mill and carting away of debris was 
fixed (April 2003) for Rs.54 lakh , Rs.46 lakh and Rs.90 lakh respectively based on 
the highest of the salvage value (as per valuation done by government approved 
valuer), six per cent of the cost of replacement as assessed by the said valuer and 
Rs.40 per square foot. The highest offers received (June 2003) was Rs.28.25 lakh for 
Om Parasakthi Mills, Rs.25.20 lakh for Kishnaveni Textile Mills and Rs.52.20 lakh for 
Somasundaram Mill. Though the bids were lower than the reserve price the ASC 
approved (June 2003) the sale resulting in loss of potential revenue of Rs.84.35 lakh. 
The ASC had justified its decision stating that value arrived based on six per cent of 
the cost of replacement would be appropriate for comparison and bids received were 
more than that criteria. The contention of ASC was  not in conformity with the GOI 
directions. 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER - IX 
 
SALE WITHOUT FOLLOWING TENDER PROCESS 
 
As per BIFR guidelines, sale of assets was to be affected by way of public 
tender.  The Audit, however, pointed out that in 11 cases, the sale was made without 
following the tender process. 
 
Explaining the reasons for not resorting to public tendering in all the cases to 
fetch the maximum value in a transparent and competitive manner, NTC in a written 
reply submitted as under: - 
 
“Company could not resort to the public tender system in some cases 
considering the various reasons viz., accessibility of the plot, size of the plot, 
consistent litigations, defects in title and orders issued by the local authorities 
for earmarking the la nd for road network etc.  It can be said that the decision 
for sale of land in these cases was taken by the Asset Sale Committee on 
case to case basis considering the specific nature. The  item wise detailed 
reasons for not following guidelines in these cases are as follows:  
Apollo Mills – sale of FSI against 40’ & 60’ D.P. Road 
 
The Apollo Mill land was sold in June‟05.  The decision to conduct an 
infrastructure study was taken on 13.05.06, after one year, in a meeting held 
on 13.05.06 between the then Chi ef Minister of Maharashtra and the Hon‟ble 
Union Minister of Textiles, where NTC was asked to undertake certain 
infrastructure studies.  The Municipal Commissioner expressed the need for 
proper road network in this meeting.  Infrastructure study was accord ingly 
carried out by NTC and report submitted to Municipal Corporation of Greater 
Mumbai (MCGM).  MCGM vide letter dated 14.09.06 informed about the 
approval of the layout of the internal road network in the mill area, with the 
request to hand over the lan d to them for the same.  The 40 and 60 ft. D.P. 
Roads were proposed in the area of Apollo Mills.   The matter was placed 
before the Asset Sale Committee in its 32nd 36th and 38th meetings and the 
Asset Sale Committee was informed of the surrender for such a land for D.P. 
Road on NTC getting 100% FSI, which can be loaded on the 
adjoining/remaining plots.  NTC was expected to develop the road and hand -
over the same to MCGM.  M/s. Macrotech Constructions Pvt. Ltd., the buyer of 
the Apollo Mill land, submitted a proposal to NTC for purchase of FSI 
generated out of D.P. Road land to be surrendered to MCGM.  The proposal 
was discussed by ASC and it was approved for the following reasons: 
 
a) No new construction was to take place on the retained area of Apollo 
Mills and hence the said FSI could have remained unutilized. 
b) FSI cannot be loaded on any other property of NTC as the same is to 
be utilized on the remaining plot. 
c) In the event of not selling FSI the same can be sold only as TDR in the 
suburbs at substantially lower rate. 
d) The rate of Rs.9800/- per sq.ft. of FSI, based on the 3 valuation reports 
obtained by NTC, was offered to the buyer as against their offer to buy 
the said FSI at the rate of Rs. 7000/ - per sq.ft.  After deliberations with 

37 
 
ASC, the buyer agreed th e rate of Rs. 9800/ - per sq.ft. which is higher 
than the ready reckoner rate of Rs. 5574/- per sq. ft. 
e) The D.P. Road was constructed by the purchaser which in normal 
course would have been the obligation of NTC. 
f) Instead of NTC the purchaser of FSI will dev elop the road and 
handover the same to MCGM in lieu of the FSI. 
 
The decision to conduct the infrastructure study was undertaken after 
one year of the sale of Apollo Mill land.  It was on the basis of the directions of 
the MCGM that the D.P. Road had to be  constructed for meeting the road 
network in the mill and surrender of land for D.P. Road is mandatory.  
Acceptance letter for sale of land with FSI for 40 and 60 ft. D.P. Roads were 
issued on 16.10.07 and 14.01.08.  The buyer undertook the responsibility to 
develop the D.P. Roads and hand -over the same to MCGM, which was 
originally the responsibility of NTC. 
 
Apollo Mills: Triangular Plot 
 
The Company sold 7.30 acres of land of Apollo Mills by public tender to 
M/s. Macrotech Constructions Pvt. Ltd., after retaining 23393 sq. mtrs. for the 
working of Apollo Mills.  There is a triangular portion measuring 2736 sq. mtrs. 
with a dilapidated godown which is of no use (later on corrected as 2202 
sq.mts., after measurement) which is situated between the land sold to M/s. 
Macrotech Constructions Pvt. Ltd. and the Western side of the proposed 60 ft. 
D.P. Road.  The party proposed to purchase the same triangular portion of the 
land at Rs. 7525 per. sq. ft.  The Asset Sale Committee (ASC) considered the 
proposal on the following grounds:- 
 
a) Considering the heavy development in the area, it would be mandatory 
for the Corporation to surrender the space for Electric Sub Station to 
BEST for a larger public interest.  However, if the Company directly 
surrender the land to BES T, NTC would not get any consideration for 
the same. 
b) The triangular plot of land is hardly buildable as the requirement of 
open space as per DC Regulation is mandatory and the construction is 
allowed only after keeping open space of 15‟ from road. 
c) As per R ehabilitation Scheme sanctioned by BIFR, total 9.51 Acres 
land of Apollo Textile Mills has been earmarked as surplus land for 
sale.  So far 8.63 Acres land has been sold leaving balance of 0.88 
Acres.  The subject triangular plot is admeasuring 0.68 Acres i.e. much 
below the balance land for sale. 
d) The plot cannot be sold through Public Tender Process as it is situated 
at the rear side and at present there is no access to the plot as the 
access shall be available only after development of 60‟ DP Road and 
further connectivity of the proposed road network in the area. 
e) The plot was not in use of Apollo Mills and separated from the mills 
land because of development of 60‟ DP Road. 
f) Since the high rise development in the vicinity is highly objected by the 
Home Mini stry of Government of Maharashtra, any permission for 
development on plot is subject to NOC from Central Jail Authority of the 
State Government. 

38 
 
 
g) The triangular portion is adjoining to the land sold to M/s. Macrotech 
and if the same is disposed of to them,  then it would be merged in their 
land and becomes useable/buildable. 
 
The ASC decided to sell this land at the highest valuation rate of Rs. 
9800/- per sq. ft. of the Government approved valuer, which was more than 
the ready reckoner rate of 2008 i.e. Rs.  4599/- per sq. ft., which was in the 
best interest of the Company. 
 
Apollo Mills (182.64 SQ. MTRS.) 
 
In the course of measurement of land to give 22‟ right to way, a small 
strip of the land measuring 1966.44 sq. ft., measured by Shri N.B. 
Dharmadhikari, Architect, situated towards the side of the land was purchased 
by M/s. Macrotech Constructions Pvt. Ltd. This parcel of land cannot be 
used/availed by the Company, the ASC deliberated on the issue and was of 
the view that such a small piece may not be able  to be sold as independent 
plot with so much value, considering the constraint of access, etc. if sold to 
another party.  Hence, this was sold to the earlier purchaser on the same rate 
at which the mill land was sold through public tender process earlier, subject 
to charging of simple rate of interest at 9% per annum for the appropriate 
period. 
 
Apollo Mills (Measurement difference – 1742 sq. ft.) 
 
The Corporation has sold 7.43 acres (323709 sq. ft.) of land of Apollo 
Mills to Macrotech Constructions Pvt. L td., by following tender process.  In 
addition, a small portion of land for Roads, right to way, triangular portion 
admeasuring 72315 sq.ft. was also sold to them, which was subject to final 
measurement and subject to exact quantum of FSI, to be approved by MCGM.  
Difference, if any, was to be adjusted on pro -rata basis by the party and finally 
settled by proper payment/return, as the case may be.  After the joint survey, it 
was noticed that difference in the area sold was 1742 sq. ft. more and ASC 
decided that the payment may be calculated for the actual area, as agreed 
upon and hence this small plot of 1742 sq. ft. was not put for sale but for 
measurement difference consideration was received, as agreed upon at the 
rate sold for triangular plot. 
 
In the case of other properties, mentioned in the report, as not followed 
the tender system, we would like to submit that each case of the land attached 
with the different kinds of problem which were to be sorted out.  The reasons 
for the same were given below in respect of each case: 
 
 
 
New Jack Printing Press 
 
This is a case where the ASC of the Company had taken a decision on 
the basis of the policy approved by the Company for sale of leasehold 

39 
 
property. The opinion for sale of leasehold property was taken from the 
Solicitor General of India. 
 
The party was called for negotiation by the ASC and the rate was 
enhanced in the meeting for vesting the ownership rights for the above 
consideration.  The Committee also deliberated as to whether this subject 
matter needs to be referred to the Ministry of Textiles when the then Joint 
Secretary informed the Committee that since the ASC of NTC is constituted by 
the Ministry of Textiles/NTC in line with the Revival Scheme approved by the 
BIFR, reference of matters to MOT on sale of assets will only result in delay, in 
arriving at a final decision on the disposal of assets.  Since the Ministry of 
Textiles is represented by a senior level IAS Officers, viz., Joint Secretary, and 
its views are anyways reflected in the meeting of t he ASC by the Joint 
Secretary.  All the decisions of sale of assets are finally and fully rested with 
the ASC.  Accordingly, no reference to Ministry of Textiles is required and the 
ASC is fully empowered to take all decisions on sale of assets of the Company 
under the Revival Scheme in the best interest of NTC.  
 
Elphinstone Mill Chawls 
 
NTC sold land and building of Elphinstone Mills staff quarters through 
public tender process at a price more than the RP.  As per the tender 
conditions, the purchaser had to provide six tenements of approx. 750 sq. ft. 
carpet area to NTC free of cost in lieu of the area occupied for showroom and 
godown. 
 
NTC thus acquired the rights to receive the constructed plot from the 
purchaser.  The purchaser has been allowed 3 years time for providing the six 
flats after a construction.  The purchaser had proposed to purchase the rights 
from NTC.  The rates have been valued by 3 approved Govt. valuers and the 
highest of the same was Rs. 351 lakhs which was above the stamp duty ready 
reckoner rates, 2006, of Rs. 280.96 lakhs.  The ASC negotiated with the party 
and approved the sale of relinquishment of the rights for Rs. 355 lakhs which 
was above the fixed RP.  In this particular case, the sale is only relinquishment 
of the right and no t the real property and further to get the rights, we have to 
wait for more than three years.  There is no loss also as the price realized was 
more than the stamp duty ready reckoner rates and also more than the 
highest value of the 3 valuers, i.e., Rs. 351 lakhs. 
 
Model Mills, Nagpur (762 Sq. Mtrs) 
 
The mill land was sold to M/s. Kashmiri Developers Pvt. Ltd. by 
following the public tender process.  During the survey done through Govt. 
City Survey Department, Nagpur, a small strip of 762 sq. mtrs. was available 
in between the two plots sold to the party.  This particular plot was not having 
direct access from the road.  Hence, ASC decided to sell the land to the same 
party on the same tender rate which was obtained by following the tender 
process earlier.  The ASC in its meeting held on 19.12.2006 also decided to 
charge interest at the rate of SBI PLR rate from the date of the execution of 
the earlier land sale deed. 
 

40 
 
The small plot was sold at the same tender rate and terms of the earlier 
process. 
 
Tata Mills FSI Sold To RBI 
 
RBI had taken a lease of 1,71,000 sq. ft. from the erstwhile 
management of Tata Mills and in turn RBI sub -leased 1,51,079 sq. ft. with the 
condition that Tata Mill should maintain area vacant during the tenure of the 
lease.  With th e leasehold rights of the Tata Mill was sold to RBI at a 
compensation settled between the officials of the Ministry of Textiles and RBI, 
it is not the ownership right but only surrender of the lease rights to another 
arm of the Government by settlement bet ween two companies of the Govt.  
Hence, no tender procedure was followed in this case. 
 
Worli Mills, Bungalow 
 
The property is in the form of Bungalow constructed on the land of 
MCGM     taken on lease by erstwhile owners since March, 1971.  The title of 
the property was doubtful as NTC was not having possession and the tenant 
and sub -tenant have been paying the property tax etc. since long.  The 
bungalow was also not registered in the name of NTC with the MCGM.  Sale 
was implemented to avoid litigation whi ch was pending in Court for last 22 
years. 
 
Jyoti Weaving Factory 
 
NTC had sold 4.29 acres of land of 2 surveys, No. 69 and 30.  In the 
meantime, the unit got the mill land mutated from the appropriate authorities in 
the name of NTC (WBABO) Ltd.  As per th e mutation certificate, the land area 
was found to be 4.98 acres instead of 4.13 acres.  In view of the difference in 
area, the Company engaged authorized surveyor to measure the actual area 
of both the plots.  The party was disputing that they had purchased the land on 
“as is where is and on as is what is basis” without measuring the land and 
there was no scope of paying extra for the increase of 0.85 acre as per the 
mutation certificate. 
 
After discussion in the ASC meeting held on 22.10.2005, the party 
agreed to pay in principle for the excess quantum of land on pro -rata basis.  
This is the case of dispute and settled through negotiation and hence, the 
Company followed a tender process in this case and the highest bidder was 
asked to pay the balance for t he excess land, on pro -rata basis, on physical 
measurement.” 
 
In reply to another related question, NTC in a written note stated as under: 
“These are cases which are of exceptional nature and not a normal process 
of sale of land. Properties subject to sale  in these 11 cases were associated 
with peculiar problems related to its 
existence/title/location/possession/development etc.” 
 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER - X 
 
INCONSISTENCIES IN THE GUIDELINES 
 
As pointed out by Audit, the  inconsistencies between the BIFR/GOI guidelines 
and the procedures laid down by the Company were as follows: 
 
(a) The BIFR guidelines provided that bidders should deposit the EMD equal to 
10 percent of the offer while the Company fixed (July 2002) the amount of 
EMD equivalent to five percent of the reserve price which was increased to 10 
percent in March, 2003 
(b) The BIFR prescribed that the Company should receive Bank Draft for the 
EMD.  However, the Company provided (July 2002) that in case EMD was 
above Rupees one crore unconditional and irrevocable Bank Guarantee (BG) 
could be accepted in lieu of the Bank draft. 
(c) BIFR guidelines provided that the Company should charge interest at the rate 
of 18 percent per annum on the delayed payments.  However, the Company 
instructed (March, 2003) the sub -offices to charge interest at the rate 
prevailing SBI PLR plus four percent per annum on delayed payments.  It was 
stipulated in the tender document that ASC could extend the payment 
schedule up to 60 days. 
(d) The schedule of payment of sale consideration by the purchaser as prescribed 
by the Company in the tender documents was not in conformity with the BIFR 
guidelines. 
 
According to the Audit, the Company stated during September, 2008 that ASC 
was an empowered body to decide the issues relating to the sale of surplus assets 
and to decide the guidelines depending upon the situation and circumstances.  The 
Company also main tained that the ASC was fully empowered to extend the period 
beyond 60 days.   
Asked about  the reasons for deviating from BIFR/GOI guidelines regarding 
fixation of EMD, mode of receipt of EMD, payment of sale consideration by the 
purchase, receipt of inter est on delayed payment and interest to be charged in case 
of delay, NTC in its written reply stated as under: 
“BIFR has given guidelines for fixation of EMD @ 10% of offer whereas at the 
time of formulating tender conditions EMD @10% of the reserve price w as 
fixed so that EMD would be uniform without any discrimination from one party 
to another.   Guarantee in place of DD for more than Rs.1 crore has been 
permitted as per the tender with the intention to enable more parties to 
participate so that NTC could get the competitive rates.  The tender conditions 
were framed after considering the prevailing conditions in the real estate 
markets.  The interest rates were fluctuating and it has been decided to put on 
the tender conditions that interest rate @SBI PLR+4% will be collected in case 
of delay in payment.  The tender conditions were framed and vetted by various 
legal experts.  The conditions are more or less same as per guidelines issued 
by BIFR and also placed before the ASC of the various erstwhile subsidiar y 
corporations for deliberations and approval.  After approval this had been 
followed unilaterally in all the erstwhile subsidiary corporations and even after 
merger.” 
 

42 
 
When enquired whether the aforesaid matters were placed in the Central ASC 
meeting for consideration as agreed to by the management, NTC stated as follows: 
 
“After taking the views of all ASC Members which has emerged during the 
tender process, the guidelines were reviewed and modified by the 
management.  Such modifications are only for the better interest of the 
company.” 
 
As regards the steps being taken by the Company to bring uniformity between 
the BIFR/GOI guidelin es and the Company‟s procedures, NTC in a written reply 
stated that: 
 
“The matter is taken up with Ministry for framing the policy guidelines in 
respect of fixing the reserve price and also sale of FSI policy. The tender 
conditions will also be taken up for review and modifications, if any.” 
 
When asked whether ASC constituted by the Government has the authority to 
evolve procedures going beyond the guidelines of BIFR, NTC stated as follows: 
 
“No. The deviations pointed out have to be examined on a case to case basis, 
and then only, a final view can be taken.” 
Audit pointed out that guarantee in place of DD for more than Rs. 1 crore has 
been permitted as per the tender with the intention to enable more parties to 
participate so that NTC c ould get the competitive rates and  the tender conditions 
were framed after considering the p revailing conditions in the real estate markets.   
When sought a clarification as to how the provision of Bank guarantee could increase 
the response from more parties to participate in the tender , the Company replied as 
under: 
 
“As the provision of Bank gua rantee does not need monetary outflow of the 
funds, response to participate in the tender with such condition was obvious to 
increase.  This was only to facilitate more competition by getting more offers 
by changing the threshold limit of furnishing EMD in  the form of Bank 
Guarantee instead of Demand Draft.” 
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER - XI 
 
FUND MANAGEMENT 
 
It has been pointed out in Audit that n o separate account was maintained by 
NTC for deposition of sale proceeds of surplus assets and subsequent utilisation of 
money received which was against BIFR guidelines.  According to the information 
furnished to the Audit, the Ministry has accepted the observation for compliance to 
make system more efficient. 
 
Asked about the instructions, if any, issued to open separate accounts to keep 
records of the funds generated from sale of surplus assets, NTC in a written stated: 
 
“Further instructions are issued to transfer the funds of sale of land and sale of 
other assets separately to two different banks accounts bank.   In the books of 
accounts separate accounts are maintained to account for the sales proceeds 
of land and building and other surplus assets.” 
 
As regards the steps to synchronize the schedule of sale of surplus assets 
with the fund requirements for modernization, NTC stated in a written reply that: 
 
“Sources and Utilization of fund Statement are prepared on monthly basis in 
addition to the cash flow statement to synchronize the fund requirement for 
modernization with sales of surplus assets.” 
  When enquired how was it ensured that the sale process carried out by NTC 
was competitive and transparent, NTC stated as under:  
 
 “The sales were made through a transparent manner by giving wide publicity.  
Company‟s core business is not sale of assets. However, company has ma de 
all efforts to get better realisations from sale of assets.   NTC has never been 
in the business of selling assets.  This has been a new area of activity for the 
company on account of implementation of the revival Scheme.  The 
professional Managers of th e company have done their best and taken 
decisions in good faith to get the best valuations for its properties.  NTC is 
committed to refine and improve the system further, based upon its 
experience, audit observations etc. The suggestions given by the Audi t and 
the valuable observations of the Hon‟ble Members will be taken into account 
for further improving the existing system.” 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER XII 
 
LESSONS LEARNT 
 
Replying to a question about the lessons learnt by the Company from the 
deficiencies and shortcomings pointed out by Audit from time to time for affecting 
improvements in the system of sale of land and buildings to the best financial 
advantage of the Company in a transparent and prudent manner particularly when 
almost 50 per cent of the land and buildings are yet to be sold by the Company , NTC 
replied as under: 
 
“The Company has never been in the business in selling assets and this has 
been a new area of activity on account of implementation of the revival 
scheme. NTC will review the existing p olicy and bring out modifications 
wherever required for implementation in all fu ture cases of sale, taking into  
account the observations . (Suggestion of Audit & COPU)   NTC has now 
framed a policy for fixation of reserve price and sale of its surplus land w hich 
has been approved by its Board of Directors on 18.11.2009.  NTC is also 
framing a policy for additional FSI and for chawl development.  These are 
expected to ensure maximum realization for NTC in a transparent and prudent 
manner.  NTC has also been ad vised to work out its minimum requirement of 
funds for implementation of revival scheme and to identify properties for 
realizing that amount.” 
 
As regard s the engagement of professional experts for marketing of its  
properties, NTC stated as under: 
 “NTC also contemplates to engage professional experts for marketing of its 
properties in an efficient manner to maximize the realization of resources in 
case of high value properties i.e. exceeding Rs. 100 crore.” 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Sl. No. 1 
Revival Scheme 
 National Textile Corporation Limited (Company) incorporated with the 
main objective of managing the affairs of sick textile undertakings taken over 
by the Government of India(GOI), was managing 119 textile mills thro ugh its 
nine subsidiaries. Of these, eight subsidiaries were declared sick between 1992 
and 1994 under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.  
In the year 2002, the Board for Industrial Finance and Reconstruction 
(BIFR)/GOI approved revival scheme for these sick subsidiaries envisaging 
modernization of 53 viable mills and closure of 66 unviable mills at an 
estimated cost of Rs.3937 crore.   The scheme was self-financing and the funds 
realized from sale of surplus assets of NTC mills w ere to be utilized for 
revival/modernization.  However, this scheme could not be implemented, as 
envisaged, due to non -availability of funds through sale of surplus assets  
mainly on account of delay in getting the permission for sale of land of the 
mills from the State Governments concerned  and implementation period of the 
scheme was extended  from 31 st March, 2004 to 31 st March, 2006.  Meanwhile, 
the remaining one subsidiary of the Company was also declared sick in 
December, 2005 and a modified rehabilitation scheme (MS -2006) costing 
Rs.5267.56 crore was submitted to BIFR in January, 2006 which was approved 
in March, 2006.   The implementation period of MS -2006 was upto 31 st March, 
2008.  The Committee’s examination has revealed that the Company could not 
achieve the precise objectives of modernization/revival of mills, reduced 

46 
 
manpower strength and sale of surplus assets as  envisaged in the modified 
scheme even after extension of implementation period for a further period of 
one year under another modified scheme of 2008 approved by BIFR.  Although 
the Company is stated to have generated Rs.4034.60 crore by sale of assets of  
the closed mills and surplus assets of the viable mills upto 30 th September, 
2009, the fact remains that the process of revival/modernization and the sale of 
almost half of surplus land of NTC mills is yet to be completed.  Obviously, the 
Company and the administrative Ministry have failed to identify the weak spots 
in the implementation of the scheme from every possible angle despite grant of 
extension of implementation period from time to time under modified schemes.  
Now that a proposal for extension of  revival scheme upto 31 st March, 2011 is 
stated to be under consideration for approval of the Union Cabinet, the 
Committee desire that effective and concrete steps should  be taken by the 
Ministry of  Textiles to ensure proper implementation and realizatio n of 
objectives of the revival scheme within the proposed extended period.  
  

47 
 
Sl. No. 2 
Audit Review 
The Committee note that the revival scheme for NTC envisaged 
compliance of BIFR/GOI guidelines and instructions issued by the Company 
for sale of surplus land and buildings.  The process of sale was to be operated 
in such a manner as to generate maximum resources for the revival plan and to 
ensure that the sale was conducted in a transparent and fair manner.  The 
findings contained in the Audit review coveri ng the sale of surplus land and 
buildings between 1 st April, 2002 and 31 st March, 2008 in six of the nine sub -
offices of the Company and further examination of the subject matter by the 
Committee have brought out several inadequacies in the systems and 
procedures adopted by the Company during sale process of its surplus land 
and buildings.  Some such important aspects have been dealt with in the 
succeeding paragraphs of this Report.  
  

48 
 
Sl. No. 3 
Sale of properties not identified in the revival scheme 
The Committee note that in accordance with the revival scheme 
approved by BIFR/GOI, the Ministry of Textiles constituted Asset Sale 
Committee (ASC) from time to time for the subsidiaries of NTC for undertaking 
sale of the properties of the Company.  The ASCs f or sick subsidiaries so 
constituted were assigned the specific functions to ensure that the land was 
sold in such a manner as to generate maximum resources for the revival plan 
besides ensuring that the sale was conducted in a transparent and fair manner 
through open notification and as per highest professional standards.   
Subsequently, a single ASC was constituted after merger of the nine 
subsidiaries in the Company in the year 2006. The Committee are surprised 
over the casual manner in which such ASCs fu nctioned as is evident from the 
audit findings that certain parcels of land not identified as surplus in five cases 
in the revival schemes were sold by the Company.   The Company has tried to 
justify sale of properties in such four cases on the ground that  physical 
measurement was not done prior to submitting proposal to BIFR and the sale 
of entire land in these cases was approved by BIFR as a unit for the area  
appearing in records.  NTC has however, admitted that the sale of land in the 
fifth case was ini tially not identified but BIFR approved its sale and treated it 
authorized subsequently.  From these facts the Committee can only conclude 
that the ASCs functioned in a n arbitrary  manner and resorted to hasty sale of 
land of NTC mills without paying due a ttention towards the specific  details of 
NTC properties being offered for sale under the revival schemes  approved by 
BIFR.  Since 50 percent of its identified properties are yet to be sold, the 

49 
 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Textiles should lay do wn precise 
guidelines in this regard so as to obviate recurrence of instances of sale of 
land and buildings beyond the purview of revival scheme approved by 
BIFR/GOI.  The Committee would also like the Ministry to make it mandatory 
that land measurements a re carried out by the Company before offering any 
property for sale. 
  

50 
 
Sl. No. 4 
System of Fixation of Reserve Price 
(a). Non-observance of procedure for valuation of properties 
The Committee note that the procedure devised by the Company in 
November, 2002  for sale of fixed assets envisaged that the ASC should 
determine reserve price of land on the basis of average of three valuations, 
namely, valuation in Draft Rehabilitation Scheme(DRS) approved by BIFR, 
Valuation given by Property Consultants and the Val uation by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT).  In November, 2004, the GOI further directed that 
the reserve price should not be less than Minimum Assured Return (MAR) in 
case of properties in Mumbai, where Marketing Consultants had quoted MAR.  
It wa s, however, observed in Audit that all the three valuation factors were 
considered in only 27 cases out of 79 cases of sale of land. Strangely enough, 
while only one or two valuations factors were considered in 37 cases, none of 
the prescribed valuation fa ctors are reported to be considered at the time of 
fixing the reserve price in as many as 15 cases.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, these cases of blatant procedural violations clearly reveal the 
scant regard shown by the ASC towards Company’s precise guidelines for 
fixation of reserve price.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of  Textiles should identify the level at which these lapses had 
occurred and conte mplate establishing an effective monitoring system to 
ensure that the guidelines/directions issued for sale of  remaining surplus land 
of NTC mills are scrupulously followed in future.  
  

51 
 
Sl. No. 5 
(b). CBDT Valuations 
The audit review reveals that out of 66 cases of sale of land through 
tender, CBDT valuation of 1994 -95 and 1998 -99 was considered for fixation of 
reserve price in 29 cases during April, 2002 to March, 2008. However, the CBDT 
valuation was not indexed to the year of fixation of reserve price for arriving at 
realistic value.   During his evidence before the Committee, the CMD, NTC 
deposed “I have gone through the records of the Company and I have found 
that CBDT was involved in the valuation of land once in 1995 -96 period.  After 
that when the Company approached them, they have not agreed.” The 
Company, however, could not produce any documentary evidence portraying 
unwillingness by CBDT for undertaking valuation of NTC properties leading the 
Committee to believe that NTC did not invariably invol ve CBDT in the process 
of fixation of reserve price in accordance with their own specific guidelines 
issued in November, 2002.  At this stage, the Committee express their strong 
displeasure over the manner in which the valuation of CBDT  was not given 
due consideration for fixation of reserve price in all cases as stipulated in the 
guidelines issued by the Company in November, 2002.   The Committee , 
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Textiles should involve expert agencies of 
the Government like CPWD and  CBDT in the process of valuation of NTC 
properties to be offered for sale in the coming years. 
  

52 
 
Sl. No. 6 
(c). MAR Valuation 
The Committee note that the GOI’s direction stipulated that the reserve 
price in case of properties in Mumbai should not be less than MAR, where 
marketing consultants had quoted the same.  They, however, find that the 
Company had no system of vetting valua tion reports and MAR given by the 
consultants with the result that there were wide variations between sale value 
realized and MAR quoted by the consultants. According to the Audit, such 
variations ranged between 94.3% and 279.28% in the case of 5 land parc els for 
which MAR was obtained.  The Committee are not convinced with the reply of 
the Company that MAR was arrived at by best international real estate 
consultant and there was no reason for NTC to question their wisdom. On the 
other hand, the Committee a re of firm view that MAR reports obtained by the 
Company did not give the realistic market value of the land parcels offered for 
sale as is evident from the substantially high sale value realized by the 
Company in all these cases.  At this stage, the Commi ttee can only conclude 
that the purpose of obtaining MAR for the purposes of fixation of best 
price/reserve price could not be achieved.    
 
  

53 
 
Sl. No. 7 
(d). Fair Market Value 
The Committee note that the GOI directed in April, 2005 that the ASC 
should take a decision on the reserve price  keeping it as close to the market 
value as  possible.  The Committee’s examination, has, however, brought out 
that there were wide variations between the reserve price fixed and the actual 
sale value realized in a number o f cases on the basis of valuation done by the 
ASC.  The self -admission of the Company that it had realized 180% to 350% 
higher than the reserve price fixed for the sale of properties in Mumbai is a 
clear indicator that no system had been put in place to as sess the fair market 
value of the properties in accordance with the GOI directives.  Whatever may 
be the claims of the Company for sale value realizations for NTC’s properties in 
Mumbai, the fact remains that the reserve prices fixed by the ASC in the instant 
cases were nowhere near the market prices realized by the Company.  The 
Committee express their strong displeasure over the failure of the Company to 
devise an effective system to assess the fair market value of NTC properties 
before offering them for sale so as to ensure realization of maximum possible 
revenue.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Textiles 
should now devise suitable procedures for assessing fair market value of NTC 
properties being offered for sale and ensure stric t compliance of such 
procedures within the laid down policies.  
  

54 
 
Sl. No. 8 
Defects in Tender Documents 
The Committee are constrained to observe that the information 
disclosed in the tender documents issued for sale of assets in a number of 
cases was eithe r incorrect or ambiguous and that the Company had not 
established any system for verification of the contents of the tender 
documents.  Prominent among these cases related to Mumbai Textile Mill, 
Apollo Textile Mill and Chalisgaon Textile Mill where Audit has estimated a loss 
of Rs.185.10 crore to the Company.  The audit observations and the replies of 
the Ministry in these cases have been briefly enumerated in the following 
paragraphs: 
(i) Mumbai Textile Mill, Mumbai 
The Audit has pointed out  that the tender document for sale of land of 
the Mill stated that the mill area consisting of  67,293.17 square metre 
bearing CSNo.464 (admeasuring 65,993.17 square metre) and CS 
No.4/464 (Marwari Chowka Chawl admeasuring 1300 Sq uare metre) was 
offered for sale.  While the Company had no intention for sale of land of 
Marwari Chowka Chawl, it was wrongly included in the tender document.  
Further, the sale deed and the possession letter specifying the 
boundaries of the land sold did  not include area of Marwari Chowka 
Chawl.  Subsequently, the purchaser asked for possession of Marwari 
Chowka Chawl also since it was included in the tender document.  The 
ASC accepted the fact that the parcel of land of 1300 square metre was 
wrongly incl uded  in the tender document and the possession  and 
ownership of this land worth Rs. 13.56 crore was given to the private 

55 
 
party without any consideration besides the liability of  about Rs.5.23 
crore to rehabilitate 24 occupants of Chawl was owned by the Company 
resulting in loss of  Rs. 18.79 crore.  
NTC admitted the fact that land of 1300 square metre was 
occupied by Chawl and had not appeared in the lay out plan due to 
mistake.  While contending that the mistake of non-disclosure of Marwari 
Chowka Chawl  had not been liable for any loss to the Company, the 
reply of NTC is strangely and conspicuously silent on the audit 
observations on handing over the possession of 1300 square metre plot 
without any consideration and the liability owned by the Company for  
rehabilitation of occupants of Marwari Chowka Chawl.   
(ii) Apollo Textile Mill, Mumbai 
The Audit has brought out that the Company had received lesser 
amount in tendered bids by not disclosing the vital information about the 
feasibility of access to the Main Road which was allowed later on.  This 
enhanced the value of the land resulting in lo ss of Rs.165.80 crore to the 
Company after deducting consideration received for right to access to 
main road.  
NTC has informed the Committee that originally, the property was 
tendered in 2005 giving all the particulars known to the Company.  Later 
on, in 2006, a provision for road was made as per the town planning and 
thus it cannot be presumed as deficiency in tender document.   
(iii) Chalisgaon Textile Mill, Chalisgaon 

56 
 
According to the Audit, six plots of land of the Mills were sold to 
the highest bidder and t he purchaser did not pay second and final 
instalment due on the plea that in the tender document the Company had 
wrongly mentioned the land to be in residential zone though it was in 
industrial zone.  This incorrect information in tender document resulted 
in delay in receipt of sale proceeds for which no interest was recovered 
and the Company lost interest of Rs.51 lakh calculated on the basis of 18 
per cent per annum.  
Responding to the Audit observation, NTC stated that the State 
Government/local municipa l authorities were reluctant to grant approvals for 
change of zone.  Since NTC was in financial crunch during that period, it was 
decided to sell the land on `as is where is’ basis for survival of the Company 
and the tenders were floated before obtaining change of zone. 
 Explaining its failure to establish a proper system for verification of all 
the facts included in tender documents, the Company put forth  the plea that 
NTC had no expertise of sale of land and it had resorted to execute sale of 
assets only to implement the revival scheme approved by the BIFR.  Going by 
the self admission of the Company that the defects in the tender documents 
had occurred due to inadequacy  of  the system,  the Committee are  of the firm 
opinion that the casual approach on the part of the Company and the failure of 
the Ministry to devise a foolproof system in this regard ultimately proved 
detrimental to the financial interests of the Company.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all the cases of loss due to defective te nder 
documents as pointed out by Audit should be thoroughly enquired into at  the 
highest level in the Ministry of Textiles and responsibility fixed for such costly 

57 
 
lapses.  The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in each 
such case.     
 
  

58 
 
Sl. No. 9 
Sale Below the Registration Rates and Reserve Prices 
 During the course of their examination, the Committee’s attention has 
also been drawn to certain cases of sale of  NTC properties below the 
prevailing registration rates and the reserve price in contravention of the GOI 
directives issued in November, 2004.   NTC has pleaded that the Company 
cannot indefinitely keep on retendering if a property after repeated attempts is 
not taken for the reserve price fixed by the Company.  At the same time, NTC 
has assured the Committee that the “GOI is reviewing the guidel ines for 
fixation of the reserve price with a view to refining and improving the system 
and achieving optimum realization from sale of assets.”  The Committee hope 
that earnest efforts would be made by the Ministry of Textiles to ensure 
compliance of their  new guidelines in the best financial interest of the 
Company.   
  

59 
 
Sl. No. 10 
Sale without Following Tender Process 
The Committee’s scrutiny of the information made available to them 
brings out that the procedure and guidelines to be followed by ASC, issue d in 
March, 2002 as per BIFR Order -2002 clearly stipulated that the “Sale of assets 
should be effected by way of public sale through sealed tenders, after 
adequate notice is given to the public through advertisements…..”.  Further, 
one of the specific functions assigned to the ASC constituted from time to time 
was to ensure that the sale was conducted in a fair and transparent manner 
and through open notification.  The audit review has, however, brought out that 
the sale was made without following tender pr ocess in a number of cases.  
While furnishing the reasons for not following guidelines in these cases,  NTC 
pleaded that the Company could not resort to the public tender system in some 
cases which were of exceptional nature due to reasons such as accessibility of 
the plot, size of the plot, consistent litigations, defects in title and orders 
issued by the local authorities for earmarking the land for road network, etc.  
While giving due credence to exceptional nature of some of these cases, the 
Committee c annot accept the accessibility, size and location of some of the 
properties as valid reasons for not resorting to its sale without following tender 
process.  While taking a serious view of these instances of deviation from 
stipulated guidelines, the Commit tee recommend that the Government should 
now incorporate an effective system of review of the decisions taken by the 
Company in all such cases where any departure is made from the 
directions/guidelines issued for the implementation of the revival schemes.  
   

60 
 
Sl. No. 11 
Inconsistencies among guidelines and the procedures 
During their examination of the subject, the Committee’s attention has 
also been drawn to the fact that there were inconsistencies among the 
guidelines issued by the BIFR/GOI and the proced ures laid down by the 
Company resulting in revenue loss to the Company.   These included: fixation 
of earnest money deposit (EMD) by the Company at a lower rate; non receipt of  
EMD in Demand Draft ; and grant of extension ranging from 96 days to 1371 
days  for payment beyond 60 days from the due date of payment  without 
charging interest leviable on delayed payments.  According to the Audit, the 
Company stated during September, 2008 that ASC was an empowered body to 
decide the issues relating to the sale o f surplus assets and to decide the 
guidelines depending upon the situation and circumstances.  The Company 
also maintained that the ASC was fully empowered to extend the period 
beyond 60 days.  During the examination of the subject, the Company, 
however, informed the Committee that the ASC constituted by the Government 
has no authority to evolve procedures going beyond the guidelines of the BIFR 
and the deviations pointed out  have to be examined on a case to case basis so 
as to take a final view in the mat ter.  The Committee strongly recommend that 
the Company/Ministry should fix responsibility for these blatant acts of 
procedural irregularities.  
 
  

61 
 
Sl. No. 12 
Need for Improving Systems 
 During the examination of the subject matter, NTC has repeatedly 
pleaded before the Committee that the Company has never been in the 
business of selling assets and this has been a new area of activity on account 
of implementation of the revival scheme.  The Committee are constrained to 
observe that most of the issues/sh ortcomings pointed out by the Audit could 
have been avoided had the Company  devised systems and procedures strictly 
in accordance with the BIFR guidelines  and acted accordingly thereon. Having 
taken note of the assurance given by the Company th at it will review the 
existing policy on the basis of suggestions of Audit and make modifications 
required for implementation in all future cases of sale , t he Committee firmly 
desire that the Company should amend its system of valuation and sale of 
assets without further delay.  
  

62 
 
Sl. No. 13 
To sum up, the examination of the subject matter relating to sale of 
surplus properties by NTC has revealed several shortcomings/irregularities. 
According to the Audit findings, Company either suffered losses or lost 
opportunities to earn in the following cases:-  
 (a) Defects in tender documents (loss of Rs.185.10 crore);  
 (b) Sale below registration rates (loss of potential revenue of Rs.10.43 
crore); 
 (c) Sale below reserve price (loss of potential revenue of 84.35 lakh); 
 (d Inconsistencies in the guidelines (loss of potential  revenue of 
Rs.49.60 crore).  
The Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry and the 
Company have not made any sincere efforts to realize optimum value of the 
properties sold.  The Committ ee, therefore, strongly desire that the Ministry of 
Textiles and the Company should take concrete measures to fully exploit the 
market conditions for optimal gains to the advantage of the Company in 
respect of the sale of remaining surplus assets.  
 
 
 
New Delhi            V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
12 February, 2010        Chairman  
23 Magha, 1931 (S)                              Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

63 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
Appendix-I 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
National Textile Corporation 
Limited Sale of surplus land and 
buildings Highlights 
System issues 
 
The prescribed criterion for fixation of reserve price was followed in 27 cases only out of 
79 cases of sale of land examined in audit. This had resulted in fixation of lower reserve 
price. 
 
(Para 9.7.2.1) 
 
Absence of system for vetting of „Minimum Assured Return‟ reports resulted in under- 
fixation of reserve price by Rs.493.46 crore in five cases. 
 
(Para 9.7.2.1B) 
 
Defects in the tender documents resulted in the loss of Rs.185.10 crore in three cases. 
 
(Para 9.7.3) 
 
Compliance issues 
 
The Government of India  (GOI) directives of not  selling below the prevailing 
registration/circle  rates  were  not  followed  resulting  in  loss  of  opportunity  to  earn 
Rs.10.43 crore in six cases. 
 
(Para 9.7.5) 
 
Land and buildings were sold below reserve price in contravention of the GOI directions. 
 
(Para 9.7.6) 
 
Land was sold without following  the tender process in contravention  of guidelines  of 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). 
 
(Para 9.7.7) 
 
Fixation of earnest money deposit (EMD) at a rate lower than that prescribed in the BIFR 
guidelines  resulted  in  loss  of  opportunity  to  earn  Rs.89  lakh  in  case  of Aurangabad 
Textile Mill. 
 
(Para 9.7.8(a)) 
 
Non-receipt of EMD in demand drafts in contravention  to BIFR guidelines resulted in 
loss of revenue of Rs.57.70 lakh in 19 cases. 
 
(Para 9.7.8(b)) 
 
 
 
 
138 

64 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
Extension of 96 to 1371 days for payment beyond 60 days from the due date of 
payment resulted in loss of interest  of Rs.46 .79 crore in four cases. Interest of 
Rs.1.34 crore was recovered less in six cases while granting extension within 60 
days. 
Para 9.7.8(c)) 
 
Summary of recommendations 
 
1.  Specific guidelines, for sale of surplus land and buildings not 
considered in the revival schemes approved by BIFR, may be framed. 
 
2.  The valuation by Central Board of Direct Taxes should be obtained in 
all cases and given due consideration in fixation of reserve price. 
 
3.  The GOI may lay down guidelines for valuation of building 
structures/materials and the same may be applied uniformly in all the 
sub-offices. 
 
4.  The Company  may establish  a proper system for verification  of all 
the facts included in tender documents to avoid defects in tender 
documents. 
 
5.  The internal controls in accounting system be strengthened. 
 
6.  All the properties identified should be sold through public tender to 
fetch the maximum value. 
 
7.  The Company should adhere to the guidelines prescribed by the BIFR. 
 
8.  The  GOI  may  consider  specifying  modalities  where  the  delay  in  
payment exceeds 60 days. 
 
9.  The schedule of sale of surplus assets should be synchronized  
with the fund requirements   for  modernisation.   The  Management  
may  ensure  that  fund realised from the sale is accounted for as per 
BIFR guidelines. 
 
9.1  Introduction 
 
National Textile Corporation Limited (Company) was incorporated  in April 1968 
with the main objective of managing the affairs of sick  textile undertakings taken 
over by the GOI. The Company  was managing  119 textile mills through its 
nine subsidiaries.  All these subsidiaries were declared sick (eight between 1992 
and 1994 and one in December 2005)  under  the  Sick  Industrial  Companies  
(Special  Provisions)  Act  1985.  Revival schemes (2002) and a modified revival 
scheme (2006) were approved by the B oard for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR)/GOI which envisaged closure of unviable mills and revival 
of viable mills. According to these schemes, 77 unviable mills were to be closed, 
40 viable mills to be revived (22 through modernisation and 18 through public 
private  partnership)  and  two  mills  in  Pondicherry1    to  be  transferred  to  the  
State Government.  The scheme was self-financing,  the funds  realised  from  
sale of surplus assets were to be utilised for revival/modernisation.  As set Sale 
Committee (ASC) was constituted for each subsidiary to take decisions regarding 
sale of surplus assets.   With effect from 1 April 2006, all the nine subsidiaries 
were merged into the Company and a single ASC was constituted (July 2008). 
The erstwhile subsidiaries exist as sub-offices of the Company. 
 
1 Now Puducherry. 
 

65 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
9.2  Scope of Audit 
 
The performance audit covered the sale of surplus land and buildings from 1 April 2002 
to 31 March 2008 in six2  of the nine sub-offices of the Company. Performance audit on 
sale of surplus land and buildings by the sub-office (Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka 
and Mahe) was included in C&AG Audit Report No.4 of 2 005. Sale of surplus  land and 
buildings  by  sub-office  Uttar  Pradesh  (17.01  acres)  and  sub-office  Madhya  Pradesh 
(35.33 acres) were not significant and therefore, not included in the performance audit. 
 
The main issues considered in performance audit were identification of surplus land and 
buildings,  fixation  of  reserve  price,  tender  process,  receipt  of  sale  proceeds,  internal 
control system and fund management. 
 
9.3  Audit objectives 
 
The performance audit was conducted to examine: 
 
• the existence and effectiveness of the system for identification of surplus land and 
buildings,  fixation  of  reserve  price,  tender  process,  receipt  of  sale  proceeds, 
internal control system and fund management (System Issues); 
 
• the extent of compliance of BIFR/GOI guidelines and instructions issued by the 
Company for sale of land and buildings (Compliance Issues); 
 
• that  the  whole  process  of  sale,  systems  and  procedures  were  designed  
and operated in a manner that promotes transparency and the decisions were 
taken in the best interests of the Company. 
 
9.4  Audit criteria 
 
The following criteria were adopted to examine whether: 
 
(i)  BIFR/GOI guidelines were followed regarding: (a) Fixation of reserve price. 
(b) Fixation of Earnest Money Deposit and its forfeiture. (c) Drafting of the tender 
documents. 
(d) Receipt of sale proceeds and recovery of interest in cases of delayed receipts. (e) 
Accounting of sale proceeds. 
(ii) Instructions   issued  by  the  Company   were  in  compliance   with  the  BIFR/GOI 
guidelines. 
 
9.5  Audit methodology and sample size 
 
9.5.1  After  a preliminary  study  and collection  of background  information,  an Entry 
conference  was held with the Management  on 28 February  2008 to discuss  the audit 
objectives, scope of audit and audit criteria. Based on the examination of records relating 
to identification, valuation, tender and sale of surplus land and buildings, a preliminary 
 
 
2  NTC (Delhi, Punjab and Rajasthan), NTC (Maharashtra North), NTC (Maharashtra South), NTC 
(West Bengal, Assam, Bihar and Orissa), NTC (Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry) and NTC (Gujarat). 
 
 
140 

66 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
report was issued to the Management on 18 August 2008. Exit conference to discuss the 
audit fin dings was held on  9  September   2 008.  The Management‟s   reply to the 
performance audit report was received in September 2008. 
 
9.5.2  Total surplus land of 2737.99 acres and buildings of 286.70 acres were 
identified for sale in the revival scheme.  Of this, the Company sold  1354.80  acres of 
land and 
257.85 acres of buildings upto 31 March 2008. In the six sub-offices selected for Audit, 
there were 110 cases of sale upto March 2008 covering 790.68 acres of land and 100.25 
acres of buildings. An amount of Rs.3819.44 crore was realised upto 31 March 2008 by 
sale of surplus assets. All 110 cases (79 cases of land and 31 cases of buildings) were 
reviewed in Audit. 
 
9.6  Acknowledgement 
 
Audit  acknowledges  the  cooperation  and  assistance  extended  by  the  Management  at 
various stages of performance audit. 
 
9.7  Audit findings and recommendations 
 
System Issues 
 
9.7.1  Sale of surplus land and buildings not identified in the revival scheme 
 
Certain parcels of land which were not identified as surplus in the revival schemes were 
sold by the Company. A few cases are: 
 
Table 9.1 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name of the property 
 
Land 
identifie
d (in 
acres) 
 
Actually 
sold (in 
acres) 
 
Difference 
(in acres ) 
 
Remarks 
 
1. 
 
Jyoti Weaving Mills, 
Kolkata 
 
4.29 
 
4.94 
 
0.65 
 
Increase was due to 
mutation done at a later 
date. 
 
2. 
 
Shree  Mahalaxmi  
Cotton 
Mills, 24 paragana 
 
11.24 
 
11.34 
 
0.10  
 
Reasons for sale  of  
land more than identified 
were not on record 
 
3. 
 
Model Mill, Nagpur 
 
40.33 
 
42.09 
 
1.76 
 
4. 
 
Central Cotton Mill, 
Howrah 
 
11.67 
 
12.06 
 
0.39 
 
5. 
 
Bungalow  of  New  City 
Mill, Worli Mumbai 
 
--- 
 
0.16 
 
0.16 
 
Approval  of   BIFR  
was obtained 
 
 
Total   
 
3.06  
 
There were no specific guidelines for sale of land and buildings beyond those 
included in the revival schemes approved by BIFR. Approval of BIFR was not 
obtained for sale of such land and buildings (except in the Sl. No. 5) 
 
 
 
 
141 

67 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9.1 
 
Specific guidelines, for sale of surplus land and buildings not considered in 
the revival schemes approved by BIFR, may be framed. 
 
9.7.2  System of valuation of properties and fixation of reserve price 
 
Out of 110 cases of sale, the reserve price was fixed only in 66 cases of land and 31 
cases of buildings. Two mills were transferred to the Government of Pon dicherry at the 
price agreed in the Memorandum of Understanding.   In the remaining 11 cases, the 
sale was made without following the tender process. 
 
9.7.2.1 System of fixation of reserve price of land 
 
According to the methodology for fixation of reserve price devised (November 2002) by 
the  Company,  reserve  price  was  to  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  average  of  three 
valuations,   n amely,  valuation  in  draft  revival  scheme  (DRS)  approved  by  BIFR, 
valuations given by property consultants and valuation by Central Board of Direct Taxes 
(CBDT).  The GOI further  directed  (November  2004)  that in case of Mumbai,  where 
marketing consultants (consultants) had quoted Minimum Assured Return3  (MAR), the 
reserve price should not be less than MAR. 
 
It was observed in Audit (April 2008) that out of 79 cases of sale of land, only in 27 cases 
all  the  three  valuation  factors  were  considered.  In  37  cases  either  two  or  only  one 
valuation  factors  were considered  while  in 15 cases none of the prescribed  valuation 
factors were considered while fixing the reserve price.   Further, in 26 cases out of 79 
cases, reserve price fixed was less than 30 per cent of the sale value though the GOI had 
specifically directed (April 2005) that reserve price should be nearer to the market value. 
It  was  also  noticed  that  there  was  wide  variation  between  the  actual  sale  value  
and valuation done under the three factors used for reserve price fixation. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that the reserve price was only an indicative 
figure for decision making. Moreover, there was no relation between the reserve price 
fixed and the price bid.  In sale of properties in Mumbai, the Company had realised 180 
per cent to 350 per cent higher  than the reserve  price  fixed because  of location  and 
demand of the property. Also, in case of no response or less response than the 
reserve price in three repeated attempts of tender, the Company had confirmed the 
sale for the value that was best available at that point of time. 
 
The reply of the Management  was  not convincing. Though the reserve price was only 
indicative  it  should not be less than the valuation  as per guidelines  of the Company. 
Further, wide variation between reserve price and sale realisation in Mumbai indicates 
that there was no system to assess the demand and market value of the properties 
despite the GOI directives in April 2005. Also, the Company should have built the 
mechanism for change in the methodology for fixation of reser ve price in case response 
was unsatisfactory. 
 
Deficiencies in different factors used for fixing reserve price were as follows: 
 
3 The value of the land was derived from the value of built-up area after deducting cost of 
construction and development and other ancillary charges. 
 
 
142 

68 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
(A) DRS valuation 
 
In 66 cases of sale of land through tender, valuation in DRS was made upto 2002 whereas 
the sales were made between April 2002 and March 2008. This had resulted in fixation  of 
lower reserve price due to timing difference between the date of valuation in DRS and the date 
of fixation of reserve price. 
 
(B) MAR valuation 
 
The  Company  had  no  s ystem  of  vetting  valuation  reports  and  MAR  given  by  the 
consultants.  Further, the Company had obtained MAR for five land parcels only (sold upto  
March  2008)  against  the  25  land  parcels  identified  for  sale  in  Mumbai.  While quoting 
MAR for these five parcels, the consultants had stated (February 2005) that it was not a 
valuation of the property and the Company may take a conscious decision to fix reserve price 
on the basis of valuation of the property or on the basis of MAR. A comparative position of 
MAR vis-à-vis reserve price fixed and actual sale value in the five cases is given below: 
 
Table 9.2  
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
mill 
Highest 
MAR 
quoted 
by 
consulta
nt 
Valuation of 
building 
structure
s 
Reserve 
price 
fixed 
Sale value Varianc
e 
between 
MAR and 
sale value 
(percentage) 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 7 
(Col 6-Col 
3)/Col 3 x100 
 
1. 
 
Jupiter Mill 
 
142.32 
 
12.22 
 
155.00 
 
276.60 
 
94.35 
 
2. 
 
Elphinston 
Mill 
 
120.00 
 
3.51 
 
125.00 
 
441.75 
 
268.12 
 
3. 
 
Kohinoor Mill 
No.3 
 
111.00 
 
1.15 
 
120.00 
 
421.00 
 
279.28 
 
4. 
 
Mumbai 
Textile Mill 
 
260.00 
 
5.28 
 
270.00 
 
702.22 
 
170.08 
 
5. 
 
Apollo Textile 
Mill 
 
90.00 
 
5.99 
 
100.00 
 
180.00 
 
100.00 
 
 
Total 
 
723.32 
 
28.15 
 
770.00 
 
2021.57 
 
179.49 
 
It was  observed that the variation between sale value realised and MAR quoted by the 
consultants ranged between 94.35 per cent and 279.28 per cent. The purpose of obtaining 
MAR was not achieved as it did not give the realistic market value of the land parcels 
being offered for sale. 
 
A test check of MAR had revealed the following: 
 
(i)  During valuation of MAR in 2005, market rates of Rs.5400 per square foot in 
one case (Sl. No.1) and Rs.7000 per square foot in other cases (Sl. No.2 to 5), 
prevailing 
 
 
 
143 

69 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
during 2002-03 in the area where these mills were situated were adopted. The real estate 
market was sluggish in 2002-03 but had started booming in 2005; as such market rates 
were much higher in 2005 than in 2002. This deficiency in MAR was not observed by the 
Company. In case the market rates of 2002 were upgraded by charging the interest at the 
rate of State Bank of India Prime Lending Rates (SBI PLR) plus four per cent for time 
difference the MAR would have increased by Rs.336.34 crore. 
 
(ii)  While  calculating  saleable  floor  space  index  (FSI)4    for  estimating  revenue 
realisation, the consultants had increased the allowable FSI by 20 per cent available for 
lift,  stairs,  balcony,  etc.,  under  the  Development   Co ntrol  Regulations  for  Greater 
Bombay, 1991 (DCR) but had not considered additional FSI allowable for car parking 
and basement under Regulation 35 of DCR.  Due to this the MAR was understated by 
Rs.19.77 crore. 
 
(iii)  Cost of construction for arriving at MAR was considered as Rs.13,988 per square 
metre in respect of four cases (Sl.No.2 to 5) and Rs.13,450 per square metre for one case 
(Sl.No. 1), whereas ready reckoner rate5  (2005) for the best construction was Rs.8,500 
per square metre. There was, thus, over estimation  of  cost of construction  and under 
estimation of MAR by Rs.137.35 crore. 
 
Thus, absence of any system for vetting MAR reports by the Company had resulted in 
under fixation of reserve price by Rs.493.46 crore in the above five cases. 
 
The  Management  while  accepting  (September  2008)  that  vetting  of  M AR  was  not 
considered by the Company stated that MAR was obtained to determine the best 
price/reserve price. Further, price realised was much higher than the reserve price fixed 
for these land parcels. 
 
The reply of the Management was not acceptable. Best price/reserve price could not be 
determined from unrealistic MAR reports. Also, high realisation could not be taken as a 
plea for acceptance for such MAR reports. 
 
(C)  CBDT valuation 
 
It was observed  in Audit that out of 66 cases of sale of land through  tender,  CBDT 
valuation was considered in 29 cases only. In 28  cases CBDT valuation of 1994 -95 was 
considered and in one case valuation of 1998-99 was considered for fixation of reserve 
price during April 2002 to March  2008. The CBDT valuation was not indexed (based on 
capital  gain  index  of  CBDT)  to  the  year  of fixation  of  reserve  price  for  arriving  at 
realistic value. 
 
The Management  stated (September  2008) that the CBDT valuation was done only in 
1997 and subsequently CBDT was not willing for any valuation. 
 
The  reply  of the Management  was  not  tenable.  Even  the  valuation  of 1997  was  not 
relevant during the year of fixation of reserve price and should have been indexed to the 
 
 
4 Floor Space Index (FSI) in Mumbai = Carpet Area x 1.33 
5  Ready reckoner is a compilation of prevailing market rates in various areas of 
Mumbai. This is compiled by a group of government approved valuers and forwarded by 
the Deputy Inspector General 
of Registration Mumbai Division. 
 
 
144 

70 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
year of fixation of reserve price. Further, the Management could not produce any record 
in support of their reply that CBDT was not willing for any valuation. 
 
The following ca ses highlight  the impact  of deficiencies  in the system  of fixation  of 
reserve price. 
 
(i)  Udaipur Cotton Mill 
 
The reserve price of land of Udaipur Cotton Mills was initially fixed (October 2002) at 
Rs.51.97 crore based on DRS valuation. This was reduced to Rs.12.57 crore in July 2005 
based on prevailing registration rates in the district whereas, in accorda nce with the 
Company‟s  guidelines,  the reserve  price  comes  to Rs.32.28  crore6.  The reserve  price 
fixed was thus, lower by Rs.19.71 crore as compared to the reserve price based on the 
Company‟s guidelines. The land was sold at Rs.15.12 crore to private party in October 
2005. 
 
The Management  stated (May 2008) that values of property had dropped considerably 
due to slow down of the  economy and land could not be used for residential/commercial 
purpose. 
 
The reply was not tenable. The real estate market was booming in 2005 when reserve 
price was re-fixed. 
 
(ii)  Rajkot Textile Mill 
 
The reserve price of land of Rajkot Textile Mills was fixed at Rs.36.00 crore (February 
2003) based on DRS valuation. It was re-fixed at Rs.27.68 crore7 (July 2003) on the basis 
of Company‟s guidelines but was further reduced to Rs.23.00 crore in May 2005 at the 
prevailing registration rate. The land was sold at Rs.18.20 crore (July 2006). The reserve 
price fixed was thus, lower by Rs.4.68 crore as compared to the reserve price based on 
the Company‟s guidelines. 
 
(iii)  Himadri Textile Mill 
 
The reserve price of Himadri  Textile  Mill  was fixed (January  2007) at Rs.8.80  crore 
considering the highest value given by the three  government approved valuers. Due to 
revision  of  registration  rates  in  February  2007,  the  reserve  price  was  increased  to 
Rs.14.00 crore (April 2007). In contravention of the Company‟s guidelines, the DRS and 
CBDT valuations8  were not considered. The land was sold at Rs.11.20 crore in August 
2007. 
 
Recommendation No. 9.2 
 
The valuation by CBDT should be obtained in all cases and given due consideration 
in fixation of reserve price. 
 
 
 
6 The average of DRS valuation (Rs.51.97 crore), indexed CBDT valuation to the year of sale 
(Rs.18.31 crore) and valuation by government approved valuer (Rs.26.57 crore). 
7The average of DRS valuation (Rs.35.30 crore), CBDT valuation (Rs.30.15 crore) and valuation by 
valuers (Rs.17.60 crore). 
8 DRS valuation (Rs.8.77 crore) and CBDT valuation (not available). 
 
 
145 

71 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
9.7.2.2 System of valuation of building structures/materials 
 
Sub-offices were adopting different methodology for valuation and consequent fixation of 
reserve price of buildings structures/materials identified for sale. In all the 31 cases of sale 
of buildings during April 2002 to March 2008 in six sub-offices selected for audit, it was 
observed  that DRS valuation  and valuation  by the government  approved  valuers were 
considered for fixation of the reserve price as given in the table below: 
 
Table 9.3 
 
Sub-office 
 
Total 
case
s 
 
Higher of 
the two 
 
Lower of 
the two 
 
Above both 
 
Betwee
n two 
 
Delhi, Punjab and 
Rajasthan 
 
2 
 
-- 
 
1 
 
1 
 
-- 
 
Gujarat 
 
11 
 
5 
 
2 
 
2 
 
2 
 
West Bengal, 
Assam, Bihar and 
Orissa 
 
9 
 
1 
 
-- 
 
8 
 
-- 
 
Tamil Nadu and 
Pondicherry 
 
8 
 
4* 
 
-- 
 
2 
 
2 
 
Maharashtra North 
 
1 
 
-- 
 
-- 
 
1 
 
-- 
 
*DRS valuation was not done in three cases.  Out of these, in one case reserve price was 
fixed at the valuation given by the registered valuer and in two cases the same was fixed at 
above the valuation given by the valuer. 
 
It was noticed  that no uniform  system  for  fixation  of reserve  price of buildings  
was adopted. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that buildings were always sold on the 
basis of retrievable items like bricks, wooden items, steel structures, wires, etc. The 
system was to go by professional experts, which was followed in all cases. 
 
The Management reply was not convincing as the reasons for adopting different 
criteria for valuation of different buildings were not clarified. 
 
Recommendation No. 9.3 
 
The GOI may lay down guidelines for valuation of building structures/materials  
and the same may be applied uniformly in all the sub-offices. 
 
9.7.3  Defects in the tender documents 
 
It  was  observed  in  Audit  that  in  the  tender  documents  issued  for  sale  of  land  and 
buildings   the   information   disclosed   was   either   incorrect   or   ambiguous   or   vital 
information was not disclosed. Further, the Company had not established any system for 
verification  of  the  contents  of  the  tender  documents.  Due  to  non -existence  of  such 
system, the Company had suffered a loss of Rs.185.10 crore. 
 
The cases in which the Company incurred loss are discussed below. 
 
 
 
146 

72 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
(A)  Mumbai Textile Mill, Mumbai 
 
The tender document for sale of land of Mumbai Textile Mill stated (June 2005) that the 
mill area consisting of 67,293.17 square metre bearing Cadastral Survey (CS) No.464 and 
4/464  was offered  for sale.  The  mill  plot  consisted  of only  CS No.464  admeasuring 
65,993.17 square metre. The CS No.4/464 admeasuring 1,300 square metre consisted of 
Marwari chowka chawl. The land was sold for Rs.702.22 crore (July 2005). 
 
It was observed  in Audit  t hat the Company  had no intention  for sale of the land of 
Marwari chowka chawl (CS No.4/464). It was wrongly included in the tender document. This 
was evident from the fact that in the layout map enclosed with the tender document, only 
mill land (CS No.464) was depicted. Also, in the terms and conditions of t he tender 
document there was no mention of providing alternative accommodation to the occupants 
of Marwari chowka chawl as per Development Control Regulations for Greater Bombay, 
1991. Further, the sa le deed (October 2005) and the possession letter specified the 
boundaries of the land sold which did not include area of Marwari chowka chawl. 
 
In September 2006, the purchaser asked for possession of Marwari chowka chawl (CS 
No.4/464) also since it was included in the tender document. The ASC accepted the fact 
(October 2006) that this parcel of land of 1,300 square metre was wrongly included in the 
tender document but decided to rehabilitate the occupants of the  chawl to another plot of 
land.  The possession and ownership of 1,300 square metre of land worth Rs.13.56 crore 
was given to the private party without any consideration  besi des the liability of about 
Rs.5.23 crore to rehabilitate 24 occupants of chawl was owned by the Company. This had 
resulted in loss of Rs.18.79 crore to the Company. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that though there was mistake in the tender 
that information  regarding Marwari chowka chawl was not incorporated,  however, the 
land was sold on “as is what is” basis.  Further, the responsibility of rehabilitation of 24 
occupants of Marwari chowka chawl was on the purchaser and hence any expenditure on 
that account was to be borne by the purchaser. 
 
The Management  had accepted  the mistake  in the tender document.  However,  as the 
liability of rehabilitation was not disclosed in the tender document, the purchaser could 
not be forced to o wn the liability. Further, the ASC had decided (October 2006) that the 
Company may rehabilitate the occupants of the Marwari chowka chawl. 
 
(B)  Apollo Textile Mill, Mumbai 
 
Surplus land on rear side of Apollo Textile Mill admeasuring 30073.30 square metre with 
existing structures and permissible FSI of 39314.58 square metre was sold in July 2005 to 
the highest bidder at Rs.180 crore. This portion did not have direct access to the main 
road (N.M. Joshi Marg). Tender document did not disclose about any prospective access 
to the main road. Instead, it was  specified in the tender document that access to Jivraj 
Boricha Marg (small road on rear side) could be made available. The Jivraj Boricha Marg 
was heavily encroached and was not motorable. It was observed in Audit that ASC had 
allowed (October 2006) access of 40 foot approach road to the main road (N.M. Joshi 
Marg). This had enhanced the value of land (October 2007) to Rs.1,05,448 per square 
metre (based on the valuation done by government approved valuer after the access to the 
main road was allowed) from Rs.45,784.54 per square metre. Normal enhancement due 
 
 
147 

73 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
to timing difference (the Company charged SBI PLR plus four per cent per annum for 
timing   difference)   worked   out   to   Rs.16,535.09   per   square   metre,   the   abnormal 
enhancement  due  to access  to  the  main  road  (not  disclosed  in the tender  
document) worked out to Rs.43,128.37  per square metre. Thus, by not disclosing the 
feasibility of access  to  the  main  road  (which  was  allowed  later  on)  in  t he  tender  
document,  the Company  had  received  lesser  amount  in  tendered  bids.  This  had  
resulted  in  l oss  of Rs.165.80 crore after deducting consideration received for right to 
access to main road. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that due to improper access through Jeevraj 
Boricha Marg, ASC accepted the proposal of purchaser to grant them right of way on 22 
foot  (and  not  the  40  foot)  through  the  retained  land  of  Apollo  Mill  on  payment  of 
appropriate consideration. Subsequently, the DP Road network of 40 foot and 60 foot in 
and  around  Apollo  and  Sitaram  mills  were  incorporated  by  Municipal  Corporation 
Greater Mumbai (MCGM). 
 
The reply of the Management was not convincing. By giving access from the main road, 
the value of the land had increased substantially (more than 94 per cent). While preparing 
the tender  document,  the possibility  of access  from  the main  road  should  have  been 
considered, which was given subsequently. 
 
(C)  Chalisgaon Textile Mill, Chalisgaon 
 
Six plots of land of Chalisgaon Textile Mill were sold (December 2002) to the highest 
bidder at the negotiated price of Rs.3.34 crore. The purchaser did not pay second and 
final instalment of Rs.2.50 crore which was due in January 2003 on the plea that in the 
tender document the Company had wrongly mentioned the land to be in residential zone 
though it was in indust rial zone. The purchaser asked (February 2003) for extension for 
payment till industrial zone was converted into residential Zone. The Company decided 
(July  2003)  that  purchaser  may  be permitted  to  make  payment  without  interest  after 
change of zone. The payment was received in August 2004. Further, it was decided to 
retain  one  plot  due  to  resistance  from  local  people  and  after  adjusting  the  amount 
receivable  for  that  plot,  the  net  receivable  was  worked  out  to  Rs.1.90  crore.  Thus, 
incorrect information  in tender document  r esulted in delay in receipt of sale proceeds 
amounting  to Rs.1.90  crore  for 18 months  for which  no interest  was recovered.  The 
Company lost interest of Rs.51 lakh calculated on the basis of 18 per cent per annum for 
the period from 13 February 2003 to 21 August 2004. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that the State Government/MCGM  were  not 
granting  approval  for  con version.  The  sale  of  l and  was  critical  for  survival  of  the 
Company  and  implementation  of  revival  scheme.  Hence,  sale  was  confirmed  before 
change of zone. 
 
The reply of the Management confirmed the Audit contention.  
Recommendation No. 9.4 
The Company may establish a proper system for verification of all the facts 
included in tender documents to avoid defects in tender documents. 
 
 
 
148 

74 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
9.7.4  Weaknesses in internal controls of accounting system 
 
It was observed in Audit that the Company did not have any Control Register to monitor the 
receipt and deposit of Demand Drafts (DDs)/Pay Orders (POs) received as Earnest Money 
Deposit (EMD). The DDs/ POs received with the tenders were kept in Technical Division  and  
DDs/POs  of  unsuccessful  bidders  were  returned  in  original  without knowledge of 
Finance Division. 
 
Recommendation No. 9.5 
 
The internal control in accounting system be strengthened. 
 
The Management had accepted (September 2008) the recommendation. 
 
Compliance Issues 
 
9.7.5  Sale below registration rates 
 
The GOI directed  (Nov ember  2004) that the reserve price fixed (or re-fixed)  for any 
property should not be less than the circle rates/registration  rates fixed by the District 
Collector.  It  was  observed  in  audit  (April  2008)  that  in  contravention  of  the  GOI 
directions; sale was made below the prevailing registration rates in the following cases. 
 
Table No 9.4  
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the mill Valuation as 
per registration 
rates 
Reserve price 
fixed by the 
Company 
Actual 
Sale 
price 
Loss 
 
1. 
 
Edward Mill 
 
10.55 
 
4.00 
 
5.85 
 
4.70 
 
2. 
 
Shree Bijay Cotton Mill 
 
3.79 
 
1.92 
 
1.95 
 
1.84 
 
3. 
 
Jahangir Textile Mill 
 
26.83 
 
25.00 
 
25.00 
 
1.83 
 
4. 
 
Coimbatore Murugan 
Mill 
 
3.04 
 
1.73 
 
1.89 
 
1.15 
 
5. 
 
Kishnaveni Textile Mill 
 
5.50 
 
4.80 
 
5.20 
 
0.30 
 
6. 
 
Sri Rangavilas Mill 
 
8.61 
 
3.33 
 
8.00 
 
0.61 
 
Total 
 
10.43 
 
The Company lost an opportunity to earn Rs.10.43 crore due to fixing reserve price and 
sale below the prevailing registration rates. 
 
9.7.6  Sale below reserve price 
 
The GOI directed (November 2004) that no sale should be confirmed where the highest 
bid falls below the reserve price. In all such cases, the tenders should be called again. It 
was observed in Audit that in contravention of the GOI directions, sale was made below 
the reserve price. This could be seen from the sale of building of Om Parasakthi Mills, 
Kishnaveni Textile Mills and Somasundaram Mill. 
 
 
 
149 

75 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
The reserve price for demolition  of  the buildings of Om Parasakthi Mills, Kishnaveni 
Textile Mills and Somasundaram Mill and carting away of debris was fixed (April 2003) for 
Rs.54 lakh, Rs.46 lakh and Rs.90 lakh respectively based on the highest of t he salvage 
value (as per valuation done by government approved valuer), six per cent of the cost of 
replacement as assessed by the said valuer and Rs.40 per square foot. The highest offers 
received (June 2003) was Rs.28.25 lakh for Om Parasakthi Mills, Rs.25.20 lakh for 
Kishnaveni  Textile Mills and Rs.52.20 lakh for Somasundaram  Mill. Though the bids 
were lower than the reserve price the ASC approved (June 2003) the sale resulting in loss 
of potential revenue of Rs.84.35 lakh.   The ASC had justified its decision stating that 
value arrived based on six per cent of the cost of replacement would be appropriate for 
comparison and bids received were more than that criteria. The contention of ASC was 
not in conformity with the GOI directions. 
 
9.7.7  Sale without following tender process 
 
As per BIFR guidelines, sale of as sets was to be affected by way of sale through public 
tender. 
 
It was observed in Audit that in case of Apollo Textile Mills, Mumbai, five parcels of land  
were  sold  without  following  the  ten der  process.  In addition  to the  surplus  land 
(39,314.58 square metre of FSI) sold to M/s  Macrotech Constructions in July 2005 by 
following the tender process, 10,105.68 square metre9  of FSI was also sold to the same 
party during April 2006 to March 2008 without following the tendering process. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9.6 
 
All the properties identified should be sold  through public tender to fetch the 
maximum value. 
 
9.7.8  Inconsistencies in the guidelines 
 
In the revival scheme, guidelines to be followed by ASC for the sale of surplus assets 
were issued by the BIFR and the GOI.  Accordingly, the Company laid down (July 2002) 
the procedure  for  sale of surplus assets to be adopted by ASC. This was amended  in 
November   2002   and   March   2003.   It   was   observed   in   Audit   that   there   were 
inconsistencies  among the guidelines issued by the BIFR/GOI and the procedures  laid 
down by the Company.  Some of the inconsistencies were as follows: 
 
(a)  The BIFR guidelines provided that bidders should deposit the EMD equal to 10 
per cent of the offer so that the reserve price fixed by the Company was not indicated to 
the intended  bidders.   However,  the Company  fixed (July 2002) the amount of EMD 
equivalent to five per cent of the reserve price which was increased to 10 per cent in 
March 2003.  Due to this, reserve price became indicative. Besides, wherever offer was 
more than the re serve price, less EMD was received by the C ompany and consequent 
guarantee cover for performance of the sale contract was reduced. 
 
 
 
9 242.91 sq. mt + 3850.28 sq. mt. +1932.21 sq. mt. +441.40 sq. mt. +3638.88 sq. mt. 
 
 
150 

76 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
It was observed in Audit that in case of sale of land of Aurangabad Textile Mills, EMD 
was fixed at Rs. one crore (being 10 per cent of the reserve price) by the Company. The 
highest bid was offered for Rs.18.90 crore. As per BIFR guidelines EMD should have 
been Rs.1.89  crore.  The party failed to pay the instalments  even within the extended 
period as such the deal was cancelled  and EMD of Rs. one crore only was forfeited. 
Thus, the Company  lost the opportunity  to earn Rs.89 lakh due to non-observance  of 
BIFR guidelines. 
 
The Management  stated (September  2008) that the Company  could not recover  more 
EMD than fixed by ASC.   
 
The reply was not acceptable. The EMD should have been fixed at 10 per cent of the 
offer as per BIFR guidelines instead of 10 per cent of reserve price. 
 
(b)  The BIFR prescribed that the Company should receive Bank Draft for the EMD. 
However, the C ompany provided (July 2002) that in case EMD was above Rs. one crore 
unconditional  and irrevocable  Bank Guarantee  (BG) could be accepted  in lieu of the 
Bank Draft. 
 
It was  observed  in  Audit  that  in  19  cases  of  sale,  49  bids  (30  unsuccessful  and  19 
successful) were received with BG as EMD.  Amount of Rs.429.85 crore received in BG 
could not be deposited in the bank.  In case the amount was received in bank draft as per 
BIFR guidelines and deposited in the bank, the Company could have earned the interest 
of Rs.57.70 lakh at the rate of 3.50 per cent per annum for 14 days (the time available for 
refund of EMD after tender opening). 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that EMD received from the bidders, either by 
way of bank draft or bank guarantee, was returned to them immediately  af ter opening 
tender,  keeping  the  EMD  of  highest  bidder  in  custody.  The  bank  guarantee  was 
immediately  converted  into  bank  draft  through  the  highest  bidder  and  the  Company 
received EMD amount by bank draft and deposited the same in Escrow Account. 
 
The  Management,  however,  did  not  clarify  the  reasons  for  deviating  from  BIFR 
guidelines 
 
(c)  BIFR guidelines provided that the Company should charge interest at the rate of 
18 per cent per annum on the delayed  p ayments.   However,  the Company  instructed 
(March 2003) the sub-offices to charge interest at the rate of prevailing SBI PLR plus 
four per cent per annum on delayed payments. It was stipulated in the tender document 
that if t he successful bidder did not pay the balance amount of consideration within the 
payment schedule, the ASC could forfeit the EMD and any other deposits made and can 
proceed to resell the property.   However, the ASC could extend the payment schedule 
upto 60 days. 
 
It was observed in Audit that there were deviations from these provisions in 10 cases as 
discussed below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
151 

77 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
(i)  In four cases10  extension beyond 60 days for instalments receivable of Rs.630.21 
crore was granted  by ASC.   The extension  ranged from 96 days to 1371 days, thus, 
giving undue benefit of the price escalation to the private parties.   Besides,  interest of 
Rs.46.79  crore  (upto  31  March  2008)  leviable  on  delayed  payments  as  per  BIFR 
guidelines  was  not  charged  on  different  grounds.  Further,  in  one  case  (bungalow  of 
Apollo Textile Mill at Napean Sea Road, Mumbai), the title was passed (March 2007) without 
receiving the full consideration  of  Rs.281.71 crore (including interest), against the BIFR 
guidelines. 
 
The Management stated (June 2008) that ASC was fully empowered to extend the period 
beyond 60 days. 
 
The reply of the Management was contrary to the decision of ASC (February 2008) taken 
in the  case of A hmedabad Jupiter Textile Mill, where it was  clearly mentioned that they 
could not extend the period of payment beyond 60 days. 
 
(ii)  In  six  cases11   extension  upto  60  days  was  granted  by  ASC.  In  two  
cases (Kohinoor Mill No.3 and Old labour chawl of Model Mill), the interest of Rs.1.20 crore 
chargeable as per BIFR guidelines was not levied on the delayed payments.  In other four 
cases,  the  total  interest  of Rs.1.94  crore  was  charged  against  the  leviable  interest  of 
Rs.2.08  crore.  This  resulted  in  non  recovery/under  recovery  of  interest  on  
delayed payment by Rs.1.34 crore. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that ASC was an empowered body to decide 
the issues relating to the sale of surplus assets and to decide the guidelines depending 
upon the situation and circumstances. 
 
The  reply   was  not  tenable.   ASC  was  not  empowered   to  take  any  decision   in 
contravention of BIFR/ GOI guidelines. Interest should have been charged on the delayed 
payments. 
 
(d)  As  per  BIFR  guidelines   the  purchaser   was  required   to  pay  the  purchase 
consideration after adjusting the EMD received in two instalments of 50 per cent before 
the end of 60 days and 40 per cent of the sale value before the end of 90 days from the 
date of intimation of acceptance of the bid. However, the Company  provided (July 2002) 
that in case  sale value was less than Rs.100 crore, the payment should be made in two 
instalments of 25 per cent (after adjusting EMD) within 15 days and  75 per cent of the 
sale value within 60 days from the date of issue of acceptance letter by the Company. For 
sale value of more than Rs.100 crore, the Company provided that the payment should be 
made in three instalments of 25 per cent (after adjusting EMD) within 15 days, 40 per 
cent within 45 days and 35 per cent of the sale value within 90 days respectively from the 
date of issue of acceptance letter by the Company. 
 
 
 
 
 
10  Elphinstone Spinning & Weaving Mill, Panipat Woollen Mill, bungalow of Apollo Textile Mill at 
Napean Sea Road and Tata Textile Mill. 
11 Kohinoor Mill No.3, Old labour chawl of Model Mill, Rampuria Cotton Mill, Bengal Fine 
Spinning & Weaving Mill No.1, Gaya Cotton & Jute Mills, Bangasri Cotton Mill. 
 
 
152 

78 
 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9.7 
 
(i)  The Company should adhere to the guidelines prescribed by the BIFR. 
 
(ii)  The  GOI  may  consider  specifying  modalities  where  the  delay  in  
payment exceeds 60 days. 
 
The Management stated (September 2008) that in the light of recommendations made by 
the Audit, this matter will be placed in the Central ASC meeting for consideration. 
 
9.7.9  Fund management 
 
According to t he BIFR guidelines, all the funds generated from sale of assets were to be 
credited to a separate account and all expenses related to Modified Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme and modernization  were to be debited to that account. As on 31 March 2008, 
Rs.3819.44  crore  was  generated  by  the  Company  from  the  sale  of  surplus  assets 
(including machinery). Surplus fund of Rs.1,452.60 crore was invested in term deposits 
with Banks and an interest of Rs.430.43 crore was earned as on 31 March 2008. 
 
It was observed in Audit that: 
 
• No separate account was maintained for deposition of sale proceeds of surplus assets 
and subsequent utilisation of money received which was against BIFR guidelines. 
 
• There was delay of 2 to 25 days in remitting the sale proceeds from one of the sub-
offices  (West  Bengal  Assam  Bihar  and  Orissa)  to  the  Corporate  office resulted in 
locking of fund. 
 
• The GOI had provided Rs.1,321.34 crore only for wage support against which the 
Company  had expended  Rs.1,3 62.53  crore for shortfall in wages and Rs.13.00 crore  
for  back  wages  upto  31  March  2008.  This  had  resulted  in  irregular expenditure of 
Rs.54.19 crore from the funds generated from the revival scheme. 
 
Recommendation No. 9.8 
 
The  schedule  of  sale  of  surplus  assets  should  be  synchronized   with  the  
fund requirements for modernisation. The Management may ensure that fund 
realized from the sale is accounted for as per BIFR guidelines. 
 
9.8  Conclusion 
 
After analysing  the whole  process  of sale and disposal  of land and buildings,  it was 
observed that: 
 
• The GOI/BIFR guidelines for determination of reserve price were followed in 27 cases only 
out of 79 cases of sale of land examined. 
 
• Reports of consultants were not evaluated and the tender documents had certain 
irregularities. 
 

Report No. PA 27 of 2009-10 
 
 
• Properties  were  sold  below  registration/circle  rates;  below  reserve  price  
and without following the tender process. 
 
• No prescribed procedure for valuation of building structures was in existence. 
 
• There were inconsistencies  among the guidelines  issued by BIFR/GOI  and 
the procedure laid down by the Company. 
 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December 2008; reply was awaited. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

80 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE 7th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 12TH NOVEMBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1030 hrs to 1230 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
6 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
8 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
10 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
11 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
12 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy  
13 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri Sunil Verma   Dy. C&AG (Comm.) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri K.P. Sashidharan  Director General (Commercial) 
3. Shri R.M. Johri   Principal Director Commercial Audit 
Officials of National Textile Corporation Limited 
 
1 Shri K. Ramachandran Pillai CMD 
2 Shri R.K. Sharma Director (Technical) 
3 Shri B.K. Mishra Director (Finance) 

81 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives from the Office of 
C&AG and requested them to brief the Committee on Chapter IX reg arding „Sale of 
Surplus Land and Building by NTC‟ of Audit Report No. PA 27 of 2009 -10 (Performance 
Audit).  Accordingly, the Chairman, Audit Board (Deputy C&AG) briefed the Committee 
on the subject matter.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of National Textile 
Corporation Limited (NTC) and drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by 
the Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  The 
representatives of NTC made a brief power point presentat ion on the subject.  The 
Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the representatives of NTC.  
Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was not readil y available 
with the representatives of NTC.  They were therefore asked to furnish the same to the 
Committee Secretariat at the earliest possible. 
 
4. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of NTC for providing all the 
information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
5. Verbatim record of evidence was kept.  
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

82 
 
MINUTES OF THE 11th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 17TH DECEMBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1700 hrs to 1745 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
4 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5 Shri Ganesh Singh 
6 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
8 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
9 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
10 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
11 Shri Amar Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri K.P. Sashidharan  Director General (Commercial) 
2. Y.N. Thakare    Principal Director (Commercial) & Member  
      Secretary, Audit Board 
3. Shri R.M. Johri   Principal Director Commercial Audit 
 
Officials of Ministry of Textiles 
 
1. Smt. Rita Menon Secretary 
2. Dr. Sutanu Behuria AS&FA 
3. Smt. Monika S. Garg Joint Secretary  
4. Shri J.K. Prasad Director 
 
 

83 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Textiles 
and drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating to 
evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  Then, the Members raised queries on 
various aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same 
were given by the representatives of Ministry.  Information on some of the points raised 
by the Committee was not readily available with the representatives of Ministry.  They 
were therefore asked to furnish the s ame to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest 
possible. 
 
3. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry for providing all 
the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
4. Verbatim record of evidence was kept.  
 
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

84 
 
MINUTES OF THE 15th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 12th FEBRUARY 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1300 hrs to 1315 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
4 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
5 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
6 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
7 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravinder Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri Sunil Verma  Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri K.P. Sasidharan Director General (Commercial) 
 
2. The Committee first took up for consideration Draft report on „Sales of surplus 
Land and Buildings by National Textile Corporation Ltd.‟ based on Ch apter IX of C&AG 
Report No. PA 27 of 2009 -10 (Performance Audit of activities of selected PSUs) and 
adopted the same with some minor modifications.  
 
3.  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the Reports for presentation.  
 
5. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 