C.P.U. NO. 961 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2013 - 2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
PURCHASE OF CONDENSATE AT CRUDE OIL PRICE BY OIL & NATURAL GAS 
CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[BASED ON AUDIT PARA NO. 13.5.1 OF C&AG’S REPORT NO. 9 OF 2009-10] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.2.2014 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 5.2.2014  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY 2014 / MAGHA, 1935 (S) 
  
 
28 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
Composition of the Committee (2013-14)  
Composition of the Committee (2010-11)   
Composition of the Committee (2011-12)   
Composition of the Committee (2012-13)   
Introduction  
 REPORT   
 PART - I  
Chapter-I AUDIT PARA  
Chapter-II DEFICIENCIES IN PSC AND VALUATION OF CONDENSATE 
(i). APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE 19.11 
(ii). SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
(iii). BENEFIT TO THE GOVERNMENT EXCHEQUER  
(iv). VALUE ADDED PRODUCTS 
(v). EIL STUDY 
(vi). DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT FROM THE BASSEIN GAS FIELD 
(vii). VIOLATION OF INTERIM ARRANGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
PART - II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 ANNEXURES  
 Relevant Articles of PSC 
 
 
 APPENDICES  
Appendix-I Minutes of the Sitting  of the Committee on Public Undertakings held 
on 6 August 2012  
Appendix-II Minutes of the Sitting  of the Committee on Public Undertakings held 
on 1 October 2012  
Appendix-III Minutes of the Sitting  of the Committee on Public Undertakings held 
on 7 January 2014  
  
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.     Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri Yogendra Singh Executive Officer 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2010-2011) 
 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
5 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
6 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
8 Shri Baijayant Panda 
9 Shri L. Rajagopal 
10 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12 Shri Ganesh Singh 
13 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
17 Shri Naresh Gujral 
18 Shri Prakash Javadekar 
19 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
20 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
21 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
22 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2011-2012) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
4. Shri Ramesh Bais 
5. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
9. Shri Baijayant Panda ‘Jay’ 
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivajirao Patil 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Vacant   
17. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
18. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
19. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant  
22. Shri N.K. Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
*  Vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 27.1.2012.  
 
#  Vice Ms. Mabel Rebello and Shri Tapan Kumar Sen ceased to be members of the 
Committee consequent upon their retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2.4.2012.  
  

COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Vacant  
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.     Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.     Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________  
 
* Vice Shri Ambica Banerjee, M.P. passed away on 25 April, 2013.  
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings (2013 -14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -
eighth Report on purchase of condensate at crude oil price by Oil & Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited based on Audit Para No. 13.5.1 of C&AG’s Report No. 9 of 2009-10. 
 
2. The Committee on Publ ic Undertakings (2010 -11) had selected the above said 
subject for detailed examination. However, the examination of the Subject could not be 
completed during the term of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2010 -11). The 
Committee on Public Undertakings ( 2011-12 & 2012 -13) reselected the subject and 
further continued the examination.   Since the examination remained inconclusive during 
the terms of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2011 -12 & 2012 -13), the present 
Committee again selected the Subject to complete the unfinished task. 
  
3. The Committee (2012 -13) took oral evidence of the representatives of ONGC 
Limited and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 6 August 2012 and 1 October 
2012.   
  
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their S itting held on              
7 January 2014. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and ONGC Limited for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to them  in connection with the examination of the 
Subject. 
 
6. The Committee would like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of Comptroller & Auditor General of India.  
 
7. The Committee also wish to expr ess their sincere thanks to the predecessor 
Committees for their valuable contribution in the examination of the subject. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi ;   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 January, 2013 Chairman 
17 Pausha, 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 

PART - I 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
AUDIT PARA 
 
The Tapti gas field is a joint venture (JV), jointly operated by Oil and Natural  Gas 
Corporation Limited ( ONGC), Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and British Gas 
Exploration and Production India Limited (BGEPIL) as per the Production Sharing 
Contract (PSC) executed in December 1994.  The production of gas from the field 
started in June 1997.  The field is also producing condensate along with gas.  The PSC, 
however, did not provide for the disposal of Tapti condensate (JV condensate) and the 
Government of India (GOI) also did not appoint its nominee for purchase of the 
condensate.  At the instance of the GOI, an ‘interim arrangement’ was made (May 
1998) whereby ONGC retained the JV condensate and in turn delivered its own gas to 
GAIL (India) Limited on energy (MMBTU) equivalent basis.  GAIL was paying for the 
total MMBTU of gas to the J V as per the PSC gas pricing mechanism.  ONGC in turn 
was using the JV condensate for extraction of value added products (VAPs) viz., 
Naphtha, Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO), Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG) etc., at its own 
plant at Hazira.  This arrangement continued till 31 March 2005. 
 
ONGC was also the transporter and processor of JV gas and its issues on 
fixation of transportation and processing charges were outstanding with the JV.  Other 
two JV partners (viz., RIL and BGEPIL) insisted on valuation of cond ensate at crude oil 
price instead of gas price as a precondition f or settlement of these issues. On              
31 December, 2005, ONGC entered into a ‘settlement agreement’ (effective 1 April 
2005) with Panna Mukta and Tapti (PMT) JV on pricing of conden sate at crude oil price 
including other related issues like fixation of transportation and processing charges and 
delivery point etc.  ONGC apprised (3 March, 2006) its Board of Directors (Board) that 
on valuing the condensate at crude oil price, ONGC would gain Rs. 131 crore (US$ 
29.11 million) in terms of value of VAPs to be extracted from the condensate production 
profile of 2.021 MMT for the period from April 2005 to 2019.  The proposal to value 

condensate at crude oil price under the ‘settlement agreem ent’ was approved by the 
Board in March 2006. 
Audit observed (June 2008) that the decision of ONGC to purchase condensate 
at crude oil price was inconsistent with the directives (May 1998) of Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) to treat the conde nsate as gas.  MOPNG had 
reiterated its decision in November 2003 and informed the JV that the existing system 
would continue.  Further, a study conducted (February 2005) by Engineers India Limited 
at the instance of MOPNG also concluded (March 2005) that condensate obtained from 
Tapti field could be treated as gas which was accepted (April 2005) by the MOPNG.  
Besides, ONGC was valuing the condensate generated from its own Bassein gas field 
at gas price and paying royalty as applicable to gas.  ONGC’s deci sion to treat 
condensate as crude was imprudent as it had resulted in a loss of Rs. 853.09 crore 
(upto March 2009) to ONGC.  Considering the average price paid for condensate (i.e. 
US$ 69.56 per barrel), loss to ONGC over the remaining contract period (200 9-2019) 
was estimated at Rs. 1091.58 crore.  The net gain of Rs. 131 crore on the VAPs 
apprised to the B oard was in fact loss of Rs. 202 crore (US$ 45 million) as ONGC had 
not considered the subsidy element on domestic LPG and SKO which it was bearing as 
per the Government directives. 
The Committee in this connection note that at the time of entering into the 
aforesaid contract, ONGC had been in existence for nerly four decades in different 
forms-initially set up as an Oil and Natural Gas Directorate in 195 5, converted as a 
statutory body in 1959 and re -organised as a limited company in 1994 under the 
Companies Act. 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - II 
 
DEFICIENCIES IN PSC AND VALUATION OF CONDENSATE 
 
Audit pointed out that t he Production Sharing Contract (PSC) of Tapti gas f ield 
did not provide for the disposal of Tapti Condensate (also called JV condensate)  which 
is produced alongwith the gas .  As such GOI did not appoint any nominee for purchase 
of Tapti condensate.  However, when production of gas for Tapti was commenced i n 
June 1997 on the direction of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas , an interim 
arrangement (MoU) was made for delivering substituted equivalent volume of gas on 
energy basis (MMBTU) in lieu of Tapti condensate (after making interim deductions) to 
delivery point at Hazira. 
 
 When asked as to why the Product Sharing Contract (PSC) has not provided for 
disposal of Tapti Condensate and is silent over the appointment of Government 
nominee for purchase of condensate, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in it s 
written reply dated 5 April 2013 submitted that i t is right that Tapti PSC is silent about 
disposal of Tapti Condensate and the Government nominee because no separate 
disposal plan of Condensate was envisaged under the PSC. The Mid and South Tapti 
PSC was awarded as a discovered field producing non -associated Natural Gas. The 
Condensate under Tapti PSC is not a casing head condensate but is produced along 
with the gas and transported in a commingled form.  During negotiations of the PSC, 
Operator suggested to lay a separate pipeline for transportation of the gas. However, 
ONGC maintained that since it had excess capacity available in the existing 36”/42” 
pipeline from South Bassein to Hazira, the same could be used for transporting the 
Tapti gas along with ONGC’s commingled gas and JV would pay transportation tariff for 
the same. This view was supported by Government and agreed to by the operator and 
accordingly it was included in the initial Plan of Development (IPOD) annexed at 
Annexure –G1 to the PSC.   However, because of the very characteristics of the 
condensate, Article 19.11 of the PSC has provided that the provisions specified in 
determination of the price of the sales of crude Oil shall apply mutatis mutandis to 
condensates for the Valuation of Oil. 

The Audit in its vetting remarks stated that i n the absence of disposal of Tapti 
Condensate and the Government nominee under the PSC, the issue of disposal and 
pricing of condensate was jointly deliberated by the MoPNG, DGH, EIL, ONGC and 
PMT-JV, GAIL on various occasions and it was concluded that condensate to be treated 
as gas. These are mentioned below.  
 
“(a)  In 1997, at the time of commencement of production from Tapti field, on 
the direction of MoPNG, an interim arrangement was made for delivering 
substituted equivalent volume of gas on energy b asis (MMBTU contents), in lieu 
of Tapti condensate (after making interim 5% deductions) to GAIL at Hazira. As 
per MOU between ONGC and JV for transportation of gas and associated 
condensate, entered in June 1997, ONGC has been deducting 5% from the 
condensate energy in terms of MMBTU received at TPP (Tapti Process 
Platform), before redelivery to GAIL at Hazira.  The clause 5 of the MOU 
between JV (as shipper) and ONGC (as transporter) for transportation of gas and 
associated condensate the parties (i.e. JV and ONGC) inter alia stated that  
‘......the parties acknowledge and agree that the foregoing interim 
deduction of 5% of the number of BTUs contained in condensate is a 
special temporary procedure undertaken during the term of MOU pending 
final agreement b etween Shipper and the Government of India on the 
disposition and fiscal treatment of condensate produced in the Mid & 
South Tapti contract area’. 
 This was also reiterated by ONGC in its reply to the audit in June 2008 
wherein it stated that ‘the 5% deduc tion in respect of condensate energy is 
subject to final decision regarding sale/disposal of the condensate by the 
Government’. 
(b) In its internal note of January 1998, MoPNG brought out that ONGC and 
EIL felt that there would be some administrative probl em in treating condensate 
at Hazira. Whereas, Enron Oil & Gas India Limited (EOGIL), Operator of Tapti JV 
field  (EOGIL stake was purchased by BGEPIL in 2002) had informed MoPNG 
that Tapti condensate may be treated as gas and even if the condensate is 
treated as crude oil, no cess and royalty applicable to crude oil would be payable 
by them. As there was no clear opinion on treatment of condensate as crude oil 
or gas, MoPNG referred the matter to the Law Ministry for legal interpretation of 
provisions of PS C and provisions of law. The law Ministry in turn replied 
(19.01.1998) that as the matter referred was of technical nature and MoPNG at 
first instance may examine the issue and give its comments. 
(c) As the issue required somewhat deeper examination, at th e direction of 
MoPNG a joint meeting with the representatives of ONGC, Engineers India 
Limited (EIL) and Director General of Hydrocarbon (DGH) was held in 13th and 
14th April 1998 to look into the possible solution to the condensate disposal of 

Tapti field  in terms of nominee, price of condensate, royalty and metering etc. 
The committee after examining the definition of condensate, crude oil and natural 
gas under Tapti PSC had following interpretation and conclusion.  
(i) Interpretation: ‘The well fluid pro duced at Tapti field contains 
hydrocarbons which fall under the definition of natural gas and condensate 
due to their being vapour phase and liquid phase respectively at normal 
temperature and pressure conditions. However, these hydrocarbons are 
not separa ted at the platforms at normal temperature and pressure 
conditions as the processing facility is not designed for such separation at 
the platform. Condensate as defined in the PSC is not being obtained at 
Tapti platform and hence it cannot be measured as a separate product. By 
installing a liquid chromatograph in addition to the existing, it would be 
possible to assess the extent of hydrocarbon in well fluid that would 
remain in liquid phase at normal temperature and pressure. However, it is 
an indirect method and may not be very accurate. If this condensate is to 
be obtained as a product on Tapti platform the stabilization facilities to 
bring the condensate to normal temperature and pressure conditions and 
other facilities as deemed necessary would need to be ascertained from 
the operator’. 
(ii) Conclusion: Condensate as per provisions of the PSC cannot be sold 
to a nominee as the same is not available as a product in the present 
scenario. Hence identifying a part of the production as condensate and 
part as gas is not feasible and only logical way of measuring the 
production from Tapti field is in terms of equivalent energy.  
(d) During March 1998, EOGIL on issue of finalization of Tapti Gas Sales 
Purchase Agreement (GSPA) intimated to the DGH/MoPNG that JV w as willing 
to sell the condensate either on MMBTU equivalent basis or condensate itself, 
but in either case at the international prices established in and on terms of 
conditions consistent with the PSC. Thus Tapti -JV was willing to sell Tapti 
condensate at MMbtu equivalent basis i.e. gas price as per PSC (Article 21).  
(e) During the progress review meeting of PMT -JV held (November 2003) by 
MoPNG with PMT -JV partners, DGH and Government nominee, IOC and GAIL 
for purchase of JV crude oil and gas respectively , the issue regarding 
designating, a Government nominee for receipt of condensate was discussed. It 
was brought out that ONGC is at present receiving condensate at Hazira. The 
Joint Secretary, MoPNG mentioned that in case any party has problem with 
existing arrangement, it should send its suggestions/proposal to DGH, else, the 
existing system would continue.     
(f) At the instance of MoPNG, EIL carried out the simulations for the well fluid 
composition for Tapti gas field as furnished by ONGC. EIL, in its report of March 
2005 had stated that condensate was not present at reservoir conditions, was 
generated at the wellhead conditions and was in vapour form even at a 
temperature of 42.7oC. On examination of the behaviour of the Tapti well fluid at 

reservoir a nd wellhead conditions and the definition of condensate as given in 
the PSC, EIL concluded (March 2005) that condensate obtained from Tapti gas 
field can be treated as gas. MoPNG accepted EIL recommendation (April 2005). 
(g) Thus, from the above facts, it can be seen that the term ‘condensate’ was 
examined by the various technical bodies working under MoPNG who opined  
that condensate can be treated as gas and same was also agreed  to by the 
MoPNG. 
 The term ‘condensate’ was defined at article 1.18 in the PSC as ‘those low 
vapour pressure hydrocarbons obtained from natural gas through condensation 
or extraction and refers solely to those hydrocarbons that are liquid at normal 
surface temperature and pressure conditions (provided that in the event 
condensate i s produced from an oil field and is segregated and separated 
separately to the delivery point, then the provisions of this contract shall apply to 
such condensate as it were crude oil)’.  
 It is explicit from the above definition that a condensate would be  treated 
as crude oil and provisions of the PSC (impliedly Article 19.11 for its valuation as 
crude oil) would apply to such a condensate only if: 
 (a) the condensate is produced from an oil field; and 
 (b) it is segregated and separated separately. 
  Since condensate in the instant case is produced from a gas field 
and not from an oil field, the first and essential condition is not satisfied 
and, hence, condensate produced from the Tapti gas field cannot be 
treated at par with crude oil. Article 19.11 of PSC for valuation of the 
condensate would, therefore, not apply for its valuation.  
 Further, even if the Tapti field was an oil field, the second condition is not 
satisfied as no facilities have been installed at the platform to segregate and 
separate the condensate separately. Hence, for this reason also, the condensate 
produced from Tapti gas field cannot be treated as crude oil and Article 19.11 
cannot be applied for its valuation. 
 In a joint meeting (April 1998) ONGC, EIL and DGH examined the 
definitions of condensate under PSC and concluded that ‘these hydrocarbons are 
not separated at the platforms normal temperature and pressure conditions as 
the processing facility is not designed for such separation at the platform’. Hence, 
it was stated that ‘ condensate as per provisions of the PSC cannot be sold to a 
nominee as the same is not available as a product in the present scenario. 
Hence identifying a part of the production as condensate and part as gas is not 
feasible and only logical way of measurin g the production from Tapti field is in 
terms of equivalent energy’. 
Even if the argument put forth by Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas that 
because of the very characteristics of the condensate, Article 19.11 of the PSC 

has provided that the provisions  specified in determination of the price of the 
sales of crude oil shall apply mutatis mutandis to condensates for the valuation of 
Oil (which means that Article 19.2 to 19.10 are to be applied’) is to be considered 
(though contrary to term ‘condensate’ ex amined and accepted by MoPNG 
through its various technical bodies) ONGC needs to be appointed as its 
nominee of the Government under Article 18.2 and 19 of PSC. This has not been 
done in the revised system of disposal of condensate.” 
 
The Committee enquire d as to  whether any Detailed Project Report was 
prepared before the PSC was signed and, if so, whether there was no reference in the 
DPR about disposal of JV condensate and appointment of nominee for purchase of 
condensate.  In response , the Ministry  of Petroleum & Natural Gas in a written reply 
stated that u nder mid -South Tapti PSC, the Detailed Project Report was the 
‘Development Plan’ which was prepared before the signing of the PSC and is annexed 
as Annexure G1 to PSC. In the Development Plan, the   dis posal plan of condensate 
products has been   stated that it will be transported via a sub -marine line to a 
connecting point with the existing Bassein - Hazira Pipelin e or the new planned 
pipeline.  
 
 In response to the aforesaid reply of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, the 
Audit in their vetted remarks stated as follows: 
 
“The draft report of on pricing options submitted on 15.12.1998 by the three 
member committee referred by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  in reply 
was not accepted by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas as evident from the 
fact that during the progress review meeting of PMT -JV held (November 2003) 
by MoPNG with PMT -JV partners, DGH and Government nominee, IOC and 
GAIL for purchase of JV crude oil and gas respectively, th e issue regarding 
designating, a Government nominee for receipt of condensate was discussed. It 
was brought out that ONGC is at present receiving condensate at Hazira. The 
Joint Secretary, MoPNG mentioned that in case any party has problem with 
existing arrangement, it should send its suggestions/proposal to DGH, else, the 
existing system would continue. Further, at the instance of MoPNG, EIL carried 
out the simulations for the well fluid composition for Tapti gas field as furnished 
by ONGC. EIL, in its rep ort of March 2005 had stated that condensate was not 
present at reservoir conditions, was generated at the wellhead conditions and 
was in vapour form even at a temperature of 42.7oC. On examination of the 
behaviour of the Tapti well fluid at reservoir and wellhead conditions and the 
definition of condensate as given in the PSC, EIL concluded (March 2005) that 

condensate obtained from Tapti gas field can be treated as gas. MoPNG 
accepted EIL recommendation (April 2005). 
Even if the argument put forth by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  that 
‘price of condensate is to be fixed under Article 19.11 (which means that Article 
19.2 to 19.10 are to be applied’) is to be considered (though contrary to term 
‘condensate’ examined and accepted by MoPNG through it s various technical 
bodies and term of MOU) ONGC needs to be appointed as its nominee of the 
Government under Article 18.2 and 19 of PSC. This has not been done in the 
revised system of disposal of condensate.” 
 
On being asked to clarify as to  whether the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
had sought the opinion of the Law Ministry before signing PSC, the Secretary, MoPNG 
during evidence held on 6th August, 2012   deposed as under: 
 
“We entered into this after it was vetted by the Law Ministry. The contrac t is 
vetted by the Law Ministry.” 
 
However, when asked to furnish the relevant records pertaining to the vetting of 
PSC by the Law Ministry, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  in its subsequent 
post evidence reply stated that generally  the practice ha s been to get any contract 
legally vetted from Law Ministry before it is signed.   However, in respect of this PSC 
since the relevant record is not traceable, the same cannot be substantiated with 
documentary evidence. “ 
In their  vetting remarks on the aforesaid reply of the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, Audit stated that  the issue regarding designating a Government nominee 
for receipt of Condensate was discussed (November 2003) in the meeting held by the 
MoPNG with the JV, GAIL and DGH, wherein MoP NG reiterated its earlier decision (i.e. 
MoU arrangement wherein ONGC wa s retaining the JV condensate and in turn 
delivering its  own gas to GAIL on energy equivalent basis) and directed to continue the 
existing arrangement and stated that in case any part y has problems with the existing 
arrangements, it should send its suggestions/proposal to DGH, else, the existing system 
would continue. Subsequent to the meeting, the GAIL did not react to the direction of 
MoPNG.  
 

 
 
(i). Applicability of Article 19.11 of PSC 
 
 In December 2005, ONGC entered into a ‘settlement agreement’ with Panna 
Mukta and Tapti JV on pricing of condendate at crude oil price.  ONGC justified its 
decision to value condensate at crude oil prices on th e basis of Article 19.11 of PSC 
which s tates that  provisions specified from Article 19.1 to 19.10 of the PSC for the 
determination of price of sale of crude oil shall apply mutatis mutandis to condensate.  
However, it is observed from Article 1.18 of the PSC  giving definition of Condensate 
that “Condensate” means those low vapor pressure hydrocarbons  obtained  from  
natural  Gas  through  condensation  or  extrac tion  and  refers solely  to those  
hydrocarbons  that are liquid  at normal  surface  temperature  and pressure 
conditions (provided that in the event condensate is produced from an oil field and is 
segregated and transported  separate ly to the delivery point, then the provisions of 
this contract shall apply to such condensate as if it were Crude Oil).  Audit has 
observed that Tapti  being a gas bearing field, the provision of Article 19.11 of the PSC 
on valuation of oil did not apply to condensate. 
 
The Committee enquired as to how ONGC c o u l d  justify the applicability of 
article 19.11 in determining the value of condensate in case of Tapti, which is a gas 
field.  In response, the CMD, ONGC during evidence deposed as under:  
“It is exactly saying that all condensates are to be treated as gas unless they 
are transported separately.  The main thing is that it comes out from an oil field. 
Tapti is not an oil field. Tapti is a gas field. Therefore, that provision of 19.11 of 
PSC applies”. 
 
With regard to the applicability of Article 19.11 of PSC in determining the value 
of Tapti condensate, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  in its post  evidence 
reply stated that t he definition of Natural Gas as given in Article 1.54 of the PSC; 
“Natural Gas” means wet gas, dry gas, all other gaseous hydrocarbons,  and all 
substances contained therein, including sulfur and helium,  which are produced  from 
oil or gas wells, excluding  those condensed  or extracted liquid  hydrocarbons  that  
are  liquid  at  normal  temperature  and  pressure  conditions  and including the 

residue gas remaining after the condensation or extraction of liquid hydrocarbons 
from gas.  It is evident from the definition of gas that Condensate is excluded from 
natural gas. Gas is valued as per valuation provided in Article 21 of the PSC.  
Condensate, if produced from the oil field is blended with the crude oil if its 
separation is not warranted; therefore, it is valued as oil only. However, if the 
Condensate produced from an oil field is segregated and transported separately  to 
the Delivery Point then as per the provision in Article 1.18 this Condensate has to be 
treated as Crude oil.Tapti is a gas field and Gas along with Condensate is produced 
and ultimately delivered in commingled form . Therefore, Gas produced from Tapti is 
valued as  Gas and Condensate produced is separated at the platform and its 
valuation is done as Condensate as provided in Article 19.11 of the PSC. As  per  
provisions  of  the  PSC,  Condensate  cannot  be  treated  as  gas  for  the purpose of 
its valuation under Article 21 of the PSC. Valuation of Condensate can only be done 
as per the procedure laid down in Article 19 of the PSC. This is on the  basis  of  
Article  19.4  of the  PSC,  providing  that  Crude  Oil  and/or  Condensate  in respect 
of which the price is being determined is said to be similar in characteristic  and 
quality to the said condensate traded in international market.  The Article 19.11 of 
the PSC of Mid and South Tapti on the ‘Valuation of Oil’ clearly states that “the 
provisions specified above for the determination of the price of sales of crude oil 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to condensates. 
 In view of the foregoing, ONGC maintained that price of condensate  is  to  be  
fixed  under  Article  19.11  which  means  that Article 19.2 to 19.10  are applicable, 
with the modification/or  necess ary changes that the price has to be fixed with 
reference to the price of Condensate and not of Crude oil. 
Contesting the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit in its vetting remarks observed 
that the term ‘condensate’ as defined in article 1.18 explicit that a condensate would be 
treated as crude oil and provisions of the PSC (impliedly Article 19.11 for its valuation 
as crude oil) would apply to such a condensate only if: 
(a) the condensate is produced from an oil field; and 
(b) it is segregated and transported separately. 

  Audit further contended that s ince condensate in the instant case is produced 
from a gas field and not from an oil field, the first and essential condition is not satisfied 
and, hence, condensate produced from t he Tapti gas field cannot be treated at par with 
crude oil. Article 19.11 of PSC for valuation of the condensate would, therefore, not 
apply for its valuation.  Further, even if the Tapti field was an oil field, the second 
condition is not satisfied as no facilities have been installed at the platform to segregate 
and separate the condensate separately. Hence, for this reason also, the condensate 
produced from Tapti gas field cannot be treated as crude oil and Article 19.11 cannot  be 
applied for its valuation. 
 During evidence, the Committee enquired whether opinion of the Law Ministry 
was sought on the issue.  ONGC in its post evidence reply (28.8.2012) stated that it has 
obtained legal opinion from the Additional Solicitor General of India, which is given as 
under:  
“the  price  to be fixed  of the condensate  produced  from  Mid & South  Tapti  
Contract  area is necessarily to be fixed under Article 19 of the PSC Titled, 
“Valuation  of Oil”. Necessarily the condensate cannot  be treated as gas for 
the purpose of valuation.  Nor can it to be treated as purely Crude oil for the 
purpose of valuation.  It can only be  treated as crude oil  in the peculiar 
situation covered by the second portion of Article 1.18 which does not arise in 
the facts of this case. 
The price of condensate is to be fixed under Article 19.11 which means 
that Article 19.2 to 19.10 have to be applied, with the modification that  the 
price has to be fixed with reference to the price of condensate and not of crude 
oil.” 
However, disagreeing with ONGC’s justification, Audit in its vetting remarks  has 
stated that t he term condensate under PSC, and its disposal and valuation was jointly 
deliberated by the MoPNG, DGH, EIL, ONGC and PMT -JV, GAIL on various occasions 
and it was concluded that conde nsate to be treated as gas. These are  summarised as 
under:  
“(i) Legal opinion of ASG has been obtained only in September 2012. Earlier 
(Jan 1998), however, the Law Ministry refused to give any opinion on the 
subject being of a ‘technical nature’.  

(ii) The technical examination of treatment of condensate under PSC by the 
MoPNG through its various technical bodies such as DGH, ONGC and 
EIL, lead to the opinion that condensate should be treated as ‘gas’.  
(iii) It has now been opined that the sale price of c ondensate is to be 
governed by article 19.11 of PSC. The term ‘condensate’ appearing in this 
article is defined in the PSC at article 1.18 as ‘those low vapour pressure 
hydrocarbons obtained from natural gas through condensation or 
extraction and refers solely to those hydrocarbons that are liquid at normal 
surface temperature and pressure conditions (provided that in the event 
condensate is produced from an oil field and is segregated and separated 
separately to the delivery point, then the provisions of t his contract shall 
apply to such condensate as it were crude oil)’.  
(iv) In a joint meeting (April 1998) ONGC, EIL and DGH examined the 
definitions of condensate under PSC and concluded that ‘these 
hydrocarbons are not separated at the platforms normal te mperature and 
pressure conditions as the processing facility is not designed for such 
separation at the platform’. Hence, it was stated that ‘condensate as per 
provisions of the PSC cannot be sold to a nominee as the same is not 
available as a product in t he present scenario. Hence identifying a part of 
the production as condensate and part as gas is not feasible and only 
logical way of measuring the production from Tapti field is in terms of 
equivalent energy’. This summarises the technical difficulty of a pplying 
article 19.11 in the instant case. 
(v) JV during initial period (1997 -98) insisted for treatment of condensate as 
gas. This was presumably because the price of gas was then higher than 
crude oil. The stand of the JV changed over time as price of cr ude oil 
soared. This gives an impression that the definition of ‘condensate’ was 
differently interpreted at different times to only suit the interests of the JV.  
(vi) Even if the argument put forth (1 October 2012) by ONGC quoting the 
legal opinion that ‘ price of condensate is to be fixed under Article 19.11 
(which means that Article 19.2 to 19.10 are to be applied’) is to be 
considered (though contrary to term ‘condensate’ examined and accepted 
by MoPNG through its various technical bodies) ONGC needs to be 
appointed as its nominee of the Government under Article 18.2 and 19 of 
PSC. This has not been done in the revised system of disposal of 
condensate 
It is worth to mention that Government appointed GAIL as its 
nominee to purchase 100% of natural gas produced by the JV. 
(vii) Based on legal opinion now obtained, MOPNG/ONGC contended that 
valuation of condensate should be done under the provisions of Article 
19.11 i.e. 'Valuation of Oil' of PSC. It is noteworthy that: 

(a) the legal opinion does not state specifically whether the condensate 
being produced from Tapti field is gas or crude oil. Mere legal 
interpretation of the provisions of the PSC cannot help us in arriving 
at a logical conclusion about the exact nature, physical condition 
and characteristics of the condensate which require technical and 
scientific analysis of the composition and behaviour of the 
condensate in the present scenario;   
(b) EIL, in its report of March 2005 had stated that condensate was not 
present at reservoir conditions, was gen erated at the wellhead 
conditions and was in vapour form even at a temperature of 
42.7oC.  In the ATN submitted by MOPNG in August 2011 to 
COPU, MOPNG contended that the condensate produced from 
ONGC's Bassein and Satellite (B&S) gas field was different fr om 
that produced from the Tapti gas field on the ground that B&S gas 
field is a dry gas field, the gas produced does not contain heavier 
molecule at reservoir level and the condensate is formed at surface 
during transportation to Hazira.  
(c) However, conclusion of EIL report shows that that the conditions in 
which condensate is produced in both the fields are similar.  
(d)  In case, legal opinion suggests ONGC to value the Tapti 
condensate as crude oil, the condensate produced from B&S field 
has also to be treated at par. 
(e) MOPNG/ONGC is silent in applying the opinion of the legal counsel 
to the condensate produced from B&S field and does not state 
monetary implications in case the decision is extended to B&S field.  
(f) Without reference to any expert op inion on the technical matters 
involved in the case facilitating a conclusive decision on nature of 
the condensate, the legal opinion recommends for valuation of 
condensate under the provisions of Article 19 of the PSC.  
(g) It is noteworthy that Article 1 9.11 relates to Valuation of Oil and not 
of the Condensate. Thus, without a clear decision from 
scientific/technical experts on the nature of the condensate being 
produced from the Tapti field, it would not be justifiable to apply 
provisions of Article 19. 2 to 19.10 of PSC for valuation of the 
condensate in the instant case.  
(h) Audit is not aware of the terms of reference made by ONGC to the 
legal counsel and it is not clear whether ONGC's stance of valuing 
the condensate as gas under circumstances akin t o that of B&S 
field were brought to the notice of the counsel.  
(i) The term ‘condensate’ has been defined as appearing in this article 
is defined at article 1.18 of the PSC as under: 

(j) Condensate means those low vapour pressure hydrocarbons 
obtained from natural gas through condensation or extraction and 
refers solely to those hydrocarbons that are liquid at normal surface 
temperature and pressure conditions (provided that in the event 
Condensate is produced from an oil field and is segregated and 
separated separately to the delivery point, then the provisions of 
this contract shall apply to such condensate as if it were Crude Oil).  
(k) It is explicit from the above definition that a condensate would be 
treated as crude oil and provisions of the PSC ( impliedly Article 
19.11 for its valuation as crude oil) would apply to such a 
condensate only if: 
(a) the condensate is produced from an oil field; and 
(b) it is segregated and separated separately. 
(l) Since condensate in the instant case is produced from  a gas field 
and not from an oil field, the first and essential condition is not 
satisfied and, hence, condensate produced from the Tapti gas field 
cannot be treated at par with crude oil. Article 19.11 of PSC for 
valuation of the condensate would, therefo re, not apply for its 
valuation.  
(m) Further, even if the Tapti field was an oil field, the second condition 
is not satisfied as no facilities have been installed at the platform to 
segregate and separate the condensate separately. Hence, for this 
reason also, the condensate produced from Tapti gas field cannot 
be treated as crude oil and Article 19.11 cannot be applied for its 
valuation.  
(n) In the absence of any facilities having been installed at the Tapti 
gas platform for separation of the condensate from natural gas, 
ONGC cannot measure the exact quantity of the condensate for 
applying a rate commensurate to that of crude oil to the 
condensate.  
(o) During initial period (1997 -98), JV insisted for treatment of 
condensate as gas. This was obviously bec ause the price of gas 
was then higher than crude oil. The stand of JV has changed over 
time as price of crude oil soared. This gives an impression that the 
definition of ‘condensate’ was differently interpreted at different time 
only to suit interests of the JV. 
(p) Even if the argument put forth (1 October 2012) by ONGC quoting 
the legal opinion that price of condensate is to be fixed under 
Article 19.11 (which means that Article 19.2 to 19.10 are to be 
applied) holds good (though contrary to term ‘condens ate’ 
examined and accepted by MOPNG through its various technical 

bodies), ONGC should have ensured that before buying the 
condensate, it is appointed as a nominee of the Government under 
Article 18.2 and 19 of PSC. This has not been done in the revised 
system of disposal of condensate.  Consequently, ONGC has 
purchased the condensate, without the approval of GOI and at a 
price which is not suited to the financial interests of ONGC.” 
Justifying the applicability of Article 19.11 of PSC in determining the va lue of 
condensate in case of Tapti Gas Field, ONGC stated that definition of Condensate in 
Mid & South Tapti PSC is consistent with the definition appearing in other PSCs i.e. 
CB‐OS/2, KG‐DWN‐98/3 etc. Condensate produced along with the natural gas from 
CB‐OS/2 & KG‐DWN‐98/3 is being sold as Condensate valued as liquid hydrocarbon 
and not as Gas.  The applic ability of Article 19.11 in determining the value of 
Condensate produced from gas field has been demonstrated in other PSC  i.e.  
CB‐OS/2  also  and  endorsed  by  the  Government.  In  this  context,  it  is pertinent to 
submit that IOC, the Government nominee for purchase of Condensate produced  
from  Laxmi  &  Gauri  fields  of  CB‐OS/2  JV  was  not  willing  to  purchase 
Condensate  as  per  the  terms  of  the  PSC,  therefore  the  Government  in  April,  
2005 decided  that,  “the  Contractor  is permitted  to make  its own  arrangement  for 
sale  of Condensate  in India. The Contractor should ensure that Condensate  price 
obtained by them should not be below the price determined in terms of the PSC”.  
In view of the foregoing,  ONGC contended that valuation  of Tapti 
condensate  under  Article  19.11 is in line with the provisions of the Mid & S outh 
Tapti PSC and it has  been valued as Condensate and  not  as  Crude  oil  and  
benchmarked   to  NWS  Condensate   (79%)  and  Senipah Condensate (21%). 
In the context of the aforesaid reply of ONGC, the Audit in its vetting remarks 
submitted as under: 
“As regards MOPNG contention on similar definition of condensate in other 
PSCs, it is submitted that notwithstanding any similarity in the definition of 
condensate in other PSCs as contended by MOPNG, the JV partners on Tapti 
PSC were not authorised to decide among themselves the nature of the 
condensate and its price, without prior approval of the Government in view of the 
following: 

a) The PSC relating to Tapti field did not provide for disposal of the 
condensate. The Government of India (GOI) also had not appointed its 
nominee under the PSC for purchase of the condensate. 
b) At the instance of the GOI, an ‘interim arrangement’ was made (May 
1998) whereby ONGC retained the JV condensate and in turn delivered its 
own gas to GAIL (India) Limited on energy equivalent i.e. Million Metric 
British Thermal Unit (MMBTU) basis. 
c) In November 2003, MOPNG had communicated its decision to the Tapti 
JV that the existing system of purchase of condensate would continue.  
d) MOPNG had accepted (April 2005) the conclusion (March 2005) of 
Engineers India Limited (EIL) that condensate o btained from Tapti gas 
field could be treated as gas. The conclusion of EIL was based on a study 
conducted (February 2005) by it at the instance of MOPNG itself. 
e) Till the time i.e. December 2005 of signing of the settlement agreement 
among the JV partners,  the MOPNG had not communicated to JV 
partners including ONGC any decision to the contrary of its interim 
arrangement made in May 1998 and reiterated in November 2003. 
f) In clause 5 of the MOU signed by the JV partners in June 1996 as a part 
of interim arran gement, the JV partners had stated “......the parties 
acknowledge and agree that the foregoing interim deduction of 5% of the 
number of BTUs contained in condensate is a special temporary 
procedure undertaken during the term of MOU pending final agreement 
between Shipper and the Government of India on the disposition and 
fiscal treatment of condensate produced in the Mid & South Tapti contract 
area.” 
g) The interim arrangement had not been altered by the Government till and 
after signing of the settlement agreement. 
In case of KG-DWN-98/3 block, pricing of condensate was yet (September 
2013) to be approved by the Government as indicated in  MOPNG's letter No/O -
19024/9/2000-ONG/D-V (C No. 2162) dated 2.9.2011. MOPNG may supply 
subsequent communication in support of its contention on the issue. Further, 
MOPNG after deliberation with the DGH, EIL, GAIL and ONGC had concluded 
that Tapti condensate may be treated as gas and accordingly directed ONGC to 
purchase JV condensate at gas price.”  
(ii). SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT 
According to Audit, ONGC was the transporter and processor of JV gas and its 
issues on fixation of transportation and processing charges were outstanding with the 
JV. Other two JV partners (viz., RIL and BGEPIL) insisted on valuation of condensate at 
crude oil price instead of gas price as a precondition for settlement of these issues. On 
31December,2005, ONGC entered into a ‘settlement agreement’ (effective 1 April 2005) 

with Panna Mukta and Tapti(PMT) JV on pricing of condensate at crude oil price 
including other related issues like fixation of transportation and processing charges and 
delivery point etc.  ONGC apprised (3 March 2006) its Board of Directors (Board) that 
on valuing the condensate at crude oil price, it would gain Rs.131 crore (US$29.11 
million) in terms of value of VAPs to be extracted from the condensate production profile 
of 2.021 MMT for the period from April 2005 to 2019. The proposal to value condensate 
at crude oil price under the ‘settlement agreement’ was approved by the Board in Mar ch 
2006. 
When asked about the details of disputes regarding transportation and 
processing charges  between ONGC and JV partners,  the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas in its post evidence reply stated that various outstanding issues of ONGC 
with JV and impasse thereof are as under: 
 
a. Non- finalization of Tapti Transportation & Processing tariff. 
b. Treatment of Tapti condensate. 
c. No tariff was  being paid to ONGC, either by  JV or by GAIL, for 
transporting Panna- Mukta gas to Hazira 
d. 10% Panna-Mukta Gas Sales Revenue withheld by GAIL.  
e. Inadequate compensation to ONGC for processing of Panna-Mukta  
           gas by Hazira. 
 
 Transportation & Processing of Tapti Gas: 
  
Article 13.1.3 (g) of the PSC clearly specifies that, Companies' development 
concept contemplated  use of existing ONGC - owned facilities for re -
separation and handling of Condensate and Gas upon its arrival at Hazira. 
Further it stipulates that, ONGC (owner of pipeline and Hazira Gas 
Processing Unit i.e Service provider to PMT -JV) and Companies will 
determine a payment, terms and conditions for the use of processing and 
treating facilities owned by ONGC, which payment shall be based on the 
principles detailed in Appendix I  (of PSC) , or alternately the Contractor 
install the necessary facilities, the co st of which shall be cost recoverable 
and subject to the Cost Recovery Limit.  Subsequently, in the Management 
Committee Meeting  held on 4th December 1995, it was decided to use 
ONGC's existing 36"/42" pipeline.   Due to different assumptions by JV and 
ONGC consensus could not be arrived on transportation tariff. However, to 
commence gas production in 1997 from Tapti MOU was entered and interim 
transportation & processing tariff of US $ 0.18/MSCF was agreed. 
 
 

 Panna-Mukta Transportation tariff: 
 
Panna-Mukta P SC is open to differing interpretations with respect to 
Delivery Point. As per Article 21.5.13 (a) iv of Panna -Mukta PSC, "Delivery 
Point" means the upstream weld at the underwater connection between 
Seller's pipeline and ONGC's underwater Gas transmission  line or lines 
which transport gas from the Bassein field to the Hazira area. On the other 
hand Article 21.5.13 (e) of the same PSC, mentions that, "Parties 
acknowledge that Gas is to be received by GAIL at Hazira downstream of 
separation and sweetening fa cilities owned and operated by ONGC. 
Pursuant to article 21.5.13(a) -(iv) above, JV partners contended that 
transportation tariff for Panna-Mukta (PM) gas is not payable by them as the 
delivery points is offshore, whereas GAIL maintained that in conformity to 
Article 21.5.13 (e) of the same PSC, the delivery point  is Hazira and 
accordingly transportation tariff is not payable by them as well. ONGC, as 
transporter of Panna -Mukta JV gas was eligible to receive transportation 
tariff either from sellers' (JV) o r buyer (GAIL) but the fact remains that 
neither GAIL, the Govt. nominee, in respect of Panna - Mukta Gas, not JV 
was paying any transportation charges to ONGC. Additionally GAIL was 
directed by MoP&NG in Jan 1998, to make 90% on account payment for the 
gas price to JV and remaining 10% be kept in ESCROW account pending 
resolution of Delivery points issue. ONGC requested MoP&NG for release 
of 10% gas price retained by GAIL in favour of ONGC. In response to 
ONGC's request, MoP&NG vide letter dated 28th Novemb er, 2003 directed 
all the parties to resolve the dispute regarding delivery point. Once the 
dispute of delivery point is resolved the release of 10% withheld money with 
GAIL would be made according to the resolution of the dispute on delivery 
point. While,  ONGC was actually transporting the JV gas since inception 
from offshore to Hazira, yet no tariff was being realized either from JV of 
from GAIL for Panna -Mukta gas and merely US $0.0585/MSCM was being 
paid to ONGC as processing charges for the same as an ad-hoc measures. 
 
In its vetted comments to the aforesaid reply, Audit stated as under: 
 
“The moot point in audit report is treatment of condensate as crude oil by ONGC 
in contravention to MoPNG directives to treat condensate as gas, which was 
agreed by th e ONGC as a pre -condition of JV in resolution of pending 
transportation and processing charges issues with JV. In this package deal, 
ONGC suffered a loss of ` 825 crore up to March 2009, considering the 
differential in condensate price and incremental gain  in gas transportation and 
processing, charges. Though Tapti PSC envisaged lying of separate pipeline for 
transportation of gas from offshore to onshore, in a Management Committee of 
Tapti JV comprising of representatives of JV and DGH as representatives o f GoI 
held on 4.1.2005, it was decided to use ONGC pipeline for transportation of Tapti 
gas. The decision was beneficial to both the parties as capital cost for laying 
separate pipeline and also operating cost for maintenance of pipeline for JV got 

avoided. Similarly, ONGC was also benefited since its spare pipeline capacity 
was used for transportation of JV gas.   
 
 The details of transportation and processing charges for transportation 
and processing of JV gas billed by the ONGC, rates as per pre -settlement 
agreement and rates as per post settlement agreement is tabulated below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O 
 
 
O 
 
 
 
ONGC being transporter of gas was legally entitled to receive charges either 
from JV (seller) or GAIL (buyer). However, due to dispute over delivery point of gas, 
ONGC did not receive gas transportation charges till March 2005.   
 
It may be seen from the table that though ONGC got marginal increase in 
transportation processi ng charges for Tapti gas and Panna -Mukta gas 
processing charges. However, it was less compared to rates at which ONGC 
billed to JV. The Panna-Mukta gas transportation charge was also less compared 
to rates at which ONGC billed to JV. Similarly, ONGC suffer ed loss in processing 
of Panna-Mukta gas since losses was reduced to 1.65%.  During the last COPU 
meeting held on 6 August 2012 ONGC presented a benefit of US$ 86.6 million till 
March 2012 on transportation and processing charges as given below: 
 
Description  Gas 
Volume 
MMSCM 
Gas 
Volume 
MMSCF 
Differential 
Tariff 
US$/ MSCF 
Tariff received from 
JV partners 
US$ MM (60%) 
Tapti Transportation 35,067 12,37,387 0.005 3.7 
PM-Transportation 12,891 4,54,868 0.155 42.3 
PM-Processing  20,964 7,39,742 0.0915 40.6 
Total up to 31/3/2012     86.6 
Element ONGC 
Billed 
JV Incremental Gain/loss to ONGC 
  Pre-
settlement 
rate 
 
Post-
settlement 
rate 
Incremental 
gain/loss in 
post settlement 
w.r.t. to ONGC 
billed 
Incremental 
gain/loss in 
post settlement 
w.r.t. to  pre-
settlement 
rates 
Tapti 
transportation & 
processing 
charges 
(MSCF) 
US$ 0.31 US$ 0.18 US$ 0.185 (-) US$ 0.125 (+) US$ 0.005 
Panna-Mukta 
transportation 
charges 
(MSCF) 
US$0.31 Nil^^ US$ 0.155 (-) US$ 0.1555 (+) US$ 0.155 
Panna-Mukta 
processing 
charges 
(MSCF) 
US$ 0.39 US$ 0.0585 US$ 0.15 (-) US$ 0.24 (+) US$ 0.0915 
Panna-Mukta 
processing loss 
(%) 
 4% 2.35%  (-) 1.65% 

P/M processing loss     (-) 34.79 
Overall gain to ONGC up to 
31/3/2012 including PM 
transportation charges  
   51.81 
Overall gain to ONGC up to 
31/3/2012 excluding PM 
transportation charges* 
   9.51 
 
ONGC as the transporter was eligible for transportation charges from JV and this 
eligibility had been confirmed by MoL&J and accepted by MoPNG. Besides, in March 2005, the 
JV was allowed to sell the gas to domestic private parties and this change may have influenced 
the decision of the JV to bear the transportation charges, particularly as some of these domestic 
private companies were affiliates of the JV partners (BGEPIL and RIL).  
 
However, ONGC's calculation did not consider the Panna Mukta gas 
processing loss of US $ 34.79 million till August 2012, and incorrectly projected 
transportation charges of US$42.30 million as gain to ONGC as a result of 
settlement.  
 
More important, what has been projected as a gain to ONGC, was in fact 
its legitimate right to receive it fo r use of its pipeline which had already been 
accepted by the Ministry of Law. However, due to dispute over delivery point of 
gas, ONGC was not able to receive gas transportation charges till March 2005 
either from the buyer (GAIL) or from the seller (JV) f or usage of its pipeline in the 
sale process.  Considering the Panna Mukta gas processing loss of US$34.79 
million till August 2012  the overall gain to ONGC was only US $ 51.81 million till 
March 2012 and excluding the PM transportation charges it was onl y US$ 9.51 
million. The gain of US$ 9.51 million was set off by the loss due to valuation of 
condensate as crude oil instead of earlier practice of valuing it as gas on energy 
equivalent basis. This aspect is not brought out by MOPNG/ONGC before 
COPU.” 
 
Since the issue of processing and transportation is  incidental to the operation 
of a gas field, the Committee enquired as to how such  an issue was ignored at the 
time of signing of PSC. In response, t he Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  in its 
written reply stated that t he issue of processing and  transportation  of  Tapti gas is 
defined in Article 13.1.3(g) of the PSC. It clearly  specifies that, Companies’ 
development concept contemplated use of existing ONGC‐owned facilities. Further it 
stipulates that, ONGC and Companies will  determine the terms and conditions for 
the use of processing and treating facilities owned by ONGC, for which payment shall 
be bas ed on the  principles detailed in Appendix I (of PSC) , or Alternately the 
Contractor install the necessary facilities, the cost of which shall be cost recoverable 
and not subject to the Cost Recovery Limit. It is submitted that, Hazira plant of ONGC, 

has been extracting VAPs from the hydrocarbons produced from its own fields much 
before the signing of Tapti PSC. Incidentally, the delivery point of Tapti Gas is also 
Hazira. In view of above and also in the  best  national  interest,  Management  
Committee  (MC)  decided  to  utilize  ONGC pipeline  and  processing  facility  for  
evacuation  and  delivery  of  Tapti  Gas  to  GoI nominee GAIL. In line  with  the  
provisions  of the  PSC,  MC  in December,  1995  decided  that  the  gas pipeline 
from Mid & South Tapti should be tie‐in to ONGC’s existing 36”/42” pipelines. The 
maximum total transportation tariff to be paid by JV to ONGC would be limited to the 
costs of installing a separate pipeline by JV.   In this context, it may be submitted 
that, use of ONGC’s existing  facilities by JV ensured 40% savings to ONGC towards 
CAPEX. This also ensured effective utilization of the then spare capacity in the 
pipeline and at Hazira Plant, resulting in significant revenue for ONGC without any 
CAPEX. 
 In response to the aforesaid reply  of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas , 
Audit in its vetting remarks stated as under:-  
 
“ONGC as a transporter of JV gas was entitled to receive suitable compensation 
from the JV (Seller) as per term of PSC. In view of disagreement between JV and 
ONGC over methodology of calculation of transportation tariff and processing 
charges, JV was paying interim charges/pro cessing charges much below the 
invoices raised by the ONGC. In settlement agreement, ONGC got a little 
marginal increase in transportation tariff and processing charges. Against this 
ONGC agreed JV’s pre-condition of purchase of JV condensate at crude oil price 
(higher price) in place of gas price (lower price) which was in contravention 
MoPNG directives which was detrimental to its own interest.” 
  
It may be seen from the table  that though ONGC got marginal increase in 
transportation processing charges for  Tapti gas and Pan na-Mukta gas processing 
charges, it was less compared to rates at which ONGC billed to JV. The Panna -Mukta 
gas transportation charge was also less compared to rates at which ONGC billed to JV. 
Similarly, ONGC suffered loss in processing o f Panna -Mukta gas since losses was 
reduced to 1.65%.   
 During the evidence held on 6th August, 2012, the Committee desired to know as 
to why the ONGC did not approach the Law Ministry or exercised the option of 
arbitration to resolve the outstanding issue s relating to the transportation/processing 

charges. In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in its post evidence reply 
stated that , as transporter of Panna Mukta JV gas  ONGC was eligible to receive 
transportation tariff either from sellers’ ( JV) or buyer (GAIL) but the fact remains that 
neither GAIL, the Government nominee, in respect of Panna Mukta Gas, nor JV was 
paying any transportation charges to ONGC.  ONGC in August 1999 sought the legal 
opinion from the then Additional Solicitor Genera l of India Mr. Altaf Ahmed.  The 
Learned Counsel inferred that the cost of transportation of Panna Mukta Gas to be 
borne by the Buyer or its nominee i.e. GAIL.  Law Ministry examined the legal opinion 
obtained by ONGC and acknowledged the apparent conflict  in the various provisions of 
PSC in respect of Delivery Point of Panna Mukta Gas.  However, Law Ministry advised 
that the Delivery Point is to be taken Hazira.  Despite all efforts by ONGC, the issue of 
Delivery Point and payment of transportation tariff to ONGC remained unresolved.  In 
view of the dispute on Delivery Point, in January 1998, MOPNG directed GAIL, to make 
90% on account payment for the gas price to JV and remaining 10% be kept in 
ESCROW account pending resolution of Delivery Point issue.  Al though, 10% withheld 
money by GAIL was in an interest bearing Escrow account, however, ONGC continued 
to pursue with the GOI to settle the issue of Delivery Point.  Further, it was considered 
prudent not to invoke dispute resolution mechanism, envisaged un der the PSC, against 
GOI by joining hands with private JV partners. 
 
Disagreeing with the aforesaid reply, Audit in its vetting remarks stated that it 
needs to be appreciated that ONGC is the transporter in this instance in dispute with the 
JV (as shipper) . The JV has refused to pay transportation charges to ONGC which is 
contrary to the opinion of the Law Ministry (the JV is liable to pay transportation 
charges) and MoPNG (directed the JV to pay the transportation charges). MoPNG had 
also safeguarded the i nterest of ONGC by withholding 10% of PM JV gas revenue 
through GAIL, its nominee for purchase of JV gas toward the transportation charges. 
ONGC, thus, should have invoked arbitration against the JV  for non payment of 
transportation charges. As per PSC, the JV increased the gas price (2004) after 7 years 
of commencement of production. However, GAIL did not agree for the revised gas price 
stating that the priority sector may not able to absorb the revised gas price. MoPNG with 

effect from April 2005, allowed the JV to market its gas to private domestic parties. In 
settlement agreement, JV agreed to pay gas transportation charges to ONGC since 
under the changed scenario of marking gas to private domesti c parties, it might have 
been difficult to pass on gas transportation charges burden to private domestic buyers 
(i.e. asking buyer to take delivery at offshore). Interestingly, the JV had sold some of the 
gas to its affiliated parties (RIL and BGPIL affiliates). 
 
 To a query as to whether any consultation was made by ONGC with the Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas before ente ring into settlement agreement and  if so, what 
was the advice of the Government, ONGC in its reply stated that Settlement Agreement’ 
was in line with PSC, which provided that for Panna Mukta & Tapti, the gas will be 
received at ONGC’s Hazira facilities, where it will be processed and handed over to 
GAIL, the Government Nominee. Such transportation & processing of gas will be done 
by ONGC at an agreed tariff between them.  Hence, it was a commercial agreement 
between PMT -JV and ONGC as transporter.  It did not envisage  any approval of the 
Government. 
 
Disagreeing with the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit in its vetting remarks stated 
that buyer and seller cannot independently decide price of hydrocarbon without 
approval of the GOI.  Further, as per section 3.1.4(C) of Accounting Procedure to PMT -
JV entered into ‘settlement agreement’ wherein it was decided to purchase JV 
condensate at crude  oil price.  Further, GOI is the owner of the JV field and buyer and 
seller cannot independently decide hydrocarbon price without the approval of the 
Government. 
  
According to the Audit, the purchase of condensate at crude oil price resulted in 
significant loss to ONGC and benefit to the other two operators viz. Reliance Industries 
Limited and British Gas Exploration and Production India Limited, the private parties. 
 
 Commenting on the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas stated that It was a business deal to settle all the long outstanding 
commercial issues within the framework of the PSC, in the fo rm of a ‘Settlement 

Agreement’.  In this context, it may be pertinent to mention that while as per the 
provisions of PSC Articl e 21.5.12 (e), the payments to ONGC were to be made on 
incremental basis, however, at ONGC’s insistence, the basis of Tariff for Panna -Mukta 
gas was agreed on ‘Avoided Cost’ basis resulting in substantial gain in tariff.  It is worth 
mentioning that the es timated revenue to be accrued on the basis of agreed 
transportation tariff & processing charges during the duration of PSC is much more than 
the cost incurred by ONGC in laying either 36”/42” pipeline.  The capacities of 36”/42” 
Bassien – Hazira trunk line s were based on 4.03 MMSCMD plateau production from 
Tapti (as per Tapti FR), whereas the same lines are now being used to carry 12 -12.5 
MMSCMD of JV gas, resulting in significant revenue for ONGC without any capex.  This 
also ensured effective utilization of the then spare capacity in the pipeline and at Hazira 
Plant. 
 Audit in its vetting remarks stated that a s the Tapti condensate at crude oil 
pricing was a pre -condition of JV for resolution of pending transportation charges and 
processing fees through ‘Settlement Agreement’, it was necessary for ONGC to assess 
the incremental benefit considering the different ial in the existing pre -settlement and 
revised post settlement tariff/ transportation charges on the basis of pricing of 
condensate at crude oil prices.  This was not done and appraised to Board.” 
  
On being asked whether ONGC assessed the actual losses correctly considering 
the differential in pre -settlement and r evised post settlement scenario,   ONGC stated 
that Government  of India has not suffered any loss on account of the revised post‐ 
settlement  tariff  /  transportation  charges  including  pricing  of condensate  at 
benchmarked  price.  In fact, Government  has  accrued more  revenue  / statutory 
l e v i e s post settlement agreement.  Pursuant to Settlement Agreement effective 
from April 1, 2005 JV has been paying Cess and Royalty to t he Government on 
Condensate saved and sold from Tapti, resulting in higher levies.  Estimated Cess  & 
Royalty as applicable on Oil/condensate, as  per PSC works out to Rs. 1,408/MT. 
whereas, applicable Royalty on gas at PSC ceiling price of US $ 5.57/MMBTU 
works  out to ~ Rs. 797/MT.  Thus it is evident that GoI would be benefited by ~ Rs. 
611 per MT in terms of statutory levies on liquid condensate.  Further,  it is worth  

mentioning  that  Government  has  also  been  benefited  by sale  of Condensate as 
liquid as its share of Profit Petroleum is greater than before. Consequent to  above,  
next  slab  of  Investment  Multiple  vis‐à‐vis  Profit  Petroleum  would  trigger early at 
least by a year or two on account of higher accumulative  revenue from sale of Tapti 
condensate.  Thus, GoI entitlement of PP would become 40%, from present level of 
20%. Thereby, resulting in s ubstantial increase in GoI  share, whereas, Contractors’ 
entitlement would be 60% only. It is therefore submitted that the Settlement 
Agreement has been beneficial to the Government. 
  
In this context, the Committee enquired as to whether any cost‐benefit analysis 
was undertaken before entering into settlement agreement in 2005. In reply, ONGC 
submitted that t he details of financi al impact over the Contract period (upto 2019) 
comprising, different tariffs, sale & purchase  of  condensate  & release of 10% 
money with held by GAIL was worked out and Board was informed including the 
details of cash inflow and outflow to ONGC. The same is submitted hereunder: 
 
 Financial Impact over the Contract period (upto 2019) 
 
Tariff US$/MSCF Effective date ONGC 
US$MM 
BGEPIL 
US$ MM 
RIL 
US$MM 
Tapti Tptn.@ 0.185 for gas profile of 2,038 
BCF 
 Inception +226.24 -113.12 -113.12 
PM-Tptn@0.155 for gas profile  of  912 BCF 
gas 
1.4.2005 +84.80 -42.40 -42.40 
PM-Proc.@0.15 for gas profile of 1,131 BCF 
gas 
Inception  +101.80 -50.90 -50.90 
Inflow  + 412.84 -206.42 -206.42 
PM Tptn& Proc. Loss based on gas price @ 
US$ 3.11/MMBTU 
Inception till 
31.3.2005 
-7.20 + 3.60 +3.60 
PM Tptn. & Proc. Loss based on gas price @ 
US$ 3.11/MMBTU 
1.4.2005 till 
31.12.2005 
-1.44 + 0.72 + 0.72 
Outflow -8.64 +4.32 +4.32 
Tapti Condensate  
Past benefit to ONGC by  sale of  Tapti 
Condensate ( Differential Revenue gain) 
Inception to 
31.3.2005 
+ US $ 43.76 million (60%) 
Purchase of Tapti Condensate @ Rs. 1.4.2005 till - Rs. 2,372 crores 

19,561/ MT for condensate profile of 2.021 
MMT (60%,1.213 MMT) 
2019 
Revenue from VAP @ Rs.20,636/MT  1.4.2005 till 
 2019 
 +Rs. 2,503 Crores 
10% money with held by GAIL  in Escrow account, Total Rs. 379 crores including interest .  
50% in escrow account with JV* & 50% 
amount ( Rs. 189.50 crores for distribution)  
After release 
by 
MoP&NG/GAIL  
+ 75.80 
crores 
+56.85 
crores 
+56.85 
crores 
 
  * Balance 50% kept in Escrow in view of Sale Tax Case Sub-Judice in Guajrat High Court 
 
 Commenting on the aforesaid reply, Audit in its vetting remarks stated that even 
considering the additional revenue of Rs 154.35 crore to the Government in form of 
additional royalty, cess and profit petroleum by treating condensate as crude oil price 
(higher rate) than gas price (lower rate), the net loss to the ONGC worked out to Rs 
670.86 crore till March 200 9. As regard to profit petroleum, till 2011 -12 Government 
accrued 20% of profit petroleum (i.e. first slab of profit petroleum).  
When asked  to make a comparison  of the profits  that were made  by ONGC  
during  the period from May 1998 to March 2005 (when condensate  was valued at 
prices of gas) with that of  same number of years starting  from April 2005 (when 
the condensate was valued  at crude oil prices), ONGC in a written reply submitted 
that the practice of valuating condensate at prices of gas continued till 31.3.2005 and 
in this process if ONGC got unintended benefit, it should not be construed as actual 
loss in today’s terms as the present practice agreed by ONGC with PMT‐JV is as per 
provisions of Tapti PSC.  In this context, it may be pertinent to mention that while 
as per provisions of PSC Art. 21.5.13 (e) the payments to ONGC for Panna‐Mukta  
gas transportation were to be made on  incremental  basis,  however,  at  ONGC’s  
insistence  the  basis  of  Tariff  for  Panna‐ Mukta gas was agreed on “Avoided Cost” 
basis resulting in substantial gain in tariff. It is worth mentioning  that the estimated  
revenue  to be accrued  on the basis of agreed transportation  tariff  & processing  
charges  during  the duration  of PSC  is  much  more than the cost incurred  by 
ONGC in laying either 36”/42” pipelines.  This also ensured effective utilization of 
the then spare capacity in these pipelines and at Hazira Plant. However, the 

comparative benefit to ONGC pre/post settlement agreements have been worked out 
for 100% JV and ONGC share as applicable are as under: 
A. Valuation of Condensate as gas equivalent in energy terms vis‐à‐vis 
benchmarked to liquid hydrocarbon. 
                              In US $ Million  
Valuation of Condensate as Gas Equiv. & as Liquid 1997-
31.3.2005 
1.4.2005 to 
31.3.2012 
 
A. Condensate produced 5.56 MM Bbls 9.91 MM Bbls 
B. Value, Benchmarked as liquid 145.12 769.14 
C. Value as Gas, equivalent in energy terms 74.58 215.90 
D. Comparative gain to ONGC (B-C) 70.54 (-) 553.24 
 Payment by ONGC to JV (60%)  331.94 
 
B.   Revenue from Transportation and Processing charges pre and   
 post settlement agreement: 
                                              In US$ Million  
Details of Transportation & Processing tariff Pre Settlement 
(1997 – 
31.3.2005) 
Post 
Settlement 
(1.4.2005 to 
31.3.2012) 
 
A.   Tapti Tptn. & Proc. Charges 
 
93.56 135.36 
B.  Panna-Mukta Transportation charges  Nil 70.50 
C. Panna- Mukta Processing charges 16.67 94.30 
D.   Receipt from ESCROW (dedn. for Tptn.) 10% Withheld 28.64 
Total 110.23 328.80 
 
C.   Differential gain to ONGC till 31.3.2012 Pre vis‐à‐vis PostSettlement 
Agreement 
 
 
 
 
Description Gas Volume Diff. Tarrif Differential 
Revenue 
60% received 
from JV 
 MMSCF US$/MSCF US $ MM US $ MM 
Tapti Tptn. & 
Proc. 
1,237368 0.005 6.19 3.71 
PM-
Tptn(1/4/2005) 
454,869 0.155 70.50 42.30 
PM-Processing 739,742 0.0915 67.69 40.61 
Total   144.38 86.63 

D.   The benefit analysis to ONGC, Hazira by purchase of  Condensate 
as liquid(1.4.2005 to 31.3.2012) is also submitted. 
 
 
The Condensate purchased by ONGC, Hazira was processed for 
extraction of Va lue Added Products (VAPs) mainly LPG,  Naptha, Kerosene & 
Heavy cuts  (HSD).  The benefit/loss to ONGC, Hazira post S ettlement 
Agreement from VAPs upto 31.3.2012 is summarized hereunder: 
 
Sl. No. Description US $ MM 
MMmmmmJD
JDJDJDJDJD
JDJDmmmmJ
JJmmmmmm
mmmMMMM
M 
1  Input Cost Hazira – Condensate price + Processing Cost ( 100%) 
 
 
1100(100%) 
790.25 
2  Net Revenue from VAPs (100%) 799.45 
3  Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, without discount. 9.20 
4  Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, with discount on LPG & SKO (139.47)* 
5  Past benefit to ONGC, Hazira/Short payment to JV 70.54 
6  Net Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, with discount on LPG & SKO (68.93) 
 
 * It is pertinent to mention here that the subsidies computation for 
compensating the under recovery by OMC on sale of petroleum product does not 
take into account LPG & SKO production but only oil production and subsidies 
worked out are there after distribution to HSD, LPG &SKO. 
 
In its vetted remarks on the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit stated that Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas  has not given the year wise details of profits made by ONGC 
in terms of transportation and processing Charges after the settlement of concerned 
outstanding issues with JV partners.  The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has 
given the pre and post comparative benefits of pre and post settlement (up to March 
2012).  In post settlement, ONGC suffered a loss of US$ 331.94 million by agreeing 
JV’s pre-condition of  purchase of condensate at crude oil price (higher price) in place of 
gas price (lower price) and against agreeing to JV’s pre condition , it has got benefits of 
US$ 86.63 million towards upward revision in transportation charges and processing 
charges.  The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas’s calculation does not include loss of 
US$ 34.79 million (up to August 2012) suffered by ONGC towards reduction in 
percentage of Panna -Mukta gas processing loss from 4% to 2.35% in package deal. 
Further gain toward Panna gas transportation charges of US$ 42.30 million projected by 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  was in fact ONGC’s  legitimate right to receive 
it for use of its pipeline which has already been accepted by the Ministry of Law.  Thus, 
net lo ss to ONGC worked out to US$ 280.10 million including Panna gas processing 
loss (US$ 331.94( -) US$ 86.63 +US$ 34.79 million).  Excluding the Panna gas 

transportation charges, loss worked out to US$ 322.40 million till March 2012.  Further, 
condensate at crude oil price was also a loss making proposition to ONGC since in its 
financial calculation it did not factor subsidy on sale of domestic LPG and kerosene 
which it is bearing as per GoI policy. The loss on this account informed by the Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas  was US$ 68.93 million till March 2012 .  This has been 
worked out by setting of the gain of US$ 70.54 million in the pre -settlement period. The 
loss reported by ONGC in the post settlement period till 31.3.2012 was US $139.74 
million without accounting for the subsidy burden on the value added products extracte d 
and sold from the condensate. 
 When desired to know about the details of ONGC’s profit calculations during the 
post settlement period of PSC (2005 -2019), the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in 
a written reply stated as under:- 
“During the post settlement periof of PSC (upto 2019 -20), the gross margin 
accrued to ONGC on VAPs without accounting for subsidy is estimated at US$ 
6.38.  The benefit to ONGC for the same period on account of settlement 
agreement is estimated to be US$ 164.14 Million (86.62+10.63+66.89).  Hence, 
the total benefit to ONGC during the above period is estimated to be US$ 170.52 
Million (164.14+6.38).  However, even after discount on accoun t of GOI directive, 
the gain to ONGC is estimated at US$ 0.59 Million (170.52 -163.55-6.38) during 
the same period.   
 
Further, considering the entire PSC period, the gross margin accrued to 
ONGC on VAPs without accounting for subsidy is estimated at US$ 73.35.  Thus, 
total benefit to ONGC during this period is estimated to be US$ 237.49 Million 
(164.14+73.35).  However, e ven after discount on account of GOI directive, the 
gain to ONGC is estimated at US$ 38.94 Million (237.49 -125.20-73.35) during 
the same period.   
 
Seen in totality, the settlement agreement has not only ironed out the long 
pending issues with JV partners,  but is estimated to not result in any financial 
loss to ONGC over both post settlement period and even the entire PSC period.” 
 
 As per the information furnished by the Ministry, the details of the ONGC’s 
comparative profit calculations during the pre -settlement (1997 -2005) and post -
settlement period (2005-2019) of PSC are as follows: 
 
A. Valuation of C ondensate as gas equivalent in energy terms vis‐à‐vis 
benchmarked to liquid hydrocarbon. 
                           In US $ Million  
Valuation of Condensate as Gas 1997- 1.4.2005 to 2012-13 2013-14 

Equiv. & as Liquid 31.3.2005 31.3.2012 to  
2019-20 
A. Condensate produced 5.56 MM Bbls 9.91 MM Bbls 0.54 0.51 
B. Value, Benchmarked as liquid 145.12 769.14 57.16 53.55 
C. Value as Gas, equivalent in 
energy terms 
74.58 215.90 12.65 11.99 
D. Comparative gain to ONGC (B-
C) 
70.54 (-) 553.24 (44.51) (41.56) 
 Payment by ONGC to JV (60%)  331.94 26.71 24.94 
 
Note: 
 
1. Tapti production profile for condensate and gas is upto 2015-16 only. 
2. For the period 2013-14 to 2019-20 the condensate rate (SP) is assumed at US$ 105 per 
BBL. 
3. NCV of 4.22 (average NCV of 2012-13) is assumed for conversion of condensate BBL to 
MMBTU. 
 
B.   Revenue from Transportation and Processing charges pre and post 
settlement agreement: 
In US$ Million  
Details of Transportation & Processing 
tariff 
Pre 
Settlement 
(1997 – 
31.3.2005) 
Post 
Settlement 
(1.4.2005 to 
31.3.2012) 
2012-13 2013-14 
to 2019-
20 
A.   Tapti Tptn. & Proc. Charges 93.56 135.36 8.12 9.24 
B.  Panna-Mukta Transportation charges  Nil 70.50 11.01 69.94 
C. Panna- Mukta Processing charges 16.67 94.30 10.65 67.69 
D.   Receipt from ESCROW (dedn. for 
Tptn.) 
10% 
Withheld 
28.64 - - 
Total 110.23 328.80 29.78 146.87 
 
C.   Differential gain to ONGC till 31.3.2012 Pre vis‐à‐vis Post Settlement 
Agreement 
 
   Upto 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 to 2019-20 
Description Gas 
Volume 
Diff. 
Tarrif 
Differenti
al 
Revenue 
60% 
receive
d from 
JV 
Differenti
al 
Revenue 
100% 
Differenti
al 
Revenue 
60% 
received 
from JV 
Differenti
al 
Revenue 
100% 
Differenti
al 
Revenue 
60% 
received 
from JV 
 MMSC
F 
US$/M
SCF 
US $ MM US $ 
MM 
US $ MM US $ MM US $ MM US $ MM 
Tapti Tptn. 
& Proc. 
1,23736
8 
0.005 6.19 3.71 0.22 0.13 0.25 0.15 
PM-
Tptn(1/4/20
05) 
454,869 0.155 70.50 42.30 11.01 6.60 69.94 41.97 
PM- 739,742 0.0915 67.69 40.61 6.50  3.90 41.29 24.77 

 
D.   The benefit analysis to ONGC, Hazira by purchase of Condensate 
as liquid(1.4.2005 to 31.3.2012) is also submitted. 
 
 
The Condensate purchased by ONGC, Hazira was processed for 
extraction of Va lue Added Products (VAPs) mainly LPG,  Naptha, Kerosene & 
Heavy cuts  (HSD).  The benefit/loss to ONGC, Hazira post S ettlement 
Agreement from VAPs upto 31.3.2012 is summarized hereunder: 
US $ MM 
Sl.No. Description 2005-06 to 
2011-12 
2012-13 
to 2019-
20 
Total from 
2005-06 to 
2019-20 
1  Input Cost Hazira – Condensate price + 
Processing Cost ( 100%) 
790.25 143.40 933.65 
2  Net Revenue from VAPs  799.45 140.58 940.03 
3  Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, without 
discount. 
9.20 (2.82) 6.38 
4  Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, with discount 
on LPG & SKO 
(139.47)* (24.08) (163.55) 
5  Past benefit to ONGC, Hazira/Short payment 
to JV 
70.54 0.00 70.54 
6  Net Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, with 
discount on LPG & SKO 
(68.93) (24.08) (93.01) 
 
* It is pertinent to mention here that the subsidies computation for compensating the under 
recovery by OMC on sale of petroleum product does not take into account LPG & SKO production 
but only oil production and subsidies worked out are there after distribution to HSD, LPG &SKO. 
 
D.1  The benefit analysis to ONGC, Hazira by purchase of condensate as 
liquid (1997-98 to 2019-20) is also submitted. 
US $ MM 
Sl.No. Description 1997-98 to 
2004-05 
2005-06 to 
2011-12 
2012-13 
to 2019-
20 
Total from 
1997-98 to 
2019-20 
1  Input Cost Hazira – Condensate 
price + Processing Cost ( 100%) 
80.64* 790.25 143.40 1014.28 
2  Net Revenue from VAPs  147.60 799.45 140.58 1087.63 
3  Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, 
without discount. 
66.97 9.20 (2.82) 73.35 
4  Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, with 
discount on LPG & SKO 
55.33 (139.47) (41.06) (125.20) 
5  Past benefit to ONGC, 
Hazira/Short payment to JV 
**  0.00 0.00 
6  Net Benefit/Loss to ONGC, Hazira, 
with discount on LPG & SKO 
55.33 (139.47) (41.06) (125.20) 
Processing 
Total   144.38 86.63 17.72 10.63 111.48 66.89 

 
*  Input cost is arrived after adding condensate price paid as gas for US$ 74.58 MM (Table 
A)+ processing cost of US$ 6.06 MM 
** Past benefit shown at S.No. 5 in previous Table D is ignored in Table D1, since this 
benefit is already included in condensate price at S.No. 1 in this table D1. 
 
(iii). Benefit to Government Exchequer 
 
 ONGC has claimed that Government had been benefited by valuing condensate 
at crude oil prices.  Asked to explain the basis for this stand, the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas in its reply (5 April 2013) stated that pursuant  to  Settlement  Agreement  
effective  from  April  1,  2005  JV  has  been paying Cess and Royalty to the 
Government on Condensate saved and sold from Tapti, resulting in higher levies.   
Further, Government has also been benefi ted by sale of Condensate as liquid as its 
share of Profit Petroleum is greater than before.   Actual revenue received by the GoI 
from statutory levies & Profit Petroleum  in respect of Mid & South Tapti Contact area is 
as under: 
 
                                                   Actual Paid to the GoI, All figures in US $ MM 
Description Inception till 
31-3-2005 
 31.3.2005 
1.4.2005 to 
31-3-2012 
Inception till 
31-3-2012 
Remarks 
Total statutory Levies 135.82 367.79 503.61 As per CRS 
GoI Profit Petroleum 161.53 572.92 734.45 EOY Statement 
Note: All figures represents for; 
 Tapti Gas + Tapti Condensate (as Gas equiv.) till 31.3.2005 & (as liquid) from 1.4.2005 to 31.3.2012 
1.1/.41.4.2005 to 31.3.2012 
 
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas further submitted that on the actual 
revenue received by the GoI, comparative benefit/Loss to GoI has been worked out in 
Pre and Post – Settlement scenario as under:- 
 
a) GoI take for valuation of Condensate as gas equivalent in energy terms 
vis‐à‐vis benchmarked to liquid hydrocarbon (Inception to 31.3.2005). 
 
Pre-settlement Agreement  (inception till 31.3.2005), all figures in US$MM  
Description GoI Take in US $ Million Remarks 
 As Gas 
Equ.(Actual) 
Valued as Liquid Cess applicable for 
liquids only. 
Royalty/Statutory Levies 135.82 149.89 
GoI share of PP 161.53 172.64  
Total 297.35 322.71  
Loss to GoI in valuing Condensate as gas Equivalent in energy terms 
 
US $ 25.36 MM 
 
b) GoI take for valuation of Condensate benchmarked to liquid hydrocarbon 
vis‐à‐vis as gas equivalent in energy terms (1.4.2005 to 31.3.2012) 
 
Post-settlement Agreement  (1.4.2005 to 31.3.2012), all figures in US$MM  

Description GoI Take in US $ Million Remarks 
 As Gas Equ. 
Calculated 
Valued as 
Liquid(Actual) 
Cess applicable for 
liquids only. 
Royalty/Statutory Levies 349.64 367.79 
GoI share of PP 465.91 572.92  
Total 815.55 940.71  
 Benefit  to GoI by valuing Condensate  benchmarked to liquid Hydrocarbon. US $ 1 25.1 6 MM 
 
 The Ministry of Petroleum &  Natural Gas stated that it is evident  from  above  
that,  during  June  1998  to  31.3.2005  (Pre ‐ Settlement  period)  GoI suffered  a loss 
of ~ US $ 25.36 Million  due to treatment  of condensate  as gas equivalent instead of 
liquid hydrocarbon.  Howeve r,  GoI has been benefited to the tune of ~ US $ 125 
Million   during   the  period   1.4.2005   till  31.3.2012 by treating   condensate   as  
liquid  in comparison to valuing as gas.  The  above  facts  corroborates   the  earlier  
observation   by  C&AG   in  its  Report  No.  5 (Commercial) of 1996 and Draft Report 
2005 that, “GoI suffered loss of Rs. 67.67 Crore due to treatment of Tapti Condensate 
as gas instead of crude oil and future loss on that account is estimated to be Rs. 232 
Crore ( Para no. 4. 4.4.1 to 4.4.4.4).  Consequent  to  valuation  of  condensate  at  
benchmarked  price,  next  slab  of  Investment Multiple vis-à-vis Profit Petroleum 
would trigger early at least by a year or two on account of higher accumulative  
revenue from sale of Tap ti condensate. Thus, GoI entitlement of PP would become 
40%, from present level of 20%. It is therefore submitted that the valuation of 
condensate as liquid has been beneficial to the Government.  
  
 Audit in its vetting remarks to the aforesaid reply of ONGC stated that in CAG 
Para, audit has also taken into consideration incremental benefits accrued to 
Government in form of statutory levies and profit petroleum due to consideration of 
condensate at crude oil price (higher price) than natural gas price (low er price) and 
commented that decision of ONGC to purchase JV condensate at crude oil price in lieu 
of gas price (contravention to ministry) which resulted in loss to ONGC (including 
Government incremental benefit).   As per data provided by the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas,  the loss to ONGC even after taking incremental benefit to the Govt. 
worked out to US$ 205.01 million till 31.3.2012 as given below.  
 

Elements  US$ MM 
Loss due to purchase of condensate at crude oil price in place of gas 
price (1.4.2005 to 31.3.2012)-ONGC to JV 60% 
(-) 331.94 
Incremental gain to ONGC on transportation and processing charges -
60% received from JV  
86.63 
Loss to ONGC on reduction in % of processing loss up to August 2012 
not considered by Ministry  
(-) 34.79 
Govt.incremental gain on statutory levies and PP -60% excluding 40% of 
ONGC (Government ONGC) share  
75.09 
Total loss to ONGC including Govt. incremental gain  205.01 
 
It was clarified by Audit that a  draft comment had been made in course of an 
audit stat ing that GoI has suffered loss of Rs. 67.67 crore due to treatment of Tapti 
condensate as gas instead of crude oil. This was based on a study of DGH which 
pointed out that royalty and cess on crude oil is higher compared to gas. However , this 
was a very limited analysis which did not consider the holistic picture of changing 
treatment of condensate from gas to crude oil as was done in the instant para. It may 
also be pointed out here that the comment was a draft comment which was not incl uded 
in the final audit report and thus is a part of audit’s working papers/ documentation and 
is not a final view taken by the CAG. 
 
(iv). Value Added Products  
 
 ONGC had reportedly apprised ( 3 March 2006) its Board of Directors (Board) 
that on valuing the condensate at crude oil prices, ONGC would gain Rs. 131 crore 
(US$29.11 million) in terms of value of VAPs to be extracted from the condensate 
production profile of 2.021 MMT for the period fro m April 2005 to 2019.   Audit has 
however, observed that the said net gain of 131 crore was in fact a loss of  Rs. 202 
crore as ONGC had not considered the subsidy element on domestic  Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (LPG) and  Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO) which it was bearing as per 
the government directives. 
  
When asked as to whether ONGC overlooked the subsidy burden on Liqu ified 
Petroleum Gas (LPG) and Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO), while working out the net gain 
/ loss on the Value Added Products (VAPs), ONGC in its reply stated that Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMC’s) incur under recovery in selling the price ‐ sensitive products 

(LPG ‐ domestic, SKO‐PDS, MS and HSD) on prices approved by the Govt. from time 
to time. Approximately one  third of such under recovery is borne by upstream o il 
companies (ONGC, OIL  and GAIL) in the ratio of their net profit of the previous 
year. The share of under recovery of each upstream ONGC is first determined in 
absolute amounts (i.e. crore) and is then denominated in terms of Rs. Per  tone or 
barrel of discount to be all owed by each upstream ONGC on the sale of crude  oil,  
LPG,  SKO  to  OMC/refineries  in  such  a manner  that  the  discount  on sale 
allowed by the upstream ONGC to the OMC’s/refineries  is exactly equal to the under 
recoveries allocated to upstream  companies These working are carried out by 
MoP&NG/PPAC on quarterly basis. In sub stance, the subsidy discount allowed by 
upstream companies (in Rs. crore) is independent of the quantum of their production 
of crude, LPG and SKO, since the subsidy amount depends upon the under 
recoveries of the OMC’s.  Thus for economic analysis/decision making for investment  
in upstream projects, only the contribution from additional production is taken into 
consideration at pre‐subsidy discount rates. Since the subsidy discount to be passed 
on is f ixed and does not depend upon quantity produced, for economic analysis 
purpose, the subsidy element was not factored in. 
  
Disagreeing with the abovestated explanation of ONGC, the Audit in its vetting 
remarks stated that the a rgument is not convincing since ONGC is bearing subsidy on 
domestic LPG and Kerosene as per GoI policy , ONGC should have factored the 
subsidy element while working out financial calculations for purchase of condensate at 
crude oil price (though contrary to MoPNG directives). As worked out by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas  the loss to ONGC considering subsidy element was US $ 
68.93 million till 31.3.2012. 
 
Enquired as to how the gain of Rs. 131 crore was calculated a nd whether it was 
placed before the Board, ONGC in a written reply stated that w hile seeking approval of 
ONGC management for execution of settlement agreement, the estimated benefit of Rs. 
131 crore through VAP extraction was not considered. However, the e stimated benefit 
to accrue was provisionally assessed based on the nine month average price of VAP 

and condensate price indexed to Brent Crude, a figure which was to be reworked based 
on the recommendation of outside expert. Gain from VAP per MT as worked out @ 
Rs.1,075/MT to Rs.131 crore (1075*2.031 MMT *0.6 (JV share) = 131 crore) and same 
was apprised to ONGC Board. 
 
Audit in its vetting remarks stated in this regard that while appraising its Board, 
ONGC management in its financial calculation did not fa ctor the subsidy element on 
sale of domestic LPG and SKO which has its bearing as per GoI policy. ONGC 
considered the invoice price of domestic LPG and SKO instead of realized price. 
Further processing cost was higher at ` 581 per MT (as per cost records o f ONGC and 
confirmation of processing cost obtained from Hazira plant of ONGC) instead of Rs. 400 
per MT considered by ONGC. In addition, Rs. 51 per MT for export charges was taken 
by audit which was not considered by ONGC in its calculation. Thus, gain of  Rs. 131 
crore presented by ONGC to its Board was in fact a loss of Rs. 202 crore. 
 
 On being asked whether ONGC was getting the value added products in the 
earlier arrangement and was there any way the JV could have sold the condensate to 
any Party other than GoI or its nominees, thus depriving ONGC of the benefit of value 
added products, ONGC in a written reply stated that it has been extracting VAPs since 
commencement of Tapti gas production, i.e., June 1997 and is continuing to extract the 
same now also. It is submitted that pursuant to Article 18 of the PSC, regarding sale to 
any party other than GoI or its nominee, when GoI is unable to nominate or has elected 
not to purchase full or partial off take of production within ninety days of the sale offer 
made by JV to GoI, provision exists for sale of Petroleum to any party other than GoI or 
its nominee at Arms Length Sales as provided in Article 19.3. The Hazira Plant of 
ONGC has been extracting VAPs from the hydrocarbons produced from its own field 
much before signing of Tapti PSC. Incidentally, the delivery point of Tapti Gas is also 
Hazira. In view of above and also in the best national interest, MC decided to utilize 
ONGC pipeline and processing facility for evacuation and delivery to Tapti Gas to GoI 
nominee GAIL. In fact, utilization of ONGC infrastructure by JV was instrumental in early 
production & sale of gas from Tapti field, benefitting the nation as a whole. In turn, 

ONGC got an opportunity to extract VAP out of JV gas, thereby facilitating full value 
realization of Tapti gas. 
In their vetting remarks to the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit stated that the 
MoPNG has made the arrangement for disposal of condensate. AS per MoPNG 
instance, MoU was signed between JV (seller) and ONGC (buyer) wherein ONGC was 
retaining the JV condensate and in turn delivering its own gas to GAIL on energy 
equivalent basis. The issue regarding designating a Government nominee for receipt of 
Condensate was discussed (November 2003) in the meeting held by the MoPNG with 
the JV, GAIL and DGH, wherein MoPNG reiterated its earlier decision i.e. MoU 
arrangement wherein ONGC was retaining the JV condensate and in turn delivering its 
own gas to GAIL on energy equivalent basis and directed to continue the existing 
arrangement. 
 
(v). EIL STUDY 
 
 According to Audit, a study was conducted by Engineers India Limited in 
February 2005 at the instance of MOPNG which concluded (March 2005) that 
condensate obtained from Tapti field could be treated as gas which was accepted (April 
2005) by the MoPNG.  
When asked to clarify as to why ONGC went ahead signing settlement 
agreement with JV partners ignoring the findings of EIL  report, CMD, ONGC during 
evidence held on 6 August, 2012 deposed as under:-  
“the report has never been public nor a decision has been conveyed”.  
 
In view of the findings  of the EIL study, the Committee enquired as to  how 
ONGC  could justify its decision  to consider  condensate  obtained  from  Tapti  gas  
field  as oil and whether ONGC used different technical methods/grounds from those 
relied upon by the EIL to determine the nature of condensate and if so, whether  such 
methods were in consonance with the standard International norms. In response,  
ONGC stated as under: 
“…in order to enable early commencement of gas production from Tapti field, it 
was purely an interim decision taken by MoP&NG  to treat the Condensate as 

gas. EIL carried out the study on treatment of condensate twice, on the advice 
of MoP&NG first in the year 1998 and again in 2005. 
a)   In  1998,   EIL  carried   out  by  simulation   method   the  total   take   of  
contractors considering   condensate   being  treated   as  gas  and  
condensate   being  treated   as condensate. 
b)  EIL sub mitted its report  in  July  1998  to  the  Mini stry.  MoP&NG,  in  
Sept’  1998 constituted  a Committee of experts to study EIL report to work 
out vario us pricing options  for  the  C ondensate.  Co mmittee  af ter  
detailed  deliberations  recommended tha t:  “Condensate  may  be valued  
as Crude  Oil”  and  sub mitted  its rep ort  in Dec’1 998. Co mmittee al so 
stated that, “Gas conde nsate is not being treated as Gas in ternationally”. 
Committee after evalua ting various options recommended that 
“Condensate may be valued as Crude Oil”  and submitted its report  
“Pricing options for Tapti condensate” to the Ministry in December’ 1998. 
c) DGH, the technical arm of the Government also carried out (Sept’ 
1997) the revenue implication of treating condensate as gas as well as 
oil and opined that its treatment as oil would be beneficial to the 
Government.” 
d)    However, the Report has not been accepted by the MoP&NG. 
e)  Treatment of Condensate was again discussed in the Ministry in 2005 
and EIL was assigned to carry out simulation for the Tapti well fluid. EIL 
submitted its report in March, 2005 and opined that “it is reasonable to 
conclude that condensate obtained from Tapti gas can be treated as 
gas”. However this report has also not been accepted by the MoP&NG. 
An examination of EIL Report of 2005, reveals the following facts: 
 
•    Only one well sample (STB#1) has been taken for simulation study. 
•    Interpretation has been done using simulation by HYSYS. 
•    Considering   the   foregoing,   probably   led   EIL   to   suggest   treatment   
of Tapti Condensate as Gas. However, actual  composition  of  Tapti  
Condensate  as per Core  Lab  Report  (based on more representative 
sample collected from process platform) is as under: 
 Methane ‐ 29.30% by Mole 
 C1 to C5  ‐  46.1% by Mole 
 C6 and Higher fractions ‐ 53.9 % by Mole. 
 
It is worth mentioning that, Tapti fluid has a (Condensate Gas Ratio) CGR 
in the range of ~ 9 to 16 Bbls/MMSCF (average ~ 12 Bbls/MMSCF). 
 
It may  be pertinent to mention that treatment of condensate as gas in 
equivalent energy terms is not appropriate   valuation   due to difference   in 
constituents   of gas and condensate.  Condensate being rich in higher 

components is used for VAP production and is commercially valued much higher 
vis-à-vis gas. Condensate produced along with the natural gas from other fields 
under PSC, i.e. CB‐ OS/2 & KG‐ DWN‐ 98/3 etc. is being sold as condensate,   
valued   as liquid hydrocarbon.   Therefore,   it is reiterated   that the valuation of 
Tapti condensate is consistent as per the provisions of the PSC.” 
 
In their vetting remarks to the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit stated that EIL 
report of December 1998 was not accepted by the Government as evident from the fact 
that during the progress review meeting of PMT -JV held (November 2003) by MoPNG 
with PMT-JV partners, DGH and Government nominee, IOC and GAIL for purchase of 
JV crude oil and gas respectively, the issue regarding designating, a Government 
nominee for receipt of condensate was discussed. It was brought o ut that ONGC is at 
present receiving condensate at Hazira. The Joint Secretary, MoPNG mentioned that in 
case any party has problem with existing arrangement, it should send its 
suggestions/proposal to DGH, else, the existing system would continue.  Further , at the 
instance of MoPNG, EIL carried out the simulations for the well fluid composition for 
Tapti gas field as furnished by ONGC. EIL, in its report of March 2005 had stated that 
condensate was not present at reservoir conditions, was generated at the w ellhead 
conditions and was in vapour form even at a temperature of 42.7oC. On examination of 
the behaviour of the Tapti well fluid at reservoir and wellhead conditions and the 
definition of condensate as given in the PSC, EIL concluded (March 2005) that 
condensate obtained from Tapti gas field can be treated as gas.  According to Audit, 
MoPNG accepted EIL recommendation (April 2005). 
To a specific query as to whether the study report of EIL on valuation of 
condensate was accepted by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas in a written reply categorically stated that the same has not 
been accepted by them as it was not required as per PSC. 
(vi). DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT FROM THE BASSEIN GAS FIELD 
 
Audit has observed that ONGC was valuing the condensate generated from its 
own Bassein gas field at gas prices and paying royalty as applicable to gas whereas in 
case of Tapti Gas Fields the condensate was valued at crude oil prices.  

In this regard ONGC was asked to clarify as to why it has applied different   
parameters to determine the valuation of condensate produced at its Tapti and Bassein 
gas fields. In response, ONGC stated that its Bassein and Satellite (B&S) is regarded as 
a dry gas field, as the gas produced does not contain heavier molecules as condensate, 
at reservoir conditions. However, condensate is formed at surface and during 
transportation to Hazira.  Whereas in case of Tapti JV field, the gas, as produced 
contains liquid hydrocarbon i.e. condensate at the well head itself. Therefore, in case of 
Tapti field, since condensate is produced at the well head itself (by wet gas), rather than 
in course of pipeline transportation in case of Bassein gas (dry gas), as such, value 
extraction  proposition from Tapti gas was distinctly multifold.   
It is pertinent to submit that in May/June 1998, MoP&NG asked EIL to carry out a 
study to advise on treatment of Condensate produced along with gas from Tapti fields. 
Accordingly, EIL submitted its report in July, 1998 to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas.  Subsequently,  MoP&NG,  in Sept’ 1998 constituted  a Committee  comprising  of 
senior technical experts from GAIL & ONGC to study EIL report on treatment of 
Condensate and to work out various pricing  options for the Condensate. Committee in 
its report on page no.  3 stated that’  ”Generally   Naphtha obtained from refinery 
contains C5    to C9 hydrocarbons.  The Tapti Condensate contains around 10.6 mole%  
of C10   and 25.9%  of C10+ hydrocarbons  and balance 63.6% being C5  to C9. Hence 
the Tapti Gas Condensate can’t be treated at par with Naphtha. However, the 
composition of Tapti Gas Condensate (C4 to C10+) matches almost with light stabilized 
crude oil”.Further, JV partners, M/s Enron, (now BGEPIL)  & RIL have been insisting 
since 1997 -98 for designating GoI nominee and valuation of condensate, under the 
provisions of the PSC. As such, it was not possible for ONGC to deny their entitlement 
as provided in Article 14.4 of PSC in respect of Sharing of Profit Petroleum.   
ONGC further stated that in CAG Report No. 5 (Commercial) of 1996 and Draft 
Report 2005 (para no. 4.4.4.3), audit observed that the bid of RIL/EOGIL for Tapti field 
had been evaluated after consideration of the condensate as crude oil fo r statutory 
levies and pricing and;  DGH has carried out (Sept’ 1997) the revenue implication of 
treating condensate as gas as well as oil and opined that its treatment as oil would b e 

beneficial to the Government.  In view of foregoing, the valuation of Ta pti Condensate 
done as per the provisions PSC is in order. 
In their vetting remarks to the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit stated as under: 
 At the instance of MoPNG, EIL carried out the simulations for the well fluid 
composition for Tapti gas field as furni shed by ONGC. EIL, in its report had 
stated that condensate was not present at reservoir conditions, was generated at 
the wellhead conditions and was in vapour form even at a temperature of 42.7oC 
On examination of the behaviour of the Tapti well fluid at reservoir and wellhead 
conditions and the definition of condensate as given in the PSC, EIL concluded 
(March 2005) that condensate obtained from Tapti gas field can be treated as 
gas. MoPNG accepted EIL recommendation (April 2005).As regard to B&S gas 
field of ONGC, condensate is also generated at wellhead. Thus MoPNG 
argument that in B&S field condensate is formed at surface during transportation 
to Hazira is not factual. Thus in the both field s condensate is produced at 
wellhead.  
 
 JV during initial perio d (1997-98) insisted for treatment of condensate as 
gas. This was presumably because the price of gas was then higher than crude 
oil.  The stand of the JV changed over time as price of crude oil soared. 
 
 A draft comment had been made in course of an audit stating that GoI has 
suffered loss of ` 67.67 crore due to treatment of Tapti condensate as gas 
instead of crude oil. This was based on a study of DGH which pointed out that 
royalty and cess on crude oil is higher compared to gas. However this was a very 
limited analysis which did not consider the holistic picture of changing treatment 
of condensate from gas to crude oil as was done in the instant para. It may also 
be pointed out here that the comment was a draft comment which was not 
included in the final audit report and thus is a part of audit’s working papers/ 
documentation and is not a final view taken by the CAG.” 
  
(vii). Violation of Interim Arrangement 
 Audit has observed that the decision of ONGC to purchase condensate at crude 
oil price was inconsistent with the directive (May 1998) of Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas to treat the condensate at gas. In November 2003, MoPNG reiterated its 
earlier decision of treating condensate as gas and dire cted that the existing system 
would continue. MoPNG had conducted study through M/S EIL (March 2005) who after 
considering the behavior of the Tapti well fluid at reservoir and well head condition and 

definition of the PSC document concluded (March 2005) t hat condensate obtained from 
Tapti gas can be treated as gas and the same was accepted by MoPNG. 
 The Committee enquired as to whether any directions were issued by GOI 
regarding disposal of Tapti condensate (Joint Venture Condensate), and If so, the 
details thereof as also when these were issued.  In response, ONGC  stated that the 
earlier direction given by the Government to treat the Tapti Condensate on ‘Energy 
Equivalent Losses” was based on the study of EIL, though PSC talked of treating its 
valuation on the basis of crude oil equivalents. However, the Settlement agreed in 
Settlement Agreement dated 31.12.2005 signed between ONGC as transporter of gas 
and PMT JV agreed ONGC as transporter of the gas and PMT JV agreed ONGC as 
buyer of condensate and its valuation mutatis mutandis with crude oil. Since the 
valuation agreed by ONGC is in line with PSC provisions, Government of India didn’t 
have any objection to such sale. 
 
Disagreeing with the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit in its vetting remarks stated 
that as per Article 1.18 of the PSC, Tapti condensate cannot be treated as Crude Oil. 
Study conducted (February 2005) by M/S Engineering India Limited, at the instance of 
MoPNG, also concluded (March 2005) that be treated as gas and same was accepte d 
(April 2005) by the MoPNG.   As regards MOPNG’s reply that the valuation agreed by 
ONGC is in line with the PSC provision and the Government of India did not have any 
objection to such sale may be viewed in light of the following: 
 
 Tapti PSC does not cont ain any terms and conditions relating to Condensate 
disposal. 
 The definition of ‘Condensate’ in Article 1.18 of the Tapti PSC provides that in the 
event Condensate is produced from an ‘Oil field’ and is segregated an 
transported separately to the delivery Point, then the provisions of the PSC shall 
apply to such Condensate as if it were Crude Oil. 
 The provision of Article 19.11 relate to Valuation of Oil and as per Article 1.18 
Article 19.11 applies to condensate only if the condensate is produced from 
Crude Oil field. In the present case, the condensate has been produced from a 
gas field. 
 Since Tapti is a gas field, the PSC provision referred by the MoPNG is not 
applicable to the condensate produced from this field. 
 In absence of provision for disposal of c ondensate in the PSC, as per the 
direction of MoPNG, at the time of commencement of production, MOU was 

signed between ONGC and JV wherein ONGC was retaining the JV condensate 
and in turn delivering its own gas to GAIL on energy equivalent basis. 
 MoPNG in November 2003 reiterated its above decision and directed PMT -JV 
and ONGC to continue the existing arrangement. 
 MoPNG had conducted study through M/S EIL (March 2005) who after 
considering the behaviour of the Tapti well fluid at reservoir and well head 
conditions and definition of the PSC document concluded (March 2005) that 
condensate obtained from Tapti gas can be treated as gas and the same was 
accepted by the MoPNG (April 2005). 
 Thus, ONGC’s decision to purchase Tapti condensate at crude oil price was n ot 
as per PSC provision and also in contravention to the MoPNG directives. 
 The GOI is the owner of the field and as such had given Mining Lease to the JV 
on certain terms and conditions. Thus, the buyer and seller cannot independently 
decide price of hydrocarbon without approval of the GOI the owner. 
PMT-JV entered into ‘settlement agreement’ wherein it was decided to purchase 
JV condensate at crude oil price. Further, GOI is the owner of the JV field and 
buyer and seller cannot independently decide hydroca rbon price without the 
approval of the Government. 
 
When asked whether the directions of the Government of India were being 
followed by ONGC, ONGC stated that an interim arrangement was made for delivering 
substituted equivalent volume of gas on energy basis (MMBTU contents), in lieu of Tapti 
condensate. Such practice continued till 31.03.2005 and in this process if ONGC got 
unintended benefit, it may not be treated as actual loss in today’s terms as the present 
practice agreed by ONGC with PMT-JV is as per provisions of Tapti PSC. 
 
 During the evidence, the Committee enquired as to why ONGC went ahead to 
sign settlement agreement with JV partners which was in contravention of 
Government’s interim arrangement of 1998.  In response, the Secretary, MoPNG 
deposed: 
 
“Sir, in fact the arrangement was well laid out in the Production Sharing Contract 
(PSC) itself.  It has in fact made it clear how this condensate is to be valued.  It is 
there in the PSC itself.  But somehow as an interim arrangement, because there 
were other disputes, it was said okay you treat it as gas, means it should be 
priced at energy equivalent accordingly.  So, somehow it went on from 1997 to 
2005.  In 2005, since the other disputes were being settled, almost everybody at 
that point in time,  because the PSC is quite clear about it, said that we must 
implement.” 
 
 The Secretary added:  

 
“That is a fact because in 1998, there was a meeting convened by the then Joint 
Secretary (Exploration) where all the players participated and it was thought 
proper that it should be valued as gas.  That is what is written.  But as a follow up 
of that, no order was issued.” 
 
When asked whether the ONGC has the authority to enter into any agreement 
without prior approval of the Government, CMD, ONGC deposed as under:  
 
“Sir, this was discussed and approved in the Board where the Government 
nominee was also there and the Joint Venture has informed the Government 
after this Settlement Agreement.” 
 
In this context, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas was asked to clarify as to 
how the Government remained silent when JV informed them about the Settlement 
Agreement and the valuation of Tapt i Condensate at crude oil price which was contrary 
to  their directives of 1995 and the outcome of EIL study accepted by the Government in 
April 2005.  In response, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas replied that the 
Ministry has not objected to the settlement Agreement as the pricing of condensate was 
finally agreed between the parties in accordance with Article 19.11 of PSC and the 
settlement Agreement is a commercial decision between ONGC and the JV. 
 
 Not agreeing with the aforesaid reply of ONGC, Audit in its vetting remarks stated 
that the pricing of condensate at crude oil price was in contravention to Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas ’s own directives to ONGC which was based on deliberations 
with DGH, EIL, ONGC, GAIL and PMT -JV and also indepe ndent study conducted by it 
through EIL in March 2005 which was accepted by it in April 2005.  Further, Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas has not appointed ONGC (ONGC) as its nominee to purchase 
the JV condensate which is required under Article 18.2 and 19 of the PSC. It may be 
mentioned here that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  appointed GAIL as its 
nominee to purchase 100% of JV gas.   
 
As regards ONGC’s intimation to its Board of Directors regarding the Settlement 
Agreement, Audit had observed that ONGC did not apprise the Board of the incremental 
gain/loss on settlement of outstanding issues of transportation and processing charges 

vis-à-vis purchase of condensate at crude oil price in place of gas price which was a 
pre-condition of JV for settlement of outstanding issues.  Further, ONGC did not apprise 
the Board that purchase of condensate was at crude oil price which was in 
contravention to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas ’s directives.  Perusal of agenda 
papers and minutes of the Board Meeting of ONGC also confirmed the stand of Audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee are distressed to know the serious deficiencies in a 
commercial contract entered into between the Government of India, Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC), Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and 
British Gas Exploration and Production India Limited (BGEPIL) formerly known as 
Enron Oil and Gas India Limited.  The Production Sharing Contract (PSC) of the 
Tapti Gas Field, a joint venture (JV) jointly operated by ONGC, RIL and BGEPIL 
was executed in December 1994.  The PSC devised by ONGC  did not provide for 
disposal of Tapti condensate and there was no separate pricing mechanism for 
condensate.  The PSC was also silent about the appointment of Government 
nominee for purchase of the condensate and there was also no clarity in the PSC 
about delivery point of condensate which led to different interpretations.  The 
Committees’ pointed query seeking reasons for these lapses has not yielded any 
specific information.  The Committee deplore the lapses on the part of ONGC and 
urge ONGC and the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to exercise extreme care 
in future and ensure that there are no shortcomings in commercial contracts.  
 
2. The lacunae in the PSC with regard to disposal and pricing of condensate 
led to an interim arrangement whereby ONGC r etained the JV condensate and in 
turn delivered its own gas to GAIL on energy equivalent basis as per the PSC gas 
pricing mechanism.  The fact that the interim arrangement, made at the instance 
of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, continued for almo st seven years (i.e. 
from May 1998 to March 2005) shows the apathy with which the matter has been 
handled.  The Committee feel that adhocism on the part of Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas in such a crucial matter is inexplicable.  It is only in Decembe r 
2005, the interim arrangement was replaced by a ‘settlement agreement’ which 
was signed between ONGC and JV partners.  
 

3. ONGC is the transporter and processor of JV gas and its issues on fixation 
of transportation and processing charges were outstandin g with the JV partners.  
The JV partners (viz., RIL and BGEPIL) insisted on valuation of condensate at 
crude oil price as a precondition for settlement of JV gas transportation and 
processing charges.  ONGC entered into a ‘settlement agreement’ on 31 
December 2005 (effective 1 April 2005) with JV partners which fixed pricing of 
condensate at crude oil price and resolved other issues like transportation and 
processing charges and delivery point, etc.  The Committee see no reason why 
the issue of fixation of transport and processing charges was linked to valuation 
of condensate.  Since the ONGC was legally entitled to receive transportation 
charges for JV gas, it should have gone for independent amicable settlement or 
gone in for arbitration in the matter, par ticularly in view of Law Ministry’s opinion 
that JV is liable to pay transportation charges to ONGC.   
 
4. ONGC justified its decision to value condensate at crude oil price on the 
basis of Article 19.11 of the PSC.  Audit, relying on the proviso to Articl e 1.18 of 
the PSC, took the stand that condensate could be treated as crude oil only if the 
conditions laid down in the proviso are fulfilled.  The Committee feel that the 
proviso to Article 1.18 which deals with the condensate from an oil field is not 
relevant in this case, as Tapti is a gas field and not an oil field.  The definition of 
‘condensate’ in Article 1.18 and pricing of condensate as stipulated in Article 
19.11 are relevant.   
 
5. The Committee note that the joint meeting held on 13 -14 April 1998 (at the 
instance of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas), wherein representatives of 
ONGC, EIL and DGH were present had inter-alia concluded that ‘the well fluid 
produced at Tapti field con tains hydrocarbons which fall under the definition of 
natural gas and condensate due to their being in vapour phase and liquid phase 
respectively at normal temperature and pressure conditions.’   It is also 
noteworthy to mention that a Committee constituted  by the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas in September 1998 comprising senior technical experts of GAIL 
and ONGC concluded that the composition of Tapti Gas Condensate matches 

almost with light stabilized crude oil and pointed out that ‘gas condensate is  not 
being treated as gas internationally.’  The Committee note that barring problems 
in separation and measurement of the condensate, the interpretation arrived at by 
these bodies with respect to properties of condensate broadly conforms to the 
definition of condensate given in Article 1.18 of the PSC.  Further, the legal 
opinion of Additional Solicitor General in this regard states that ‘ the price of the 
condensate produced  from  Mid & South Tapti Contract area  is necessarily to 
be fixed under Article 19 of the PSC which means that Article 19.2 to 19.10 have 
to be applied, with the modification that the price has to be fixed with reference to 
the price of condensate and not of crude oil’ also broadly conforms with the 
interpretation of ONGC.  Taking into consideration the various views of the expert 
bodies and also given the fact that there is no separate pricing mechanism for 
condensate in the PSC, the Committee feel that condensate produced from Tapti 
Gas field (as defined in article 1.18) could not have been valued other than in 
accordance with Article 19.11.   
 
6. Though, EIL study of 2005 concluded that condensate should be treated as 
gas, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had categorically stated that EIL 
Report has not been accepted by them as i t was not required as per PSC.  
However, Audit has contended that the Ministry had accepted EIL 
recommendations.  The Committee, however, are of the view that as per PSC, 
‘gas’ and ‘condensate’ are two different products with different characteristics 
and ‘one’ cannot be treated as ‘the other’.  
 
7. What irks the Committee is that the ‘settlement agreement’ in 2005 was 
made by ONGC without prior approval of the Board of Directors and without the 
approval of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas which was t he first signatory 
to the original production sharing contract.  Since the ‘settlement agreement’ with 
huge financial implications replaced the operational interim arrangement which 
had been devised at the instance of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s in 
1998, propriety demanded that prior approval of the Board of Directors and the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas was taken before implementation of the 

‘settlement agreement’.  It is regrettable that even the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas ignored the question of propriety in the matter and drew satisfaction 
from the fact that Panna -Mukta & Tapti JV intimated them of the developments 
expost facto.  The Committee hope that there will be no repetition of such lapses 
in future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi ;   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 January, 2013 Chairman 
17 Pausha, 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

ANNEXURE 
 
ARTICLE-18 
 
DOMESTIC SUPPLY, SALE, DISPOSAL AND EXPORT OF CRUDE OIL 
 
18.1 Until such time as  the total availability to the Government  and government 
companies of Crude Oil from all Petroleum Production activities in India meets 
the total national demand, as determined by the Government, each constituent of 
Contractor shall be required to offer to the Government or its nominee all of the  
Contractor’s entitlement to Crude Oil from each Field in order to assist in 
satisfying the national demand, provided, however, that nothing contained in any 
contract entered into by the Contractor for the supply, sale or disposal of 
Petroleum, with any no minee of the Government pursuant to this Contract shall 
in any manner abrogate the obligation of the Government contained herein. 
 
18.2 Pursuant to Article 18.1 and subject to Articles 18.4 and 18.6, each constituent of 
Contractor shall offer to sell to th e Government (or its nominee) its total 
Participating Interest share of Crude Oil to which it is entitled under Articles 13 
and 14 at the price determined in accordance with Article 19 for sales to 
Government and the Government shall have the option to pur chase the whole or 
any portion thereof at the said price. 
 
18.3 The aforementioned offer shall be made by each constituent of Contractor in 
writing, at lease six (6) months preceding the Financial Year in which the sale is 
to be made, specifying the estimated quantities and grade of Crude Oil being 
offered (based upon estimates which shall be adjusted  within ninety (90) days of 
the end of each Financial Year on the basis of actual quantities produced and 
saved. The Government shall exercise its optio n to purchase, in writing, not later 
than ninety days (90) preceding the Financial Year in respect of which the sale is 
to be made, specifying the quantity and grade of Crude Oil which it elects to take 
in the ensuring year. Failure by the Government to gi ve such notice within the 
period specified shall be conclusively deemed an election to take all of the Crude 
Oil offered (adjusted as provided herein) in the ensuring Financial Year. 
 
18.4 If, during any Financial Year, India attains Self -Sufficiency, the Government shall 
promptly thereafter, but in no event later than the end of that Financial Year, so 
advise the Contractor by written notice. In such event, as from the end of the first 
quarter of the following Financial Year, or such earlier date as the Pa rties may 
mutually agree, Government’s option to purchase shall be suspended and each 
constituent of Contractor shall have the right to lift and export its Participating 
Interest share of Crude Oil until such time, if any, as Self -Sufficiency shall have 
ceased to exist. If Self -Sufficiency ceases to exist during a Financial Year, the 
Government shall recover its option to purchase under Article 18.2 in respect of 
the following Financial Year by giving notice thereof to the Contractor as provided 
in Article 18.3. 

 
18.5 All payments in respect of sales to the Government pursuant to provisions of this 
Article 18 shall be made by the Government within the period for credit applicable 
in the calculation of the price pursuant to Article 19. If no time frame for cr edit is 
applicable in such calculation, payment shall be made within forty five (45) days 
from the date the invoice is delivered to the Government. Contractor shall submit 
a monthly invoice to the Government for the quantity of Crude Oil delivered. 
Payment shall be made in United Stated Dollars by bank wire to the credit of the 
Foreign Company’s designated account with a bank within or outside India. All 
amounts unpaid by the Government by the due date shall, from the due date, 
bear interest calculated on a  day-to-day basis at the LIEOR plus one percentage 
(1%) point from the due date compound daily until paid. 
 
18.6 If full payment is not received by Contractor when due as provided in Article 18.5, 
the Contractor shall, at any time thereafter, notify the Go vernment of the default 
and, unless such default is remedied within fifteen (15) days from the date of 
notice, the Contractor shall have the right, unless otherwise agreed, upon written 
notice to the Government and without prejudice to the Contractor’s rig ht to 
recover all costs, charges, expenses and losses incurred by the Contractor: 
 
a) to suspend the Government’s option to purchase under Article 18.2 and 
transport the Petroleum to any onshore facility and sell as each constituent 
of Contractor may in its absolute discretion deem fit; 
 
b) without prejudice to the foregoing, to freely lift, sell and export all its 
Participating Interest share of Crude Oil subject to the destination restrictions 
specified in Article 18.7, until the Government has paid the d ue amount plus 
interest as provided herein; 
 
c) if the payment plus interest is not received by the Contractor within one 
hundred and eighty (180) days from the date the payment was due, to 
receive and export the Government’s share of Profit Oil until such  time as 
either Government has paid all amounts due plus interests, or the value, 
based on the price as determined in accordance with Article 19, of 
Government’s share of Profit Oil so sold is equal to all amounts due plus 
interest, whichever first occurs;  provided, however, that if the Government 
makes a payment to the Contractor after the Contractor has commenced 
sale of Government’s share of Profit Oil and such payment together with the 
value of Government’s share of Profit Oil sold (based on the price 
determined in accordance with Article 19) exceeds the amount due plus 
interest, necessary adjustment shall be carried out to refund to the 
Government forthwith the excess amount received by the Contractor. 
 
18.7 The Contractor shall be entitled to freely li ft, sell and export any Crude Oil which 
the Government is unable to take or has elected not to purchase pursuant to this 
Article 18 subject to Government’s generally applicable destination restrictions to 

countries with which the Government, for policy rea sons, has severed or 
restricted trade. 
 
18.8 No later than sixty (60) days prior to the commencement of production in a Field 
(or Fields where production is from more than one Field), and thereafter no less 
than sixty (60) days before the commencement of e ach Financial Year, the 
Contractor shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the Parties a production 
forecast setting out the total quantity of Crude Oil that it estimates can be 
produced from a Field during the succeeding year, base on the maximum 
efficient rate of recovery of Crude Oil from that Field in accordance with good 
petroleum industry practice. No later than thirty (30) days prior to the 
commencement of each Calendar Quarter, the Contractor shall advise its 
estimate of production for the succe eding Calendar Quarter and shall endeavour 
to produce the forecast quantity for each Calendar Quarter. 
 
18.9 Each party comprising the Contractor shall, throughout the term of this Contract, 
have the right to separately take in kind and dispose of all its share of Cost 
Petroleum and Profit Petroleum and shall have the obligation to lift the Cost 
Petroleum and Profit Petroleum on a current basis and in such quantities so as 
not to cause a restriction of production or inconvenience to the other Parties. 
 
18.10 The Government shall, throughout the term of this Contract, have the right to 
separately take in kind and dispose of its share of Profit Petroleum and of such 
portion of the Contractor’s share of Petroleum as is purchased by the 
Government pursuant to Ar ticle 18, subject to Article 18.6 and shall have the 
obligation to lift all of the Oil on a current basis and in such quantities so as not to 
cause a restriction of production or inconvenience to the other Parties. 
 
18.11 For the purpose of implementing th e provisions of Articles 18.9 and 18.10, a 
Crude Oil lifting procedure shall be agreed upon by the Parties as soon as 
practicable but no later than two (2) months after the Effective Date of this 
Contract. Such lifting procedure shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
 (a) a procedure for notification by the Operator to the Government, and to 
each Party comprising the Contractor, of Projected Crude Oil production; 
 (b) a procedure for notification by the Government, and by each Party 
comprising the Contractor, to the Operator, of its expected off take and the 
consequences of inability or failure to off take. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

ARTICLE-19 
 
VALUATION OF OIL 
 
19.1 For the purpose of this Contract, the Value of Crude Oil shall be based on the 
Price determined as provided herein. 
 
19.2 A price for Crude Oil shall be determined for each Calendar Month or such other 
period as the Parties may agree (hereinafter referred to as “the Delivery Period”) 
in terms of United States Dollars per Barrel, FOB Delivery Point for Crude Oil 
produced and sold or otherwise disposed of from each Contract Area, for each 
Delivery Period, in accordance with the appropriate basis for that type of sale or 
disposal specified below. 
 
19.3 In the event that some or all of Contractor’s total sa les of Crude Oil during a 
Delivery Period are made to third parties in Arms Length Sales, all sales so made 
shall be valued at the weighted average of the prices actually received by 
Contractor, calculated by dividing the total receipts from all such sales  FOB the 
Delivery Point by the total number of Barrels of the Crude Oil sold in such sales. 
 
19.3.1 In the event that a portion of such third party Arms Length Sales are made 
on a basis other than an FOB basis as herein specified, the portion shall 
be valued at the prices equivalent to the prices FOB the Delivery point for 
such sales determined by deducting all costs (such as transportation, 
demurrage, loss of Crude Oil in transit and similar costs) incurred 
downstream of the Delivery Point, and the prices so determined shall be 
deemed to be the actual prices received for the purpose of calculation of 
the weighted average of the prices for all third party Arms Length Sales for 
the Delivery Period. 
 
19.3.2 Each constituent of Contractor shall separately submi t to the Government, 
within fifteen (15) days of the end of each Delivery Period, a report 
containing the actual prices obtained in their respective Arms Length 
Sales to third parties of any Crude Oil. Such reports shall distinguish 
between term sales and spot sales and itemize volumes, customers, 
prices received and credit terms, and the constituent of the Contractor 
shall allow the Government to examine the relevant sales contracts. 
 
19.4 In the event that some or all of a constituent of Contractor’s tota l sales of Crude 
Oil during a Calendar Month are made to the Government, the price of all sales 
so made shall, unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, be determined on 
the basis of either the FOB selling price per Barrel of one or more crude oils 
which, at the time of calculation, are being freely and actively traded in the 
international market and are similar in characteristics and quality to the Crude Oil 
and/ or Condensate in respect of which the price is being determined, such FOB 
selling price to be ascertained from Platt’s Crude Oil Market Wire daily 

publication (“Platt’s”), or the spot market for the same crude oils ascertained in 
the same manner, whichever price, in the opinion of the Parties, more truly 
reflects the current value of such crude oils. For any Calendar Month in which 
sales take place, the price shall be the arithmetic average price per Barrel 
determined by calculating the average for the preceding Calendar Month of the 
mean of the high and low FOB or spot prices for each day of the  crude oil (s) 
selected for comparison adjusted for differences in the Crude Oil and the crude 
oil  (s) being compared for quality, transportation costs, delivery time, quantity, 
payment terms, the market area into which the Crude Oil is being sold, other 
contract terms to the extent known and other relevant factors. In the event that 
Platt’s ceases to be published or is not published for a period of thirty (30) 
consecutive days, the Parties shall agree on an alternative daily publication. 
 
19.4.1 Notwithstanding anything herein otherwise provided, the price paid for 
such sales shall be, in any Calendar Month, the FOB selling price for a 
Market Crude (“Market Crude”) which shall be Brent (DTD) on a United 
States Dollar per Barrel basis less US$ 0.10 per Barrel. 
  
19.4.2 The Market Crude price will be based on the previous Calendar Month’s 
average of the daily low and high quotations of Market Crude as published 
by Platt’s Market wire. The average is to be calculated up to three (3) 
decimals to arrive at a United States Dollar per Barrel price, which will be 
applicable for the month of supply. 
 
19.4.3 The Government and/or its nominee shall pay any and all sales tax 
payable on the sale of Oil to the Government or its nominee. 
 
19.4.4 The Government and /or its nominee shall enter into a Crude Oil sales 
agreement with the Constituents of the Contractor which shall contain 
terms and conditions normally contained in international Crude Oil sales 
agreements of a similar nature. 
 
19.5 In the event that in any  Delivery Period some but not all o a constituent of 
Contractor’s sales of Crude Oil from the Contract Area are made to the 
Government or a Government company and some but not all of a constituent of 
Contractor’s sales of Crude Oil from the Contract Area a re made to third parties 
in Arms Length Sales and the price as established in accordance with Article 
19.4 differs by more than one percent (1%) from the price as determined in 
accordance with Article 19.3 for the same Delivery Period, the Parties shall me et, 
upon notice from any Party, to determine if the prices established for the relevant 
Delivery Period for sales to the Government should be adjusted  taking into 
account third party Arms Length Sales made by a constituent of Contractor of the 
same or sim ilar Crude Oil from the relevant Field or other fields and published 
information in respect of other genuine third party Arms Length Sales of the 
same or similar crude oil for that Delivery Period. Until the matter of an 
adjustment for the relevant Deliver y Period is finally determined, the price as 

established in accordance with this Article will apply for that Delivery Period. Any 
adjustment, if necessary, will be made within thirty (30) days from the date the 
adjustment for that Delivery Period is finally determined. 
 
19.6 A constituent of Contractor shall determine the relevant prices in accordance with 
this Article and the calculation, basis of calculation and the price determined shall 
be supplied to the Government and shall be subject to agreement by the 
Government before it is finally determined. Pending final determination, the last 
established price, if any, for the Crude Oil shall be used. 
 
19.7 In the event that the Parties fail to reach agreement on any matter concerning 
selection of the crude oi l (s) for comparison, the calculation, the basis of, or 
mechanism for the calculation of the prices, the prices arrived at, the adjustment 
of any price or generally about the manner in which the prices are determined 
according to the provisions of this Art icle within thirty (30) days, or such longer 
period as may be mutually agreed between the parties, from the date of 
commencement of Commercial Production or the end of each Delivery Period 
thereafter, any Party may refer the matter or matters in issue for final 
determination by a sole expert appointed as provided in Article 33. 
 
19.7.1 Within ten (10) days of the said appointment, the Parties shall provide the 
expert with all information they deem necessary or as the expert may 
reasonably require. 
  
19.7.2 Within fifteen (15) days from the date of his appointment, the expert shall 
report to the Parties on the issue (s) referred to him for determination, 
applying the criteria or mechanism set forth herein and indicate his 
decision thereon to be applicable for  the relevant Delivery Period for 
Crude Oil and such decision shall be accepted as final and binding by the 
Parties. 
  
19.7.3 Except for the adjustment referred to in Article 19.5, any price or pricing 
mechanism agreed by the Parties pursuant to the provis ions of this Article 
shall not be changed retroactively. 
 
19.8 Any sale or disposal to Affiliates or other sale or disposal or Crude Oil Produced 
from a Field, other than to the Government or Government companies or to third 
parties in Arms Length Sales, i n any Delivery Period, shall be valued on the 
same basis as sales to the Government or a Government company.  In the event 
of such a sale or disposal by a Company, such Company shall submit to the 
Government, within fifteen (15) days of the end of each Del ivery Period, all 
relevant information concerning such sales or disposals. 
 
19.9 In the event that in any Delivery Period there is more than one type of sales 
referred to in Articles 19.3, 19.4 and 19.8, then, for the purpose of calculating 
Cost Petroleum and Profit Petroleum entitlement pursuant to Articles 13 and 14, 

a single price per Barrel of Crude Oil for all the sales for the relevant Delivery 
Period shall be used. Such single price shall be the weighted average of the 
prices determined for each type  of sale, weighted by the respective volumes of 
Crude Oil sold in each type of sale in the relevant Delivery Period. 
 
19.10 In this, Article the term “Government” shall include any other agency or nominee 
of the Government to whom Crude Oil is to be sold. 
 
19.11 The provisions specified above for the determination of the price of sales of 
Crude Oil shall apply mutatis mutandis to Condensates. 
 
19.12 The Parties shall meet annually, or sooner upon notice served by any Party on 
the others, to review the list of selected Crude Oils or the mechanism established 
pursuant to this Article 19 in light of any new facts since the date of selection of 
such Crude Oils or establishment of such mechanism and to determine what 
adjustment (if any) should be made to the said selection or mechanism by mutual 
agreement of the Parties. 
 
RELEVANT  ARTICLES OF PSC 
 
1.8 “ Associated Natural Gas” or “ANG” means Natural Gas occurring in association 
with Crude Oil either as free gas or in solution, if such Crude Oil can by itself be 
commercially produced. 
 
1.9 “Barrel” means a quantity or unit equal to 158.9074 litres (forty -two (42) United 
States gallons) liquid measure, at a temperature of sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit 
(15.56 degrees Centigrade) under one atmosphere of pressure (14.7 paisa). 
 
1.10 “Basement” means any igneous or metamorphic rock, or rock or any stratum of 
such nature, in and below which the geological structure or physical 
characteristics of the rock sequence do not have the properties necessary for the 
accumulation o f Petroleum in commercial quantities and which reflects the 
maximum depth at which any such accumulation can be reasonably expected in 
accordance with the knowledge generally accepted in the international petroleum 
industry. 
 
1.11 “Calendar Month” means an y of the twelve (12) months of the Calendar Year 
unless specified otherwise. 
 
1.12 “Calendar Quarter” means a period of three consecutive Calendar Months 
commencing on the first day of January, April, July and October of each 
Calendar Year. 
 
1.13 “Calendar year” means a period of twelve consecutive months according to the 
Gregorian calendar commencing with the first day of January and ending with the 
thirty-first day of December. 

 
1.14 “Commercial Discovery” means a Discovery which, when produced, is likely  to 
yield a reasonably profit on the funds invested  in Petroleum Operations, after 
deduction of Contract Costs, and which has been declared a Commercial 
Discovery in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 and / or Article 21, after 
consideration of a ll pertinent operating and financial data such as recoverable 
reserves, sustainable production levels, estimated development and production 
expenditures, prevailing prices and other relevant technical and economic factors 
according to generally accepted practices in the international petroleum industry. 
 
1.15 “Commercial Production” means production of Crude Oil or Natural Gas or both 
from a Field within the Contract Area and delivery of the same at the relevant 
Delivery Point under a programme of regular production and sale. 
 
1.16 “Company” means either EOGIL or RIL. 
 
1.17 “Companies” means EOGIL and RIL. 
 
1.18 “Condensate” means those low vapour pressure hydrocarbons obtained from 
Natural Gas through condensation or extraction and refers solely to those 
hydrocarbons that are liquid at normal surface temperature and pressure 
conditions (provided that in the event Condensate is produced from an Oil Field 
and is segregated and transported separately to the Delivery Point, then the 
provisions of this Contract  shall apply to such Condensate as if it were Crude 
Oil.) 
 
1.19 “Contract” means this agreement and the Appendices attached hereto and made 
a part hereof and any amendments made thereto pursuant to the terms hereof. 
 
1.20 “Contract Area” means the area des cribed in Appendix A and delineated on the 
map attached as Appendix B, or any portion of the area remaining after 
relinquishment or surrender from time to time pursuant to the terms of this 
Contract. 
 
1.21 “Contract Costs” means Exploration Costs, Developm ent Costs, Production 
Costs, and all other costs related to Petroleum Operations as set forth in Section 
3 of the Accounting Procedure. 
 
1.22 “Contract Year” means a period of twelve consecutive months counted from the 
Effective Date or from the anniversary of the Effective Date. 
 
1.23 “Contractor” means EOGIL, RIL and ONGC. 
 
1.24 “Cost Petroleum” means the portion of the total volume of Petroleum produced 
and saved from the Contract Area which the Contractor is entitled to take from 

the Contract Area in a particular period for the recovery of Contract Costs as 
provided in Article 13. 
 
1.25 “Cost Recovery Limit” shall have the meaning given in Article 13.1.2. 
1.26 “Crude Oil” means crude mineral oil, asphalt, ozokerite and all kinds of 
hydrocarbons and bitumens, both in solid and in liquid form, in their natural state 
or obtained from Natural Gas by condensation or extraction, including distillate 
and Condensate when commingled with the heavier hydrocarbons and delivered 
as a blend at the Delivery Point but excluding verified Natural Gas. 
 
1.27 “Delivery Point” means except as otherwise herein provided or as may be 
otherwise agreed between the Government and the Contractor, the point at 
which Petroleum reaches the upstream weld of the outlet flange of the deli very 
facility, either offshore or onshore and different  Delivery Points may be 
established for purposes of sales to the Government, export or domestic sales. 
 
1.28 “Development Area” means that part of the Contract Area corresponding to the 
area of an Oil  Field or Gas Field delineated in simple geometric shape, together 
with a reasonable margin of additional area surrounding the Field consistent with 
international petroleum industry practices and approved by the Management 
Committee or the Government, as the case may be. 
 
1.53 “Minimum Work Obligation” means the Work Programme related to those items 
specified in Appendix G as approved by the Management Committee. 
 
1.54 “Natural Gas” means wet gas, dry Gas, all other gaseous hydrocarbons, and all 
substances contained therein, including sulphur  and helium, which are Produced 
from Oil or Gas Wells, excluding those condensed or extracted liquid 
hydrocarbons that area liquid at normal temperature and pressure conditions, 
and including the residue Gas remaining a fter the condensation or extraction of 
liquid hydrocarbons from Gas. 
 
1.55 “Net Cash Income” shall have the meaning assigned in paragraph 2 of Appendix 
D. 
 
1.56 “New Discovery” means a Discovery made after the Effective Date. 
 
1.57 “Non Associated Natural Gas” or “NANG” means Natural Gas which is produced 
either without association with Crude Oil or in association with Crude Oil which 
by itself cannot be commercially produced. 
 
1.58 “Oil” means “Crude Oil”. 
 
1.59 “Oil Field” means an area within the Contrac tor Area consisting of a single Oil 
Reservoir or multiple Oil Reservoirs all grouped on or related to the same 
individual geological structure, or stratigraphic conditions, designated by the 

Contractor and approved by the Government or the Management Commi ttee, as 
the case may be (to include the maximum area of potential productivity in the 
Contract Area in a simple geometric shape)  in respect of which a Commercial 
Discovery has been declared and a Development Plan has been approved in 
accordance with Arti cle 9 hereof and reference to an Oil Field shall include a 
reference to the production of Associated Natural Gas from that Oil Field. 
 
1.60 “Operating Agreement” means the Joint Operating Agreement entered into by the 
Parties constituting Contractor in acc ordance with Article 6, with respect to the 
conduct of Petroleum Operations. 
 
1.61 “Operating Committee” means the committee established by that name in the 
Operating Agreement. 
 
1.62 “Operator” means the party so designated in Article 6. 
 
1.63 “Participating Interest” means the percentage of participation of the constituents 
of the Contractor at any given time in the rights and obligations under this 
Contract. Initially the Participating Interest of the constituents of Contractor are as 
follows: 
 
 
  

Annexure - 8B 
ARTICLE 21 
NATURAL GAS 
 
21.1 Subject to Article 21.2, the Indian domestic market shall have the first call on the 
utilization of Natural Gas discovered pursuant to Petroleum Operations and 
produced from the Contract Area. Accordingly, any proposal by the Contractor 
relating to Discovery and production of Natural Gas from the Contract Area shall 
be made in the context of the Government’s policy for the utilization of Natural 
Gas and shall take into account the objectives of the Government to develop its 
resources in the most efficient manner and to promote conservation measures. 
 
21.2 Contractor shall have the right to use Natural Gas produced from the Contract 
Area for the purpose of Petroleum Operations including, but not limited to, 
reinjection for  pressure maintenance in the Oil Fields, Gas lifting and power 
generation. 
 
21.3 For the purpose of sales to the domestic market pursuant to this Article 21, the 
Delivery Point shall be the Delivery Point set forth in the Gas sales contract 
entered into by the Contractor. 
 
21.4 Associated Natural Gas (ANG) 
  
 21.4.1 In the event that a New Discovery of Crude Oil contains ANG, Contractor 
shall declare in the proposal for the declaration of the New Discovery as a 
Commercial Discovery as specified in Article 9 , whether (and by what 
amount) the estimated production of ANG is anticipated to exceed the 
quantities of ANG which will be used in accordance with Article 21.2 
(herein after referred to as “the Excess ANG”). In such event the 
Contractor shall indicate whe ther, on the basis of the available data and 
information, it has reasonable grounds for believing that the Excess ANG 
could be commercially exploited in accordance with the terms of this 
Contract along with the Commercial Production of the Crude Oil from t he 
Oil Field, and whether the Contractor intends to so exploit the Excess 
ANH. 
  
 21.4.2 Based on the principle of full utilization and minimum flaring of ANG, a 
proposed development plan for an Oil Field (or Oil Fields), shall to the 
extent economically r easonable, include a plan for utilization of the ANG 
from the Existing Discovery and New Discovery, including estimated 
quantities to be flared, re -injected, and to be used for Petroleum 
Operations; and if the Contractor proposes to commercially exploit th e 
Excess ANG for sale in the domestic market in accordance with 
Government’s policy, or elsewhere, the proposed plans for such 
exploitation.   
  

 24.4.3 If the Contractor wishes to exploit the Excess ANG (whether from an 
Existing or New Discovery), such AN G shall first be offered for sale to the 
Government (or its nominee) in writing in accordance with the terms of this 
contract. On receipt of such offer, the Government (or its nominee) shall, 
within three (3) months of the date of receipt thereof, notify t he Contractor, 
in writing, whether or not it wishes to exercise its option to purchase the 
Excess ANG. 
 
 21.4.4 If the Government exercises its option to purchases the Excess ANG as 
provided in Article 21.4.3 : 
 
  (a) the Government shall indicate in the n otice exercising the 
 option, a date, within two (2) years of the date of the  Contractor’s 
offer, for commencement of purchase of the  Excess ANG; 
 
  (b) within six (6) months of the date of notification of the  exercise of 
the Government’s option pursuant to Article  21.4.3, the contractor and 
the Government (or its nominee)  shall agree on the terms for the sale to 
Government (or its  nominee) of the Excess ANG. 
 
 21.4.5 If the Government does not exercise its option to purchase the Excess 
ANG the Contra ctor shall be free to explore markets for the commercial 
exploitation of the Excess ANG. 
 
 21.4.6 Where the Contractor is of the view that Excess ANG cannot be 
commercially exploited and chooses not to exploit ANG, or is unable to 
find a market for the Excess ANG pursuant to Article 21.4.5, the 
Government shall be entitled to take and utilize such Excess ANG.  
  
 21.4.7 If the Government elects to take the Excess ANG as provided in Article 
21.4.6 : 
   
  (a) the Contractor shall deliver such Excess ANG to the  Government 
(or its nominee) free of cost, at the downstream  flange of the 
Gas/Oil separation facilities; 
   
  (b) the Government or its nominee shall bear all costs including 
 gathering, treating, processing and transporting costs  beyond the 
downstream flange of the Gas/Oil separation  facilities; 
 
  (c) the delivery of such Excess ANG shall be subject to  procedures 
to be agreed between the Government or its  nominee and the 
Contractor prior to such delivery, such  procedures to include matters 
relating to timing of off-take of  such Excess ANG, which procedures  
shall not, in any way,  restrict oil production. 
  

 21.4.8 Excess ANG which is not commercially exploited by the Contractor, or 
taken by the Government or its nominee pursuant to this Artic le 21, shall 
be returned to the subsurface structure or flared where such flaring is 
approved in the Development Plan, which approval shall not be 
unreasonably withheld, for the relevant Oil Field or where reinjection is 
uneconomical or inadvisable in acco rdance with good reservoir 
engineering practices. 
 
 21.4.9 Where the Contractor is of the view that there is economic merit in flaring 
Gas in the absence of a Gas transmission system or during such time as 
the pipeline is inoperable or lacks capacity to ta ke all available Gas, 
Contractor shall have the right to flare Gas. in any such event, Contractor 
shall notify the Management Committee within forth -eight (48) hours to 
obtain its approval for continuing operations. 
 
 21.4.10 As soon as practicable after t he New Discovery referred to in Article 
21.4.1 or the submission to the Government of the proposal for the 
declaration of the New Discovery as a Commercial Discovery as therein 
specified, the Contractor and the Government or its nominee shall meet to 
discuss the sale and/or disposal of any ANG discovered with a view to 
giving effect to the provisions of this Article 21 in a timely manner. 
 
21.5 Non Associated Natural Gas (NANG) 
 
 21.5.1 In the event of a New Discovery of NANG, the Contractor shall promptly 
report such New Discovery to the Management Committee and the 
provisions of Articles 9.1 and 9.2 shall apply. The remaining provisions of 
Article 9 would apply to the New Discovery and development of NANG 
only in so far as they are not inconsistent with th e provisions of Articles 
21.5.1 to 21.5.13. 
  
 21.5.2 If, pursuant to Article 9.1, the Contractor gives notification that a New 
Discovery is of potential commercial interest, the Contractor shall submit 
to the Management Committee, within one (1) Calendar Year from the 
date of notification of the above New Discovery, the proposed Appraisal 
Programme, including a Work Programme and budget to carry out an 
adequate and effective appraisal of such New Discovery, to determine (i) 
without delay, whether such New Discovery is a Commercial Discovery 
and (ii) with reasonable precision, the boundaries of the area to be 
delineated as a Field. Such programme shall be supported by all relevant 
data such as well data, Contractor’s best estimate of reserve range and 
production potential and shall indicate the date of commencement of the 
proposed Appraisal Programme. Where in the case of an Existing 
Discovery, Contractor desires to carry out additional appraisal work, the 
contractor shall submit its proposed Appraisal Progra mme with a Work 

Programme and budget to the Management Committee within one 
hundred twenty (120) days of the Effective Date for approval. 
  
 21.5.3 The proposed Appraisal Programme for an Existing Discovery or a New 
Discovery shall be considered by the Man agement Committee within sixty 
(60) days of its submission by the Contractor and the programme together 
with the Work Programme and budget submitted by the Contractor revised 
in accordance with any agreed amendments or additions thereto approved 
by the Man agement Committee, shall be adopted as the Appraisal 
Programme and the Contractor shall promptly proceed with 
implementation of such programme. 
 
 21.5.4 If on the basis of the results of the Appraisal Programme, the Contractor is 
of the opinion that NANG h as been discovered I n commercial quantities, 
it shall submit to the Management Committee, as soon as practicable but 
not later than five (5) years from the date of notification of the 
aforementioned New Discovery, a proposal Commercial Discovery. Such 
proposal shall take into account the Government’s policies on Gas 
utilization and propose alternative options (if any) for use or consumption 
of the NANG and be supported by, inter alia, technical and economic data, 
evaluations, interpretations and analyses o f such data, feasibility studies 
relating to the New Discovery prepared by or on behalf of the Contractor 
and other relevant information. 
 
 21.5.5 In the case of a New Discovery, simultaneously with the Contractor’s 
Appraisal Programme, Government and the Contractor shall seek to reach 
an agreement on the development, production, processing, utilization and 
sale of the NANG, in the context of Article 21.1, within thirty -six (36) 
months of the date of notification of the Discovery referred to in Article 
21.5. If no proposal is submitted to the Management Committee by the 
Contractor within five (5) years from the date of notification of such New 
Discovery, the Contractor shall relinquish its rights to develop such New 
Discovery and the area relating to such Ne w Discovery shall be excluded 
from the Contract Area. 
 
 21.5.6 Where the Contractor has submitted a proposal for the declaration of a 
New Discovery as a Commercial Discovery, the Management Committee 
shall consider the proposal of the Contractor with refer ence to commercial 
utilization of the NANG in the domestic market or elsewhere and in the 
context of Government’s policy on Gas utilization and the chain of 
activities required to bring the NANG from the Delivery Point to potential 
consumers in the domesti c market or elsewhere. The Management 
Committee may, within ninety (90) days, request that the Contractor 
submit any additional information of the New Discovery and the related 
Appraisal Programme that it may reasonably require to facilitate a decision 

on whether or not to declare the New Discovery as a Commercial 
Discovery. 
 
 21.5.7 The Management Committee shall make a decision regarding the 
declaration of a New Discovery as a Commercial Discovery within the 
latter of : 
   
  (a) one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of such proposals;   
    
or 
 
  (b) one hundred eighty (180) of receipt of the additional  information 
referred to above. 
 
 21.5.8 If the Management Committee, with the approval of the Government, 
declares a New Discovery a Commercial Discovery, such declaration shall 
be accompanied by an indication of the probable date(s) by when the 
market(s) would be ready to receive the Gas and an estimate of the 
quantities of Gas that could be to utilized. The Contractor, in such an 
event, shall, w ithin one (1) Calendar Year of the declaration of the New 
Discovery as a Commercial Discovery, submit a Development Plan for the 
development of the Gas Field to the Management Committee for its 
approval. Such plan shall be supported by all relevant informa tion 
including, inter alia, the information required din Article 9.6. In the case of 
an Existing Discovery, Contractor shall within ninety (90) days of the 
Effective Date propose a Development Plan following the plan brought out 
in Appendix G, intended to achieve the production profile brought out in 
Appendix H, containing the detailed information required in Article 9.6, 
with supporting budget and the Management Committee shall render its 
decision regarding such proposal within thirty (30) days of such sub mittal. 
Where a Development Plan is so agreed, it shall be an approved 
Development Plan pursuant to this Article. 
 
 21.5.9 If the Development Plan has not been approved by the Management 
Committee within one hundred and eighty (180) days of its submission,  
the Contractor shall have the right to submit such plan or plans directly to 
the Government for approval, within sixty (60) days of the expiry of the 
time provided to the Management Committee to approve the plan or plans. 
The Government shall respond to t he submission within ninety (90) days 
of receipt thereof. If the Government rejects the Contractor’s proposed 
plan or plans, the Government shall state in writing the reasons for such 
rejection and the Contractor shall have the right to resubmit, within si xty 
(60) days of written notice of such rejection, such plan or plans duly 
amended to meet the Government’s objections thereto. Such right of 
resubmission of each proposed plan or plans shall be exercisable by the 
Contractor only once. If the Parties are u nable to agree, any Party shall 

have the right to submit the matter to arbitration. Government within the 
aforesaid period, the Contractor shall relinquish its right to develop such 
Gas Field and such Gas Field shall be excluded from the Contract Area. 
 
 21.5.10 If the Management Committee is unable to agree on the declaration of a 
New Discovery as a Commercial Discovery within the time limit prescribed 
in Article 21.5.7, the Contractor, or any of its constituents, shall be entitled 
to submit such proposal directly to the Government for approval. In such 
event, the Contractor, or any of its constituents, shall also submit a 
comprehensive plan or plans for development of such New Discovery, 
which shall detail the proposed Development Plan for utilization of t he 
NANG produced in the domestic market giving inter alia, the data 
specified in Article 21.5.8. The proposal for declaration of the New 
Discovery as a Commercial Discovery as well as the proposed 
Development within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the  expiry of 
the time given to the management Committee to reach a decision on the 
proposal for declaration of the New Discovery as a Commercial Discovery 
and Government shall respond to the said submission within one hundred 
twenty (120) days of its receipt . If the Government disapproves the 
proposed plan or plans, the Government shall state in writing the reasons 
for such disapproval and the concerned Parties shall have the right to 
resubmit, within sixty (60) days, such plan or plans duly amended to meet 
the Government’s objections thereto. Such right of resubmission of each 
proposed plan or plans shall be exercisable by the Contractor only once. 
In the event the Government does not approve such plan or plans, any 
Party shall have the right to submit the ma tter to arbitration. If no such 
plan (plans) is (are) submitted to the Government within the aforesaid 
period, the Contractor shall relinquish its rights to develop such Gas Field 
and such Gas Field shall be excluded from the Contract Area.    
  
 21.5.11 In the event the Management Committee, or Government, as     the case 
may be, approves the Contractor’s proposal for declaration  of the New 
Discovery as a Commercial Discovery and also the comprehensive plan or 
plans for development of such New Discovery a nd for the utilization of 
NANG produced in the domestic market, the Gas Field shall be promptly 
developed by the Contractor in accordance with the approved plan which 
shall be the Development Plan for the Field. 
 
21.5.12 In the event the Contractor does no t commence development of a New 
Discovery within ten (10) years from the date of completion of the first 
Discovery well, the Contractor shall relinquish its rights to develop such 
New Discovery and the area relating to such New Discovery shall be 
excluded from the Contract Area. 
 
21.5.13 The price of the ANG and NANG produced from the Oil or Gas Field for 
use in India shall be specified in the Gas sales contract, which shall be in 

accordance with the provisions of this Article 21.5.13, between the 
Contractor and the nominee of the Government. 
 
(a) Unless the context otherwise requires the following words and terms 
wherever and whenever used or appearing in the this Article 21.5.13 shall 
have the following meaning: 
   
(i) “British thermal Unit” or “BTU” means  the amount of energy required to 
raise the temperature of one (1) pound (avoirdupois) of pure water, at sixty 
degree (60) Fahrenheit, one degree (1) Fahrenheit at an absolute 
pressure of 14.73 pounds per square inch. 
 
(ii) “Buyer” means the Government of India or its nominee. 
 
(iii) “Deliverability” means the lesser of the maximum aggregate rate of all 
wells in the Contract Area or the maximum delivery capacity of the 
processing facility, subject to generally accepted international petroleum 
industry practices. 
 
(iv) “Delivery Points” means a point downstream of the Seller’s onshore Gas 
receiving facility in the Hazira area and at the upstream weld of the 
connection to the Buyer’s pipeline in the Hazira area. 
 
(v) “Maximum Delivery Pressure” has the meaning  set forth in Article 21.5.13 
(c). 
 
(vi) “MMBTU” means one million (1,000,000) BTU’s on a net heating value 
basis. 
 
(vii) “Seller” means Contractor. 
 
  (b) The Seller agrees to produce and deliver, on a daily basis, to the Buyer 
one hundred percent (100%) of the Deliverability of ANG  and NANG at 
the Delivery Point and the Buyer, provided the Gas is made available and 
tendered for delivery by the Seller, agrees to take and purchase, on a 
daily basis, one hundred percent (100%) of the Deliverability of ANG a nd 
NANG provided, however, that Seller, at Seller’s sole discretion, subject to 
generally accepted operator practices in the international petroleum 
industry, may adjust deliveries to provide for necessary maintenance, 
service and testing. Buyer may reques t that Seller very deliveries to 
accommodate similar circumstances in the Buyer’s operation and Seller’s 
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Communications procedures 
shall be mutually agreed in the Gas sales contract in accordance with 
internationally accepted industry standards. 
 

(c) The Gas sold hereunder shall be delivered at the Delivery Point I n the 
Hazira area at the operating pressure of the Buyer’s owned or contracted 
pipeline up to a maximum pressure (“Maximum Delivery Pressure”) of one 
thousand (1000) psig. 
 
(d) Subject to the provisions hereof, the Buyer’s shall pay the Seller for each 
MMBTU of Gas delivered hereunder, or for each MMBTU of Gas for which 
the Buyer is obligated to pay hereunder, a price calculated as follows: 
 
 The Base Price (“Base Price”) in United Stated Dollars (US$) per MMBTU 
is fixed o n the basis of ninety -nine percent (99%) of a Low Sulfur Fuel Oil 
Basket (“LSFO Basket”) calculated as the average of the daily mean value 
for low and high prices of fuel oil taking into account equal parts of : 
 
(1) bulk residual fuel oil, containing one percent (1%) sulfur, quoted for barges 
at Northwest Europe, (Barges, FOB Rotterdam); and  
 
(2) bulk residual fuel oil, containing one percent (1%) sulfur, quoted for 
Mediterranean, basis Italy, (Cargoes, FOB Med, basis Italy); and 
 
(3) a theoretical blend of residual fuel oil composed of Singapore Cargoes 
made up of seventy -four percent (74%) of LSWR -SR 0.3% (three -tenths 
percent (0.3%) sulfur), and twenty -six percent (26%0 of HSFO 180,  three 
and one-half percent (3.5%) sulfur, viscosity 180 centistokes. 
 
 The Base Price is calculated on the basis of the arithmetic average of the 
monthly values of the prices of the listed products as published in Platt’s 
Oilgram Price Report for the eigh teen (18) months of May, 1992 through 
October, 1993, inclusive. (These values are derived from the mean of the 
daily ranges on days the postings are published to give a monthly value). 
For the purpose of this Contract, Base Price will be equal to 
$2.32/MMBTU. 
 
The price of Gas for each MMBTU for each Calendar Quarter thereafter 
shall be determined by the following formula : 
 
Price = Base Price x (A/B) 
 
Where: 
 
A = a value calculated for the HS/LSFO Basket defined in this Article 
21.5.13 (d) evaluated for the twelve (12) months preceding the Calendar 
Quarter using the method for averaging as described for calculating the 
Base Price, and 
 

B =  a value calculated for the HS/LSFO Basket, evaluated for the twelve 
(12) months April 1993 through March 1994. 
 
The High Sulfur/Low Sulfur Fuel Oil Basket (“HS/LSFO Basket) is valued 
as equal parts of: 
 
(1) bulk residual fuel oil, containing one percent (1%) sulfur, 
 quoted for Mediterranean, basis Italy, (Cargoes, FOB Med,  basis 
Italy); and  
 
(2) bulk residual fuel oi l, containing one percent (1%) sulfur, quoted for 
Northwest Europe Cargoes, CIF, basis ARA, (Cargoes CIF NEW, Basis 
ARA), and  
 
(3) bulk residual fuel oil, Singapore Cargoes containing three and one -half 
percent (3.5%) sulfur, viscosity 180 centistokes, (S ingapore HSFO, 180 
cst), and  
 
(4) bulk residual fuel oil, Cargoes, FOB Arab Gulf, Viscosity 180 centistokes, 
(Arab Gulf, FOB HSFO 180 cst) 
 
Using the method for averaging as described for calculating the Base 
Price. 
 
The Floor Price (“Floor Price”) shall be ninety percent (90%) of the 
monthly values of the prices of the LSFO Basket as published in Platt’s 
Oilgram Price Report for the eighteen (18) months of May, 1992 through 
October, 1993, inclusive. (Three values are derived from mean of the daily 
ranges on days the postings are published to give a monthly value). For 
the purpose of this Contract, Floor Price will be equal to $2.11/MMBTU. 
 
Notwithstanding results of the calculations for price as shown in this Article 
21.5.13 (d), the actual price shall in no event be less than a Floor Price 
(“Floor Price”) which is calculated as US$ 2.11/MMBTU, nor more than a 
Ceiling (“Ceiling”) of the Floor Price plus US$ 1.00 MMBTU, provided that 
after seven (7) years from the Date of first delivery, the Seller shall hav e 
the option to revise the Ceiling to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of 
ninety percent (90%) of the same or equivalent basket of fuel oils used in 
calculating the Base Price averaged over the immediately preceding 
eighteen (18) months. 
 
Parties agree to convert US$/barrel prices for fuel oil as published  in 
Platt’s Oilgram to US$/MMBTU using a factor of 6.28. 
 
If Platt’s Oilgram is no longer published, an alternate publication shall be 
mutually agreed upon. 

 
21.5.14 Nothing contained in any contract ente red into by the Contractor for the 
supply, sale or disposal of Gas, with any nominee of the Government shall 
in any manner abrogate the obligation of the Government contained 
herein.  
 
21.5.15 The Government and / or its nominee shall pay any and all sales  tax 
payable on the sale of Gas to the Government or its nominee. 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE 6th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 6th August, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5 Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8 Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
9 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
10 Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
11 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
12 Shri Uday Singh 
13 
 
Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14 Shri Tariq Anwar 
15 Shri Anil Desai 
16 Shri Naresh Gujral 
17 Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri S. Bal Shekar   Additional Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3    Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
2 Ms. Revathy Iyer Director General (Commercial)-II 
 

 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS AND ONGC 
 
1 Shri G.C. Chaturvedi Secretary, P&NG 
2 Shri Sudhir Bhargava Additional Secretary, P&NG 
3 Shri Sudhir Vasudeva CMD, ONGC 
 
2.  The Committee met to take the oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
(ONGC) in connection with examination of Audit Para No. 13. 5.1 of C&AG’s Report No. 
9 of 2009 -10 regarding Loss due to purchase of condensate at crude oil price by Oil & 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited.  
 
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) and ONGC and drew their attention to Direction 58 
of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence before the Parliamentary 
Committees.   
 
4.  The representatives of ONGC then made a power point presentation on the 
subject highlighting the various aspects brought out in the C&AG Audit Para No.13.5.1. 
During the course of discussion on Audit Para, the Chairman and Members raised 
queries on various  aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications 
on the same were sought from the Secretary, MoPNG and CMD, ONGC. As the 
information on a number of issues raised by the members was not available with the 
representatives of the Ministr y/ONGC, the Committee felt that the Ministry and ONGC 
need to come up with more specific and concrete replies on the subject matter and it 
was unanimously decided that a timeframe of two weeks may be given to the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas and Oil  and Natural Gas Corporation Limited to furnish the 
replies on the issues raised during the meeting.   
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE 10th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 1 st October, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1640 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
3 Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
4 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
5 Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
6 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7 
8 
Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
10 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1      Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2     Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
2 Shri P.Sesh Kumar Director General (Commercial)-II, Audit Board 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM &  
NATURAL GAS AND ONGC 
 
1 Shri G.C. Chaturvedi Secretary, P&NG 
2 Shri Sudhir Vasudeva CMD, ONGC 
 
 

2.  The Committee met to take the oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
(ONGC) in connection with examination of Audit Para No. 13.5.1 of C&AG’s Report No. 
9 of 2009 -10 regarding Loss due to purchase of condensate at crude oil price by Oil & 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited.  
 
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) and ONGC and drew their attention to Direction 58 
of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence before the Parliamentary 
Committees.   
 
4.  The representatives of ONGC then made a brief power point presentation on the 
subject highlighting the various aspects brought out in the C& AG Audit Para No.13.5.1. 
During the course of discussion on Audit Para, the Chairman and Members raised 
queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject and also sought the 
explanations/clarifications on the same from the Secretary, MoPNG and CMD, ONGC . 
As the Members were not satisfied with the replies made by the representatives of the 
Ministry/ONGC, the Committee felt that the Ministry and ONGC need to come up with 
more specific and concrete replies on the subject matter based on the inputs by the 
technical experts, if any sought by them, and it was unanimously decided that a 
timeframe of two weeks may be given to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited to furnish the replies on the issues raised 
during the meeting.   
 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7th January 2014 from 1200 hrs to 1310 hrs 
in Room No. 53, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
4.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
6.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
7.  Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
9.  Shri Anil Desai 
10.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
11.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
12.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri P. Mukherjee Deputy C&AG 
2. Shri Gautam Guha DG (Commercial)-I 
3. Shri P. Sesh Kumar DG (Commercial)-II 

 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Officers of C&AG to 
the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on the following 
subjects and adopted the same without any modifications: 
(i). XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX; and,  
 
(ii). Purchase of condensate at crude oil price by Oil & Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited based on Audit Para No. 13.5.1 of C&AG’s Report 
No. 9 of 2009-10 
 
4. Since the Lok Sabha stands adjourned sine-die, the Committee decided to 
present the two Reports to Speaker, Lok Sabha under Direction 71A (1) of ‘The 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’  and authorized the Chairman to finalize the two 
Reports after suitably incorporating the audit vetting remarks and on the basis of factual 
verification and present  them to Speaker, Lok Sabha and then to Parliament as and 
when Parliament sitting is reconvened.    
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXX Matter not related to this Report. 