C.P.U. No. 940 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED   
UNPRODUCTIVE PAYMENT OF INCENTIVE 
 
 
(MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS) 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-First Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
– Unproductive payment of incentive in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited 
based on Para 14.4.1 of the Report on Union Government (Commercial) of the 
C&AG of India No. 11 CA of 2008.) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2010 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2010 / Vaisakha 1932(S) 
7 

2 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
CHAPTER   l 
 
Report  5 
 APPENDIX  
I Minutes of the sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

3 
 
C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009 - 2010) 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo—Chairman  
 
Sl. No. MEMBERS, LOK SABHA 
2. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8. Shri Baijayant Panda 
9. Shri L. Rajagopal 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
13. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
MEMBERS, RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
18. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
21. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22. Shri Amar Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director  
3.  Shri Paolienlal Haokip Under Secretary 
 
 
 
(iii) 

4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-First 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited – Unproductive 
payment of incentive in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited Based on Para 14.4.1 
of the Report on Union Government (Commercial) of the C&AG of India No. 11 CA of 
2008. 
2. The Thirty-first Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2008-2009) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 16th December, 200 8.  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 7th July, 
2009.  The Committee on Pu blic Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 25th April 2010. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix – I.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee is given in Appendix – II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO, 
28 April, 2010 Chairman, 
8 Vaisakha, 1932(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
                 
 
 
(v) 
 
  

5 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Thirty -first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings which was presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2008. 
 
 Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of the 
only recommendation contained in the Report.  The recommendation had two aspects, 
both of which have been addressed by the Government in their action taken notes. 
 
 In the report, the Committee had observed and recommended on two aspects as 
given below. 
 
Recommendation – Delay in formulation and implementation of PRI Scheme 
 
The Committee note that HPCL in 2006 introduced an incentive scheme, namely, 
the Performance Related Incentive (PRI) scheme. This new scheme was in addition to 
the two already existing schemes viz., the Productivity Incentive (PI) scheme and the 
Performance Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme. This scheme in que stion was justified on 
the basis of DPE guideline increasing the limit for payment of performance linked 
incentives to 50% of basic pay and five percent of distributable profit and subject to the 
condition that payments made under the two existing schemes are well below such limit. 
The Committee further note that the PRI was made effective retrospectively from the 
year 2004 -05 and later extended to include the years 2002 -03 and 2003 -04. As a 
consequence, incentive payments of Rs. 19.55 crore, Rs. 23.91 cror e, Rs. 16.30 crore 
and Rs. 16.50 crore for the years 2002 - 03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively 
were made under the new PRI scheme, amounting to a total payout of Rs. 76.26 crore. 
In this regard, the Committee note that since the parameters for de termining the 
payment under PRI scheme would have been evolved only after the scheme was 
introduced in 2006, the Board of HPCL decided to use the parameters of the PI scheme 
for payment of incentives under PRI for the years 2002-03 to 2005-06. 
 
As per the Audit objection, the payment of incentives retrospectively for the years 
2002-03 to 2005 -06 using the performance parameters of PI scheme, instead of PRI 
Scheme was irregular since the objectives of the two schemes were entirely different 
and tantamounts t o releasing of double payment for the same performance thereby 
resulting in unproductive payment of incentive. Further, implementation of scheme 
retrospectively cannot be expected to motivate employees for the performance already 
achieved and rewarded. 
 

6 
 
The Company, however, has tried to justify their act by stating that the PRI 
scheme was introduced primarily to utilize the provisions of the revised guidelines to 
address the inadequacy of the two existing schemes to fairly reward the performance of 
employees in meeting the stiff targets set for them especially since 2002 -03 in view of 
the dismantling of the Administered Price Mechanism (APM) in Oil sector and the 
emerging competition from the private players. Besides, the scheme was also aimed at 
containing the high attrition rate evident since 2005 due to a wide disparity among the 
salary and benefits paid to employees of public sector oil companies and their 
counterparts in private sector. 
 
The Committee are not convinced with the justification furnished by the Company 
on the Audit objections in respect of the PRI Scheme. The Committee feel that the PRI 
Scheme should have been operationalized soon after the revised guidelines for the 
payment of perquisites and allowances were issued by DPE in 1999. In the o pinion of 
the Committee, the management, despite having the necessary autonomy to pre -empt 
the undesirable occurrence of high attrition among its experienced employees, had 
failed to initiate timely action to compensate them at comparable levels through a 
proactive introduction of permissible incentives. The Committee recommend that the 
company should in future take proactive steps to motivate and retain its workforce 
rather than engage itself in repair work often involving questionable methods such as 
the utilization of performance parameters of one scheme to pay incentives under 
another scheme. 
 
As regards giving of retrospective effect to the implementation of the PRI 
scheme, the Committee note that both HPCL management and the Ministry concurred 
in justi fying the decision based on the need to reward the appreciable performance 
rendered by the employees since the end of the APM regime in 2002 -03 and the 
inadequacy of the existing limits of incentives to adequately reward such performance. 
While appreciatin g the argument, the Committee reiterate that in view of the fact that 
DPE guidelines have provided for the implementation of such a scheme as early as 
1999, the justification put forth by the management and the ministry are at best an 
attempt to cover up i nefficiency in timely introduction of the scheme. Further, the 
Committee are in concurrence with audit’s observation that payment of incentives under 
PRI scheme based on performance parameters of the PI scheme, which stood attained 
and rewarded technically amounts to unproductive payment, for incentive schemes are 
by nature meant to motivate future performance based on defined parameters and 
should not be utilized to exhaust unutilized funds in gestures of retrospective 
benevolence. The Committee therefore recommend that the company must take timely 
action to effect such schemes as per guidelines issued from time to time so as to 
ensure that recurrence of such kind of anomaly and undesirable situations do not arise. 
 
 In reply, the Government had submitted a ction taken notes on the two aspects of 
the recommendation of the Committee, had their replies vetted by the C&AG and given 
their comments on the remarks of the C&AG as given below: 
 
  

7 
 
Recommendation (Aspect-I) 
 
The Committee recommended that the Company s hould in future take proactive 
steps to motivate and retain its workforce rather than engage itself in repair work often 
involving questionable methods such as the utilization of performance parameters of 
one scheme to pay incentives under another scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As advised by Honourable Committee, effective 2006 -07, the Corporation 
adopted the mechanism of payment of PRI based on specific parameters set by the 
Strategic Business Units at the beginning of the year.  The payment made to the se 
SBUs is based on actual performance against the targets set by them.  This mechanism 
was further improved during the year 2007 -08 by linking the performance of SBUs to 
individual performance, in order to motivate the employees for focused performance 
towards growth and profitability of the Corporation.” 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
O.M. No.R-30024/51/2007-MC dated 6th July, 2009 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The reply of the Government has been verified and found correct.  Para is 
therefore not pursued further. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
 No further comments in view of the decision of C&AG to not to pursue the Para 
further. 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
O.M. No.R-30024/51/2007-MC dated 6th July, 2009 
 
 
Recommendation (Aspect-II) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the company must take timely action to effect 
such schemes as per guidelines issued from time to time so as to ensure that 
recurrence of such kind of anomaly and undesirable situations do not arise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As advised by Honourable Committee, the Corporation has taken action 
regarding payment of PRI Scheme based on the actual performance against the targets 
set in the beginning of the year by each SBU and individual officers and same will 
continue in future w ith improved performance based mechanism.  The Incentive 
Scheme of the Corporation would also be suitably modified to conform with the latest 

8 
 
guidelines on the subject consequent to the recent revision of pay and allowances of 
Executives of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE). 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
O.M. No.R-30024/51/2007-MC dated 6th July, 2009 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The mechanism for payment of incentive against PRI Scheme has been 
improved by the  Company.  Modification to the incentive scheme with reference to the 
revision of pay and allowances of executives of CPSE will be reviewed in Audit and 
observations, if any, will be taken up separately.  Hence, the Para may be treated as 
settled. 
 
Comments of the Ministry on the remarks of Office of C&AG 
 
 No further comments in view of the decision of C&AG to treat the Para as settled. 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
O.M. No.R-30024/51/2007-MC dated 6th July, 2009 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 Considering the fact that the Office of C&AG had verified the reply of the 
Government and found it to be correct, the Committee express their deep 
satisfaction over the prompt appreciation by the Government of their 
recommendation.  The Committee further o bserved that the better exchange of 
perspectives between the executive and the Office of C&AG during the process of 
Audit would go a long way in making the exercise of ensuring accountability of 
the Executive more meaningful and substantive.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO, 
28 April, 2010 Chairman, 
8 Vaisakha, 1932(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
  

9 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 17th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 28th APRIL 2010 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs to 1600 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri Baijayant Panda 
6 Shri L. Rajagopal 
7 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
8 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
9 Shri Ganesh Singh 
10 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
12 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
13 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
14 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Under Secretary 
 
Officials of C&AG 
 
1. K.P. Sasidharan   Director General (Commercial) 
2. Birendra Kumar   Principal Director (Comm.) Audit Board 
 
  

10 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Reports on the following 
subjects and adopted them without modification: - 
(i). Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited – Unproductive payment of 
incentive in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited Based on Para 
14.4.1 of the Report on Union Government (Commercial) of the C&AG of 
India No. 11 CA of 2008, and  
 
(ii). XXXXX   XXXXX   XXXXX 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 