CPU NO. 939 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
SECURITY PRINTING AND MINTING CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April,  2010 / Chaitra 1932(S) 
6 

2 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page No.  
Composition of the Committee (2009-2010) (v) 
Introduction (vii) 
 Part- I 
Report 
 
 
CHAPTER  I. ROLE AND OBJECTIVES 
 
6 
 a).        Introductory 
 
 
 b).        Rationale for formation  
 c).        Role and functions   
   
CHAPTER  II ORGANISATIONAL MATTERS 
 
13 
 a).        Organisaional set up  
 b).        Board of Directors  
 c).        Manpower   
   
CHAPTER  III PERFORMANCE  19 
 a).       Policy of the Govt.  
 b).       Indents  
 c).       Order Book Position  
 d).       Capacity Utilisation  
 e).       System of forecasting  
 f)         Disposal of Impaired Machinery   
 g).       Export/Import  
 h)        Foreign Exchange  
  
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
CHAPTER  IV FUNCTIONAL MATTERS 30 
 a).      Capital Structure  
 b).      Sundry Debtors  
 c).      Corporate Social Responsibility  
 d).      Security System  
 e).      Taxation matters  
 f)        Mini-Ratna Status  
 g)       Modernization  
   
CHAPTER  V R&D AND INDIGENISATION 38 
 a).       R&D  
 b).       Outsourcing  
 c).       Challenges of Counterfeit Notes  
  
Part –II 
 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
 
 
 
 
48 
ANNEXURES 
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

4 
 
 C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009 - 2010) 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo - Chairman 
 MEMBERS,  LOK SABHA 
2. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8. Shri Baijayant Panda 
9. Shri L. Rajagopal 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
13. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
18. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
21. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22. Shri Amar Singh 
             
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal                         Sr. Executive Asstt.  
 
 
 
 
(v) 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertaking s having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixth Report on 
the Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL). 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of SPMCIL on 27 th 
October, 2009 and further, took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) and Reserve Bank of India on 20 th January, 
2010.           
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2009 -10) considered and adopted 
this Report at their sitting held on 9th March.2010.     . 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL)  and Ministry of 
Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) and Reserve Bank of India for placing before 
them the desired material and information in connection with the examination of the 
subject.  The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by  the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of the 
Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                      SHRI V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
9th March, 2010          Chairman 
19 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)                        Committee on Public Undertakings  
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 
 

6 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER-1 
ROLE AND OBJECTIVES 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India Ltd. (SPMCIL) is a Mini -Ratna 
Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) wholly owned Schedule „A‟ Company of 
Government of India, incorporated on 13th January, 2006 with its registered office at 
New Delhi. SPMCIL. The Corporation is engaged in the manufacture / production of 
Currency and Bank Notes, Security Paper, Non -judicial Stamp Papers, Postal 
Stamps & Stationery, Travel Documents viz. , Passport and Visa, Security 
Certificates, Cheques, Bonds, Warrants,  Special Certificates with Security Features, 
Security Inks, Circulation & Commemorative Coins, Medallions, Refining of Gold, 
Silver and Assay of Precious Metals, etc.  
 
RATIONALE FOR FORMATION  
1.2 The Corporation was incorporated by taking over two secur ity presses at 
Nashik and Hyderabad, two currency note presses at Dewas and Nashik, four mints 
at Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad and Noida and one security paper mill at 
Hoshangabad which were working under the direct administrative control  of t he 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. 
1.3 Explaining the background for formation of a Corporation by the 
corporatization of the departmental industrial orgarnisations, SPMCIL furnished the 
following information: 
“The Expenditure Reforms Commission in i ts 3rd Report dated 23 rd December, 
2000 while giving a set of nine recommendations concerning mints and 
presses, suggested exploration of the option of placing India Security Press, 
Nashik and four India Government Mints under a corporate body. It was also  
recommended by the Commission that the feasibility of the Department of 
Posts taking over the Security Printing Press, Hyderabad may be explored. 
The Commission further recommended for the  two currency note presses  at 
Dewas and Nashik to be transferred to the control of Bharatiya Reserve Bank 
Note Mundran Private Limited,  setting up  of a new security paper mill by the 
Reserve Bank of India and phasing out or privatization of Security Paper Mill, 
Hoshangabad. Neither Reserve Bank of India nor Department  of Posts agreed 
to take over the security presses as per the recommendations of the 
Expenditure Reforms Commission. The feasibility of hiving off security paper 
mill at Hoshangabad could not fructify due to operational and logistic 
constraints. On subsequ ent review of functions and performance of the Units, 
it was realized that the main constraints in the existing system of keeping 
these units as Government entities were low productivity, obsolete technology, 
outdated financial systems and procedures, besi des delay in responding 
technologically to the challenges of counterfeiting. All these factors, in 
combination, were resulting in inefficient capacity utilization and consequential 
higher cost of production. In view of the above, the Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India (IFCI) Limited was appointed as consultant to study the 
working of the nine units and present a feasibility report for their 

7 
 
corporatization. The IFCI Report highlighted the inefficiencies and low 
productivity prevalent in the system lead ing to higher cost of production and 
lower profitability. The Report suggested that –  
(a) The corporatization was necessary for the overall improvement in decision 
making process, operational flexibility coupled with commensurate 
accountability fostering effi ciency and higher productivity in the units. As a 
sequel, the corporatization of units would lead to reduction of Government 
expenditure in terms of managing the units besides inculcating efficiency 
through rationalization of operational hassles and flexib ility in employing 
advanced technology. 
(b) Corporatization of the units under a unified corporate was necessitated to 
enable the management to take appropriate and timely decisions for 
manpower deployment, improving financial performance and fixing of 
performance and productivity standards. The Report of the IFCI was accepted 
by the Government. Accordingly, it was decided to form a wholly owned 
corporation by taking over all the nine security presses/mints/security paper 
mill. The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 2 nd September, 2005 approved 
the formation of a wholly owned corporation, namely, the Security Printing and 
Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL). The corporation was 
incorporated under the Companies Act on 13th January, 2006.” 
1.4 When asked w hy the Government considered it expedient to incorporate 
SPMCIL by placing under it all the nine departmental units functioning under the 
direct control of the Ministry of Finance for a fairly long period in a sensitive area like 
printing of currency n otes and security documents/papers, minting of coins, etc ., the 
Ministry stated in a written note as under: 
“A review of the international scenario reveals that the form of governance of 
Mints and Security Presses has by and large moved from government to a 
corporate like structure in case of many countries, such as, United Kingdom, 
France, Germany, China, South Korea and many other countries.   Printing of 
currency notes and security documents and minting of coins are sensitive 
areas in all the countries.  That is why, though the production of Bank Notes, 
Coins and Security Documents have been transferred to a corporate body, 
the design, material, security features and circulation of these is still under the 
control of the Union Government, RBI and the Stat e Governments (in respect 
of non-judicial stamp papers and court fee stamps).  Further, the security of 
all the establishments is looked after by the Central Industrial Security Force 
(CISF).  At three places, the security is under State Police Establishme nts 
which is also being handed over to the CISF.  The policy aspects concerning 
currency and coinage are still under the control of the Central Government 
and the Reserve Bank of India and the security to the units is also provided by 
the Central/State Sec urity Agencies. Thus, there is no security risk at all in 
transfer of the functions of the 9 departmental units to a corporate body, i.e., 
SPMCIL”. 
ROLE AND FUNCTIONS  
1.5 According to the information made available, SPMCIL is broadly operating 
through fou r production verticals i.e. Currency Printing Presses, Security Printing 

8 
 
Presses, Security Paper Mill and India Government Mints. A brief introduction of 
these units alongwith details of operational activity is as follows: 
1.   CURRENCY PRINTING PRESSES  
(i) There are two Currency Printing Presses i.e. Currency Note Press (CNP), 
Nashik Road (Maharashtra) and Bank Note Press (BNP), Dewas (M.P) which 
are engaged in production of Bank Notes for our country as well as for foreign 
countries using state of the art technology. 
(ii) These units have created a niche for themselves in the market. More than 
40% of Currency Notes circulated in India are printed by company. These 
units are equipped with designing, engraving, complete Pre -printing and 
Offset facilities, Intaglio P rinting machines, Numbering & Finishing machines 
etc.  
(iii) Both the Currency Note Printing Presses are ISO 9001:2000 & ISO 
14001:2004 certified units having fool -proof accounting of security items, 
stringent security systems with ultra -modern eco -friendly effi cient treatment 
facilities and complemented by a service department to ensure maximum in -
transit security.  
(iv) These units have captive railway treasury wagons / carriages for transporting 
the treasury consignments. These units have history of export of Bank Notes 
to countries like East Africa, Iraq, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Bhutan etc. 
 
2.  SECURITY PRINTING PRESSES  
(i) There are two Security printing presses of SPMCIL namely India Security 
Press (ISP), Nashik Road (Maharashtra) and Security Printing Press (SP P), 
Hyderabad (A.P.).  Security Printing Presses have glorious history of 
employing specialized technology and multiple printing processes to produce 
security products under secure operating procedures and manufacturing 
protocols. These presses have the latest technological facilities for Designing, 
Pre-printing and Post-Printing.  
(ii) These Presses print the 100% requirement of passports and other travel 
documents, Non -judicial stamp papers, cheques, bonds, warrants, postal 
stamps and postal stationery and other security products.  
(iii) The Security Printing Presses have the capability of incorporating security 
features like chemically reactive elements, various Guilloche patterns, micro 
lettering, designs with UV inks, bi -fluorescent inks, optical variable inks, mi cro 
perforation, adhesive/glue, embossing, die-cutting and personalization, etc.  
 
3.   SECURITY PAPER MILL (SPM) HOSHANGABAD (M.P.) 
(i) Security Paper Mill (SPM), Hoshangabad was established in 1968 and 
notified as non -commercial undertaking under the adminis trative control of 
Govt. of India, Ministry of Finance. This unit is responsible for manufacturing 
of different types of Security Papers.  
(ii) Papers manufactured by this unit are used for printing of Currency Notes by 
Currency Note Press (CNP), Nashik and Ban k Note Press (BNP), Dewas and 

9 
 
for Non-Judicial Stamps being printed by India Security Press (ISP), Nashik 
and Security Printing Press (SPP), Hyderabad. 
(iii) SPM has the distinction of incorporating numerous security features in paper 
viz. Fluorescence Fibers, M ulti-tonal Three Dimensional Watermark, 
Electrotype Watermark, various types of Security Threads, Taggants, etc. At 
SPM, Hoshangabad, the eco -friendly process and the energy conservation 
aspects are assigned the utmost importance.  
(iv) In the year 2008 -09, SPM has indigenously developed Rho dodendron flower 
watermark in CWBN Paper and supplied the paper to CNP for printing of 
Nepalese Bank Note of Rs.10/ - denomination. For maintaining quality 
management system, SPM has received ISO 9001:2000 certification by QSI  
Certification Service, USA.  
4.   MINTS 
SPMCIL‟s four Mints at Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Noida have rich minting 
heritage and legacy of producing quality products. These mints are carrying 
out minting of all coins circulated in the country. India Govern ment Mints 
(IGM) offer comprehensive range of services covering every stage of the 
minting process – from planning to the finished products. Utilization of 
advanced technology, innovation, quality and reliable delivery methods are 
some of the components of strength of these mints. 
Circulation Coins  
(i) The manufacturing process for circulating coins in these mints 
constitutes a perfect symbiosis between the centuries-old art of engraving, the 
minting process and the most advanced industrial processes -word-class 
technology and material management, traceability, automation to finish the 
coins adhering to extreme quality and security norms. IGMs have struck coins 
for countries like Greece, Sri Lanka, East Africa, Australia, Egypt, Bhutan, 
Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Malay sia, Oman, Thailand, in the past, and Dominican 
Republic in the current year. 
(ii) The mints are equipped with Computerized Numeric Control Engraving 
Machines which are used for manufacturing master punches/matrix/dies for 
coins. India Government Mints are having latest Coining Presses. In all, these 
mints are having 60 Coining Presses. 
(iii) There are latest Blanking Lines available for in -house production of coin 
blanks. India Government Mints are having Polishing and Pickling Lines for 
polishing of coin blanks. India Government Mint (IGM), Noida is also equipped 
with automatic visual inspection and sorting system to check the quality of 
coin blanks/ coins to meet International Quality Standards.  
(iv)  SPMCIL has also placed purchase order for three numbers of fully 
automatic centrifugal finishing lines and four numbers of semi automatic 
centrifugal finishing lines from Germany. All India Government Mints are 
equipped with coin Pouch Packing Machines. Apart from above, Mints are 
equipped with Heat treatment, Workshop, Ass aying/ Medallion/ Bullion 
facilities etc.  
 

10 
 
 
Commemorative Coins 
(v) The Commemorative / Collectors‟ coins are anybody‟s prized 
possession. And the range of these exclusive coins manufactured by IGMs is  
the result of proven track record with efficiency, excellence and elegance.  
(vi) Minting of these coins starts with developing the designs and 
engraving by deft hands. Then begins the mechanical exercise of 
manufacturing master punch/dies on CNC machines followed by stamping 
with Automatic Multi -Strike Medal Presses , ensuring the top -notch quality. 
This is an exclusive process as it obviates deterioration of the Blanks and 
allows great precision. The same piece is struck repeatedly with a view to 
achieving clarity and comprehensive expression of the image. These 
commemorative coins are manufactured in Proof and Un-circulated variety.  
(vii) In 2008 -09, India Government Mint (IGM), Mumbai has issued   
commemorative coins on Khadi & Village Industries, First War of 
Independence and Gur-Ta-Gaddi of Shri Guru Granth Sahib.  
(viii)  India Government Mint (IGM), Kolkata has issued commemorative 
coins on   Shahid Bhagat Singh Birth Centenary and 200th Birth Anniversary 
of Louis Braille. 
Medallion and Bullion Activity 
(i) Apart from circulation coins minting, IGMs are also a trusted name in 
minting of items like Medallions and Investment Coins, etc. In doing so, the 
manufacturing of Medallion starts with steps of creating a perfect design, 
followed by quality minting which culminates into a personalised examination 
of the finished product. The dies are put to an exceptional care in terms of 
cleanliness and inspection to generate output of optimum quality. 
(ii) Further, building credibility and gaining trust, for decades, at Mumbai, 
Kolkata and Hyderabad the Refining and Hallmarking of the Precious Me tals 
is also undertaken. The IGMs set benchmark in the Assay Certification and 
the same is emulated by other players as industry norm. 
(iii) IGMs spearhead in refining the offerings of precious metals made to 
various temples, religious places, trusts, etc. and m inting them into coins. 
IGMs have made a niche in the minting world – with excellence in design, 
expertise in minting precious metals, and above all, a long tradition of 
craftsmanship. Reliability is combined in a natural manner in design and 
production of individualistic solution that truly reflect the customers‟ values.  
(iv) In 2008 -09, out of the new orders executed/customer added, the 
manufacturing of medals for Commonwealth Youth Games, Pune, 2008, 
National Youth Award Medal, Dollars for Shri Thirupati Thi rumala 
Devasthanam, Shipping Corporation of India Limited, North Eastern Railways, 
etc. are worth mentioning.  
(v) Various Stamping Equipments and Weights & Measures to Pan -India 
offices of Controller of Legal Metrology (Weights & Measures) and Special 
silver anodes for Telecom Factory, Deonar were also supplied by IGM, 
Mumbai.  

11 
 
(vi) Gold bars, from the gold ornaments which were earlier melted by IGM, 
Mumbai, were also supplied to State Bank of India.  
 
1.6 It is seen from  the Annual Report (2008 -09) of SPMCIL that the Department 
of Economic Affairs has granted Mini -Ratna Category -1 CPSE status to the 
Corporation which provides enhanced powers to the Corporation in the field of 
investments, joint ventures and other commercial matters.  It has also been stated 
that from time to time, directions have been issued by the Ministry for productivity, 
costing, R&D etc.  
1.7 On being asked what specific functions have been retained by the Ministry of 
Finance in the matters connected with overall working of the Corporation , the  
Ministry in a written note stated as under: 
“Government of India has retained the functions of policy formulation 
regarding design and security features of currency and coins, administrative 
control of the Company, issues relating to counterfeiting and ot her such 
issues having security and monetary policy concerns.”  
1.8 With regard to the monitoring role being played by the Ministry of Finance in 
the working of SPMCIL, the Ministry stated in a written note as follows. 
“Ministry of Finance, Department of E conomic Affairs conducts half yearly 
review meeting of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) as per MoU 
stipulations. In addition, annual review meeting is also held with the task force 
of DPE. Further there is a Production Planning Meeting regularly convened by 
Ministry to decide about indent, production and distribution of indents among 
SPMCIL and Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Private Limited 
(BRBNMPL), a wholly owned company of RBI.”   
1.9 As per the information furnished, SPMCIL has been created with t he 
objectives of overall improvement in decision making process, operational flexibility 
coupled with commensurate accountability fostering efficiency and higher 
productivity in the units. As a sequel, it would result in reduction of Government 
expenditure in terms of managing the units besides inculcating efficiency through 
rationalization of operational hassles and flexibility in employing advanced 
technology.  This would also result in bringing down the actual cost of production 
leading to relatively lower budgetary support from the Government.   Management is 
mandated to take appropriate and timely decisions for manpower deployment, 
improving financial performance and fixing of performance and productivity 
standards.  Other objectives are optimization of  managerial deployment and 
manpower along with formation of promotion policies, rewards and remuneration 
structure linked with the performance and productivity.   The role of SPMCIL is to 
take care of management, control, operations and maintenance of, 
production/printing/ manufacture of security grade paper; coins and medallions; 
currency and bank notes; stamps, non -judicial stamp papers; passport, visas and 
related documents, security paper; postage stamps and stationary; security 
certificates, government securities, bonds, cheques, demand draft, identity cards, ink 
and other related materials required for production/printing of above -stated items 
and to do the acts or thing being necessary or incidental thereto.  

12 
 
1.10 The Committee have been informed  that the Corporation has been created 
with the objectives of overall improvement in decision making process and 
operational flexibility so as to bring down the actual cost of production leading to 
relatively lower budgetary support from the Government , However,  no study has 
been conducted by the Administrative Ministry to ascertain the extent to which the 
Corporation has achieved its assigned objectives as the company is recently 
created.  It is also stated that SPMCIL has increased productivity, turnover and profit 
and is likely to be rated as "Excellent" during 2008 -09 as per the performance 
measurement of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed between the 
company and the Ministry of Finance.  
1.11 When asked w hat parameters for measuring physical and financi al 
performance of the Corporation have been stipulated by the Ministry of Finance in 
the MoU signed between the Corporation and the Ministry , the Ministry in a written 
note stated as under:-  
“The parameters for physical and financial performance of SPMCIL are as per 
the broad guidelines given by DPE for signing of MoUs.” 
1.12 On a question how these parameters compare with actual achievements 
reported by all the production units before their corporatization, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as under:- 
“Prior to corporatization, these units were operating like departmental 
organizations and maintaining accounts on cash basis. Hence the static 
financial parameters such as gross margin, net profit etc, which are primarily 
for commercial undertakings with  accrual basis of accounts, were not 
monitored or maintained. Regarding dynamic parameters e.g. ISO 
certification, project implementation and modernization etc, targets have been 
assigned and same are monitored for the relevant period. Hence, any 
comparison with past performance may not give relevant/comparable result.” 
1.13 On being asked w hether the Ministry of Finance feels that the Corporation 
has succeeded in its objective of bringing down the cost of production and reduced 
budgetary support from the G overnment, the Ministry in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“Cost of production has come down due to measures of improvement taken 
by the company. There is no budgetary support to the company. During the 
year 2007-08 and 2008 -09, prices of currency notes have not been revised 
despite overall increase in raw material and manpower costs. Company has 
been in a position to absorb the cost due to improved productivity and 
enhanced efficiency. For coins and postal stationery also, cost analysis has 
been done by Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India and it has 
been observed that company has been able to bring down the cost of 
production.” 
1.14 The Secretary, Ministry of Finance further  added during the evidence before 
the Committee as under:  
“……. we feel that in its brief existence so far, the Corporation has vindicated 
the promise with which it was set up and lived up to the initial expectations.” 

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
ORGANISATIONAL MATTERS 
 
ORGANISATIONAL SET-UP 
2.1 In the preliminary material, SPMCIL stated t hat t he Company is headed by 
the Chairman and Managing Director.  There are three functional Directors heading 
Technical, Finance and Human Resource. CVO is heading Vigilance department. 
Technical department takes care of technical matter, production plann ing, 
maintenance, technology, R&D, Logistics, procurement and marketing. Finance 
Department handles Finance, accounts, taxation, Internal audit, costing, budgeting, 
capital investments, corporate finance, co-ordination with Auditors, Systems and Co-
ordination, Company Secretariat etc. HR department handles Administration, 
establishment, training, personnel and Industrial relations etc. Full time CVO has 
recently joined the organization and vigilance set up is being strengthened in the 
corporate office and u nits.  Units are headed by General Managers with the same 
organizational setup which was practiced at the time of Government department but 
is presently functioning under the control and directions of Head/corporate office.  
General Manager is assisted by functional heads like Dy. General Manager (DGM), 
Financial Advisor & Chief Account Officer (FA&CAO), Chief Purchase & Stores 
Officer (CPSO), Works Manager and Chief Administrative Officer.  Each unit has a 
security set up of CISF/State special police force  and headed by Commandant/ Dy.  
Commandant. 
2.2 On being asked whether t he present organizational set up is adequate / 
satisfactory, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
“The present set up in the Units is same and corporate set up has been 
created in the last three years.  To rationalize standard manpower study has 
been conducted by National Productivity Council (NPC) at non -executive 
level. For the organizational set up study has been proposed.  By inputs from 
the professional consultant the vi sion and mission for the next 10 years is 
being worked out.  The set up will be strengthened as per the business 
requirements in the field of information technology, marketing, corporate 
communications, taxation, R&D, corporate strategy, internal audit, et c. which 
are presently not exclusive functions. Further, the existing functions of 
Technical, Maintenance, Production, Planning, HR, Finance and Accounts 
need strengthening both at unit and corporate level.  Vigilance set up is also 
being strengthened in the units.” 
2.3 When asked w hether the Government has received any proposals from 
SPMCIL to conduct a study on its organizational set up as well as its future plans , 
the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“No Sir.  However, SPMCIL states that the   set up will be strengthened as per 
the business requirements in the field of information technology, marketing, 
corporate communications, taxation, R&D, corporate strategy, internal audit, 
etc. which are presently not exclusive functions. Further, the existing functions 
of Technical, Maintenance, Production, Planning, HR, Finance and Accounts 
need strengthening both at unit and corporate level.  Vigilance set up is also 
being strengthened in the units.” 

14 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
2.4 When asked whether the compos ition of the present Board is in accordance 
with the proportion prescribed by DPE regarding the strength of functional and non -
functional Directors, the company in a written reply stated as under:-. 
“There are four functional Directors including Chairman &  Managing Director.  
There are three Government nominees i.e. two of Ministry of Finance and one 
of Ministry of Home Affairs.  There are three customer department nominees 
of Ministry of External Affairs, Department of Posts and Reserve Bank of 
India.  Kee ping in view the security sensitive nature of the business of the 
corporation Government has decided to create this set up which is slightly 
different set up recommended by DPE for other Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs).” 
2.5 The Committee have been infor med that keeping in view the security 
sensitive nature of the business of the Corporation, Government has decided to 
create this set up of Board of Directors which is slightly different from that 
recommended by DPE for other Public Sector Undertakings.  
2.6 On being asked the extent to which the composition of Board of Directors in 
SPMCIL is different and for what precise reasons , the Ministry in the written reply 
stated as under: 
„In accordance with the Cabinet approval in the case of SPMCIL, due to 
security sensitive nature of the organization, a decision was taken to 
nominate directors from the user departments (RBI, Dept. of Post, and 
Ministry of External Affairs) who may be considered as Independent Directors 
and Government Directors have been nominated  from other Government 
departments i.e. Home Affairs and Ministry of Finance”. 
 
2.7 Regarding the contribution of Government/Non-official Directors, the company 
in a written note stated as under:- 
“At present about more than 90% business of the corporation  is in the domain 
of security products for Government/semi Government Departments and RBI. 
Since Government of India has retained the functions of policy formulation 
regarding design and security features of currency and coins, administrative 
control of th e Company, issues relating to counterfeiting etc., therefore, the 
two Government Directors of Ministry of Finance have a key role in monitoring 
the functions of the corporation affecting Government functions.  The security 
of the units and issues related to Intelligence Bureau (IB) etc. are with Ministry 
of Home Affairs, therefore nominee directors oversee these activities on 
behalf of Ministry of Home Affairs.  The three customer representatives 
namely Department of Posts, Ministry of External Affairs, and  Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) contribute in the production planning, payments, and quality 
issues related to their products in addition to the other role and responsibilities 
of the part time non-official Directors.” 
2.8 The Committee observed that the thre e customer representatives in the 
Board of Directors contribute in the production planning, payments and quality 
issues related to their products and that  the representatives of Ministry of External 
Affairs during the period 30 August, 2007 to 23 July, 200 8, did not attend nine 
meetings out of 10 meetings of Board of Directors held during his tenure.  

15 
 
  2.9 In this context, when asked to clarify whether this absence of nominee of the 
Ministry of External Affairs from meetings had any impact on the decision making 
process of the Corporation, the Ministry in the written reply stated under: 
“Though his absence from the Board Meetings was noted by the Board but 
………… nominee of the Ministry of External Affairs has been in constant 
dialogue with the General Manage r, Indian Security Press (ISP) where 
passport and related documents are produced. He has played an important 
role in the successful launch of the pilot project of E -passport and regularly 
monitoring the production of the Passports in ISP. Recently there ha s been 
substantial increase in indent by MEA and by the gradual addition of 
machines and diversion of manpower the production of passport has been 
substantially increased from 5.7 million pieces (mpcs) in 2006 -07 to 8.29 
mpcs in 2008-09.” 
  
MANPOWER  
2.10 According to the information furnished, SPMCIL was created on 13/01/2006 
and corporatization of the existing nine units (four mints, two currency note presses, 
two security presses and one security paper mill) was effected from 10/02/2006.  All 
the Governm ent employees were treated as on deemed deputation to the 
Corporation.  As on 31/3/06 there were 18448 number of Government employees. 
As already brought out, the units were saddled with excess and untrained manpower 
and outdated machinery and bring in efficiency, productivity and performance related 
payment system was part of the objectives of corporatization. After the signing of the 
tripartite agreement with the unions, SPMCIL and Government on 15/9/2008, about 
90% of the existing employees have opted fo r the corporation and balance have 
chosen to remain with Government.  As on 31/3/09 there are 14075 number of 
corporate employees and about 2000 are Government employees on deputation 
pending deployment by the surplus cell.  Existing employees being in the  high age 
bracket there is an average 6 -7% retirement per year. Keeping in view the present 
and future business scenario, a study is being conducted by engaging consultant to 
know the manpower required vis-à-vis available and the upgradation of their skill s to 
meet the new challenges. 
2.11 As regard the j ustification for the existing manpower and expenditure thereon  
the Company stated in a written reply as under: 
“Absorption of Government employees in SPMCIL has recently been finalized 
and notified by the M inistry on 02/5/09. About 90% have offered for 
absorption in the corporation.  Efforts have been directed towards the 
optimization of manpower resources and increase in the productivity levels. 
As per report of National Productivity Council  the level of ma npower 
expenditure incurred by SPMCIL is found to be on the higher side  and steps 
are being taken to rationalize manpower.  V oluntary Retirement Scheme 
(VRS) is being offered to the employees during 2009-10.”   
2.12 About the m anpower productivity , the C ompany stated in a written note as 
under: 
“As may be seen from the table below, there has been consistent increase in 
the value addition per man per month during the last three years though there 

16 
 
had also been substantial increase in the average monthly emol uments 
during 2007 -08 over 2006 -07 because  of provisioning of all arrears on 
account of VI   Pay Commission recommendations.  
                                                                                        Amount in Rs. 
Financial 
Year 
Value Additi on 
per man/month 
Avg. monthly 
emoluments 
2006-07 34,392         16,108  
2007-08 60,152         28,297  
2008-09 68,485         28,475  
 
2.13 Regarding the retiring employees, the Chairman, SPMCIL during the 
evidence stated as follows:  
“………. as far as m anpower is concerned, it is red ucing by natural 
retirement of 5 -7 per cent. But people are retiring from critical categor ies 
also, ………… The only thing is that there is a lot of untrained manpower in 
Control Category because now we are improving the control  structure with 
new technology. 
 As far as NPC is concerned, …….It was basically to rationalise their 
incentive schemes as there were different incentive schemes in different 
units. Mints are different. Somewhere officers were also included. 
Somewhere over time was included. Somewhere transport allowance was 
included.  ………“  
2.14 The Committee have been informed  that the Company has gone through a 
critical phase during the year 2008 -09 because of uncertainties prevailing over the 
issue of en -masse transfer o f Government employees to the rolls of the Company 
because some Unions and Association were initially opposed to the process of 
corporatization of Mints/Presses and Paper Mill. A Tripartite Agreement has since 
been entered into with the Government, SPMCIL and Unions for en -masse transfer 
of the employees to the Corporation. 
2.15 In this context, when asked about the features of the settlement reached 
between the Government, SPMCIL and Unions, SPMCIL stated in a written note as 
under:- 
 “The main features of the tripartite settlement are as given below: 
S.N. Main Feature 
1 The settlement shall remain in vogue in perpetuity 
2 SPMCIL shall continue to be wholly owned Corporation of 
Government of India 
3 Yardsticks for design, security features production, pl anning of 
coins & currencies and other policy issues shall remain with the 
Government 
4 Government shall not use the process of corporatization as 
means to privatize. 

17 
 
5 Government shall provide support to the Corporation to the tune 
of Rs.1200-150 
 crores for modernization 
6 Government shall ensure that assets transferred to the 
Corporation on 10.02.2006 are not sold by the Corporation. 
7 Efforts shall be made by SPMCIL to get more work orders 
through marketing. 
8 Implementation of Sixth Central Pay Co mmission and migration 
to wage pattern of PSEs 
9 Job security to the employees by SPMCIL 
10 The service conditions on deemed deputation would be 
protected. 
11 (a)  Creation of GPF fund under PF Act, 1925 (applicable for 
combined pension optees) 
(b)  For pro-rata optees formation of the trust under EPF Act, 
1952 (applicable to the employees who opted pro -rata 
pension from the government) 
12 Employees on deemed deputation will be governed by the rules 
of the Corporation now as modeled on CCS Rules. 
13 Payment of terminal benefits consequent upon en masse transfer 
to the rolls of the Company w.e.f. 1.11.2008 for which formal 
order has been issued by the Govt. on 29.05.2009. 
14 Insurance coverage in line of CGEGIS 
15 SPMCIL medical benefit scheme 
16 The leave salary liability shall be borne by the Government. 
17 All the absorbed employees shall be confirmed in SPMCIL 
18 Payment of bonus to the employees as applicable to CPSUs 
19 Central Pool Accommodation 
20 Rationalisation of Incentive Scheme in the establishment of 
SPMCIL 
21 The officers and employees in the pay -scales of Rs.6500 -10500 
shall be liable for transfer to any of the units. 
22 Payment of Overtime as per Factories Act. 
23 The Recruitment Rules of the Corporation should not adversely 
affect as were prevalent during the Government time. 
24 Formation of a structure in SPMCIL on lines of JCM  
25 Anomaly in pay-scales arising out of implementation of Vth CPC  
26 Pending Court Case of out of Court Settlement  
27 Continuation of Night Shift  

18 
 
28 Payment of Electricity and Water Charges at actuals  
29 Formulation of Scheme of Lumpsum Compensation in lieu of 
Compassionate Appointment 
30  a.) Three additional increment not absorbable in future 
increase of pay (i.e. with cumulative effect) 
 b.) One time Lumpsum payment of Rs.3500/- 
31 Voluntary Retirement Scheme  
32 Review of Security Requirements  
 
 Most of the issues as agreed and incorporated in the memorandum of 
settlement have been settled and pending issues are being implemented 
amicably in consultation with the stake holders.” 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER-III 
PERFORMANCE 
 
POLICY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.1 On the policy of the Government for circulation of currency notes and coins, 
RBI stated in a written reply as under:- 
“As per Section 22 of the RBI Act,1934, the RBI has the sole right to issue 
bank notes in India.  Regarding coins, under Section 6 of the Indian Coinage 
Act,1906, the coins are coined at the Mints for issue under the authority of the 
Central Government which in turn are lifted by the RBI from the Mints  for  
circulation. 
 
INDENTS 
3.2 According to the information made available by SPMCIL, t he details of 
production of  currency notes printed, circulation coins minted, other security 
products manufactured  and paper production are indicated below:- 
 
  PRODUCTION  in Million Pieces [mpcs] / Metric Ton [MT]  
Currency Printing Presses  
 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
CNP, NASHIK 2402 2750 3477 
BNP, DEWAS 2241 2370 2667 
INDIA GOVERNMENT MINTS 
IGM, KOLKATA 144.3 663.84 1150.16 
IGM, MUMBAI 262.29 659.39 1188.88 
IGM, HYDERABAD 221.9 626.51 920.59 
IGM, NOIDA 49.34 428.64 1196.27 
SECURITY PRINTING PRESSES 
ISP, NASHIK 423.7 438.48 415.67 
Postal items 88.1 105.4 126.04 
NJSP 182 168.28 155.81 
Passport 5.7 5.34 8.29 
Misc. Security Items 147.9 159.46 125.53 
SPP, HYDERABAD 560.1 489.5 473.2 
Postal items 374.6 305.2 295.3 
NJSP 164.7 153.3 155.5 

20 
 
Misc. Security Items 20.8 31 22.4 
SECURITY PAPER MILL 
SPM, HOSHANGABAD  (In MT) 2706 2283 2032 
 Note:- Production figures are in  Million pieces/ Metric Tones 
 
                   The planned vis -à-vis actual production during the last three years was 
as under:                                                                        
          (Quantity in Mpcs/MT) 
PRODUCT 2006-07  2007-08  2008-09  
  Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual 
Currency 4600 4643 5100 5120 6250 6144 
Coin 700 677.83 1950 2378.38 4550 4455.9 
Passports 6 5.7 6 5.34 7 8.29 
NJSP 432.3 346.7 346.98 321.58 330.53 311.31 
Postal Items 421.8 462.7 497.16 410.6 406.88 421.34 
Misc. 
Security 
Items 190.2 168.7 192.76 190.46 134.52 147.93 
Security 
Paper (in MT) 2946.8 2706 2303.3 2283.6 2765 2032.17 
 
3.3 Explaining the reasons for the shortfall in the Planned vis -a-vis actual 
production during the last three years, the Company furnished the following:- 
a) There has been uneven demand projection from RBI during last 5 years in 
respect of coins.  
b) In the case of currency notes demand has been met. Minor shortfall during 
2008-09 was due to late receipt of currency paper from imported sources. 
c) In the case of coins during 2008 -09, it could not be achieved due to lack of 
capacity of the mints. Huge demand of coins has been projected for 2007 -08, 
2008-09 and 2009-10.  It was decided to add capacity after getting some firm 
assurance from the RBI about l ifting of increased no. of coins for atleast 5 
years. It took some time and then procurement and installation of machines 
took some more time. Now machines are getting installed and capacity has 
been added in this year. 
d) Production of passport has been achieved by deploying additional resources.  
e) The Security Paper Mill is more than 40 years old and necessity exists to 
increase significantly currency and security paper production. Setting up of 
one new line at SPM, Hoshangabad and another paper mill in Joint  Venture 
with BRBNMPL at Mysore is under consideration.” 

21 
 
 ORDER BOOK POSITION 
3.4 When asked about the constraints, if any, being experienced by the Company  
in receiving orders, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
a) Company receives firm orders from its clients namely Ministry of Finance, 
Reserve Bank of India, Ministry of External Affairs, Department of Posts, other 
Government of India Departments and State Governments.  
b) Demand projection of coins and currency notes are done by RBI. For coins, i t 
has been highly uneven during last few years.  
c) The demand of postal items and stamps are coming down. Further, State 
Governments often raise indent for stamp papers without advance part 
payment and do not lift the material on production.  Some States hav e 
introduced full or part e -stamping e.g. Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Maharashtra 
which has led to reduction in demand of stamp papers. 
d) Since it is necessary to have sufficient machine capacity and human 
resources to meet production requirement, therefore the c apacity when 
created needs to be optimally utilised. Difficulties have been faced in this 
regard due to highly unpredictable nature of demand more so when SPMCIL 
has to give priority to its existing government users. This is a handicap in 
diversifying to manufacturing other security products.” 
 
3.5 Explaining the difficulties being experienced by SPMCIL due to subsidized 
cost of Postal Products, the Company in a written note stated as under:-  
“Due to the Government Policy to restrict price of some Postal p roduct in 
Public interest, SPMCIL is facing losses as the payment by postal deptt. are 
restricted to the capped prices, though the production cost of these products 
is higher. SPMCIL has requested to be paid the actual cost plus profit as it is 
now a commercial entity and its performance is monitored through MOU.” 
3.6 To a question about the efforts being made to improve its order book position, 
the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Indents are given by Government of India, Organizations and Sta te 
Governments which are decided by factors beyond the control of SPMCIL.  
That is why the company has started exploring the possibility of taking up 
assignments which have not been traditionally done by it e.g. printing of 
degree certificates for IGNOU, m anufacturing of medallion for various 
organizations, printing of currency note for Nepal Rashtra Bank etc.  The 
corporation will be looking for printing currency for other countries through 
competitive global bidding once sufficient indigenous bank note pa per is 
available.” 
 3.7 Adding further, the CMD, SPMCIL during the evidence before the Committee 
stated as under: 
 “We are trying to diversify in the security presses like for Excise Label we 
are in touch with the  State Excise Departments. It is a big busi ness for us. 
The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  has 
introduced us to the warehousing receipts, which is a negotiable instrument 
and a security product. We are going in for them. We are going in for the 
University Degree Certifi cates; we can add the security features. We are 

22 
 
trying to diversify as far as our security product is concerned. But one of the 
big business po tentials for us in this is the E -passport because the present 
demand which was 50 lakh passports is now projected  to be 2 crores per 
annum after two years” 
 
CAPACITY UTILISATION 
3.8 As per the information made available, t he capacity utilization in production/ 
manufacturing of major products against their licensed/installed capacity  during 
2008-09 was as under:  
Capacity Utilisation for Major Products 
PRODUCT UNIT INSTALLED 
CAPACITY 
2008-09 
% 
UTILISA-
TION IN 
2008-09 
REMARKS 
CURRENCY mpcs 3950 157 
More utilisation of 
capacity has been 
achieved through 
deployment of 
manpower on Over time 
basis and through 
payment of pr oductivity 
linked incentive. 
Further, staggered 
lunch hour working has 
also been attempted. 
 
COINS mpcs 2560 174 
Security 
Printing 
Products 
(ISP) 
 
SPU 5950 157 
Security 
Printing 
Products 
(SPP) 
 
SPU 3700 149 
Note: - The Security Printing Presses can use sheet fed or web fed machines for making a 
product depending upon nature of printing and number of colours in printing. The production 
output is converted on the basis of man hour effort required into Standard Product Units 
(SPU) to assess productivity.  
  
3.9 When desired to know h ow the installed capacity of the each of the units 
presently functioning under SPMCIL was originally arrived at and what factors were 
taken into consideration at the time of fixing such install ed capacity for major 
products, the Company in a written note stated as under:-  
“The nine units under SPMCIL were established at different point of time for 
meeting the currency/coin and other security product requirement. For 
example, mint at Mumbai was established in 1829 and Noida Mi nt was 
established in 1988. BNP, CNP, ISP and SPP were established in 1973, 
1928, 1925 and 1982 respectively. The units had less automation and the 
process was labour intensive. Thus, the capacity was depending more on the 
manpower efficiency. With the red uction of manpower due to 

23 
 
superannuation, the processes were modernised in a phased manner 
wherein the capacity depended on the machine efficiency. With the 
machines becoming old, the actual capacity reduced further. The production 
of coins/currency/securi ty products is depending on the indenters who are 
primarily RBI/state Governments/ MEA etc. Due to inconsistency in the 
indent, the capacities were either under utilised or have to be over utilised by 
extra working hours/incentive to workmen. For example, RBI projected a 
requirement of 9050 mpcs coins in the year 1998 -99 and nil requirements in 
2005-06.The following factors were considered at the time of fixing of said 
installed capacity: i) Operating Machine Speed , (ii) Machine Availability, (iii) 
Rejection Percentage, (iv) Actual Utilization of Man power, (v) Effective Man-
days, (vi) Working Hours, and (vii) Working efficiency 
3.10 On being asked what initiatives have been taken by the Government to 
strengthen SPMCIL to optimize its production capacity to the fullest extent, the 
Ministry in a written note stated as under:-  
“Government has agreed  to provide “support to the Corporation to the tune of 
Rs. 1200-Rs.1500 crore as per need, in the form of equity or any other form, 
for the modernization and capac ity upgradation of the existing plants and 
machineries, for making units of SPMCIL competitive” as per the tripartite 
agreement signed between the Government, SPMCIL Management and 
Unions.” 
3.11 When desired to know whether any assurance has been accorded to SPMCIL 
for sourcing Security products, the company in a written note stated as under:- :  
“The Government has committed in MoS that it will make efforts for the full 
exhaustion of the capacity of SPMCIL. The extract of clause 7 of the MoS is 
as under:  
 The production target shall be given to various units of SPMCIL according to 
the existing capacity as demonstrated by their past performance. Efforts will 
be made by corporation to get more work orders through marketing or other 
such means so that optimum  capacity utilization can be achieved.  
Government also assures that requirement of products being made by 
SPMCIL, will not be sourced from any outside organization without utilizi ng 
the full capacity of SPMCIL. 
 Entities like RBI and Department of Posts sh ould make maximum efforts to 
procure their requirements from SPMCIL.” 
  
SYSTEM OF FORECASTING 
3.12 According to the information furnished by SPMCIL, Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) does the forecasting for the supply of currency and coins based on its 
statistical formula and this requirement varies from year to year. As an example for 
the coinage in the year 1998-99, there was approximately 9000 mpcs of indent and it 
was zero in the year 2005 -06. With this type of variable forecasting the whole 
machinery/ resou rces at SPMCIL remains idle or are not able to produce the 
projected requirement unless RBI gives a long -term forecasting for at least five 
years. It is not possible to invest in machinery and manpower by SPMCIL which may 
either go waste or may be underuti lized. SPMCIL has raised this issue both with the 

24 
 
RBI and with the Government (Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance). 
The Ministry has already taken up this issue with RBI to enter into a five years MoU 
with SPMCIL so that SPMCIL can plan fo r investment in machinery, manpower and 
technology. 
3.13 While making the comments on  the above, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under:-  
“Ministry agrees with above information and difficulties experienced by 
SPMCIL due to erratic and highly  variable forecasting. RBI has been 
requested to project its demand for production of currency notes and coins for 
five years at a time.” 
3.14 When asked about the methodology RBI adopts for forecasting annual 
requirements of currency notes and coins and t he specific reasons for substantial 
variations in the projected requirements in each year of the year during the 
preceding decade, the RBI in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Reserve Bank of India arrives at the requirements of banknotes and coins on 
the basis of the projections based on long term 'relationship' of notes in 
circulation with macro economic variables like GDP, inflation, soilage, 
technology advancement like advent of other modes of payment and 
settlement like Credit/ Debit cards.  Withdrawal plan of certain series of notes, 
are also factored in the indent, whenever required. The value of projected 
banknotes in circulation is then apportioned to different denominations based 
on the trends of past 'Issue."  
3.15 As regards the variation in projections, the representative from the RBI during 
the evidence stated as under:-  
“there was definitely a wide variation in 2003 -04 vis-à-Vis 2002-03 that was 
because there was huge and unexpected demand of 500 rupee denomination 
for the ATM machines.  That  went up from 700 million pieces to 1,500  million 
pieces.  It is almost doubled. Another major variation happened in 2008 -09 
vis-à-Vis 2007-08 when there was increase in demand because of the 
withdrawal of 500 rupee denomination, old series.  This also alm ost doubled 
from 1,800 to 3,500 billion pieces.”  
3.16 The Committee have been informed  that the indent for currency note as 
divided between SPMCIL and BRMNMPL by Reserve Bank of India is 60:40 ratio.   
On being asked about the basis  on which these indents are placed in the ratio of 
60:40 between SPMCIL and BRBNMPL, the RBI stated in the written reply as 
under:- 
“Based on the above parameters our Department of Statistical and 
Information Management works out the projections of the requirements of 
banknotes. Based on the said projections, RBI finalizes the indent for the year 
by strategic management of the denomination keeping in view the production 
capacity of the presses. Allocation is made based on the production capacity 
of the presses managed by SPMCIL an d BRBNMPL. Production Capacity of 
SPMCIL and BRBNMPL are as under :  
SPMCIL  
Dewas  - 2400 million pieces.  

25 
 
Nashik – 2700 million Pieces.  
BRBNMPL  
Mysore and Salboni - 9600 million Pieces.” 
 
3.17 On being asked as to when BRBNMPL was established and what 
necessitated its formation when the units for currency note printing were already 
functioning under the Ministry of Finance, the RBI in the written note stated as 
under;- 
“BRBNMPL was set up on February 3, 1995 as a fully owned subsidiary of 
RBI.  It's presses at Mysore commenced production on June 1, 1996 and   the 
press at Salboni on December 11, 1996. The main reasons for establishing of 
BRBNMPL are under: 
  
a) Demand for bank notes : As per RBI projections, the circulation and 
replacement requirement of  the currency/ bank notes was expected to 
increase from 13430 million notes in 19 87/88 to 28791 million notes in 
1995/96. Assuming that by 1995/96 Re.1 and Rs2/ - notes would be 
completely replaced by coins, the demand for bank notes was expected to 
rise to 17211 million notes by 1995/96.  
b) Existing capacity : The Currency Note Press at Nashik and Bank Note 
Press at Dewas were then producing 6500 million pieces in 2 shifts of 11 
hours each with incentive. But this practice of working 11 hours continuously,  
was against accepted industrial working practice and habit forming over -time 
working, had to be discontinued. Steps were being taken to modernize the 
presses and work in two shifts of 9 hours each. The expected production with 
9 hours working was 6050 million notes.  
c) Justification for two New Note Presses :  After modernization the 
Currency Note Press at Nashik,  would have reached its optimum capacity of 
production 4400 million pieces with the manning strength of 5500.  It was  not 
feasible to expand b eyond this, for the reasons of security and constraints in 
infrastructural facilities. Expansion of Bank note Press Dewas beyond the 
capacity of 1650 million pieces was not feasible for severe constraint of water.  
Most viable alternative therefore was to set up new production capacities. It 
was proposed to set up two presses with total capacity of 9950 million notes. 
This along with the existing presses could meet the demand for 16000 million 
notes by 1995/96. The shortfall of 1211 million notes could be m et from the 
two New Note Presses by introducing suitable group incentive schemes. 
Initially the Ministry of Finance had decided to set up two bank note press at 
Mysore(Karnataka) and Salboni(WB). However, adequate fund were not 
allocated in the plan for th ese projects due to resource crunch.  Later RBI 
suggested to the Government that two bank note presses may be set up 
under aegis of RBI and Government approved the prop osal in November, 
1989.” 

26 
 
3.18 To a question about the installed capacity of BRBNMPL in e ach year during 
the first five years of its inception as well as during the preceding five years , the RBI 
in the written reply stated as under:- 
“The installed  capacity of both the presses ( Mysore and Salboni) was 
envisaged as 9950 Million Banknotes / 2 Sh ift running. Accordingly 
machineries were procured, commissioned and installed at these two places. 
Presently the company is able to produce 9000 million pieces in single shift 
operation basis (both the presses put together) and 18000 -19000 million 
banknotes in two shift operations ( both the presses together). This has been 
achieved through business process re engineering, which has resulted in up 
gradation of process and production parameters.” 
3.19 When desired to know about the criterion  followed by the  Government while 
placing annual indents on SPMCIL and BRBNMPL for printing of currency notes, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Indents are distributed among BRBNMPL and SPMCIL on the basis of 
available capacity and past track record of p roduction as agreed by RBI, 
BRBNMPL and SPMCIL in production planning meeting convened by the 
Ministry.” 
 3.20 In the written reply, SPMCIL has furnished the details of quantum of currency 
units indented by RBI and actually printed by BRBNMPL and the Curre ncy notes 
printing units of Ministry of Finance, (subsequently SPMCIL)in each of the years 
from   2003-04 in the following tabular form :  
 
 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10* 
Quantum 
of 
currency 
notes got 
printed 
by RBI.   
Indent Actual  Indent Actual  Indent Actual  Indent Actual  Indent Actual  Indent Actual  Indent Actual  
Total 
Indent  
17300 13166 14855 12593 15000 7001 11500 11473 12700 12745 15250 15225 16800 11775 
Share of 
BRBNM
PL 
11950 8101 9925 7971 9100 4307 6900 6830 7600 7625 9000 9081 10100 7197 
Share of 
SPMCIL  
5350 5065 4930 4622 5900 2694 4600 4643 5100 5120 6250 6144 6700 4578 
*Data as on December 2009.  
3.21 To a query w hether Ministry of Finance had taken up the issue of varying 
projections/uneven annual demands  of currency notes and coins with RBI , the 
Ministry in a written note stated as under:-  
“Matter has been taken up with RBI during production planning meetings. RBI 
has assured to look into the mechanism of forecasting of currency notes and 
coins. For ente ring into MoU for five years at a time with SPMCIL formal 
response from RBI is still awaited.  RBI have now informed that they are 
examining the issue.” 
 
 

27 
 
DISPOSAL OF IMPAIRED MACHINERY 
3.22 When desired to know about the steps  being taken for   safe disposal of 
impaired assets particularly after the Telgi scam in 2003, the CMD of the Company 
during the evidence explained as under: .   
“We have a Central Stamp Depot in Nashik.  The stamp papers  from the 
factory are transported to CSD.  T hey initially used to  be despatched them.  
Now, they are despatched under security and taken over by  the customers.  
The customer comes, takes custody of the consignment alongwith security is 
despatched. Earlier the State Governments used to give indents without any 
commitment.  There was  a rolling indent going on.  The indent used to be 
about fifty crore pieces for the indent.  At that time, the Government decided, 
after the Telgi scam in 2003, the State Governments must give 30 per cent 
advance with the stamp paper so that they do their diligence about the stamp 
paper needed.   
3.23 Further elaborating, the CEO of the Company stated as follows: 
“Thereafter the procedure order, which has been issued, is that basically a 
committee is constituted  for disposal of machinery.  The machine parts are 
destroyed by pressing or by gas cutting and the dyes etc., are defaced. Only 
then, the parts are auctioned. In fact, in Nashik, since I joined in March, I saw 
there is a huge hall filled with machinery. Nobody has touched the machinery 
for disposal because of Telgi scam. Nobody wants to touch it.”  
3.24 On being asked about the monitoring mechanism adopted at the time of 
discarding or actually dismantling the machineries , the Secretary of the DEA stated 
as under:  
 “……after the Telgi Scam a  decision was taken that no machinery would be 
discarded or dismantled. So, as of now that process is frozen. These 
machines, even when they become dysfunctional, are not dismantled or 
discarded. “ 
Export/Import 
3.25 According to the information furnished by SPMCIL, the financial performance 
of the Company during the last three years: 
 
*  Being the first year of operation only revenue budget was prepared. 
Year 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
 Budget* Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual 
Turnover 1096.52 1513.3 1605.02 2004.2 2463.44 2339.02 
Profit/Loss -99.62 268.38 150.08 199.70 342.90 433.83 
Dividend paid to 
the Government 
- NIL- - NIL- -NIL- - NIL- -NIL-  -NIL- 
Internal Generation 
of resources 
-99.62 268.38 
 
150.08 199.70 
 
342.90 433.83 

28 
 
• Due to VI pay commission recommendation expenses increased in 2007-08. 
• Due to proposed modernization of the units, surplus has been retained. 
• Downward Price revision of coins has resulted in reduced turnover than the 
budgeted figure during 2008-09. 
 
3.26 Giving a note on the export/import performance of the company indicating, 
inter-alia, the names of the countries to which exports/imports were made, the value 
of export/imports during each of the last three years and efforts made by the 
Company to augment the exports and reduce the imports, the Company in a written 
reply stated as under:- 
“In its major initiative to procure order for printing currency for foreign country, 
Currency Note Press, Nashik has succeeded in receiving order for printing 50 
million pieces of bank not es of the denomination of Rs. 10/ - of Nepal Rashtra 
Bank (NRB) through competitive global tender.   Recently, the company has 
also been successful in getting the order for the printing of Rs.100 currency 
notes for Nepal Rashtra Bank.  India Government Mint, Noida minted 450 
mpcs one Baht coins of Thailand and also 10 mpcs 25 peso coins for 
Dominican Republic.  Export has been to the tune of Rs.0.88 crores, Nil and 
Rs.4.96 crores during 2006 -07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively. Company 
imports almost entire r equirements of paper for currency, passport and high -
value stamps from France, UK, Germany, Sweden, Italy, Netherlands, 
Switzerland and Slovenia. Machines and other capital goods have been 
imported from Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Italy, Netherlands, Si ngapore 
and France.   Efforts have been made to use indigenous raw material to 
reduce the imports.  Being the security products, the alternatives available are 
limited. Value of imports of capital goods, raw materials and other stores 
during last three years are given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
3.27 According to the information furnished by SPMCIL, the foreign exchange 
earnings & outgo during the last three years was as under;- 
 
SI. 
No 
Nature of Foreign Exchange 
Outgo  
2006- 
07 
2007-
08 
2008- 
09 
1. Plant and Machinery 5.09 29.65 64.41 
2. Raw Material  357.96 328.81 625.58 
 3. Stores & Spares etc. 12.13 35.78 68.22 
 Total 375.38 394.24 758.31 

29 
 
(Rs. in Crores) 
SI. 
No Nature of Foreign Exchange Earnings 
2006-
07 
 
2007-
08 
 
2008-
09 
 
1. Export of Thai Baht Coins 0.88 - - 
2. JOB Work PESO Coins - - 0.06 
 
3. Sale of Bank Notes to Nepal Rashtra Bank  - - 4.88 
4. Total 0.88 - 4.95 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SI. 
No Nature of Foreign Exchange Outgo  
2006-
07 
 
2007-
08 
 
2008-
09 
 
1. Capital Goods 5.09 29.65 64.41 
2. Raw Material  357.96 328.81 625.58 
 
3. Stores & Spares 
11.92 
 
      
33.72 61.27 
4. Components & Spare parts 0.21 1.26 6.04 
5.  Foreign Travel 0.20 0.80 1.01 
6. Total 375.38 394.24 758.31 

30 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
FUNCTIONAL MATTERS 
CAPITAL STRUCTURE 
4.1 About the investme nt made by the Government, t he Company in a written 
reply stated that paid up capital of the company is Rs.5 lacs.  After corporatization all 
assets and liabilities were transferred to the company.  However, value and nature of 
assets has not been finalize d therefore, capital structure does not represent the true 
picture of asset base of the company. There is no investment from any other source 
other than Government of India  
4.2 When asked about the precise reasons for non -finalization of the nature and 
the value of assets transferred to the company after corporatization, the Company in 
a written reply stated as under:- 
“SPMCIL submitted its proposal of finalization of assets after obtaining its 
board‟s approval. However, it was observed that assets were no t physically 
verified and audited by the auditors hence SPMCIL was asked to get the 
assets verified and audited. As each unit has a major capital base and was 
working as a departmental unit under the coins & currency Division under this 
Ministry before cor poratisation, a detailed exercise has been undertaken in 
each unit of SPMCIL in last two years for the identification of the impaired 
Fixed Assets and Dead Stock by the Auditors . Non-finalization of the nature 
and the value of assets transferred to the Com pany after corporatization were 
primarily due to reason that at the time of the corporatization, transfer of 
assets were made on book value based on records prepared on single entry 
system without any detailed verification of Assets and Stock. As Fixed Ass ets 
form the capital base of a company, hence it was necessary to record the 
correct value of Fixed Assets less accumulated depreciation.  SPMCIL was 
asked to furnish the audited value of the Impaired Assets, dead Stock and 
overdue Debtors for taking approp riate decision in the matter. Exercise has 
been undertaken in each unit of the SPMCIL. After this exercise by SPMCIL, 
the proposal has been received by DEA and the Ministry is processing the 
proposal to finalise the capital structure.” 
4.3 When sought to k now whether any direction has been issued by t he Ministry 
to complete this work in a time bound manner, the Ministry in a written note stated as 
under:  
“Non-finalization of the nature and the value of assets transferred to the 
Company after corporatization were primarily due to reason that at the time of 
the corporatization, transfer of assets were made on book value, based on 
records prepared on single entry system without any detailed verification of 
Assets and Stock. As Fixed Assets form the capital bas e of a company, 
hence it was necessary to record the correct value of Fixed Assets less 
accumulated depreciation.  SPMCIL was asked to furnish the audited value of 
the Impaired Assets, dead Stock and overdue Debtors for taking appropriate 
decision in the matter. Exercise has been undertaken in each unit of SPMCIL. 
After this exercise by SPMCIL, the proposal has been received by DEA and 
the Ministry is processing the proposal to finalise the capital structure.” 
 

31 
 
SUNDRY DEBTORS 
4.4 As on 31.03.2009, an amount  of Rs. 836.31 crores is outstanding against 
various sundry debtors.  When sought to know whether the Government has issued 
any directions to the various Government Departments/RBI/State Governments to 
clear the outstanding debts of the SPMCIL in a timely manner, the Ministry in a 
written note stated as under:-  
“The Status of Sundry Debtors as on 31.03.09 is as follows:  
 
(Gross amount in Rs. Crores) 
Ministry of External Affairs 196.86 
Deptt of Posts 156.86 
Ministry of Finance 51.05 
Ministry of Defence 15.6 
National Savings Organisation, Nagpur 44.84 
State Governments 230.64 
RBI 92.02 
Other Central/State Govt. Departments 48.44 
Total 836.31 
 
Matter has been taken up at different levels and in different meetings. RBI has 
cleared significant amount of old and current dues. MEA is not able to clear all 
the dues due to inadequate provision in the budget. MEA has been asked to 
enhance their budget for the current year and formulate budget estimate for 
next year as per actual requirements. Regarding stat es, matter has been 
taken up in the meeting of State Secretaries and follow up is also being done. 
Further this matter is proposed to be taken up in the ensuing meeting of Chief 
Secretaries of States with the Cabinet Secretary. For settlement of old dues 
pertaining to Department of Posts, a committee has been constituted to 
finalize the cost of products manufactured by SPMCIL.” 
 4.5 According to the information furnished by SPMCIL, the majority of the 
outstanding debtors are the State Govts. for the NJSP an d other stamps. As per the 
directions of the Govt. of India the supply of the NJSP and other stamps to the State 
Govt. can not be stopped because scarcity in the market leads to the potential for 
introduction of fake stamp paper as happened in Talegi scam.    On the other hand, 
the State Governments do not clear the dues of SPMCIL with the result the debtors 
of SPMCIL are increasing year after year.  As on 31.03.2009 there is an amount of 
Rs.230.64 crores lying with various State Govts. The debtors increase working 
capital costs of SPMCIL. Govt. is seized of this issue and will put up institutional 
mechanism to see that the outstanding dues from the state govts. are cleared timely 

32 
 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (CSR) 
4.6 When asked to give details about the  initiatives that have bee n taken by the 
Corporation to discharge its corporate social responsibility during the last three 
years, the Company in a written reply stated as under: 
“SPMCIL has  formulated its Corporate  Social Responsibility policy to delive r 
benefits to society at large in tune with the philosophy of Central public sector 
enterprise. As per MOU signed with the administrative ministry for the year 
2009-2010 an amount of Rs 2 crores has been earmarked for CSR. In the 
earlier years units were s houldering the CSR by promoting education, 
community development, medical facilities, drinking water, fire brigade 
services etc. but no specific head of account was earmarked.  The details of 
activities under taken and expenditure incurred so far during 200 9-10 is as 
under:  
 Activity Expenditure (In 
Rs.) 
Ambulance has been provided to Nashik Accident 
and Medical Emergency (NAME) foundation a  non 
profit organisation on Public Private Partnership 
model with aim of providing speedy evacuation of 
accident/medical emergency Patients to a hospitals 
free of cost 
Rs.  10,17,000 
The annual running cost of the Ambulance for one 
year. Rs. 6,00,000 
Prizes to the Winner of the Post card writing 
competition organised for the Children across the 
country on the theme th at “ Gandhiji writes a Post 
Card” on  any issue of current topic of interest   
Rs. 2,16,260 
Financial assistance to the Palse Gramin Vikas 
Mandal, Nashik for construction of school building at 
Nashik. 
Rs. 10,00,000 
Total Rs. 28,33,260 
 
4.7 When asked wh ether anything has been done as corporate social 
responsibility for the adjoining communities and poor villages around the projects of 
the Corporation, the CMD of the Company during the evidence stated as under: 
“I surely agree; we have not been doing as p roactively what you have said 
for the adjoining communities and poor villages…”….. 
  
  SECURITY SYSTEM 
4.8 It is seen from Annual Report 2008 -09 of SPMCIL that at present, CISF looks 
after security arrangements of six units and security of remaining there units is 
entrusted to State Police Guards/Departmental Security. CMD, SPMCIL has 
intimated that keeping in view the national security perspective; all these units have 

33 
 
been advised CISF security. According to him, these units face competition in terms 
of t heir selling pricing from various quarters where such expensive security 
overheads are not required. He has further stated that the Ministry of Finance may 
reimburse the security expenses on these units so that SPMCIL could function as a 
competitive business unit. In this context, please state:  
4.9 When sought to know w hat security arrangements were put in place in the 
nine Departmental Units before their corporatization and how the expe nditure on this 
account was met, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Five Departmental Units before their Corporatization were provided security 
by CISF and remaining four had security arrangements through State Armed 
Police of the respective States. Their expenses were borne by the Ministry of 
Finance through budgetary allocation, for the respective units.” 
4.10 When further asked whether the CISF security was made available to some of 
these units before their corporatization , the Company in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“Yes, five units are made available CISF security before Corporatization and 
their expenses were being met through budgetary allocation for the respective 
units.” 
4.11  When asked to justify its proposal for reimbursement of security expenses by 
the Ministry of Finance when such expenses are  borne by other Public Sector 
Undertakings themselves, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
“SPMCIL is engaged in the production of the Coins and Currency which is a 
sovereign function along with the printing of Passport, Postage stamps etc. 
Being a matter of national importance, it faces probable threat perception and 
seen as potential targets by anti -national elements. Hence, SPMCIL does not 
have independent say on the deployment of security in units and has to go by 
the directions of the secu rity and intelligence agencies and State 
Governments:.  
 Further Clause 32 of MoS states that -Security requirements of all units 
will be reviewed by the Security Audit Agency of the Government including 
shifting to electronic security/surveillance system f or inner portion of the 
premises of the units.” 
Secondly about 95 % of the Production in SPMCIL depends on the Indent 
placed either by the Central/State Government or Government departments. 
At times due to substantial reduction in indents by RBI/ Govt. agencies lead to 
idling of the resources and hence increase in overheads and affect the 
viability/ profitability of SPMCIL. Further SPMCIL is expected to meet with the 
substantial and sudden increase in indents. This creates a very unusual 
position for SPMCI L which is not faced by other PSUs.   Further increased 
security expenditure makes SPMCIL products uncompetitive when it 
competes internationally as its competitors are not required to have similar 
security set up.  Hence SPMCIL has requested the Govt. to s upport in the 
security overheads.”  
 4.12 About the difficulty being faced due to Security Clearance from M inistry of 
Home Affairs, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 

34 
 
“At present, the tenders for supply of security products and machinery for the 
security products is issued only after obtaining the MHA/IB clearance.MHA 
needs to lay down the guidelines for security clearance in consultation with 
DEA so that the competition is not reduced and process of indigeniza tion is 
not affected adversely.” 
   
 TAXATION MATTERS 
 4.13 The Company in a written note informed the Committee as under:  
“Before corporatization of SPMCIL the units were exempt from payment of 
excise duty, customs and local taxes on various items. After formation of 
SPMCIL the same uni ts are being asked to pay various taxes and tax 
authorities are issuing demand notice in this regard. For most of the products 
of SPMCIL, Govt. is the ultimate consignee.   A request is pending in Ministry 
of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue  to maintain the status qou  ante on Central 
taxation issues. The important taxation issues are as follows:- 
a) Excise Duty on Security paper and Security Ink. 
b) Excise exemption on Coins and other material supplied to Govt of India. 
c) Custom duty exemption on raw material in making of security paper and 
import of capital machinery for the same.  
d) Custom Duty exemption on one time import of Currency presses, which 
was provided to RBI Presses in 1998. 
e) Exemption from payment of local taxes by State Govts. 
A meeting at the level of Finance secretary and Secretary Revenue has taken 
place and it was agreed to exempt taxes on products wherever govt 
departments are the consignees.  Deptt. of Revenue is working on the 
proposal of SPMCIL and the anomalies are likely to be resolved soon.” 
4.14 When sought to know the stand of the Government with respect t o the 
aforesaid taxation issues, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:- 
“A meeting at the level of Finance secretary and Secretary Revenue has 
taken place and it was agreed to exempt tax es on products wherever govt 
departments are the consignees.  Deptt. of Revenue is working on the 
proposal of SPMCIL and the anomalies are likely to be resolved soon.” 
 
MINI-RATNA STATUS 
4.15 The Committee have been informed  that the Government has committ ed the 
financial support of Rs. 1200-1500 crores for the modernization & up gradation of the 
SPMCIL to make it competi tive nationally and internationally. But recently, a letter 
has been received by SPMCIL from DPE that if above support is given to SPMCIL;  
the status of Mini -Ratna status will be withdrawn unless the support is in Nation al 
interest.  
 In this regard, SPMCIL stated as under:- 
 “It is the contention of SPMCIL that by its hard work in the last three years it 
has been successful in obtaining Min i Ratna status. SPMCIL is a profitable 

35 
 
company with positive net worth. The support being given by the Ministry is a 
part of its commitment to Unions so as to bring SPMCIL to a level playing field 
in competing with its competitors nationally (like BRBNMPL)  and globally. 
Some of the units in SPMCIL are running with 30 -40 years old outdated 
machinery. Therefore the support to be given by the Govt. is part of 
corporatization initiative and is not related to the losses of SPMCIL etc. 
SPMCIL is a progressive pro fitable entity and the support of the Govt. 
commitment should be honored without affecting the Mini Ratna Status. DEA 
is seized of this matter and issue shall be resolved to fulfill the Tripartite 
agreement without affecting the Mini Ratna Status of SPMCIL.” 
4.16 Justifying the demand of the SPMCIL, the Secretary, DEA during his 
deposition before the Committee stated as under: 
“The issue was raised on the mini -ratna category status of the company and 
the problem which the Department of Public Enterprises is creating in terms of 
according of that status due to the fact that the Memorandum of Settlement 
when the Corporation was created, provided that the Government commits 
itself to providing a certain amount of money every year for a certain period of 
time so that the Corporation‟s future activities and their need to improve their 
capital equipment does not suffer. We are very clear in our views that this is 
not the kind of normal support which the Department of Public Enterprises 
does not like undertakings to get from the Government. This is not in terms of 
charity; this is not in terms of any assistance without which they cannot 
operate. Therefore, we have taken up with them and we hope to be able to 
make that Department see reasons so that the status which t hey have got 
and which gives them enhanced flexibility is not taken away from them.”  
 
MODERNIZATION 
 
4.17 When desired to know whether there is any proposal to modernize and 
upgrade facilities in the Company, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Post Corporatization, modernization and upgradation is a continuous 
process at SPMCIL. The following major activities are in process:  
Currency Printing Presses: 
Replacement of one line of printing machine at BNP is under consideration. 
Replacement of two more lines of printing equipments at BNP and few 
printing machines at CNP is in planning stage. 
Ink Factory, BNP Dewas:  
In order to enhance the capacity and modernise Ink Factory, procurement of 
3 Triple Roll Mills with automatic feeding system and ot her laboratory 
instruments is in process. The modernization of ink factory is targeted to be 
completed by 31/03/2010. After modernization, Ink Factory would be able to 
meet the total requirements of BNP and CNP for Quickset intaglio inks.  
Security Paper Mill 
Procurement of one Cotton Comber Continuous Processing Plant has been 
finalized and installation is in progress. As part of major modernization of 

36 
 
SPM, procurement of one line of Currency/Security paper machine is under 
progress. Further, Government ha s approved a proposal to set up a paper 
mill through a 50:50 joint venture company of SPMCIL and BRBNMPL.   
Mints 
Pickling and Polishing Lines : Purchase order has been placed for one 
number each of Fully Automatic Centrifugal Finishing Lines for IGM, 
Hyderabad; IGM, Mumbai and IGM, Kolkata whereas one each number of 
Semi Automatic Centrifugal Finishing Line for each Mint. This shall result in 
better quality of finished coins. 
Fully Automatic Integrated Sachet Packaging Line : One number each of 
Fully Integra ted Sachet Packaging Line for each mint is under procurement 
stage. After installation of the new machines, IGMs shall be able to pack all 
the coins in pouches as per the RBI requirements.” 
4.18 To a query whether the Company has adequate funds at their di sposal for 
undertaking modernization of existing facilities, the Company in a written reply stated 
as under:- 
“Company has retained surplus for modernization of existing units and 
procurement of new machines. Government of India has also committed to 
provide Rs.1200 -1500 Crores for modernization of its units as part of its 
commitment at the time of corporatization. Thus it is expected that with 
Government support, as committed, there will not be any shortage of fund for 
modernization / upgradation.” 
4.19 Regarding the current and future plans of the Company to mee t the 
advancement of technology, the Company in a written reply stated as under:- 
“The SPMCIL has taken following initiatives to keep pace with advancement 
of technology in the areas relevant to its functions: 
(i) SPMCIL makes continuous effort to keep pace with technology by taking 
part in conferences, seminars, fairs etc. Employees are deputed to 
machine manufacturers‟ premises or on -site inspection and training to 
assimilate new technology. 
(ii) A Standing  Committee of Experts headed by Dr. Baldev Raj, Director, 
Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam (IGCAR) has 
been constituted by government to recommend indigenization of security 
features. Further, any development taking place globally is als o given 
cognizance and technology is adopted by SPMCIL. 
(iii) E-passport production has started in ISP, Nashik Road. Introduction of 
Multi coloured security fibres, Electrotype Watermark and "M" feature 
has been achieved at Security Paper Mill, Hoshangabad. In t he case of 
coins, new Nickel -Brass Rs. 5/ - coin and Bi -metallic Rs. 10/ - coin has 
been introduced. 
(iv) On-line Inspection system called „NOTA SAVE‟ has been installed and 
commissioned. This equipment will help in maintaining the quality of 
Bank Note Printing. Video Spectral Comparator -5000 instrument was 
installed in Dec. 2008 for detection of Forged Indian Currency Notes 
(FICNs) providing comprehensive laboratory workstation with different 

37 
 
types of light sources of different frequencies for the examination of 
covert security features in security printing. It has high resolution imaging 
system and facilities for examining various security features. 
(v) ISP, Nashik Road has upgraded  existing  Rapida  Printing Machines  by 
adding  two printing units  and installed  t wo  Rotary Numbering 
Machines (Indigenous) for  Visa Stickers  and other documents. It has 
also installed one latest printing machine for MICR Cheque book 
printing. 
(vi) In all 18 numbers of state of art high speed Coining Presses have been 
procured and commissioned at all the Mints.  
(vii) IGM, Hyderabad, IGM, Mumbai and IGM, Kolkata have procured one 
number each of latest blanking lines which can accommodate greater 
width of coils.” 

38 
 
CHAPTER-V 
R&D AND INDIGENIZATION 
 
R&D 
5.1 About the R&D Pr ogram being followed by S PMCIL and the major 
achievements during the last three years , the Company in a written reply stated as 
under:   
a. Initiative of R&D has been taken recently  by the company 
b. Specific areas in which R & D carried out by the Company 
BNP's Ink Factory has produce d about 228 MT of Quickset Intaglio Inks and 
other security inks and all the quantity has been consumed at SPMCIL and 
BRBNMPL. 
c. Benefits derived as a result of the above R & D  
Around 20% of total requirement is being met through indigenous production 
done at Bank Note Press ink factory .  
d. Future plan of action  
To become fully self sufficient for Intaglio Inks.    
e. Expenditure on R & D expenditure as a percentage of total turnover  
There is no dedicated set up for R&D.  Expenses incurred for R&D are  part of 
regular management and production expenditure, which is negligible.  
However, for the Financial Year 2008 -09 the budgeted R&D expenditure is 
Rs.2.5 crore as per the MoU with the Ministry of Finance 
 
5.2 The Committee have been informed  that the In k factory at Dewas has 
developed intaglio ink for printing of bank notes and is also trying to develop 
indigenous varnish for varnishing of rupees five and ten notes. It has further been 
stated that there is no dedicated set up for R&D in the Company and t he expenses 
incurred on this account are part of regular management and production 
expenditure, which are negligible. However, for the financial year 2009 -10, the 
budgeted R&D expenditure is Rs. 2.5 crore as per the MoU signed with the Ministry 
of Finance. 
5.3 To a question whether the Government is contemplating steps for establishing 
a dedicated  set up for R&D in SPMCIL particularly when substantially high 
expenditure is being incurred on import of raw materials , the Corporation in a written 
reply stated as under: 
“A Standing Committee of Experts having representation from users, 
renowned scientists from various Govt. Laboratories/Academic Institutions as 
well as Ministry has been constituted in past to steer R&D efforts. The 
Standing Committee of experts  in its one of the meeting has recommended 
for setting up of a laboratory at the national level, besides setting up second 
tier R&D in the units of SPMCIL and BRBNMPL. In the meantime it has been 
decided by the Govt. to re -constitute the committee having e xperts from 

39 
 
eminent professional, scientific and academic institutions. The 
recommendations of the earlier committee shall be examined by the 
reconstituted committee and actions taken thereafter. The  Government has 
also set up another Co mmittee to review t he practices , process and 
procedures regarding procurement of security sensitive items, such as, paper, 
ink and security features.  The terms of reference of the committee inter -alia 
include laying down the road map for setting up institutional R&D set up to 
indigenize all the security sensitive products relating to manufacture of 
currency.  The report of the committee is expected before the end of 
February, 2010. 
5.4 It is seen from the information furnished that the value of imports of raw 
materials during the last three years has been substantially high touching a figures of 
Rs. 625.58 crores in 2008-09.  In this context, when asked to explain the reasons for 
outsourcing of paper, ink and machinery, the Chairman,  SPMCIL during the 
evidence stated as under: 
“Since Independence, …, there was only one paper suppl ier, De La Rue  of 
the United Kingdom, to this country till mid 1990s.   Thereafter, there was a 
shortage of currency.  I think, in 1996 -97, currency was imported by RBI.  At 
that time, about four to f ive suppliers came into the picture.  …..  Presently we 
are having six paper suppliers of the world, who are practically the suppliers 
to the whole world.  About 30 per cent of the total supply of paper to the world 
is consumed by India.   We had one securi ty paper mill in Hosh angabad, 
which was set up in 1967, and the machineries are forty years  old.  The 
modernisation of that mill  is already in progress.  The pulping plant is at the 
advanced stage of commissioning.  Its present capacity is about 2,700 MT. In 
total…. it is about 12 to 15 per cent.  The annual consumption of paper is in 
the range of 18,000 MT today, and there we  are producing about 2,00 0 MT.  
The rest is all imported from six sources…….. 
 As far as ink is concerned, practically there are two suppliers in the 
world…. There is practically one major supplier in the world, i.e. M/s. SICPA.  
They have set up one factory in India, which is in Sikkim, where they produce  
the intaglio and the offset inks .   There is one particular ink, which is called,  
OVI, which is used for Rs.500 and Rs.1,000 notes, where the numerals are 
written, that is, colour shifting.  That is imported from their plant from 
Switzerland.  Practically ….they are the sole supplier to the world including 
USA and other countries.   As far as machinery for manufacture of paper and 
machinery for our coining presses, again there are very limited sources.  
Since we had gone for installation of one paper mill in Hoshangabad, we got 
two offers through global tender ; one is M/s Voith from Germa ny, which is 
about 85 per cent supplier to the world, and another is G&D of Germany, who 
is also paper supplier and also currency supplier to the other European 
countries.  These are the limitations.”   
  
5.5 On being asked how it is ensured that the suppliers of the paper and ink being 
limited in number do not supply the same products to the adjoining country or to any 
other country, the CMD, SPMCIL during the evidence before the Committee stated 
as under: 

40 
 
“Please be rest assured, whatever agreements we ha ve with the suppliers, 
the Government is a party to it, the RBI is a party to it. There is an exclusivity 
agreement by the supplier that that product cannot be supplied to the 
adjoining country or to any other country. So far, to our knowledge, where we 
entered into agreements, no case has come from the Intelligence agencies 
where these suppliers have supplied the same product to neighbouring 
countries. But, if a Government wants to counterfeit the note of another 
Government nobody can prevent it. If I prin t the note of Nepal, I did not need 
anything. I have all the resources. So, it is the political will which the 
Government has to take.”  
5.6 On being asked  what efforts aimed at indigenization have been initiated by 
the Government to reduce dependence on p rocurement of imported raw materials 
like paper and ink from the monopolistic supplier of the world and to promote import 
substitution for future in view of the perceived threat of the counterfeiting of Indian 
currency at large scale in the recent times , the Company in a written note stated as 
under: 
“Regarding production of paper, a joint venture company of SPMCIL and 
BRBNMPL is in process of being constituted . It will have its plant at Mysore 
within BRBNMPL premises with capacity to produce currency paper  to take 
care of requirement of currency paper which SPMCIL will not be able to meet 
through its plant at SPM, Hoshangabad.  Replacement of one line of security 
paper manufacturing machines at SPM, Hoshangabad is under procurement 
process.  Moreover, insta llation/ commissioning of a new stock preparation 
plant at SPM, Hoshangabad is underway as replacement of old pulp making 
plant.   Regarding production of ink, proposal of capacity enhancement and 
modernization of ink factory BNP, Dewas has been approved a nd SPMCIL is 
in the process of implementing it”. 
5.7 Adding further, the Chairman, SPMCIL during the evidence before the 
Committee stated as under:  
“As far as the ink is concerned, we are already modernising the Ink Factory 
and a substantial part of the i nk will be produced in -house. But still, till the 
time we are able to take care of the optically variable ink,  that will continue to 
come from that side.   About the other security products, of course, there are 
so many firms in the world – there is thread, M-feature, optical fibre etc. which 
we do not see as a common person. They are called the covert features 
which are only known when you see under ultraviolet light in the forensic lab. 
For those features, as on date, we are dependent upon the firms in the  world 
who are monopolistic and they supply. Maybe, in the years to come, once we 
have our R&D centre we will have it.”    
5.8 On R&D efforts by SPMCIL, the Secretary, Ministry of Finance during the 
evidence stated as follows: 
“SPMCIL has taken significant  steps to meet the challenges relating to 
technological innovation and put in place a continuous system for 
modernisation and upgradation of its activities. It has started activities in the 
crucial area of research and development with the overall objectiv e of 
indigenising major security products within a medium timeframe.” 
 

41 
 
 
5.9 When asked to specify the constraints encountered to augment the ink and 
paper production by the Company, the Secretary, DEA stated during the evidence as 
under: 
“We do not have the capacity. We just have one mill at Hoshangabad which is 
a very small capacity mill. We are now in the process of upgrading it. This 
effort has gained momentum in the last four -five years, particularly after the 
Corporation was set up and focus was given on this area in relation to 
security aspects. We are upgrading that capacity but there the scope to 
increase capacity is limited. It may not be the most efficient way. So, the 
exercise has been in the pipeline. Initially the attempt was that SPMCIL 
should set up a joint venture with some international entity to produce the 
paper here because they have technology and we do not have the 
technology. We need somebody to produce that paper. That had gone 
through a long and complicated process. The end result was  that it was not 
very successful. So, now the SPMCIL and the Reserve Bank got together and 
they are setting up at Mysore  a paper mill which will take this production 
capacity much higher. The detailed feasibility report, shareholders‟ 
agreement, etc, are i n the process  of finalization . So, the idea is that we 
become self -sufficient in this. I will come to the roadmap a little later. The 
security presses are producing only 250 million tonnes of intaglio ink which 
represents 25 per cent of the total consumpti on. On the currency paper it is 
10 per cent.  So, we need to have a much higher level of indigenisation so 
that the threats in this regard are minimised. Recently the Finance Minister 
has set up a Committee. This is a Committee of outside experts – retired 
Secretary, who was in Defence Procurement and who has done lot of 
procurement – reviewing the entire gamut of practices, procedures in relation 
to procurement and finalisation of sensitive security items relating to currency. 
One of the important terms of  reference of the Committee is to suggest a 
roadmap for progressive indigenisation of these inputs. The Committee is 
expected to give its report in the next month or so. Based on that, we would 
finalise the roadmap, work relating to setting up of R&D facil ities, either in  
SPMCIL or BRBNMPL.” 
  
5.10 When asked why large scale replication of the technology can not be 
imported, the Secretary, DEA during evidence stated as under: 
 “That is also not easy because they do not wish to easily part with technology 
knowing that they will lose this lucrative market. So, there is a problem”.  
  
5.11 To a question as to why capacity in terms of machine, manpower and 
technology can be augmented having developed our own technology for ink 
production, the Secretary, Departm ent of Economic Affairs during the evidence 
stated as under:  
“For that we have developed our own technology. Intaglio is a propriety ink 
which is produced by few firms internationally. But we have produced our own 
model for producing the ink. But the cons traint here is the capacity in terms of 
machine, manpower and in terms of large scale replication of the technology. 
So, when you want a large scale production of the same ink, there has to be a 

42 
 
quantum shift in the technology being used. So, we have not m ade that 
breakthrough. While we can do it in the modest scale, we cannot do it in the 
large scale. That is our present problem, but we are grappling with it and we 
expect that in the next year or so we will drastically step up the production. “  
 
OUTSOURCING 
5.12 During the deposition before the Committee, the CMD, SPMCIL informed that 
during 1996-97, the country had to outsource its printing of currency notes to meet 
the currency note requirement of country . In this regard,  when asked w hether 
Government re sorted to outsourcing of printing of currency notes to any outside 
organization/ country in any of the years during the previous two decades , the RBI in 
a written note stated as under:-  
“Yes – Government of India resorted to printing of 2000 million piece s of Rs. 
100 and 1600 million pieces of Rs. 500 during the period 1997 -98 to meet the 
increased demand and to act as buffer The details are as under : 
 
Rs. 100  denomination : 
  
(i) American Banknote Company(USA)          - 635 million pieces 
  (ii) Thomas De La Rue, UK   - 1365  million pieces     
 
Rs. 500 denomination : 
 
Giesecke  & Devrient Consortium(Germany) - 1600 million pieces.” 
 
5.13 When asked to give the reasons for outsourcing, the RBI in a written note 
stated as under:-  
„In the year 1996, average monthly demand from various offices of RBI was 
6000 crores due to partly rise in notes in circulation(NIC) and partly due to 
bad conditions of the notes. The annual rate of growth of NIC , which was 12 -
15% till 1990 increased to 17%. Supplies by Govt. pres ses aggregated 
around 34-43% in pieces and 25-30% in value during 1993-94 -1996-97(April-
Sept.).Taking into account requirement of fresh notes in terms of value  was 
expected to go up to Rs. 102000 crore in the year 1999 -2000.Production 
schedule of the not es presses vis -a-vis Bank's requirement for the years 
1996-97 to 1999-2000 were  as under: 
 
                   Demand for/Supply of bank note        (Rs. in Crore) 
 Supply  96-97 97-98 98-99 99-00 
Dewas  15920 21920 21920 21920 
Nashik 9700 9700 19765 29830 
Mysore  2500 2500 14850 19800 
Salboni  700 700 5050 19800 
Total  28820 34820 61585 91350 
Requirement  67500 78000 88400 102000 
Shortfall  38680 43180 26815 10650 
 
 Requirement    =  Rs. 335900 Cr. 
Total Production       = Rs. 216575 Cr.  

43 
 
(Requirement – Production)= Approx. Rs. 1,20,000 crore.          
 
As more than 50% of the notes in circulation comprised of Rs. 100/ - and Rs. 
500/- notes, the shortfall of at least Rs. 75000 had to be bridged, and a buffer 
was also to be created for future years. A ccordingly RBI proposed to 
Government of India to import banknotes to the extent of Rs. 1,00,000 crore 
(value –wise) in the denominations of Rs. 100 and Rs.500/- Govt. of India had 
conveyed the approval of Cabinet for RBI's proposal. 
  
5.14 In reply to a q uestion about the security measures adopted during such 
printing of currency notes abroad and its tra nsportation to India, the RBI in a written 
note stated as under:- 
 “As per the tender document following measures were envisaged: 
Controls : The overseas p rinters were required to supply certain number of  
specimen notes of each denomination for examination by RBI(so as to check 
they confirm with approved note design). The RBI also had the right to 
inspect all the Banknotes/ sheets for quality, cut, numberin g and other 
aspects of the manufacturing process at any time before delivery.    
Accounting:  
(i)The printers were required to provide piece to piece input tally with the 
product delivered at each operational stage including trial printed sheet 
stage. The same were to be checked by the representative of the RBI 
periodically.  
(ii) The manufacture of plates was to  be properly accounted.  
(iii) The spoilt sheets, notes or watermark  paper, the plates, film, etc used / 
unused in printing  were required to be securely stored and destroyed in the 
presence of RBI's representative. a certificate  to that effect to be furnished 
to RBI. 
Secrecy  
(i) Printers were required to undertake to keep the design, the   security 
features, the quantities manufactured and any o ther information concerning 
the supply strictly confidential. Such undertaking was to be in perpetuity and 
to survive the contract.  
(ii) The printers were required to make required number of plates in the 
presence of RBI's representative and all other  ma terial so made available 
(for plate making)to  be returned immediately.  
 (iii) The plates were to be numbered and kept under the custody of the printer 
who would intimate the representative of RBI whenever any new plates was 
used. The first sheet of the p rinting was to be approved by the representative 
of RBI/ GOI.  
Security Arrangements.  
The printers were responsible for maintaining the utmost secrecy of all special 
features of the notes during and after the execution and termination of the 
contract. The  printers were required to manufacture the plates/notes under 

44 
 
strict security conditions to the satisfaction of RBI/GOI .  The printers were to  
undertake the responsibility of the safe keeping of photo prints, progressives, 
dies, plates, numbering boxes, e tc and printed rejects in sheet  form and 
notes form and the numbering boxes which were to be returned free of cost to 
RBI/ GOI  duly insured. Any and every information supplied for execution of 
the order was to be  kept secret and not divulged to any othe r party without 
the specific written approval of RBI/ GOI. Tender was to be awarded on the 
strict assumption that that tenderer shall be solely responsible for any breach 
of security in relation to the job and there shall not be any sub contracting of 
the work. 
Shipment.  
Shipping consignment from U.K/(European) Continent were arranged though 
the Government of India's Forwarding Agents M/s Schenker  & Co, Ham burg. 
In case of shipment from other ports, the shipment were to be arranged  by 
Indian flag vessels only. 
The following Security features were introduced: 
        Rs. 500                                  Rs. 100 
(1) Perfect Register    (1) Perfect Register            
(2) Micro print           (2) Micro print 
(3) Water mark(new)    (3) Water mark (new) 
(4) ID mark               (4) ID mark 
(5)Cross Lines           (5)Cross Lines 
(6) Intaglio                (6) Intaglio   
(7) Windowed Security thread       (7) Windowed Security thread  
    
 CHALLENGES OF COUNTERFEIT NOTES 
5.15 When asked whether any assess ment about the quantum of fake currency 
has been made, the RBI in a written note stated as under: 
 “No such assessment has been made by Reserve Bank of India”. 
5.16 In this regard, the CMD, SPMCIL during the evidence before the Committee 
stated as under:  
“The information which some MHA sources and some agencies have been 
quoting that quantum of counterfeit currency notes is Rs.1,69,000 crore. The 
CBI Director had been quoted and he had given it  to Ministry of Finance that 
he has been misquoted.  There was one committee, Nayak Committee, which 
had projected the total currency in circulation to the 169000 crore in year 
2000.  In the recent report of Mrs. Usha Thorat, who is the Deputy Governor 
of RBI, what  they have given is that as far as the counterfeit no te detected in 
the system is concerned, there used to be about three to five pieces in a 
million pieces, which has now risen to eight, after the Dumariaganj incident in 
UP where a lot of notes were found in one of the banks‟ ATM. It has risen to 
eight pieces per million pieces now.  

45 
 
5.17 Regarding the quantum of fake currency in circulation, the representative from 
the RBI during the evidence has put it as under: 
“This is not more than about 0.001 per cent of the total notes. In terms of 
value, the value of  fake currency seized and recovered during the last few 
years is: Rs.8.39 crore in 2006; Rs.10.54 crore in 2007; Rs.25.79 crore in 
2008; and Rs.14.08 crore up to September in the calendar year 2009.”  
5.18 With regard to the operational role of SPMCIL in c hecking the counterfeit 
currency in the country , the CMD, SPMCIL, during deposition before the Committee 
stated as under:-  
“…….counterfeit matter remains with the Government. I am basically their 
vendor.” 
5.19 When asked about the specific steps taken by the Government to detect the 
counterfeit currency in the country, the Chairman of the Company stated as under: 
“As far as counterfeit detection part is concerned, it remains with the MHA, 
the law enforcement agency. As far as design part is concerned, we h elp the 
Ministry. But ultimately the recommending authority is the Board of Directors. 
They decide and the Government of India approves. In fact, in case of 97 
series, 2005 year additional features were added in those notes, particularly 
of higher denomination because they are the potential ones for counterfeiting, 
namely Rs.1000 note, Rs.500 note and Rs.100 note. You hardly find or there 
is negligible counterfeiting in Rs.50, Rs.20 or Rs.10.The Government had 
introduced additional security features in 2005. Taking a cue from the fact that 
counterfeit note was in the news for the last two or three months, a Standing 
Committee of Experts from the Ministry, from CBI, from IB, from the National 
Security Council, from RBI, from SPMCIL and BRVNL is already sittin g, and 
the sub-committee has already recommended for short -listing of the features. 
The Members will be going to few of the laboratories for testing and thereafter 
these features will be sent by the Ministry of Finance, from that Committee to 
the RBI, and the Board of Governors of RBI will recommend to the Ministry 
and it is approved by the Finance Minister. Then, the new series will start 
production with new features which normally takes, after approval, a time of 
about 12 -18 months because you have to cha nge all the design, the seals 
and in some cases the machinery changes have to be done by the supplier. 
So, this is likely to be introduced, maybe, anything between 2011 and 2012 to 
take care of the concern of the Members about fake currency.” 
5.20 On being asked to elaborate on the role of RBI in addressing the menace of 
counterfeiting in the country, the RBI in a post evidence reply stated as under:-  
 “Counterfeiting is a law and order issue and RBI‟s role in addressing the 
menace of counterfeiting lies i n improving the security features of the 
currency notes, putting in place a system where all such notes making entry 
into  banking channel are promptly detected and raising the awareness level 
of all users particularly, members of public…………….” 
 5.21 When asked about the mechanism (Administrative and Technical) devised to 
cope up with the challenges of counterfeit currency in circulation in the country 
keeping in view the fact that any delay in responding technologically to the 

46 
 
challenges of counterfeit cur rency may threaten the very financial security of the 
country, the RBI in a written note stated as under:-  
   “Reserve Bank of India has initiated the following steps in this regard. 
 All currency chest branches of banks (and certain identified non -chest 
branches which are close to international borders or have heavy cash 
transactions) have been equipped with Note Sorting Machines to detect 
and curb the circulation of counterfeit notes.  
 The Reserve Bank has been coordinating with the investigating agencies  
as well as State police authorities for information sharing. State Level 
Committees headed by Director General of Police involving all agencies 
concerned have been formed to deal with the issue of counterfeiting.  
 Forged Note Vigilance Cells have been for med at all the banks to pay 
focused attention to counterfeiting.  
 New security features/ new designs in the banknotes in all denominations 
were introduced in 2005 -06, incorporating improved anti -counterfeiting 
design and security features.  Process has been  initiated for bringing in 
further improvement in this regard. 
 RBI has initiated the process of withdrawal of old series currency notes 
keeping in view the stronger security features available in notes from 
subsequent series(s). A withdrawal plan was submi tted to GOI and 
according to the plan, steps have been initiated to remove from circulation 
bank notes of Rs. 500 denominations MG (1996 and 2000) series printed / 
circulated before 2005. The process for this was initiated in July 2008 and 
October 2009 respectively. 
 A High Level Group had been constituted by RBI to look into the System 
and Proc edure for Currency Distribution . The Group has submitted its  
Report in August 2009 and various recommendations of the group for 
combating the menace of counterfeitin g are in different stages of 
implementation. 
 RBI on 19 November 2009, has issued a directive in this regard under 
Section 35A of BR Act, 1949 to all scheduled banks directing them that 
banknotes in denominations of Rs. 100 and above should be re -issued by 
banks over their counters or through ATMs only if these banknotes are 
duly checked for authenticity/ genuineness and fitness by machines. For 
this purpose, banks should (i) use such machines in all their bank 
branches having average daily cash receipts of Rs. 1 crore and above by 
March 2010 and (ii) use such machines in all their branches having 
average daily cash receipts between Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. 1 crore by March 
2011. 
 A High Level Technical Committee of Experts was constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary(EA) to review the security features 
of currency notes. Technical sub -committee constituted by the High Level 
Technical Committee shortlisted the security features proposed by the 
various firms and submitted the report to the High Tech nical Level 
Committee. Subsequently, a review committee has been set up to review 
the whole gamut of processes, practices and procedures being followed 

47 
 
for procurement and finalization of security sensitive items relating to 
currency e.g., ink, paper, equipment and security features.   
 Setting up of vigilance by the Border Security Force and Custom 
authorities to prevent smuggling of fake notes. 
 A High Level Committee headed by the Union Home Secretary comprising 
officials from central agencies and other po lice officials has been 
constituted to monitor and draw up a comprehensive strategy to combat 
counterfeiting of currency notes. Similar bodies have also been set up in 
different States. In addition, Government of India have nominated Central 
Bureau of Inve stigation as the nodal agency to monitor investigation of 
fake currency notes.  
5.22 To a pertinent question about the  remedial steps taken or proposed to be 
taken to educate the people through press or electronic media to protect them from 
counterfeit currency, the RBI in a written note stated as under:-   
“The following remedial steps have been taken by the RBI – 
 The Reserve Bank regularly conducts training programmes for 
employees of banks and other organizations handling bulk quantities of cash 
like Railways etc. as well as police authorities.  
 As a part of the public awareness campaign, the Reserve Bank has 
placed on its web site extensive information on security features of Indian 
banknotes. 
 Posters on „Know Your Banknotes‟ are also displayed at bank 
branches. RBI in collaboration with banks is regularly organizing awareness 
programmes for members of public in all parts of the country. 
 A film on „Know Your Banknotes‟ got prepared by RBI through Films 
Division, has been supplied across our Issue offices/ Currency Chests, public 
utilities, theatres and other media for screening.  
 A joint awareness campaign with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs has 
been launched in print and electronic media under the 'Jago Grahak Jago' 
series. 
   RBI has initiated the proces s of multimedia mass awareness campaign 
for further raising public awareness on features of genuine banknotes. This 
campaign is expected to be launched during the current quarter and will last 
one year.” 
5.23 In this regard, the representative from the RBI  during the evidence stated as 
under: 
“As regards media campaign, the RBI has been taking many steps; we have 
been doing our best. Films have been made; they have been distributed to 
banks and used in campaigns ; we have Jago Grahak which is under the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs. Currently we are engaged with a professional 
media consultant who will sit with us and we will decide about a very major 
media campaign to create awareness, especially amongst the people who are 
illiterate and poor, through TV, thr ough vernacular newspapers. We are trying 
that; next year, we will have it.”   
 

48 
 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
INTRODUCTORY 
 The Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL) 
was incorporated on 13 January, 2006  in pursuance of a decision taken by the 
Government  to corporatize four mints, four presses and one paper mill earlier 
functioning under direct control of the Ministry of  Finance as industrial 
departmental organizations.  All these nine units are working  in a security 
sensitive area and engaged in producing coins, currency notes, non -judicial 
stamp papers, other security products,  postal stationery, stamps etc. 
Although SPMCIL is still in its infancy, the Committee have undertaken 
comprehensive examination of the working of this Corporation with an added 
focus on the  alarming magnitude of the problem of counterfeit currency notes 
in circulation in the country and the efficacious role SPMCIL is expected to 
play to deter counterfeiting in the area of bank note printing.  
 Explaining the rationale for setting up of SPMCIL by way of 
corporatization of the departmental units, the Secretary, Ministry of  Finance 
informed the Committee during evidence that there was a feeling that these 
departmental units needed  to operate with greater functional flexibility and 
improved functional efficiency and that the departmental methods of running 
them might not be the best course.  The Committee have also been informed 
that the corporatization of the mints, security presse s, etc. was recommended 
earlier by the Expenditure Reforms Commission in its Report dated 23.12.2000 
and it was realized on subsequent review of functions and performance of 
these units that the main constraints in the system of keeping the units as 

49 
 
Government entities were low productivity, obsolete technology, outdated 
financial systems and procedures besides delay in responding technologically 
to the challenges of counterfeiting.  Accordingly, the Government appointed 
Industrial Finance Corporation of In dia (IFCI) Ltd. as consultant to study the 
working of these nine units and present a feasibility report for their 
corporatization.  The report presented by the IFCI was accepted by the 
Government and a decision was taken to form SPMCIL by taking over all t he 
nine security presses/mints/security paper mills. The Committee are, however, 
constrained to find that while the subject matter of  changeover  of these nine 
units from departmental entities to corporate entities was being deliberated  
for a fairly long  time,  no simultaneous efforts appear to have been made to 
discern the issues  relating to manpower planning and capital structure that 
would be required to run the production units under the new corporate 
structure. The net result is that SPMCIL is still  in the process of settling these 
issues despite being in existence for over four years . While doing so, the 
Committee would like to caution the management not to resort to any arbitrary 
methods in regard to the aforesaid matters . The Committee have dealt with 
some such aspects alongwith issues related to the working of the Corporation 
in succeeding paragraphs of this Report. 

50 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
MANPOWER PLANNING 
 The Committee have been informed that all the Government employees 
functioning under the ni ne departmental units were treated as on `deemed 
deputation‟ to SPMCIL after the corporatisation of these units was effected in 
February, 2006.  The Committee‟s examination however, reveals that in the 
absence of any perspective manpower planning, the Comp any had to 
admittedly, go through a critical phase during 2008 -09 because of 
uncertainties prevailing over the issue of en -masse transfer of Government 
employees to the rolls of the Company as some unions and associations of 
the employees were initially op posed to the process of corporatization. The 
fact that a tripartite agreement on absorption of Government employees in the 
Corporation could be reached with the Government, SPMCIL and the Unions 
only in September, 2008 is a clear indicator that the issue o f deployment of 
manpower in the Corporation was not fully analysed in its entire ramifications 
before conceptualising corporatisation of the departmental units.  The net 
result is that optimization of manpower is yet to be achieved as is evident from 
the f act that about 2000 employees as on 31 March, 2009 are still awaiting 
deployment by the surplus cell even after the report of National Productivity 
Council has brought out that the expenditure on manpower in SPMCIL is on 
higher side. Closely connected are the issues relating to recruitment of skilled 
manpower, formulation of appropriate Recruitment and Service Rules, 
establishment of appropriate Industrial Relations Machinery (IRM) suitable for 
a multi -unit Corporate entity  and inculcating corporate work cu lture and 

51 
 
training of employees to meet the challenges of advanced technology besides 
new financial systems introduced after corporatiza tion.  While taking due 
notice of the initiatives taken by the Government through tripartite agreement 
to address the ap prehensions of the employees in new set up, the Committee 
wish to strongly impress upon the management to pay focused attention 
towards all aspects of streamlining the management systems consistent with 
the requirement of multi unit Corpo rate entity, job- specific skill development 
and training needs of the employees working in a Corporation engaged in 
security sensitive area.  The Committee further recommend that Recruitment 
and Service Rules may be finalized without further delay and no shortcut 
method of engaging retired officials on contract basis be resorted to.   They 
would like to be apprised of the precise steps taken in this regard.  

52 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
INDUSTRIAL RELATION MACHINERY 
 The Committee appreciate that a provision in the tripartite agre ement 
has since been incorporated for formation of a structure in SPMCIL on lines of 
Joint Consultative Machinery.  In order to meet the genuine aspirations of the 
employees working in different units, the Committee recommend that all the 
necessary steps s hould be taken to expeditiously put in place an effective 
industrial relation machinery (IRM) to take care of the teething problems which 
are generally experienced on corporatization of Government industrial units.  
In this regard, the Committee desire tha t the workers and all the unions 
functioning in the units of SPMCIL should be taken into confidence and 
actively involved on the modalities of constituting such Joint Consultative 
Machinery.  

53 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No.3  
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP 
 The Committee note  that except functioning under the control and 
directions of corporate office, the present organizational setup in all the nine 
production units of SPMCIL continues to be same as was in place when these 
units were functioning as departmental organizations under the direct control 
of Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) in the Ministry of Finance.  Although 
SPMCIL is reported to be still working out a proposal on  study on the 
organizational set up and the vision and the mission for the Corporation for 
the next ten years  by inputs from the professional consultants, the Committee 
are in no doubt that this issue requires priority attention on the part of the 
management for putting in place the requisite corporate structure in the 
production units.  The Committ ee, therefore, desire that the proposed studies 
on the organizational set up in SPMCIL should be undertaken and completed 
at the earliest with a view to achieving  the envisaged objectives of operational 
flexibility fostering efficiency and higher productivity in the production units. 

54 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
CAPITAL STRUCTURE 
 Outdated financial systems were one of the important factors for 
corporatization of the departmental units. The Committee however,  note that 
the capital structure of SPMCIL does not re flect the true picture of its asset 
base as the value and nature of assets transferred to the Corporation has not 
yet been finalized.  This delay has been attributed primarily to the reasons that 
transfer of assets from the departmental units at the time o f corporatization 
was made on book value without any detailed verification of assets and stock.  
Although the Ministry of Finance is reported to be processing the proposal to 
finalise the capital structure on the basis of a detailed exercise undertaken by 
SPMCIL to record the correct value of assets in each unit, the fact remains that 
unduly longer time has been taken to settle such an important issue having 
direct bearing on the capital base of the Corporation.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that an ear ly decision on the correct valuation of assets 
transferred to the Corporation should be taken so as to present the financial 
status of the Corporation in right perspective.  

55 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
SUNDRY DEBTORS 
 The Committee are concerned to note that SP MCIL is encountering 
various problems in realizing its outstanding dues which are stated to be 
increasing year after year. Such dues stood at Rs.836.31 crore as on 31 March, 
2009.  The information furnished in this regard reveals that the entire dues 
pertain to Central/State Governments and RBI and majority of these 
outstandings are to be realized from various State Governments (Rs.230.64 
crore), Ministry of External Affairs (Rs.196.86 crore) and Department of Posts 
(Rs.156.86 crore). The Committee‟s examination has brought out that while the 
matter of realization of outstanding dues from various State Governments has 
been taken up in the meeting of State Secretaries and the same is being 
followed up, the Ministry of  External Affairs is inexplicably not able to clear its 
outstanding dues because of inadequate provision in its budget. What is more 
surprising is the fact that a committee is reported to have been constituted to 
finalise the cost of products manufactured by SPMCIL for the purposes of 
settlement of old dues pertaining to Department of Posts. The Committee wish 
to emphasise that the burden of growing sundry debtors has an adverse 
bearing on working capital costs of SPMCIL. The Committee strongly 
recommend  that the Ministry of Finance  should inter vene in the matter to 
help SPMCIL in realization of its outstanding dues by exerting influence on the 
defaulting departments of the Central and State Governments. 

56 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
PAYMENTS FOR POSTAL STATIONERY 
 Yet another area which has engaged the attention of the Committee 
relates to incurrence of losses by SPMCIL on account non -payment of actual 
cost of production of postal stationery.  The Committee have been informed 
that  the production cost of certain items of postal stationery is high and  th e 
payments for manufacturing such stationery are restricted to capped prices 
due to Government policy to restrict the price of these products in public 
interest.  While giving due credence to Government policy in the matter, the 
Committee recommend that wa ys and means should be evolved to ensure 
payment of atleast actual cost of production of such items so that the 
commercial interests of the Corporation are not compromised.     

57 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
TAXATION MATTERS 
 SPMCIL has informed the Committee that its production units were 
earlier exempted from payment of excise and custom duties as well as local 
taxes on various items, when these were functioning as departmental 
organizations.  However, the same units are now being asked to pay various 
taxes by the  authorities who are issuing demand notices after corporatization 
of these units. According to SPMCIL, Government is the ultimate consignee 
for most of its products and it has been agreed to in a meeting at the level of 
Finance Secretary and Revenue Secret ary to exempt taxes on products 
wherever Government Departments are the consignees.  It  is also noticed 
from Memorandum of Understanding (2008 -09) between SPMCIL and Ministry 
of  Finance  that the Government also stand committed to provide assistance 
in persuading State Governments for exemption from payment of VAT, entry 
tax etc., available to the production units prior to its corporatization.  While 
appreciating the positive view taken in this matter, the Committee desire the 
Ministry of  Finance to take  requisite steps with due promptitude keeping in 
view the specific role assigned to SPMCIL in producing security products for 
public use.  

58 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
 DELAY IN LIFTING NJSP 
 The Committee have been informed that the directions by Government 
stipulate that six months stock of printed stamp paper has to be held for the 
requirement of State Governments and that the supply of such papers cannot 
be stopped because it has the potential for introduction of fake stamp papers 
as happened in Tel agi case. T he Committee‟s attention  has however,  been 
drawn towards the delay in lifting  the non judicial stamp papers by various 
State Governments leading to piling up of huge stocks in the Corporation and 
consequential high working capital costs. The Committee a re of firm view that 
sound business principles should always be the guiding factors of any 
commercial entity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that appropriate 
measures should  be taken by the Ministry of  Finance to take up this issue 
with the State Go vernments concerned in the best financial interests of the 
Corporation. 

59 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
CAPACITY UTILISATION 
 Interestingly, tall claims have been made by SPMCIL that its capacity 
utilization as against the installed capacity for major products incl uding 
currency notes and coins ranged from 149 per cent to 174 per cent during 
2008-09.  The Committee do not find any merit in the assertions made by the 
Corporation that more utilization of capacity had been achieved by means of 
deployment of manpower on  overtime basis and through payment of 
productivity linked incentive besides reducing the rejection percentage, 
machine down time and better control after corporatization.  On the other 
hand, the installed capacity in various units does not seem to have be en 
calculated on a scientific  basis giving due consideration to operating machine 
speed and actual utilization of man hours.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that SPMCIL should undertake a thorough review for rationally 
assessing its installed capacit y in each unit and take effective steps to ensure 
optimum utilization of capacity so assessed.     

60 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
DISPOSAL OF IMPAIRED MACHINERY 
The Committee note that the procedure order stipulates that the parts of 
the impaired machinery should be auctioned only after the machine parts are 
destroyed by pressing or by gas cutting  and the dies etc. are defaced.  
However, the process is reported to have been frozen and no dysfunctional 
machinery is presently being discarded or dismantled in pursuanc e of a 
decision taken after the Telagi scam.  The Committee feel that the present 
policy of  preserving the impaired machinery in the premises is not only 
fraught with danger of theft but may also lead to over accumulation besides 
huge expenses on its secu rity.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that 
SPMCIL should immediately undertake the safe and irreversible disposal of 
impaired machineries lying with the Corporation.  This is a matter which 
cannot be procrastinated due to the hazards that have been mentioned.  

61 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
SECURITY EXPENSES 
  A suggestion has been received by the Committee from the CMD, 
SPMCIL that the Ministry of Finance may reimburse the huge security 
expenses being incurred by the production units of the Corporation whic h is 
engaged in production of currency and coins which is a sovereign function.  
The Committee are in agreement with the plea made by SPMCIL that it does 
not have any independent say in the matters of deployment of security in its 
units and has to be guide d  by the directions of the intelligence agencies and 
the State Governments due to probable threat perception as potential targets 
by anti national elements.  In the opinion of the Committee,  reimbursement for 
security expenses claimed by SPMCIL seems to be justified as the magnitude 
of security deployment in the various units of SPMCIL is largely in the hands 
of the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Finance should favourably consider reimbursement of security expenditure  
incurred by the units of SPMCIL so as to facilitate functioning of these 
strategic business units.  

62 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 
 The Committee feel that the corporatized industrial units must show 
their commitment to the cause o f social responsibilities towards people 
around the area of their operation. The Committee have been informed that 
SPMCIL has formulated its corporate social responsibility policy in tune with 
the philosophy of Central Public Sector Enterprise and earmarke d an amount 
of Rs.2 crore for the purpose as per MoU signed with the administrative 
ministry for the year 2009 -2010.  The Committee‟s examination has however, 
revealed that the Corporation has incurred a meagre expenditure of Rs.0.28 
crore to provide assis tance mainly for an ambulance and construction of 
school buildings at Nasik. During evidence, the CMD, SPMCIL admitted that 
the Corporation had not been proactively doing for adjoining communities and 
poor villages. The Committee feel that the public secto r undertakings being 
the extension of the State have a moral responsibility to discharge their social 
obligations. The Committee, therefore, desire SPMCIL to do some 
introspection to take initiatives for welfare of the society at large.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise action taken in this regard. 

63 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
 ERRATIC INDENTS FOR COINS AND CURRENCY 
 The Committee note that SPMCIL is primarily dependent upon RBI and 
various other departments of Central/State Governments for its operational 
performance.  The Corporation is however, stated to be experiencing 
difficulties in optimizing its capacities particularly because of uneven demand 
projections for currency notes and coins by RBI.   The Committee have been 
informed during their examination that RBI did not place any indents for coins 
during the years 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 and the same were suddenly increased 
to 3485 million pieces in 2007 -08 and to 5900 million pieces in 2008 -09.  
Substantial variations in projected annual req uirements of currency notes has 
also been noted. Whatever may be reasons for uneven demand projections for 
currency and coins, the fact remains that such uncertainties in indents and 
lack of firm commitment for producing currency and coins put unwarranted 
pressure on the production planning and deployment of resources committed 
for printing of currency notes and minting of coins.  In the light of the candid 
admission by RBI that it is possible for them to project `approximate‟ demand 
for production of curre ncy notes and coins in advance for the next five years, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of  Finance should clinch 
the issue with RBI by impressing upon them to project their indents for 
currency notes and coins five years in advance so t hat the capacity of  each 
unit of SPMCIL is neither kept idle nor overburdened due to uneven annual 
demands nor difficulties experienced in meeting the increased demands as 
had happened in 1996 -98 when the Government of  India had to resort to 
outsourcing of printing of currency notes to foreign agencies.  

64 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
OUTSOURCING OF PRINTING OF CURRENCY NOTES 
 The Committee are aghast to note that the RBI had outsourced the 
printing of notes to three foreign countries in the year 1997 -98.  The 
Committee was informed that 2000 million  pieces of 100 rupee denomination 
and 1600 million pieces of 500 rupee denomination of notes were outsourced 
for printing at (i) American Banknote Company (USA) – 635 million pieces; (ii) 
Thomas De La Rue, UK – 1365 m illion pieces (100 rupee denomination) and 
Giesecke & Devrient Consortium (Germany) – 1600 million pieces (500 rupee 
denomination), amounting to a sum of Rs. One lac crores.  On further inquiry 
the Committee was also given to understand that such outsourci ng of the 
printing of notes was not done either prior to 1996 or after that.  The reasons 
such as (a) the bad conditions of the notes and (b) the „soilage‟ factor etc. 
mentioned by the representatives of the RBI are far from convincing.  The RBI 
system of assessment with respect to the demands of the bank notes in the 
country has been off the mark resulting in a gap between the demand and 
supply of bank notes, but this is a factor that was constant prior to and after 
1996.  The Committee rejects the reasons  that have been forwarded for this 
extraordinary decision which is unprecedented.   
The Committee also find it pertinent to point out that during printing of 
currency notes worth 1 lakh crores in three different countries, there was 
always a grave risk of unauthorised printing of excess currency notes, which 
would have been unaccounted money.  The Committee simply wonder how 
come a decision was taken to have the currency notes printed by above -
mentioned companies in three different countries.   Logically sp eaking since 

65 
 
all the said three countries are well developed, each country certainly had the 
capability of undertaking the entire printing assignment.  In any case the very 
thought of India‟s currency being printed in three different countries is 
alarming to say the least.  During that particular fateful period our entire 
economic sovereignty was at stake. 
The Committee is concerned of the grave implications of such a move as 
it has wider ramifications in a multi faceted angle.  The danger of destabilising 
the economy by the agencies or authorities who could have misused our 
security parameters vis-à-vis printing of currency notes, the use of such notes 
which could have been printed in excess could easily have fallen in the hands 
of unscrupulous elements suc h as terrorists, extremists and other economic 
offenders, looms large in our minds.  The Committee expresses its strong 
resentment over such an unprecedented, unconventional and uncalled for 
measure.  The Committee while recommending that SPMC IL be strengt hened 
to undertake the printing and minting of the required currency notes/coins, 
fervently emphasise that outsourcing of printing of currency notes/minting 
coins should never be resorted to in the future.  
 
 

66 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY 
 The menace of circulation of counterfeit currency in the country has 
been assuming alarming proportion in the recent years. While no assessment 
of counterfeit currency presently in circulation in the country has been made 
by Reserve Bank of India, the guesst imate reported in media put such 
currency at an astronomical figure of Rs.169,000 crore floating in Indian 
financial system including official banking channels. The Committee have also 
been informed by Secretary, Ministry of Finance  that the value of fake 
currency seized and recovered has increased from Rs.8.39 crore in 2006 to 
Rs.25.79 crore in 2008 and an estimate by CMD, SPMCIL   put the figure of  
counterfeit notes at 8 pieces per million after the incident of  detection of  
counterfeit bank notes in the branch of a bank at Dumariagunj, UP. It has been 
averred before the Committee that counterfeiting is a law and order issue and 
the RBI‟s role in addressing the problem of counterfeiting lies in improving the 
security features of the currency notes, puttin g in place a system where all 
such notes making entry into banking channels are promptly detected and 
raising the awareness level of all users particularly, members of public.  
Although RBI is stated to have initiated a number of steps to cope up with the 
challenges of counterfeit currency including those taken to educate the 
people, the Committee feel that the awareness campaigns launched by RBI are 
yet to reach the common masses particularly in the rural areas where poor and 
innocent people more vulnerabl e to counterfeit currency continues to be the 
victims of this problem and are easily targeted by the anti -national elements.  
While impressing upon the Government to take appropriate steps to amend 

67 
 
the penal provisions for providing protection to such hapl ess victims, the 
Committee would like to emphasise that RBI should introduce easily 
recognizable and yet scoring high on anti counterfeiting security features in 
the design of the currency notes on the lines of advanced international 
practices.  Needless t o say that inclusion of such security features will go a 
long way in mitigating the hardships being faced by the common man.  

68 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
ROLE OF SPMCIL 
 In the context of the operational role of SPMCIL in checking counterfeit 
currency, the CMD,  SPMCIL washed off his hands during evidence stating  
“.…..counterfeit matter remains with the Government. I am basically their 
vendor”.   The Committee are surprised at this explanation coming from the 
Chief Executive of a responsible Corporate organizati on entrusted, inter alia, 
with the responsibility of providing design part of currency notes to the 
Government. In the opinion of the Committee, SPMCIL is not just a vendor but 
a Government agent equally accountable for production of an ideal currency 
which cannot be easily counterfeited.   In fact, delay in responding 
technologically to the challenges of counterfeit was one of the main 
constraints experienced in the system of keeping the departmental units 
engaged in production of currency and coins as Gov ernment entities and it 
was with this purpose that the nine departmental units were corporatized and 
placed under SPMCIL. Although SPMCIL is stated to have taken certain 
initiatives to keep pace with advancement of technology, the Corporation as 
bank note designer and printer of currency notes does not appear to have 
taken requisite technological initiatives to deter counterfeiting.    The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that SPMCIL should direct its 
efforts towards continuous design innovations co nforming to international 
standards  so as to meet the challenges of counterfeiting effectively. 

69 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
INDEGINISATION OF SECURITY SENSITIVE ITEMS 
 The Committee note that the SPMCIL presently depends on foreign 
suppliers for raw material like paper and ink to the extent of around 80 -85 per 
cent. The Committee have been informed by Finance Secretary during his 
deposition that SPMCIL “has started activities in the crucial area of research 
and development with the overall objective of indigen izing major security 
products within a medium timeframe”. The information furnished to the 
Committee however, reveals that only Rs. 2.5 crore are expected to be 
incurred during 2009 -10 on R&D for which no dedicated set up exists in 
SPMCIL. At the same time , a joint venture company of SPMCIL and BRBNMPL 
for production of currency paper is yet to be constituted and the process for 
replacement and installation of security paper manufacturing machines at 
SPM Hoshangabad is still underway. As regards the indigen ization of 
production of ink, it has been stated that the Ink factory at Dewas has 
developed intaglio ink for printing of bank notes and is trying to develop 
indigenous varnish for varnishing of Rs. five and ten notes. Although two 
different committees hav e been constituted in the past by the Government to 
steer R&D efforts and to review the procedures for procurement of security 
sensitive items, their reports are also yet to reach logical ends. From these 
facts, the Committee gather a strong impression tha t the issues of R&D and 
indigenization are not being given due attention thus making the country 
vulnerable to counterfeiting due to excessive dependence on imported 
currency paper and ink for printing of bank notes.  

70 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend th at efforts at indigenization 
brooks no delay whatsoever and need be taken up with utmost priority and 
expeditiously.  The Committee while further noting that some quantity of paper 
and security ink are being indigenously produced, feel that if we have the 
capability to indigenously produce a part of our requirement, there is no 
reason why we can‟t meet our entire needs indigenously.   
 Indigenisation of core raw material such as paper and ink for printing 
currency notes are very critical from the security p oint of view.  Once we are 
self reliant in respect of producing these core raw materials, we could to a 
great measure ward off counterfeiting and other pilferage with our valued 
currency.   
 The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Finance and 
SPMCIL should expeditiously formulate a concrete plan for dedicated R&D set-
up with enhanced financial allocation and draw a roadmap with a clear 
timeframe for achieving indigenization in security sensitive items.  

71 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18 
MINI RATNA STATUS 
 Incidentally, in terms of the tripartite settlement, the Government stand 
committed to provide support to the Corporation to the tune of Rs.1200 -1500 
crore for modernization. It has however been brought to the notice of the 
Committee that a letter has rec ently been received by SPMCIL from DPE 
stating that the Mini Ratna status of the Corporation would be withdrawn 
unless the Government support is in national interest. Considering the fact 
that the financial support proposed to be given by the Ministry is a  part of  its 
commitment to the Unions and is in  no manner proposed to bridge the losses 
of the Corporation, the Committee are of firm view that it would not be 
appropriate to link the issue of Mini Ratna status with the  financial support 
proposed to be given for modernization to a Corporation required to meet the 
challenges of upgrading the technology in the area of printing of security 
products and counterfeiting of currency notes.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Finance should  resolve this issue with DPE to 
ensure that the Mini Ratna status of SPMCIL is not affected.       
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                    SHRI V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
9th March, 2010          Chairman 
19 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)                        Committee on Public Undertakings  
 

72 
 
Annexures 
MINUTES OF THE 6th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 27TH OCTOBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hrs to 1400 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
3 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
6 Shri L. Rajagopal 
7 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
8 Shri Ganesh Singh 
9 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
10 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
11 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
12 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
13 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
14 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
15 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
16 Shri Amar Singh 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 

73 
 
Representatives of SPMCIL 
 
1. Shri M.S. Rana Chairman and Managing Director, SPMCIL 
2. Shri Madan Mohan Director (Finance), SPMCIL 
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar Director (Technical), SPMCIL 
4. Dr. Manoranjan Dash Director (HR), SPMCIL 
5. Shri Ajay Nath Chief Vigilance Officer, SPMCIL 
 
2.  xxxxx      xxxxxx                   xxxxxx 
3. The Chairman then in vited the representatives of Security Printing and 
Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL) for tendering evidence before the 
Committee.  The Chairman welcomed the representatives of SPMCIL and also drew 
their attention to provisions of Rule 275 of th e Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  
The CMD, SPMCIL made a brief power point presentation on the subject.  
Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining  to the subject 
and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the CMD, SPMCIL.   
4. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of SPMCIL for providing the 
information in a lucid manner on the subject matter. 
5. Verbatim record of evidence was kept.  
 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
******* 

74 
 
MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 20th JANUARY, 2010. 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1615 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
6. Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
7. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
8. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravinder Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Officials of Ministry of Finance 
1. Shri Ashok Chawla Secretary 
2. Shri Govind Mohan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.K. Sharma Executive Director, RBI 
4. Shri R. Gandhi Chief General Manager, RBI 
 
2. xxxxxx   xxxxxx    xxxxxxx 

75 
 
3. xxxxxx   xxxxxx    xxxxxxx 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Finance 
and the representatives of RBI and drew their attention to direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence on Security Printing & Minting 
Corporation of India Limited before the Parliamentary Committees.  The Members 
raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the representatives of Ministry.  
Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was not readily available 
with the representatives of Ministry.  They were therefore asked to furnish the same 
to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest possible. 
 
5. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry for providing 
all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. Verbatim record of evidence was kept.  
 
7. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
8. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
MINUTES OF THE 16th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 9th MARCH 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1515 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
3 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
6 Shri L. Rajagopal 
7 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
8 Shri Ganesh Singh 
9 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
10 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
11 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
12 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
13 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft Reports on the following subjects and 
adopted them with some minor modifications: - 
(i). Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL); 
and  
 
(ii). xxxxxx  xxxxxxxxx   xxxxxxx 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation.  
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
  
 